democratic facade was kept in order to maintain the image of the modern nation intact, but there was little interest in making that image available and acceptable to the vast majority of the population. At this level of specificity, the image gradually assembled by the postrevolutionary government drastically altered the Porfirian goals. It was claimed that Mexico was indeed national for the first time: it was popular, mestizo, and Indian. It was considered a Mexico for all Mexicans and for the world to see as a modern mestizo nation. Instead of white immigration and foreign investment, the new national image had equally practical goals: industrialization, national and foreign investment, tourism. Moreover, due to the chaos produced by the revolution and by widespread popular mobilization, the goals of the new image of the nation were even more pragmatic: to obtain not only international recognition but also internal cohesion, concentration, and consolidation for the new revolutionary elite. But Mexican masses made their debut in an international era of mass politics, and thereafter they have had to be more clearly considered in the articulation of national images. In essence, the new revolutionary image of the nation was not more popular but more populist. The pragmatic goals of modernization and nationalism were forced simultaneously by internal circumstances and by international transformations. The postrevolutionary national image was indeed new and original, not because of its authenticity but, rather, its efficiency: the revolutionary governments soon realized that it was the very symbol of the revolution that could make the image of the nation radically national and at the same time more universal than ever before. This represented a profound break with the previous image of the nation that had always been on the border of disqualifying parochialism or crass, mimetic universalism. Just as Michelet found in the French Revolution the key to making France the epitome of modernity and universalism, so Mexican historians, artists, and diplomats with official backing made the Mexican Revolution Mexico's greatest passport to universal modernity. The revolution, it seemed, had made Mexico more Mexican. Accordingly, in the early 1920s the perceptive Mexican poet Ramón López Velarde believed that "the country's material relaxation, in thirty years of peace, nourished the notion of a pretentious and multimillionaire patria which was honorable in its present and epic in its past. These years of suffering have been necessary to conceive a less external, more modest, and perhaps more beautiful patria." 14 However, by 1940 a canny Mexican intellectual, Jorge Cuesta, wrote to the Mexican president: "When all is said and done, the Revolution is a national political truth, but now it seems almost totally a lie, a maneuver."15 This duality indicatedas some years later the Mexican historian Daniel Cosío Villegas would point outboth the political and social failures of the revolution and its great accomplishment. For Mexico's nationalism, the rev-