olution had become a "national political truth" (though some, like Cuesta, realized that it was a "maneuver"). If, as some believe, the revolution was a national war of liberation, its new and lasting effect on Mexican nationalism did not derive from its presumed anti-imperialist characterwhich could be seen as a reformulation of the old criollo anti-Hispanismbut from its universalist potential as a mass popular movement in an era of mass politics and social revolutions. In fact, the revolution became the patrimony of the nation, as much as its territory or its indigenous past did, and as such it was manipulated and maneuvered. The revolution became one with the nation, and all Mexicans were required to recognize themselves in it. In terms of the national image, this was the revolution's greatest achievement. The visible break at this second level of goals can be understood only by analyzing the various means by which the image of the nation was constructed. It can be said that it is in the realm of means that continuity is both most prevailing and most astonishing. The images of the nation had been created through a trial-and-error process of maneuvering domestic phenomena, interpreting what were believed to be universal trends, and adjusting and readjusting. Such a process was carried out by means of an overall authoritarian negotiation that often resulted in a forced centralization and homogenization. Regardless of the specific content of the image of the nation, in Mexico that image has always been officially created, promoted, and canceled by a central (in political and geographical terms) authority. Therefore, the formalities of modern nationalism and the requirements of changing ideas of modernization have been fulfilled in a drama in which, though the characters and lines may have changed, the plot, costumes, and stages have remained the same. It could be said that the Porfirians were right: Mexicans gradually became Mexicans and came to identify themselves with a modern national image. Mexico underwent an impressive socioeconomic transformation during the 1940s and 1950s. Just when the country was becoming more urban, industrial, consumerist, and relatively literate than ever before, the popular heroes comprised a bizarre mosaic of urban life and Bohemia, together with bucolic nostalgia, a combination that almost all Mexicans shared and that only Mexicans of the time fully understood. If, as the late-nineteenthcentury liberals imagined, to be Mexican meant to share one language, one race, and one spirit, then by the 1950s Mexican nationality had never been so concrete an entelechy. Within this twentieth-century cultural transformation, the long-inthe-making nationalistic ideology was adopted and thus transformed. The nationalistic infrastructure continued to be propagated and re-created by a rather authoritarian revolutionary family, according to sundry and changing interests and circumstances. But just as Indians had learned the catechism in their own way, so twentieth-century Mexicans adopted the nationalistic