symbols as their own, but in unimagined ways. By the 1950s we find Guadalupe, Juárez, and Zapata as much in evidence at soccer matches where flags and chauvinism reached unbelievable levels, as we do on the streets of East Los Angeles as symbols on the tattooed skin of brown bodies. The symbols went back and forth from San Francisco to Tijuana, from Chicago to Monterrey, from Mexico City to Mérida. And the central control and monitoring of that symbolism became increasingly dispersed. Nonetheless, the care and organization of the official national image remained in the hands of centralized power holders. By the 1950s, however, there was both a pride and a price in the historical act of being Mexican. As the Porfirians dreamed, large portions of the population were finally incorporated and formatted as Mexicans. Patriotic lessons were both acted and learned through a multiplicity of means schools, monuments, discourses, media, patriotic celebrations. But together with the pride and festivity of flags and sombreros, there was great woe in the inevitability of being Mexican. By the 1940s Mexicans sensed both the anguish and the pride of reciting "México creo en tí" (Mexico, I believe in you), knowing that this faith was always counteracted by the certainty that the nation "laughs a lot, perhaps because [it] knows that laughter is a silent woe." Of course, the revolutionary return to nationality was something to be proud of, but also something inevitable: "To our nationality we return because of love, and because of poverty." 16 observed Mexico's national poet, Ramón López Velarde. By the 1950s the radios of the rapidly growing Mexico City were broadcasting countless official speeches, commercials, and popular romantic songs that unveiled the ways of being sensually and proudly Mexicana sentimental milieu that was also a legacy of Porfirian times. One popular tune was sung by a mulatto woman, in whose metaphoric and sensual mouth trembled ''the painful groan / of a race full of bitterness." The song made Mexicans dance for their own "bronze race," a race that had been born valiant, but solely "To suffer all of its misfortunes / To suffer all of its misfortunes."