## APPENDIX 2 THE ECONOMIC COST OF WORLD'S FAIRS Considering the size of Mexico's economy during the last part of the nineteenth century and bearing in mind that world's fairs were only ephemeral events, Mexico's expenses for late-nineteenthcentury Parisian world's fairs were impressively high. The cultural value given to world's fairs and their significance for Porfirian development policies seemed to justify these expenditures. By the twentieth century, Mexico's expenditures in world's fairs had dropped drastically, for two reasons: world's fairs lost their cultural and developmentalist importance, and Mexico had political difficulties and a new revolutionary regime. The table that follows summarizes the available information about the costs of fairs for Mexico. Although the total cost of Mexico's presence at Paris 1889 constituted only 11 percent of the expenditures of the Ministry of Economic Development for the year 1889 (compared with 31 percent for Chicago 1893 and with 46 percent for Paris 1900),l it was the highest sum ever paid by Mexico in a world's fair. What explains the variations in the percentage for the Ministry of Economic Development is the reduction in resources it suffered after the creation of the Ministry of Public Works in 1891. In addition, in 1893 the silver crisis reduced the Mexican government's total expenditures for 1893 and 1900. Both Yeager and Riguzzi argue that Mexico's expenditures in Chicago were the highest (a total of U.S.\$700,000), and they estimate expenditures of Mexico in Paris 1899 as only U.S.\$400,000. I believe these figures reflect only the original budget assigned to each event. Indeed, Mexico's original budget for Chicago was planned to be the highest, but the silver crisis nullified the plans. In fact, the construction of a Mexican pavilion in Chicago was also canceled, and the cost of transportation could not have been as high as that of transportation to Paris. In addition, although originally Mexico