## NOTES Abbreviations used in the notes are listed on page 331. ## Preface 1. ''For all things proof is found / and also a reason to support everything / and there is no explanation at all because there is so much explanation" (Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz, "Acusa la hidropesía de mucha ciencia, que teme inútil aun para saber y nociva para vivir," in her Obras completas, vol. 1 (Mexico City, 1951), 5-8. ## Introduction 1. For the historical emergence of the concepts of modern and modernity that I use here, see Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht, "A History of the Concept 'Modern,'" in Making Sense in Life and Literature, ed. H. U. Gumbrecht (Minneapolis, 1992), 79-110. 2. Alan Trachtenberg, The Incorporation of America (New York, 1982), 209. 3. José Ortega y Gasset, La rebelión de las masas (Madrid, 1930), 22. 4. RUP 1:338. 5. For notions of commerce within world's fairs, see Paul Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas (Manchester, 1988), 22-23. 6. Helix, "The Industrial Exhibition of 1851," Westminster and Foreign Quarterly Review (April 1850), quoted in ibid., 27. 7. "Exposition Universelle Internationale de 1900 à Paris," quoted in Le Livre des expositions universelles, 1851-1889 (Paris, 1983), 105. 8. John Brisben Walker, "What the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Is," The Cosmopolitan, September 1904, 405. 9. Gumbrecht, "History," 94. 10. Charles Baudelaire, "Exposition Universelle 1855: Beaux-Arts," in Oeuvres complètes (Paris, 1968), 361-70. 11. See Tatsushi Narita, "Eliot and the World's Fair of St. Louis: Collateral Evidence of His Fairoutings," Nagoya City University Studies in Social Sciences and Humanities 38 (1984):1-23; and Tatsushi Narita, "Eliot and the World's Fair of St. Louis: His 'Stockholder's Coupon Ticket,'" Nagoya City University Studies in Social Sciences and Hu-