manities 36 (1982):1-24. Both articles were originally written in Japanese, with English abstracts. See Narita's note, "Fiction and Fact in T. S. Eliot's 'The Man Who Was King,'" in Notes and Queries 39 (June 1992):191-92. I thank Peter Stansky for having called my attention to Eliot's relationship with world's fairs. 12. See Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Notes from Underground, trans. Michael R. Katz (New York, 1989), 18. 13. Henry Adams, The Education of Henry Adams (Boston, 1915), 345. 14. J. R. Hawley, "The Value of International Exhibitions," North American Review 149 (September 1889):317. 15. La TypographieFrançaise, 1 July 1889, quoted by M. Reberioux, "Au tournement des expos: 1889," Le Mouvement Social, no. 149 (1989):6. 16. G. Flaubert, Dictionnaire des idées reçues, ed. Lea Caminite (Paris, 1966), 78. 17. Various studies of nationalism have influenced my historical approach, most especially Eric Hobsbawm, Nation and Nationalism (Cambridge, 1990); Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities (London, 1983); Roger Bartra, La jaula de la melancolía (Mexico City, 1987); E. Gellner, Nations and Nationalism (Oxford, 1983); Liah Greenfeld, Nationalism (Cambridge, 1992); José Murilo de Carvalho, A formação das almas (São Paulo, 1990); Pierre Nora, ed., Les Lieux de mémoire, 2 vols. (Paris, 1984); David Brading, The Origins of Mexican Nationalism (Cambridge, 1985); Partha Chatterjee, Nationalist Thought and the Colonial World (Tokyo, 1986); Kenneth Cmiel, Democratic Eloquence (New York, 1990); and Hans Kohn, The Idea of Nationalism (New York, 1944). 18. For modes of expressions of universal exhibitions, see Pascal Ory, "Étude com-parée du centenaire et du cent-cinquantenaire de la Révolution Française," in Les Images de la Révolution Française, ed. M. Vovelle (New York, 1990), 2177-83. 19. Paul Groussac, Del Plata al Niágara (Buenos Aires, 1925), 324, 346. 20. Virginia Woolf, "Mr. Bennet and Mrs. Brown," in Collected Essays, vol. 1 (London, 1966), 320. 21. Eric Hobsbawm, The Age of Empire, 1875-1914 (New York, 1987). 22. William McKinley, President McKinley's Last Speech, Delivered September 5, 1901, President's Day at the Pan-American Exposition, Buffalo (New York, 1901), 5. 23. The 1992 Seville Universal Exposition followed the path of the last universal fair of the twentieth century (Brussels 1958). For the 1992 Seville Universal Exposition seen along the lines proposed by this book, see M. Tenorio, "Sevilla 1992: De la Torre Eiffel al gran nopal," La Jornada Semanal, 27 September 1992, 16-23; and John E. Findling, "Fair Legacies: Expo '92 and Cartuja '93," in Fair Representations, ed. Robert Rydell and Nancy E. Gwinn (Amsterdam, 1994), 180-96. For the year 2000, there are plans for world's fairs in Hannover, Toronto, and Venice. See J. E. Findling, ed., Historical Dictionary of World's Fairs and Expositions, 1851- 1988 (New York, 1990), 403-10. 24. See Louis Marin's commentary on Disneyland, in his Utopiques (Paris, 1973), 297-324. 25. El Correo Español, 1 September 1891. 26. J. Michelet, Extraits historiques de J. Michelet, prepared by Ch. Seignobos (Paris, 1907), 7. 27. See the remarkable anarchist geography of the world by Elisée Reclus, L'Homme et la terre, vol. 2 (reprint, Paris, 1990), 403-6. 28. As explained in the preface, the epilogue includes a summary of how historiographical and conceptual notions are used in the book.