1. France and Her Followers 1. Bulletin de l'Exposition Universelle de Paris 1889, 15 October 1888, 3. 2. For an explanation of the different confrontations, see Blenda Nelms, The Third Republic and the Centennial of 1789 (New York, 1987), 13-17. 3. See Richard D. Mandell, Paris 1900 (Toronto, 1967), ix. 4. The nine groups were: Group 1, the arts; Group 2, education; Group 3, furniture; Group 4, textiles; Group 5, raw and manufactured products (the extractive arts); Group 6, mechanical industries and electricity; Group 7, food products; Group 8, agriculture; and Group 9, horticulture. The groups were subdivided into a total of 83 classes. See RUP 1. 5. See Walter Benjamin, "Paris, Capital of the 19th Century," in Reflections, ed. Peter Demetz, trans. E. Jephcott (New York, 1986), 146-58. In interpreting the significance of nineteenth-century world's fairs, three authors have elaborated on Benjamin's concept of "pilgrimage of the commodity fetish." See the translation of the German study by Werner Plum, Exposiciones mundiales en el siglo XIX (Bonn, 1977), 3-9; the Brazilian work by Francisco Foot Hardman, Trem fantasma (São Paulo, 1988), 49-66; and the French study by Philippe Hamon, Expositions (Berkeley, 1992). 6. See Nelms, Third Republic, 11-64. 7. The 1889 Paris fair officially ended on November 6. 8. See François Furet and Mona Ozouf, eds., A Critical Dictionary of the French Revolution (Cambridge, 1989), 882-90. 9. See Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas, 27-41. 10. See, for example, Fernando Rosenzweig, "La industria" in HMM, El porfiriato: Vida económica, 465-94; and Stephen Haber, Industry and Underdevelopment (Stanford, 1989). 11. For an example of this encouragement of private exhibitors, see EXP, Box 30, Exp. 23. 12. Tout-d'Union, 1 September 1891. 13. See Nelms, Third Republic, 30-31. 14. For an explanation of the diplomatic causes and consequences of the boycott, see Brigitte Schroeder-Gudehus, "Les Grandes Puissances devant l'Exposition Universelle de 1889," Le Mouvement Social, no. 149 ( 1989): 15-24. 15. Émile Durer, "Edison," Revue Illustrée 8 (June-December, 1889): 174-78. 16. In this regard, see Burton Benedict, "International Exhibitions and National Identity," Anthropology Today 6 (June 1991):7-9; and the analysis by Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas, 82-111. 17. La Revue Diplomatique, August 1886, 5. Meulemans published various articles on Mexico and other Latin American countries in La Revue Diplomatique; he included some of these articles in a volume published in order to be distributed during the 1889 Paris fair. See Auguste Meulemans, Revue Diplomatique: Chefs d'état, ministres et diplomates (Paris, 1889). 18. See Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas, 3-26, 52-81; and R. Rydell's examination of American imperialism in American world's fairs, All the World's a Fair (Chicago, 1984). 19. See J. L. Phelan, "Pan-Latinism, French Intervention in Mexico (1861-1867) and the Genesis of the Idea of Latin America," in Conciencia y autenticidad históricas.