Mes fils aiment tes fils; tes fêtes sont mes fêtes Et c'est pour te chanter qu'aujourd'hui mes poètes Prennent leur lyre à Mexique. Leurs accents toucheront ton coeur, car leur génie Est né sous le soleil de ta glorie infinie D'un éclair que ton front jeta: Alarcon et Corneille ont pu marcher ensemble, Ignace Ramirez à Voltaire ressemble Comme Juarez à Gambetta. France, j'ai Jean Peza, mon doux François Coppée; Guillermo Prieto chante mon épopée En Béranger de mon drapeau; Gorostiza, pour moi, c'est Collin d'Harleville; Sierra c'est Sainte-Beuve et Casasus, Delille, Altamirano, Mirabeau! ## Auguste Genin, France-Mexique (Mexico City, 1910), 3. 34. See, for example, the coverage of Mexico's awards ceremony in Tout-d'Union, 1 September 1891. 35. For an explanation of the mystification of the French Republic in monuments, see Mona Ozouf, "Le Panthéon: L'École normale des morts," in Nora, Les Lieux de mémoire, vol. 1, 139-66; and Charles Rearik, "Festivals in Modern France: The Experience of the Third Republic," Journal of Contemporary History 12 (1977):435-60. On the debate over the commemorative monument for the centennial celebration of the French Revolution, see Nelms, Third Republic, 65-105. 36. See Nelms, Third Republic, 249. 37. See Jean Marie Mayeur and Madeleine Reberioux, The Third Republic from Its Origins to the Great War, 1871-1914, trans. J. R. Foster (Cambridge, 1984), 42-65. See also Jean-Luc Pinol, Le Monde des villes au XIXe siècle (Paris, 1991), 29-31. 38. Pascal Ory, Les Expositions Universelles de Paris (Paris, 1982). 39. RUP 9:25. It was not until the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1900, for which Picard served as general commissioner, that his concept of social economy was developed through the establishment of a tenth group, on social economy. See André Gueslin, L'Invention de l'économie sociale (Paris, 1987), especially his explanation of the role played by Charles Gide in social economic thought (pp. 157-60). See also Charles Gide, Économie sociale: Rapports du jury international, Exposition Universelle de 1900 (Paris, 1901). 40. For the growth of the so-called Professors' Republic, see Christophe Charle, La République des universitaires, 1870-1940 (Paris, 1994), especially his discussion of the emergence of a "social model of intellectuals" and the role of intellectuals in politics (pp. 291-307). ## 41. See Gueslin, L'Invention, 4. 42. Letter from Manuel Flores to Carlos Pacheco, March 1888, reproduced in José Francisco Godoy, México en París (Mexico City, 1891), 216-18. In the 1880s there were indeed various asociaciones mutualistas in Mexico, most of them linked to artisan and crafts organizations. In this regard, see David W. Walker, "Porfirian Labor Politics: Working Class Organization in Mexico City and Porfirio Díaz, 1876-1902," The Amer-