2. Justo Sierra, Evolución política del pueblo mexicano (Caracas, 1980), 287. 3. Regarding the regional and professional origins of this elite, as well as its political and economic unfolding, see François X. Guerra, México del antíguo régimen a la revolución, trans. Sergio Fernández Bravo, vol. 1 (Mexico City, 1988), 59-181; José C. Valadés, El porfirismo: Historia de un régimen, vol. 1 (Mexico City, 1987), 70-89; A. de Maria y Campos, "Porfirianos prominentes: Orígenes y años de juventud de ocho intelectuales del grupo de los científicos, 1846-1876," Historia Mexicana 34 (1985): 610-51. 4. For insights on the notion of aristocratic culture, see William H. Beezley, Judas at the Jockey Club and Other Episodes of Porfirian Mexico (Lincoln, Nebraska, 1987). See also the account of the nostalgia of the Porfirian belle époque in Carlos Tello Díaz, El exilio: Un relato de familia (Mexico City, 1993). 5. German Foreign Office papers, quoted by Friedrich Katz, "Mexico: Restored Republic and Porfiriato, 1867-1910," in The Cambridge History of Latin America, ed. L. Bethell, vol. 5 (Cambridge, 1986), 57. 6. By 1900, Guerra argues, 82 percent of the Porfirian elite were professionals: 57 percent, lawyers; 15 percent, medical doctors; and 10 percent, engineers. See Guerra, México, vol. 1, 65. 7. See Esther Acevedo, Catálogo del retrato del siglo XIX en el Museo Nacional de Historia (Mexico City, 1982); Enrique Krauze, Místico de la autoridad: Porfirio Díaz (Mexico City, 1987); and Alan Knight's comments on Diaz seen by foreigners as "probably all white" (Alan Knight, The Mexican Revolution, vol. 1 [Cambridge, 1986], 3-4). 8. For the emergence and significance of this group within the Mexican liberal tradition, see Hale, Transformation of Liberalism, 3-13, 20-24, and chap. 2. 9. Justo Sierra, Evolución política del pueblo mexicano (Caracas, 1980), 265. 10. See Hale, Transformation of Liberalism, 3-8, 25-36. 11. Knight, Mexican Revolution, vol. 1, 15. 12. DO, 15 May 1889, 1. 13. On the concept of atomization, see Guerra, México, vol. 1, 46. 14. Compare Guerra's characterization of social actors in the Porfirian regime and the two types of solidaritiesmodern and traditional (ibid., 127-80). 15. Regarding the belief in Mexico's beauty and natural wealth, see Moisés González Navarro, HMM, El porfiriato: Vida social, 135- 48. See also Cosío Villegas's explanation of the liberal consensus in the prosperity of Mexican lands: Daniel Cosío Villegas, "La riqueza legendaria de México," in Extremos de América, ed. Daniel Cosío Villegas (Mexico City, 1949), 82-111. For an analysis of the influence of this belief on the creation of a national literature, see Jorge Rueda de la Serna, Los orígenes de la visión paradisiáca de la naturaleza mexicana (Mexico City, 1987), 65-89. 16. See Leopoldo Zea's classic account of Mexican positivism: El positivismo en Méx-ico (Mexico City, 1968), originally published in 1943. A different perspective is in William D. Raat, El positivismo durante el porfiriato, 1876-1910 (Mexico City, 1975). For a deeper understanding of positivism vis-à-vis Darwinism and sciences in Mexico, see Hale, Transformation of Liberalism, chap. 7; Roberto Moreno, La polémica del darwinismo en México, siglo XIX (Mexico City, 1989); and M. González Navarro, Historia y sociología (Mexico City, 1970). 17. David Brading has examined lucidly the notion of criollo patriotism. See David