Brading, The Origins of Mexican Nationalism (Cambridge, 1985); and David Brading, Prophecy and Myth in Mexican History (Cambridge, 1984), esp. 37-53. 18. This is an important point that is often overlooked. For Mexico, see Hale's discussion of the influence of Emilio Castelar and the concept of an "age of eloquence" in Transformation of Liberalism, 40-43; and Hale, "Political and Social Ideas in Latin America, 1870-1930," in The Cambridge History of Latin America, ed. L. Bethell, vol. 4 (Cambridge, 1986), 367-441, 637-643. For analyses of these aspects in other Latin American historiographical traditions, see A. Woll, Functional Past: The Uses of History in Nineteenth-Century Chile (Baton Rouge, 1982); and Germán Colmenares, Las convenciones contra la cultura (Bogotá, 1987). See also Hugh Cunningham, "The Language of Patriotism, 1750- 1914,'' History Workshop, no. 12 (1981): 1-32; and Josep M. Fradera, Cultura nacional en una societat dividida (Barcelona, 1992), 127-234. 19. Luis González, La ronda de las generaciones (Mexico City, 1984), 32. 20. Lucas Ayarragaray, "Porfirio Díaz," Revista de Derecho, Historia y Letras 10 (1901):428. 21. See Eugène-Melchior de Vogüé's passionate discussion of the pavilions of war and social economy in $" \mathrm { A }$ travers l'Exposition. VII. La Guerre.-La Paix sociale," Revue des Deux Mondes 95 (October 1889):677-93. 22. As in many other realms, the history of the Mexican economy has put a strong emphasis on the Revolution of 1910 as a watershed. New histories are beginning to break this historiographic-political belief. In this regard, see John Womack, "The Mexican Economy during the Revolution, 1910-1920: Historiography and Analysis," Marxist Perspective 1 (1978):80- 123; and Stephen Haber, "The Industrialization of Mexico: Historiography and Analysis" (1992), manuscript. 23. See Stephen Haber, "Assessing the Obstacles to Industrialization: The Mexican Economy, 1830-1940" (1991), manuscript, 1-2. 24. For an account of the economic difficulties and of the political consequences of these difficulties in the aftermath of the González era, see Don M. Coerver, The Porfirian Interregnum: The Presidency of Manuel Gonzalez of Mexico, 1880-1884 (Fort Worth, 1979), 187-230, 243-70. 25. In this regard, see the interesting analysis of the Porfirian elite management of both American and British interests (in economic, financial, and diplomatic terms) in Paolo Riguzzi, "México, Estados Unidos y Gran Bretaña, 1867-1910: Una difícil relación triangular," Historia Mexicana 41 (1992):365-436. 26. See Hilda Sánchez Martínez, "El sistema monetario y financiero mexicano bajo una perspectiva histórica: el porfiriato," in La banca, pasado y presente: Problemas financieros mexicanos, ed. José Miguel Quijano (Mexico City, 1983), 21. The growth of the textile industry in the 1890s was especially impressive, as Stephen Haber observed in "Industrialization of Mexico," 18, and in "Industrial Concentration and the Capital Markets: A Comparative Study of Brazil, Mexico, and the United States, 1830- 1930," Journal of Economic History 51 (1991):575. 27. For the generational, professional, and political structure of the Porfirian elite, see Guerra, México, vol. 1, 58-125, appendix. 28. Rafael de Zayas Enríquez, Les États-Unis Mexicains (Mexico City, 1891), 231. 29. See, for instance, the Annuaire de l'Économie Politique et de la Statistique (Paris, 1889-1901); the American almanac Appletons' Annual Cyclopaedia and Register of Im-