portant Events . . . 1889 (New York, 1890), 556-57; and the British one The Annual Register: A Review of Public Events at Home and Abroad, 1888 (London, 1889), 546. 30. See Riguzzi, "México, Estados Unidos y Gran Bretaña," 385- 97, 420-27. 31. Archibald Dunn, Mexico and Her Resources (London, 1890), 3- 4. For another example, see E. J. Howell, Mexico: Its Progress and Commercial Possibilities (London, 1892). For Howell's recommendations to British investors, see pp. 163-68. 32. HMM, El porfiriato: Vida política interior 1:690. See also José Luis Ceceña, Mé-xico en la órbita imperial (Mexico City, 1970), 49-101. 33. It was also influential in the agricultural sector, especially on sugar and rubber in Veracruz. See Sánchez Martínez, "El sistema monetario y financiero mexicano," 16-17. In 1938 Chávez Orozco estimated French investment in the oil and mining industries at 10,000 pesos for 1910, far below the 499,000 pesos invested by the United States and the 87,200,000 pesos invested by Great Britain. See Luis Chávez Orozco, Historia económica y social de México (Mexico City, 1938), 168. 34. L. N. D'Olwer, "X. Las inversiones extranjeras," in HMM, El porfiriato: Vida económica, 1018-23. See also J. Lejeune, Au Mexique (Paris, 1892). The author describes the significance of French people and investment in Mexico's urban life. The so-called almacenes de novedades were monopolized by French merchants: in 1891 they owned 70. French investment and imports, as well as Mexico's exports to France, presented a decreasing tendency throughout the Porfirian period. See A. Genin, Les Français au Mexique (Mexico City, 1910); and Rosenzweig, in HMM, El porfiriato: Vida económica, 635-720. 35. F. Bianconi, Le Mexique a la portée des industriels, des capitalistes, des négotiants, importateurs et exportateurs et des travailleurs avec une carte du Mexique commerciale, boutiére, miniére et agricole (Paris, 1989), 7-10. 36. See Haber, "Industrialization of Mexico," 10-11. 37. See Ricardo de Maria y Campos, Datos Mercantiles, compilados por Ricardo de Maria y Campos (Mexico City, 1889). De Maria y Campos revised this study for the 1900 Paris fair as Renseignements commerciaux sur les États-Unis Mexicains (Mexico City, 1899). The revision was better organized and more comprehensive (see pp. 51-214). 38. See chapter 10; and González Navarro, HMM, 102-33. 39. México, Secretaría de Fomento, Memoria, 1877-1882, vol. 1; Coerver, Porfirian Interregnum, 210-16; and González Navarro, HMM 4:134-52. For a recent account of the complex role played by land-survey companies, see Robert Holden, Mexico and the Survey of Public Lands: The Management of Modernization, 1876- 1911 (DeKalb, Illinois, 1994). 40. In his book for Mexico's display at Paris 1889, García Cubas gave examples of successful colonias. See Antonio García Cubas, Étude géographique statistique descriptive et historique des États-Unis Mexicains (Mexico City, 1889). 41. González Navarro estimated that 48,000 foreigners resided in Mexico in 1895; by 1910 there were 116,527, of which only 9 percent were in the agricultural sector. Hence immigration was never as expected, and it was especially insignificant in Mexico's agricultural development. See González Navarro, HMM 4:184. 42. See, as an example, Zayas Enríquez, Les États-Unis Mexicains. 43. García Cubas, Etude géographique, 650, an updated version in French of Antonio García Cubas, Cuadro geográfico y estadístico, descriptivo e histórico de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos (Mexico City, 1884), which was prepared for the 1884 New Orleans