fair. See also the favorable opinion of Mexico's condition for investment in Dreyfus's article on Mexico and Chile in Paris 1889 in L'Économiste Français, 23 August 1890. 44. Clement Bertier-Marriot, Un parisien au Mexique (Paris, 1886), 59-61. The author was the envoy of LeFigaro at the inauguration of the railroad line between Mexico City and New York City. The book included some presumed salaries offered in Mexico for workers: for example, 7 francs for a carpenter, and 2.50 francs for a female dressmaker. 45. Dunn, Mexico and Her Resources. 46. See, for example, Eugenio Martuscelli, Apunti sul Messico (Naples, 1892). See also E. Chabrand, De Barcelonette au Mexique (Paris, 1892), in which the author glorifies Mexico's progress in only a few years; and A Gringo, Through the Land of the Aztecs or Life and Travel in Mexico (n.p., 1892). 47. See Justo Sierra's commentary on the proposal made by Zayas Enríquez for a Memoria, EXP, Box 18, Exp. 8. In it, Sierra stated that Mexico's display ought to show that Mexico had come to "el fin de nuestra primera gran etapa en el camino del progreso positivo." 48. See González Navarro, HMM 4:134-84. 49. Francisco Pimentel, "La colonización negra," in Obras completas, vol. 5 (Mexico City, 1904), 511, 513. 50. See Moisés González Navarro, "Las ideas raciales de los científicos, 1890-1910," Historia Mexicana 37, 4 (1988):575. 51. See the study by José Maria Romero, Dictamen del vocal ingeniero . . . encargado de estudiar la influencia social y económica de la inmigración asiática en México (Mexico City, 1911). In 1889 a Tratado de amistad, navegación y comercio was signed with China, and more immigration was allowed. Chinese immigration increased, and in 1904 a commission assigned to study it, headed by José Covarrubias, concluded that Chinese immigrants would never assimilate into the Mexican nationality. Overall, there was a consensus on the inferiority of the Chinese race. See González Navarro, HMM 4:166-68; and González Navarro, "Las ideas raciales," 576. 52. See the pamphlet, Argentina, République Argentine: La Vie sociale et la vie légale des étrangers (Paris, 1889). This book was for sale in the Argentine pavilion. 53. For Vasconcelos, Argentina and the United States were more successful than Mexico was in attracting immigrants, largely because of their more democratic regimes. See José Vasconcelos, Breve historia de Mexico (Mexico City, 1937), 501-19. ## 3. Mexico and the World at Large 1. This motto was inscribed on the medals awarded at the 1851 London exhibition. 2. México, Secretaría de Fomento, Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento 1 (1877-1882):413-14. 3. See Paolo Riguzzi, "Míxico próspero: Las dimensiones de la imagen nacional en el porfiriato," Historias, no. 20 (1988):137-60; G. Yeager, "Porfirian Commercial Propaganda: Mexico in the World Industrial Expositions," The Americas 34 (October 1977):230-43; and María de la Concepción de la Fuente Salceda, ''La participación de México en la Exposición Universal de Filadelfia 1876" (Tesis de Licenciatura, Universidad Iberoamericana, 1984). 4. These two long letters can be found in manuscript form (annotated and in