full) in EXP, Box 79, Exp. 1, 10-100. Also, they were published, with several corrections, as Gabriel Mancera, Informes que el C. Gabriel Mancera comisionado especial de la junta de exposiciones en los Estados Unidos de Norte-América y miembro de ella rinde sobre el desempeño de su cargo (Mexico City, 1875). 5. El Siglo XIX, 1 January 1875. 6. Translated from The Athenian of New York, published by El Proteccionista, 13 July 1876, and reproduced in de la Fuente Salceda, "La participación de México," 298 (my translation). 7. Translated from The Standard of London by El Federalista, 25 August 1876 and reproduced in ibid., 302 (my translation). 8. For a description of the particular space occupied by Mexico, see ibid., 37-38, 56-58. In addition to the Mexican exhibit in the main building of the Philadelphia fair, Mexico displayed some photographsattributed to the Mexican photographers Cruces and Campa at the Art Gallery (ibid., 61). 9. According to de la Fuente Salceda (ibid., 92), 90,000 pesos had been spent on the building that had been constructed for the National Exposition of 1875. These figures are not reliable, for 300,000 pesos seems to be an inflated figure vis-à-vis the dimensions and size of Mexico's display at Philadelphia. 10. El Eco de Ambos Mundos, 14 January 1875, quoted in ibid., 77. 11. "Mexico at the Centennial," NYT, 1 April 1876, quoted in Paul A. Tenkotte, "Kaleidoscopes of the World: International Exhibitions and the Concept of Cultural Space, 1851-1915," American Studies 28, 1 (1987):5. 12. In 1885 another fair, in which Mexico also participated, took place in New Orleans, organized by railroad companies. It was known as the North, Central, and South American Exposition. 13. John Allwood, The Great Exhibitions (London, 1977), 74. See also Findling, Historical Dictionary, 86-90. 14. Sebastián B. de Mier, México en la Exposición Universal Internacional de París1900 (Mexico City, 1901), 6. 15. Godoy (1851-1930) wrote semiofficial laudatory books on Mexico for several universal exhibitions, as well as biographies and directories of great men. He was a writer for the Two Republics and La Patria. He participated in various world's fairs as part of Mexican commissions and wrote several books for the Mexican government in both Spanish and English, including a Spanish and English biography of Porfirio Díaz: José Francisco Godoy, Porfirio Dîaz, President of Mexico (San Francisco, 1910). Among his books on fairs are México en Parí; México en Sevilla (Mexico City, 1928); and La ciudad de Chicago y la Exposición Universal de 1893. In addition, he participated in the preparation of Mexico, Comisión de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos para la Exposición Pan-Americana de Buffalo, Nueva York, A Few Facts about Mexico (Mexico City, 1901). See also José Francisco Godoy, Enciclopedia biográfica de contemporáneos (Washington, 1898). In 1929 Godoy was still an active journalist, writing efemérides in Mexico City's newspaper Excélsior. 16. Santiago Ramírez, Noticia histórica de la riqueza minera de México y de su actual estado de explotación . . . (Mexico City, 1884). The first pages stated that it was a "special report on the occasion of the New Orleans Industrial and Cotton Exhibition, 1884-1885." 17. Rydell, All the World's a Fair, 90-94.