18. BEMP 2 (1888):149. For Mexican expenditures at the New Orleans fair, see EXP, Box 78, Exp. 3, 9; Box 71, Exp. 1-11, 17-24, 25-33, 34-41; Box 72, Exp. 1-23, 24, 25-28, 29-30 (cuentas); Box 73 (cuentas), Exp. 5-7, 1-4. 19. See, for example, how the French-speaking media praised Mexico for its state-sponsored policies of industrial development: L'Abbeille, March 1885, included in a report sent by Lancaster, EXP, Box 79, Exp. 1, 139-142. 20. This building was later dismantled and reerected on the central Alameda of Mexico City. Later, the monument to Benito Juárez was put on the same site. There were plans to locate the Juárez monument facing the Palacio Nacional. Thanks to Limantour's influential opposition, it was finally placed on Avenida Juárez. Ibarrola's building was moved to the Alameda of the suburb of Santa María la Ribera, where it is still visible today. See Fausto Ramírez, "Vertientes nacionalistas en el modernismo," in El nacionalismo en el arte mexicano (IX Coloquio de Historia del Arte) (Mexico City, 1986), 111-67; see also EXP, Box 79, Exp. l, 152-53. 21. For the influence of the Philadelphia architectural style in Latin American countries, especially Brazil, see Pesavento, "Exposições universais," 63-87. 22. A copy of the contract is in EXP, Box 78, Exp. 2. 23. Findling, Historical Dictionary, 89. 24. This was a steamship, owned by the Compañía Mexicana de Navegación (EXP, Box 71, Exp. 11). 25. For the Mexican exhibitors in New Orleans, see EXP, Box 74, Exp. 1-13, 14-33, 34-54; Box 75, Exp. 36-41, 1-20, 21-35, 43-59 (envíos), 60 (contingente from Chihuahua). 26. For the works and organization of the New Orleans fair, see the minutes of the commission's meetings in Libro de Juntas Exposición Universal de Nueva Orleans 1884-1885, meetings from 15 March 1884 to 18 November 1884, EXP, Box 73, Exp. 8-9. For a complete list of prizes, see DO, 25 November 1886, 2-4. The awards were distributed by Porfirio Díaz on 5 February 1887, in Mexico City, together with the prizes obtained by Mexicans at the Buenos Aires Continental Exhibition (EXP, Box 78, Exp. 10). 27. According to Escandón, Mexico had 50 square meters at the 1851 London fair (Pedro de Escandón, La industria y las bellas artes en la Exposición Universal de 1855 [Paris, 1856], 12). 28. Bullock had established the famous Egyptian Hall of London, in which numerous exhibitions, panoramas, and exotic products were presented to the European public. He traveled to Mexico in 1822 and brought a cast of the Calendar Stone, carvings, models of tombs, manuscripts, codices, life-size reproductions of Mexican fruits and vegetables, thousands of specimens of birds and fishes, and minerals. See William Bullock, A Description of the Unique Exhibition, Called Ancient Mexico (London, 1824); and William Bullock, Six Months' Residence and Travels in Mexico (London, 1824). For some data and pictures of these exhibitions, see Hugh Honour, The New Golden Land (New York, 1975), 183-85; and Richard D. Altick, The Shows of London (Cambridge, 1978), 246- 48. 29. Escandón, La industria y las bellas artes, 12. 30. Ibid., 8-11. 31. Escandón, La industria y las bellas artes, 14. Adorno managed to publish in Paris