a pamphlet related to his musical machine: Melagraphie, ou nouvelle notation musicale par Juan N. Adorno (Paris, 1855). 32. See the various entries for Adorno in the Patentes y Marcas; his Resumen ordenado de las discusiones pronunciadas por el ciudadano Juan Nepomuceno Adorno ante los ciudadanos redactores y editores de la prensa periódica (Mexico City, 1873); and his Acerca de la hidrografía, meteorología, seguridad hidrogénica y salubridad higiénica del valle y en especial de la Capital de México (Mexico City, 1865). See also Ramón Sánchez Flores, Historia de la tecnología y la invención en México (Mexico City, 1980), 259 ff.; Pablo Gonzalez Casanova, Una utopia de América (Mexico City, 1953), 31-59; and the comments on and catalogue of Patentes y Marcas by Jorge A. Sobernis, "Catálogo de patentes de invención en México durante el siglo XIX (1840- 1900)" (Tesis de Licenciatura, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 1989), 109-12. 33. Escandón, La industria y las bellas artes, 11-25. 34. EXP, Box 102, Exp. 9 contains an inventory that must have been prepared some time after Mexico's attendance at the 1900 Paris fair and was very likely ordered by Sebastián B. de Mier in the course of writing his own report on Mexico's participation. (Hereafter I refer to this document as Inventario.) The Inventario includes some evidence of Mexico's participation in various European and American fairs, but the actual documents are lost. 35. See Honour, New Golden Land, 183-85; and Daniel Schálvelzon, "El pabellón Xochicalco en la exposición internacional de París de 1867," in La polémica del arte nacional en México, 1850-1910, ed. Daniel Schálvelzon (Mexico City, 1988), 1657-70. Schálvelzon considers the 1867 Xochicalco replica as the direct precursor of the Mexican Aztec palace in Paris 1889. But in fact the French models of the Xochicalco building (made by the French engineer Leon Mehédin) were not even considered to picture Mexico at the 1889 world's fair, though they were proposed by Ramón Fernández (SRE leg. 1103). In this regard, see minutes of 2 June 1888, reproduced in Godoy, México en París, 75. For Leon Mehídin's models of Xochicalco, see BEMP 1 (1888): 228- 32. 36. F. Ducuing, "Exposition Universelle de 1867 Illustrée" (Paris, n.d.), 46; quoted in Le Livre des expositions universelles, 1851- 1989, 46. 38. According to Yeager, Mexico did take part in the 1878 Paris fair. However, there is no evidence that Mexico had an official presence there. UIA-Díaz 29:132 contains some evidence regarding an article in the New York Herald which argued that in 1876 Mexico had been informed of but not officially invited to the Paris fair of 1878. Nevertheless, some Mexican private exhibitors may have attended the fair (Yeager, "Porfirian Commercial Propaganda," 230-43). 39. See Yeager, "Porfirian Commercial Propaganda," 234-35. Mexico also joined the International Electricity Congress in Paris in 1881. See Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento 1 (1877- 1882):416-17. For the Berlin fair, see also SRE 19-22-14. 40. Evidence of temporary and permanent fairs can be found in SRE, as follows: permanent exhibition of Mexican products in Austria-Hungary, 187?, 19-20-72; Museo de Productos Mexicanos en el Consulado de México en 1900, 19-22-53; Museo de Productos Mexicanos en Guatemala, 1902, 19-22-66; project to establish various Mexican exhibits in numerous European cities, 1882, 19-22-48; project to