Indeed, the 1889 Paris Universal Exposition wasas several previous fairs had beenan ephemeral and diminutive portrait of what was then considered the modern world. It attempted to be an exact scale model of modern reality. The official commission in charge of the exposition maintained that the exhibition was the outcome of the order and logic of the years. That is, eleven years had been the interval between the 1855 fair and that of 1867, and between this last and that of 1878. Accordingly, the year 1889 was set to have a world exhibition. These cycles seemed to follow what a German thinker later labeled a ritualistic "pilgrimage of the commodity fetish." 5 Should the fair be a national event? Should it emphasize the commemoration of the French Revolution as a great national leap forward? Should the revolution be considered a universal patrimony? These and other questions were discussed within the framework of the unstable French Third Republic.6 After long debates, in 1884 the French President Jules Ferry issued the decree for the organization of an international fair to be held between 5 May and 31 October 1889.7 This was only one of many acts that were designed to secure a place for the revolution in the national consciousness. In fact, French modern nationalism owes to the Third Republic the taming and epic mystification of the French Revolution.8 For late-nineteenth-century Parisians, to arrange a universal exposition was almost a habitafter all, Paris's history and urban planning were replete with the remains of previous fairs. But once the world's fair project started to become reality, public and private concordance emerged on one issue: the Paris exhibition of 1889 was to be the greatest fair in the universe, in order to celebrate the most important revolution in modern times, and the principal source of France's universalism. The 1889 Paris universal exposition was indeed the greatest fair of the nineteenth century, echoed only by the world's fair of 1900, also staged in the French capital. The cost of the fair, about 46 million francs, was covered by an arrangement between the state, the city council, and a group of private investors organized as an Association de Garantie. For France, this figure shows how prized world's fairs had become in the late nineteenth century, largely as a result of belief in their efficacy in promoting industrial development and national pride. In turn, this belief justified the huge expenditures involved. Had the cost of the fair been fully met by the French state alone, it would have consumed 15 percent of all French revenues for the year 1889. The way in which world's fairs were financed shows the specific conception of the role of the state in the construction of the national image. The financing system of the 1889 Paris fair became characteristic of the French method. The first universal expositions arranged by France were financed totally with public money. However, due to the enormous losses of the Paris fair of 1878, in 1889 the system was divided into three financial componentsstate, city council, and private. By contrast, the British system relied less on