various documents. I compared the BEMP's and Godoy's evidence with my own findings in order to present the best possible information. 3. EXP, Box 1, Exp. 7. 4. EXP, Box 2, Exp. 12. 5. DO, 9 February 1888. 6. EXP, Box 4, Exp. 1, pp. 1-5. 7. This is close to the figures reproduced in México, Tesorería General de la Federación, Contaduría de la Federación: Cuenta Pública (Mexico City, 1889-1890), under the name Cuenta de egresos Número 102, Gastos para la exposición de París. According to this cuenta, the expenses were 328,024.74 pesos and the budget approved was 450,000.00 pesos. 8. The intermediary agent between Mexico and the Mexican Commission in France was Eduardo Santos y Cía. For cuentas and expenses see EXP, Box 13, Exps. 1, 2; Box 14, Exps. 1, 4; Box 17, Exp. 3; Box 18, Exps. 1, 3, 6; Box 12, Exp. 1; Box 16, Exp. 3. 9. Argentina was second, with 3.2 million francs, and the United States was third, with 1.125 million francs (RUP 9:360). 10. EXP, Box 2, Exp. 6. 11. Among them, Francisco Diaz Covarrubias (Mexican consul in Paris), Gustavo Baz (first secretary of the Mexican embassy in Paris), Antonio Mier y Celis, José Yves Limantour, Julio Limantour (attaché of the Mexican diplomatic mission in Paris), and Rafael de Zayas Enríquez. See Díaz Mimiaga's report, EXP, Box 12, Exp. 6, pp. 15a-16. 12. In fact, Santiago Rebull, a distinguished painter of classical subjects during the second half of the nineteenth century, was originally appointed chief in 1888, but he declined the offer, claiming bad health. See BEMP 1 (1888):282. See also Carta a Fomento, 21 January 1889, EXP, Box 2, Exp. 7. 13. EXP, Box 7, Exp. 9. 14. EXP, Box 5, Exp. 20. 15. EXP, Box 4, Exp. 26. 16. For instance, see C. Romero Rubio's lobbying in favor of publicist Salvador Quevedo y Zubieta in EXP, Box 3, Exp. 6. 17. EXP, Box 5, Exp. 19. 18. Others personalities that were part of the team were Dr. José D. Morales and inventor Maximino Río de la Loza (EXP, Box 6, Exp. 12). 19. His family ran a well-known candy business in Mexico. He published books, such as Estudio sobre las razas mexicanas (1885), Poèmes aztèques (1890), and Notes sur le Mexique (1910); he translated the works of Antonio Peñafiel and Rafael de Zayas En-ríquez for the 1889 exposition; and he was the editor of the Boletín de la Exposición Mexicana en París (1888-1891). In addition, he was a wealthy entrepreneur and a merchant, involved in the Cámara Francesa de Comercio de México, the Bank of London and Mexico, the Compañía Cigarrera Mexicana, the Cervecería Moctezuma, the Compaõía de las Fábricas de Papel San Rafael y Anexas, and, as agent, El Palacio de Hierro. See Alberto Maréa Carreño, "Augusto Genin: In Memoriam," in Semblanzas, vol. 2 (Mexico City, n.d.), 252-69; and Luis Everaert Dubernard, México 1900 (Mexico City, 1994), which includes some data taken from Genin's personal papers.