20. EXP, Box 6, Exp. 12. 21. México, Secretaréa de Fomento, Reglamento económico (Mexico City, 1989), 4. 22. EXP, Box 5, Exp. 24. 23. DO, 27 June 1888, Jalisco's exhibition. See also Presidential Address to the 14th Congress, DO, 17 September 1888; and DO, 25 October 1888, Morelos's exhibition. 24. DO, 13 September 1888. 25. Article 12 of the Mexican Reglamento económico. Originally, it was also established that each group had to write a report on its activities. 26. The principal receivers of Mexican material were the Bibliothèque Nationale of Paris and the British Library of the British Museum in London. Special collections of medical, chemical, biological, and ethnographic material were sent to the Pasteur Institute, the University of London, the Austrian Museum, and the Trocadero Museum in Paris. The University of Texas at Austin and the University of California at Berkeley (especially the Bancroft Library) also contain numerous examples of these materials. 27. See the annotated circular signed by Gilberto Crespo, Ferrari Pérez, and Manuel Flores in March 1888. In the notes at the margins, it is possible to observe the way in which the work of producing the image of the modern nation was divided (EXP, Box 1, Exp. 18, pp. 8-9). 28. DO, 21 September 1888. 29. See, for instance, the letter to Pacheco by the community of Cuautempan, Puebla in EXP, Box 8, Exp. 17. 30. García Cubas, Étude, v. 31. Annotated circular in EXP, Box 1, Exp. 18, pp. 8-9. 32. Annotated circular in ibid. 33. Ibid. 34. Bodo von Glümer, Cuadro estadístico de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos: Formado con datos oficiales y par disposición de la Secretaría de Estado y del Despacho de Hacienda y Crédito Público (Mexico City, 1882). 35. EXP, Box 1, Exp. 18, pp. 68-81. 36. See DO, 21 March 1889; documents reproduced in Godoy, México en París, 184-90. 37. For instance, there is evidence of the shipment of at least 744 samples of Maria y Campos's book in the steamship Ville Marseille (EXP, Box 8, Exp. 29). 38. Mexico published its own catalogue in French and Spanish. See France, Ministère du Commerce et de 1'Industrie, Exposition Universelle Internationale de 1889. Direction Générale de l'Exposition. Adjudication du Catalogue Général (Paris, 1888); and Mé-xico, Exposition Universelle International de Paris 1889, Catalogue officiel de l'Exposition de la République Mexicaine (Paris, 1889). 39. Velasco won a prize at the 1876 Philadelphia exhibit. At the 1878 Paris exposition he also displayed his paintings (at the Spanish section, since Mexico did not join that fair). See Fausto Ramírez, "Acotaciones iconográficas a la evolución de episodios y localidades en los paisajes de José María Velasco," in José María Velasco: Homenaje, ed. Fausto Ramírez (Mexico City, 1989), 43. See also chapter 7. 40. Notwithstanding, Pedro Calvo, Johann Moritz Rugendas, and Daniel Thomas Egerton preceded Velasco in landscape painting in Mexico. See Xavier Moyssén, "El dibujo de José María Velasco," in ibid., 8.