41. See Luis Islas García, Velasco: Pintor Cristiano (Mexico City, 1932); and the various essays on Velasco in Ramírez, Josí María Velasco: Homenaje. While I was revising this manuscript, Mexico City's Museo Nacional de Arte published a handsome two-volume catalogue of a national homage to Velasco. These volumes include important data on Velasco's life and significance in Mexican art. See México, Museo Nacional de Arte, Homenaje nacional a José María Velasco (1840-1912), 2 vols. (Mexico City, 1993). 42. EXP, Box 2, Exp. 14. 43. EXP, Box 6, Exp. 12. 44. See Acta de sesión, 18 May 1889, EXP, Box 12, Exp. 3. 45. Velasco exhibited paintings in both the railroad section and the industry section. See México, Catalogue officiel de l'Exposition de la République Mexicaine. See also two long reports on the Mexican exhibition: one by Léon Cahun in Le Phare de la Loire, "L'Exposition Universelle. Le Mexique" (20 June 1889); and the article in La Presse Industrielle, 4 July 1889, reproduced in Godoy, México en París, 270-75. In January 1889 the DO announced that Mexico City's delegation sent Alberto Herrera's canvas of the Cuauhtémoc monument (DO, 25 January 1889); Gabriel Guerra proposed to send a replica of Cuauhtémoc. See BEMP 1 (1888):154-55; and, for the contract to make this replica for 950 pesos in January 1888, see BEMP 1 (1888):212-14. Another sculptor, Gabriel Guerra, also exhibited a bust of Porfirio Díaz. 46. DO, 17 April 1888. 47. DO, 17 April 1888. 48. See Sierra's allusion to his 1900 visit to the world's fair, in his 1910 welcome speech for the participants in the Congress of Americanists, held in Mexico City (Sierra, Obras completas [Mexico City, 1948], vol. 5, 253-56). For a description of Sierra's fascination with the 1900 Paris fair, see Claude Dumas, Justo Sierra y el México de su tiempo, 1848-1912, vol. 2 (Mexico City, 1986), 20, 34-35. 49. See, for example, "Chronique de l'Exposition," Le Temps, 24 August 1889. 50. DO, 17 April 1888. 51. Zárate, in a document reproduced in Godoy, México en París, 104. 52. For an analysis of the role played by statistics in the general modern image, see chapter 8. 53. Reproduced in Godoy, Míxico en París, 103-6. 54. See RUP 6 (Groups 5 and 7). 55. See UIA-Díaz 842, Box 18, L. 40, Catálogo de la colección mineral del General Porfirio Díaz. 56. According to Argentine reports of mining exhibits, Mexico's mining display was especially impressive and included gold, copper, silver, and onyx. See Argentina, Exposition Universelle, 1889, Argentine Republic: Colección de informes reunidos, vol. 1 (Paris, 1890), 130-31. This report also included Mexican companies per state, with value of production (p. 131). 58. DO, 4 February 1890. 57. Ignacio Mariscal's letter to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, reproduced in México, Secretaría de Fomento, Documentos relativos a la venta de tabacos mexicanos en la Exposición Internacional de París, en 1889 (Mexico City, 1889), 14. 59. Mexico was second only to France in the total of products exhibited: France had 27,201; Mexico, 3,206.