60. See Gibbs's study of Porfirian propaganda in the United States between 1877 and 1878: William E. Gibbs, "Díaz' Executive Agents and United States Foreign Policy," Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 20, 2 (1978):165-89. 61. In this regard, see Paolo Riguzzi, "México próspero: Las dimensiones de la imagen nacional en el porfiriato," Histarias, no. 20 (1988):137-57. 62. EXP, Box 8, Exp. 19. About Godoy's propaganda books on Mexico's presence at world's fairs, see chapter 3. 63. About this book, see also EXP, Box 11, Exp. 7, in which Godoy requested economic support for its project. See Godoy, México en París. 64. EXP, Box 8, Exp. 19; Ireneo Paz, Los hombres prominentes de México, 4 vols. (Mexico City, 1888). A French journalist, J. L. Regagnón, was paid to write the French part, and José Francisco Godoy prepared the English part. 65. Paz invited Riva Palacio to add his name by paying a "subscription" of 50 pesos. See Paz's letter to Vicente Riva Palacio, 1 September 1887, Vicente Riva Palacio's letters, Genaro García Collection, University of Texas at Austin. For data about Paz's book, see Juan Bautista Iguiniz, Bibliografía biográfica mexicana (Mexico City, 1969). For the prize awarded to Paz's book, see México, Secretaría de Fomento, Lista de los premios y recompensas obtenidos por México en la Exposición de París de 1889 (Mexico City, 1891). 66. EXP, Box 8, Exp. 19. See Manuel de Olaguibel, Memoria para una bibliografía científica de México en el siglo XIX (Mexico City, 1889). 67. Some 10,000 copies of each issue were published, at a cost of 600 francs per issue. See Actas de sesión, 15 July 1889, EXP, Box 12, Exp. 3. 68. The book, which appeared in 1889, was published in Paris by Imprimerie et Librairie Centrales. Bianconi was financed by the Mexican government, though I have not been able to determine the total amount of money he received. For specific payments to Bianconi, see Sesión, 11 May 1889, EXP, Box 12, Exp. 3; BEMP 3 (1889):794-96; and BEMP 5 (1889):476. 69. BEMP 1 (1888):182-85. 70. E. Levasseur, ed., Le Mexique au début du XXe siècle, 2 vols. (Paris, 1904). 71. See Reclus, L'Homme et la terre. 72. There are few bibliographical data about this character, who played a role in various Mexican international displays. He seems to have been extremely well connected in international propaganda circles. Justo Sierra refers to him as El Barón and as "enfant du pavé flâneur," who authored humorous texts. He argued that Gostkowski went from bohemian to entrepreneur. See the article in El Federalista, 20 June 1874, reproduced in Justo Sierra, Obras completas, vol. 3, ed. Agustín Yáñez (Mexico City, 1948), 177-80. 73. EXP, Box 12, Exp. 2. 74. See EXP, Box 15, Exp. 2, for various clippings. He received 1,561 francs. 75. Gustave Gostkowski, Au Mexique (Paris, 1900). 76. Ramón Fernández wrote to Porfirio Díaz that Díaz Mimiaga did not handle the propaganda well. He believed that the money disbursed in this regard was "mal-gastado." See UIA-Díaz, L. 14, C. 25, 12492-505. 77. See Diaz Mimiaga's report in EXP, Box 12, Exp. 6. 78. Ibid. 79. EXP, Box 9, Exp. 10.