80. See Paz, Los hombres prominentes de México. It has not been easy to find bibliographical data on Diaz Mimiaga. See José C. Valadés, El Porfirismo, vol. 2 (Mexico City, 1987), 157; and Luis G. Zorrilla, Relaciones de México con la República de Centro América y con Guatemala (Mexico City, 1984), 495. All of these authors point out Diaz Mimiaga's difficult personality. 81. Díaz Mimiaga, 1849-1891, according to Manuel Mestre Ghigliazza, Efemérides biográficas (Mexico City, 1945). 82. EXP, Box 6, Exp. 8. 83. See Acta de sesión, 8 May 1889. Díaz Mimiaga complained that Bablot sent the minutes without his signature and censorship (EXP, Box 12, Exp. 3). See also Acta de sesión, 3 June 1889, EXP, Box 12, Exp. 3. 84. See Bablot's full report, copy to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, in which he explained his motivations for arranging a scientific meeting with Latin American specialists: Letter, 19 August 1889, SRE Le. 1104, pp. 276-88. 85. See Informe detallado por orden de fechas, relativo a diversas trabajos, principalmente de escultura y fundición artística, y que rinde el que subscribe . . . ," Ramón Fernández, 21 November 1889, IPBA, Box 5, Exp. 18. In this regard, see also Fausto Ramírez, "Dioses, héroes y reyes mexicanos en Paris 1889," in Historia, leyendas y mitos de México (Mexico City, 1988), 215. 86. For Contreras's plans with French engineer Colibert, and his petition for 220,000 francs, see BEMP 1 (1888):188-94. 87. EXP, Box 13, Exp. 4, PP. 8-101. All of the quotations concerning the conflict were taken from this document. 88. Manuel Gutiérrez Najera, "Alfredo Bablot," in Obras críticas y literarias, vol. 1 (Mexico City, 1959), 468-69. This was a panegyric for Bablot, who died in 1894. 89. See Justo Sierra's account of his travels, Viajes en Tierra Yankee, en la Europa Latina, in Justo Sierra, Obras completas, vol. 6, ed. José Luis Martinez (Mexico City, 1948), 15-61. ## 5. ## The Aztec Palace and the History of Mexico 1. José Martí, La edad de oro (Río Piedras, 1971), 111-12. In 1889 José Martí wrote a children's magazine, La Edad de Oro, which used the 1889 Paris fair as a way to explain the modern world to Latin American children. It is not clear whether Martí learned about the Paris fair through books and periodicals or visited the fair. His descriptions are rich in detail. I thank José Prieto for having referred me to Martí. 2. DO, 15 June 1888. About this building, and from a knowledgeable, artistic point of view, Fausto Ramirez has written two indispensable essays: "Vertientes nacionalistas en el modernismo"; and "Dioses, héroes y reyes mexicanos en París, 1889." Daniel Schávelzon reprinted some of the documents that dealt directly with the debate about the Mexican Aztec Palace in Paris. See "La polémica de la 'Arquitectura nacional' y el Pabellón de México en París," in La polémica del arte nacional, ed. Daniel Schável-zon (Mexico City, 1988), 137-64. In addition, Díaz y de Ovando's article contains some interesting reprints of the media coverage of the Mexican exhibit in Paris: Clementina Díaz y de Ovando, ''México en la Exposición Universal de 1889," Anales del Instituto de Investigaciones Estéticas, no. 61 (1990): 109-71. As I was revising this man-