uscript, I gained access to María Auxiliadora Fernández, "The Representation of National Identity in Mexican Architecture: Two Case Studies (1680 and 1889)" (Ph.D. diss., Columbia University, 1993), which deals with the Aztec Palace and with Carlos de Sigüenza y Góngora's Triumphal Arch"Teatro de Virtudes Políticas." Fernán-dez's insightful analysis incorporates postcolonial and representational theory into art history. Unfortunately, although she devotes more than 200 pages to an examination of Góngora's arch, she gives fewer than 30 pages to the Aztec Palace. 3. For orientalism at universal expositions, see Timothy Mitchell, "The World as Exhibition," Comparative Studies of Society and History 31, 2 (1989): 217-37; Timothy Mitchell, Colonising Egypt (Cambridge, 1988), 1-33; Sylviane Leprun, Le Théâtre des colonies (Paris, 1986), 130-48; Zeynep (Çelik, Displaying the Orient (Berkeley, 1992); and Raymond Corbey, "Ethnographic Showcases, 1870-1930," Cultural Anthropology, 8 (1993):338-69. 4. Regarding the characteristics of nineteenth-century Latin American patriotic history, see Colmenares, Las convenciones contra la cultura. 5. I use the term as explained by David Brading, "Creole Patriotism," in his The Origins of Mexican Nationalism (Cambridge, 1985), 3-23. The main aspects of this patriotism were the "exaltation of the Aztec past, the denigration of the Conquest, the xenophobic resentment against the gachupines, and the devotion to Our Lady Guadalupe" (p. 3). See also Enrique Florescano, Memoria mexicana (Mexico City, 1987), 300-308. 6. For this radical indigenism, see David Brading, The First America (Cambridge, 1991), 583-602; Brading, Origins of Mexican Nationalism, 81-88; and Luis Villoro, Los grandes momentos del indigenismo en México (Mexico City, 1950, 1984), 137-44. 7. See Lucas Alamán, Historia de Méjico desde los primeros movimientos que prepararon su independencia en el año de 1808 hasta la época presente, 5 vols. (Mexico City, 1849-1852). 8. For instance, consider José Vasconcelos's hispanism that recalls that of don Lucas. See chapter 12. 9. Quoted in (Çelik, Displaying the Orient, 11. 10. See Manuel Payno, Compendio de la historia de México para uso de los establecimientos de instrucción pública en la República Mexicana (Mexico City, 1870); and Josefina Vázquez, "La historiografía romántica en México," Historia Mexicana 10, 1 (1960): 1-13. 11. Compare Valadés's argument. He believed that it was during the Porfiriato that official history started (Valadés, El porfirismo, vol. 2, xxv). 12. Concern that the lack of an objective national history was an obstacle in the consolidation of the nation was shared by conservatives and even by monarchists. In this regard, see Josefina Vázquez, Nacionalismo y educación en México (Mexico City, 1970), 66-67. 13. Because, as Josefina Vázquez has shown, the first two textbooks about independent Mexico had not assimilated the Mexican past, leaving aside or misrepresenting such events as the war with the United States. See Josefina Vázquez, "Síntesis de la historia de México de historiadores mexicanos," in Investigaciones contemporáneas sobre historia de México (Mexico City, 1971 ), 213-27; and Vázquez, Nacionalismo y Educación, 44-132. 14. In addition to Riva Palacio's book, Ballesca published the next general and major history of Mexico, Justo Sierra's México, su evolución social, 2 vols. (Barcelona, 1900-1902). On Ballesca's relationship with Riva Palacio, see Victoriano Salado