álvarez, Memorias de Victoriano Salado álvarez, vol. 1, Tiempo Viejo (Mexico City, 1946), 324-27; and Ballesca's correspondence with Riva Palacio, 1 September 1887, Vicente Riva Palacio's letters, Genaro Garcia Collection, University of Texas at Austin. 15. Justo Sierra argued that he was invited by Riva Palacio to participate and that the idea for the book emerged within the intellectual discussions of the Altamirano group. See Justo Sierra, "México a través de los siglos," Revista nacional de letras y ciencias, no. 2 (1889):120-21. In turn, historian Daniel Cosío Villegas argued that the book had originated as a study of the war of intervention which was requested of Riva Palacio by President González (HMM 8:660-66). Valadés observed that México a través de los siglos had begun as a reaction to José María Roa Bárcena's "Recuerdos de la invasión norteamericana," published in El Siglo XIX. See Valadés, El porfirismo, vol. 1, 413-14. Gargallo di Castel Lentini believes that after Juárez's reforms, a small group of intellectuals realized that it was necessary to create a national literature based on the reinterpretation of national history. México a través de los siglos was part of this reinterpretation. See Francesca Gargallo di Castel Lentini, "Vicente Riva Palacio: Uno storico liberale," Revista di Storia della Storiografia 3, 2-3 (1982):123-30. See also Clementina Díaz y de Ovando, Vicente Riva Palacio y la identidad nacional (Mexico City, 1985). 16. "Proyecto de historia general de México," 3, preserved in Vicente Riva Palacio's papers, Genaro García Collection, University of Texas at Austin. 17. His novels and short stories were often inspired by colonial times. In fact, he held the records of the Inquisition and wrote novels about this topic, such as Monja casada, vírgen y mártir, and Martin Garatuza. See González Navarro, HMM, 689. 18. Riva Palacio, México a través de los siglos, vol. 2, 471. 19. See Brading, The Origins of Mexican Nationalism (Cambridge, 1985). 20. As both Moreno and Hale observe, late-nineteenth-century liberals read Darwin in French and thus absorbed the French interpretation of evolutionism as transgresisme. Riva Palacio's footnotes referred to French translations of Darwin's works, especially to Ch. Darwin, La Descendance de l'homme, 2d ed., 2 vols. (Paris, 1873-1874). See Riva Palacio, México a través de los siglos, vol. 2, 474-81; Hale, Transformation of Liberalism, 206-10; Moreno, La polémica del darwinismo; and Roberto Moreno, "Mexico," in The Comparative Reception of Darwinism, ed. Thomas F. Glick (Chicago, 1988), 346-74. 21. See Riva Palacio, México a través de los siglos, vol. 2,472-73. 22. For examples of the contemporary endurance of this view, see Díaz y de Ovando, Vicente Riva Palacio, 38; and Agustín E Basave Benítez, México mestizo: Análi-sis del nacionalismo mexicano en torno a la mestizofilia de Andrés Molina Enríquz (Mexico City, 1992), 13-41,121-24. 23. In this regard, see Victor Rico González, Hacia un concepto de la conquista de México (Mexico City, 1953), 205. 24. Compare Chavero, Xochitl and Quetzalcóatl, and the criticisms by Vicente Riva Palacio, which were made under the pseudonym of Cero: Los Ceros (Mexico City, 1882). Chavero, as mentioned in previous chapters, participated in the 1904 Saint Louis Fair. See Chavero, Discurso pronunciado el 24 de septiembre de 1904 en el Congreso de artes y ciencias de la Exposición Universal de San Luis Missouri (Mexico City, 1905). 25. Riva Palacio satirized Chavero's archaeological concerns and his private interests in public positions (Cero, Los Ceros, 156-57).