26. Ibid., 154. 27. For an explanation of the origins of the neoclassical discourse in Mexico, see David Brading, "Héroes republicanos y tiranos populares," Cuadernos Americanos, Nueva época 5, 11 (1988):9- 26. See also Hale's concept of the era of eloquence, in "Political and Social Ideas in Latin America," 367-441. 28. Chavero, México a través de los siglos, vol. 1, 67. 29. Ibid., 80. 30. Santiago Ballesca's letter to Riva Palacio, 23 April 1889, Vicente Riva Palacio's letters, Genaro Garcia Collection, University of Texas at Austin. 31. "Proyecto de historia general de México," 4. 32. R. Canto was a Catalan designer of theater stages and a devoted admirer of representational capabilities of expositions. See Justino Fernández, El arte del siglo XIX en México (Mexico City, 1967), 396. In 1888, for Barcelona's universal exposition, Canto published his Dedicatoria d'un pagés de montanya à la Universal Exposiciò de Barcelona (Barcelona, 1888). See Elías A. de Molins, Diccionario biográfico y bibliográ-rico de escritores y artistas catalanes del siglo XIX, 2 vols. (New York, 1972); and Canto's letter to Riva Palacio (in which Canto seems to have been a sort of benevolent critic of Riva Palacio's amateur paintings), Vicente Riva Palacio's letters, Genaro Garcia Collection, University of Texas at Austin. 33. Especially the descriptions by Desiré de Charnay, who was given permission in 1880 to do archaeological research and to keep a good portion of what he discovered (to be shipped to France). See Justo Sierra's support of this permission in México, Cámara de Diputados, Diario de los Debates 1 (1880):532, 536. The various volumes of México a través de los siglos also included paintings by José María Velasco, among others. 34. By the late 1880s technology not only had made books more accessible but also had produced new ways of enriching the expressive capabilities of books. In this regard, the study of the relationship between romanticism and technology is linked to the analysis of media, nationalism, and modes of representation. Compare Walter J. Ong, Rhetoric, Romance, and Technology (Ithaca, 1971); and Lee Fontanella, La imprenta y las letras en la España romántica (Frankfurt, 1982). 35. Ch. Baudelaire, "L'Exposition Universelle de 1855: Beaux-Arts," in his Oeuvres complètes, préface, présentation et notes de Marcel A. Ruff (Paris, 1968), 345. 36. Edward King Kingsborough, Antiquities of Mexico, 9 vols. (London, 1831-1848), reprinted as Antigüedades de México, basado en la recopilación de Lord Kingsborough, study and interpretation by José Corona Nuñez (Mexico City, 1964-1967). 37. See Jean Fréderic de Waldeck, Voyages pittoresque et archéologique dans la province d'Yucatan (Amérique Central), pendant les années 1834 et 1836 (Paris, 1838) and Jean Fréderic de Waldeck and E. Brasseur de Bourbourg, Monuments anciens du Mexique: Palenque et autres ruines (Paris, 1866). 38. See Guillerme Dupaix, Antiquitiés mexicaines: Relation des trois expeditions du Capitaine Dupaix, 3 vols. (Paris, 1824); and Desiré de Charnay, Les Anciennes Villes du Nouveau Monde: Voyages d'explorations au Mexique et dans l'Amérique Centrale (Paris, 1885). 39. Alfredo Chavero, Historia antigua y de la conquista, in Riva Palacio, México a través de los siglos, vol. 1 (Barcelona, 1888).