40. Ramírez, "Dioses," 220. 41. Letter from Salazar to Pacheco, 26 May 1988, EXP, Box 1, Exp. 7. Lithographs and plans of the building are missing from the archive. They can be found, together with a partial reproduction of Salazar's letter to Pacheco, in Godoy, México en París, 69-73. 42. El Monitor Republicano, 9 June 1888, reproduced in Godoy, México en París, 65-68. For a final version, see the official description of the Mexican pavilion by Antonio Perñfiel, Explication de l'édifice mexicaine à l'Exposition Internationale de Paris en 1889 (Barcelona, 1889). 43. Antonio Peñafiel, Monumentos del arte mexicano antiguo: Ornamentación, mitología, tributos y monumentos (Berlin, 1890). Peñafiel acknowledged that several mythological characters for the Mexican pavilion were based on Sahagún's designs which in turn were included in the original of Sahagús Historia de la Nueva España, a book that was furnished to Peñafiel by Eduard Seler, who had found it in Florence (Letter to Pacheco, 12 May 1988), reproduced in Godoy, México en París, 65-68. Fausto Ramirez adds that Peñafiel also used Diego Durán's Historia de las indias de la Nueva España e islas de tierra firme, published in 1867 by José Fernández and in 1880 by Gumersindo Mendoza. In the second volume of this last book, Peñafiel found the useful description and depiction of Indian rites and gods (Libro de los ritos y ceremonias en las fiestas de los dioses y celebración de ellas). He also utilized Manuel Orozco y Berra, Historia antigua de la conquista de México (Mexico City, 1880). See Ramirez, "Dioses," 221. 44. Peñafiel, Explication de l'édifice mexicaine. 45. Ibid., 1. See also Peñafiel, Monumentos del arte mexicano antiguo. This book was written at the specific request of the Mexican Ministry of Economic Development and contained texts in Spanish, French, and English. 46. Peñafiel, Explication de l'édifice mexicaine, 1. 47. Ibid., 10. 48. Ibid., 3. 50. Ibid., 56. 53. Acta de la sesión del 12 de mayo de 1888, in part reproduced in Godoy, México en París, 73-75. Chavero headed the commission in charge of evaluating Salazar's design. See BEMP 1 (1888):787. 54. Bablot, declaring himself unable to judge either project, did not vote. 55. In this regard, see "Instrucciones alas que deben sujetarse la comisión encargada de contratar las obras para el edificio de la exposición mexicana en París," signed by Pacheco, 7 June 1888, EXP, Box l, Exp. 7, 10-11. About the contract with Santos y Cía., see BEMP 2 (1888):239. 56. See Díaz Mimiaga's request for a new location in EXP, Box l, Exp. 8. 57. Mexican engineers had to deal with an old railroad track that crossed the Mexican lot in Paris. Salazar requested that the rails be removed by French authorities. See EXP, Box l, Exp. 7. See also Diaz Mimiaga's final report, EXP, Box 12, Exp. 6, p. 4; Letter, Diaz Mimiaga to Fomento, EXP, Box 8, Exp. 14; and BEMP 1 (1888):48-51. 58. EXP, Box 8, Exp. 14, Spanish version of the contract "Antiguo Establecimiento