state intervention. British world's fairs were also controlled by a state agency, but the British Royal Commission was in charge of soliciting the necessary funding from private interests. The U.S. strategy for the economic management of world's fairs was even more dependent on private organization and funding. 9 As for Mexico, it was up to the state to finance Mexican participation at world's fairs as part of promoting national industrialization. As historians of Mexico's industrialization have argued, the statedirectly formed by private interestswas the fundamental agent of industrialization.10 Thus the Mexican exhibit at the Philadelphia fair of 1876 was fully sponsored by the government of Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada. The Mexican displays in Paris 1889, Paris 1900, and Chicago 1893 were also fully funded by the Mexican government. The same was true of Mexico's presence in the New Orleans exhibition of 1884. Government expenditures to sponsor these exhibitions consumed a significant percentage of the national budget, particularly if we consider that these were only ephemeral events. The role of the Mexican state included public participation and sponsorship of private exhibitors.11 In fact, the French media acknowledged the remarkable industrial patronage of the Díaz regime. In 1891 Tout-d'Union, commenting on Mexico's performance at Paris, argued that expositions were not schools of imitation but modern showcases for new industrial and commercial needs. The sole role of government should be to facilitate private initiative, and Mexico was held up as an example of how this might be accomplished.12 Mexico's presence at the 1889 Paris fair took place within the context of an intricate international environment. After long debates, the Paris world's fair of 1889 finally commemorated the republican values of the French Revolution. Therefore, in addition to the traditional French enemies, several European monarchies were unwilling to celebrate the murderers of kings.13 Ultimately, a monarchical boycott of the exposition occurred, and in a show of solidarity, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Spain, England, Italy, the Low Countries, Portugal, Russia, and Sweden decided to have no official participation. However, thanks to French diplomatic efforts, private attendance was allowed by most of these monarchies.14 England, the reigning industrial power, was not willing to sanction with its presence either the French industrial and military displays or the rhetorical republican nationalism of France. French patriotism adjusted quickly to the circumstances. French nationalism ideologically overcame the boycott through references to the modern consensus on universal truths and values. For France, what was important was that private scientific and industrial progress was exhibited in Paris. Although the assumption was that science and industry had no citizenship, their universal presence in Paris effectively reinforced French modern nationalism. The French republic was hence