Cail. Pabellón de México en la Exposición Universal Internacional de 1889 en París. Contrato." 59. Díaz Mimiaga's final reportand Fausto Ramirez following itclaimed that the works of Zinc were produced by the house of Gillardin and designed by Julio Miltgen. The bronze works were done in the workshop of Thiebault Brothers (see Ramirez, "Dioses"). 60. For copies of the contract, see EXP, Box 8, Exp. 14, pp. 2-15, and partial reproduction (without the specific prices of each part) in Godoy, México en París, 235-42. See also DO, 26 November 1888. 61. For all the works of cement, carpentry, plumbing, zinc, and so forth, see the description of each realm, in EXP, Box 8, Exp. 13. 62. Godoy reproduced some views of the interior of the building. Other images can be found in Bulletin de l'Exposition Universelle de Paris 1889, no. 52 (1889):92; and no. 32 (1889):252. 63. La Lanteinier, 24 June 1889. See also Exposition Universelle. 1889. Pavillon du Mexique. Musique militaire-orchestre. Programmé du 22 juin, SRE Le. 1104. Mexico spent more than 10,000 francs on the inauguration (Díaz Mimiaga's estimate, EXP, Box 12, Exp. 6, p. 24a). 64. Le Petit Journal, 24 June 1889. 65. L'événement, 24 June 1889. 66. Emilia Pardo Bazán, "Al pie de la torre Eiffel," in her Obras Completas, vol. 19 (Madrid, n.d.), 246-47. 67. Vicente Riva Palacio, Mis versos (Madrid, 1893), 61. 6. Mexican Anthropology and Ethnography 1. Eugéne-Melchior de Vogüé, "À travers l'Exposition. VI. Les Exotiques.-Les Colonies," Revue des Deux Mondes 95 (September 1889):65. 2. See Martí's explanation of the 1889 fair in Ismaelillo, 81-91. 3. See France, Paris, Exposition Universelle de 1889, Congrès International des Traditions Populaires. Première session. Compte rendu (Paris, 1891). Although nothing Mexican was discussed in this congress, Mexico was represented by Eduardo Zárate and Rafael de Zayas Enríquez. 4. Stocking elaborates on Thomas Hardy's idea of universal exhibitions as precipices of time. See George Stocking, Victorian Anthropology (New York, 1987), 3-5. 5. World's fairs as a whole were main events for European and American orientalism. However, colonial expositionswithin and outside universal exhibitions were more emblematic examples of this orientalism. See Leprun, Le Théâtre des colonies, 17-23; for English fairs, Altick, Shows of London, 268-301; for American fairs, Rydell, All the World's a Fair; Corbey, "Ethnographic Showcases"; and Tankotte, "Kaleidoscopes of the World," 5-29. 6. Quoted in Mandell, Paris 1900, 21-22. 7. See Mitchell, Colonising Egypt, 1-33. See also Vogüé's account of the exhibit of the history of labor and anthropology: Eugéne-Melchior de Vogüé, "À travers l'Exposition. IV. Les Arts libéraux.- L'Histoire du travail," Revue des Deux Mondes 94 (August 1889):929-44.