8. For further elaboration on the concepts of inside and outside, see Mary Louise Pratt, Imperial Eyes: Travel and Transculturation (New York, 1992), 6-9. 9. C. de Varigny, "L'Amérique à l'Exposition Universelle," Revue des Deux Mondes 95 (September-October 1889):837. 10. A copy of this pamphlet can be found at the Paris National Library, and in EXP, Box 12, Exp. 2, Ch. Possonnier, L'Exposition mexicaine (n.p., n.d.). 11. La presse Industrielle, 4 July 1889, translated in Godoy, México en Paris, 271. 12. Leopoldo Batres, Monografías de arqueología mexicana: Teotihuacán; o, la ciudad sagrada de los toltecas (Mexico City, 1889). 13. See Peñafiel, Monumentos del arte mexicano; and Peñafiel, Explication de l'édifice mexicaine. 14. Çelik, Displaying the Orient, 2. 15. Charles Garnier and A. Ammann, L'Habitation humaine (Paris, 1892), ill-iv, quoted in ibid., 71-73. 16. Martí, La edad de oro, 63. 17. EXP, Box 8, Exp. 12. 18. See the lively descriptions and designs in Eugene-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, "Les Nahuas, les toltòques," in his Histoire de l'habitation (Paris, 1875), 278-92; and his long prologue in Desiré de Charnay, Cités et ruines americaines (Paris, 1863), 10-103. Here he suggested that pre-Hispanic architecture resembled that of the Aryan people. 19. See Garnier and Ammann, L'Habitation humaine; and Argentina's report made by the French architect Alberto Ballu, "La arquitectura en la Exposición Universal de Paris 1889." Informe argentino, found in the world's fairs collection of the Smithsonian Institution. 20. In this regard, see Burton Benedict, "The Anthropology of World's Fairs," in The Anthropology of World's Fairs: San Francisco Panama Pacific International Exposition of 1915 (Berkeley, 1984), 43-52; and Corbey, "Ethnographic Showcases," 341-45. 21. This exhibition was organized by the private McGrave Company. See Alfredo Barrón's report in SRE 19-22-25. The American photographer C. B. Waite, hired by the Mexican government, attended this fair and took photographs of the "street of Mexico" and its native people. See F. Ballesteros Montellano, "C. B. Waite, profesional fotógrafo" (Tesis de Licenciatura, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mé-xico, 1989). 22. Rydell, All the World's a Fair, 94, 147-48. Regarding Mexico's presence at the 1894 Atlanta fair, see Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento (1897), 59-60, 282-89. See also Justo Sierra's commentaries in Justo Sierra, Viajes en tierra yankee, in his Obras completas, vol. 6, 46-49. 23. The Aztec Lilliputians were a male three feet four inches tall, and a female two inches shorter. See Altick, Shows of London, 284- 87. 24. See the report of the Mexican commissioner at the 1895 Atlanta fair, Gregorio E. González, in México, Secretaría de Comercio, Memoria de la Secretaría de Comercio, 1892-1896 (Mexico City, 1898), 59, 282-89. See also chapter 11. 25. See the account of this exhibit by Alfred Charles Collineau, L'Anthropologie à l'Exposition Universelle de 1889 (Paris, 1890); and France, Paris, Exposition Universelle de 1889, La Société, l'école et le laboratoire d'anthropologie de Paris à l'Exposition Universelle de 1889 (Paris, 1889). 26. France, Ministère du Commerce et de l'Industrie, Exposition Universelle Inter-