nationale de 1889 à Paris: Monographie, palais-jardinsconstructions diverses-installations générales (Paris, 1892- 1895). 27. France, Exposition Universelle Internationale de 1889 à Paris, Catalogue général officiel: Exposition Rétrospective du travail et des sciences anthropologiques, Section 1, anthropologie, ethnographie (Lille, 1889), 26, 28-29. 28. Ibid., 10. 29. See ibid., 655; and Stephen Jay Gould, The Mismeasure of Man (New York, 1981), 75-77. 30. García Cubas, étude, 17-20. 31. Nicolás León argued that the origins of Mexico's scientific anthropology date back to 1864, when the French Scientific Commission of Mexico, sent by Napoleon III, arrived. See Memorias de la Sociedad Antonio Alzate 14 ( 1899-1900):63. See also his later history of Mexican physical anthropology, Nicolás León, "Historia de la antropología física en México," American Journal of physical Anthropology 2, 3 (1919):229-49. 32. According to José María Velasco, this agency gained great recognition in the 1889 International Congress of Conservation and Protection of Artistic Works (Memoria grupo primero, December 1889, EXP, Box 18, Exp. 12). See also Salomón Nahmad, "Las ideas sociales del positivismo en el indigenismo de la época prerevolucionaria en México," América Indígena 33, 4 (1973):1172. 33. See Jesús Galindo y Villa, "Discurso de sesión solemne conmemorativa del primer centenario de la muerte de Antonio de Alzate," Memorias de la Sociedad Antonio Alzate 13 (1899): 15. 34. See León, "Historia de la antropología física," 235. 35. "La antropología actual y el estado de las razas," La Naturaleza 6 (1882-1884):126. 36. This is argued by M. S. Stabb, "Indigenism and Racism in Mexican Thought: 1857-1911," Journal of Inter-American Studies 1 (1959):406. 37. On degeneration, see J. Edward Chamberlain and Sander L. Gilman, eds., Degeneration: The Dark Side of Progress (New York, 1985). For some insights on the growth of these ideas in Latin America (Mexico, Argentina, and Brazil), see Nancy Leys Stepan, The Hour of Eugenics (Ithaca, 1991), 21-26. 38. For a lucid and complete discussion of this process in French anthropology, see Yvette Conry, L'Introduction du darwinisme en France au XIXe siècle (Paris, 1974), 51-89. See also Angèle Kremer-Marietti, "L'Anthropologie physique et morale en France et ses implications ideologiques," in Histoire de l'anthropologie (XVIe-XIXe siècles), ed. Britta Rupp-Eisenreich (Paris, 1984), 319- 51. 39. Stocking, Victorian Anthropology, 76. 40. Daniel Brinton, "The Nation as an Element in Anthropology," in Memoirs of the International Congress of Anthropology, ed. C. Staniland Wake (Chicago, 1894), 20; and Daniel Brinton, Races and Peoples: Lectures on the Science of Ethnography (New York, 1890), 40. 41. E. T. Hamy, "La Science française au Mexique," reprinted in his Décades Améri-canae: Mémoires d'archéologie et d'ethnographie américaines (Paris, 1884), 116. Hamy refers to various travel accounts published by Baradére. See also Anne-Christine Taylor, "L'Américanisme tropical: Une frontière fossile de l'ethnologie," in Histoire de l'anthropologie (XVIe-XIXe siècles), ed. Britta Rupp-Eisenreich (Paris, 1984), 213-32; and Raoul d'Harcourt, L'Américanisme et la France (Paris, 1928).