42. G. d'Eichthal, études sur les origines bouddhiques de la civilization américaine, extract from Revue Archéologique (Paris, 1864). 43. See France, Ministère de l'Instruction Publique, Archives de la Commission Scientifique du Mexique (Paris, 1865). In "La Science française au Mexique" Hamy mentioned various other French studies on Mexico. 44. Congreso Internacional de Americanisms, Actas de la 11 reunión. Mexico 1895 (Mexico City, 1897), 29. 45. In this regard, see Stocking's explanation of the difference between the English (that is, "not a major center of physical anthropology") and French (that is, anatomical) anthropological traditions in the 1860s (Stocking, Victorian Anthropology, 67). 46. For a brief but lucid account of this debate, see Claude Blanckaert, "Monogénisme et polygénisme en France de Buffon à, Paul Broca (1749-1880)" (Ph.D. diss., University of Paris, 1981); and Claude Blanckaert, "On the Origins of French Ethnology: William Edward and the Doctrine of Race," in Bones, Bodies, Behavior: Essays on Biological Anthropology, ed. George W. Stocking (Madison, 1988), 18-55. 47. Nahmad found in García Granados and his essay of 1910 a transitional position between pure positivism and culturalism, within the Porfirian regime. See Ricardo García Granados, El concepto científico de la historia (Mexico City, 1910), also published in the Revista Positiva; and Nahmad, "Las ideas sociales." 48. In fact, in this regard the Anglo-Saxon tradition was more appealing to Mexican intellectuals. Hence, in Spencer and Darwin, both studied in French, Mexicans found, as historian Charles Hale has argued, a version of social Darwinism that allowed them to "put attention on the peculiarities of their society within the universal scheme of evolution" (Hale, Transformation of Liberalism, 213-20). See also Ricardo Godoy, "Franz Boas and His Plans for an International School of American Archaeology and Ethnology in Mexico," Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 14 (1977):228-42; and Luis Vázquez, "Historia y constitución profesional de la arqueología mexicana (1884-1940)," in II Coloquio Pedro Bosch Gimpera (Mexico City, 1993), 30-77. 49. Nicolás León, "Anomalías y mutilaciones étnicas del sistema dentario entre los tarascos pre-colombinos," Anales del Museo Michoacano 3 (1890): 168-73, reprinted in Moreno, La polémica del darwinismo, 257-61. For biographical and bibliographical data about Nicolás León, see the essay "Nicolás León" by Germán Somolinos D'Ardois in his Historia y medicina: Figuras y hechos de la historiografía médica mexicana (Mexico City 1957), 129-60. In this regard, see also Alfonso Herrera's rejection of Riva Palacio's conclusion, in Alfonso L. Herrera, "Nota relativa alas causas que producen atrofia de los pelos. Refutación a un argumento de M. de Quatrefages," Anales del Museo Nacional de México, 1st series, 4- 5 (1891):216-24, reprinted in Moreno, La polémica del darwinismo, 262-72. 50. This was published in Diario del Hogar, 13 January 1889, as a result of a request to Batres for the Mexican anthropological exhibition at the 1889 Paris fair. 51. Leopoldo Batres, "Antropología mexicana: Clasificación del tipo antropológico de las principales tribus aborígenes de México," Revista Nacional de Letras y Ciencias 1 (1889): 191-96. 52. Peñafiel published an article about his Monumentos mexicanos in the 8th ses-