sion of the International Congress of Americanists, "Archéologie mexicaine," in Congrès International des Américanistes, Compte Rendu de la Huitième Session (Paris, 1890), 519-21. See also his description of the Mexican pavilion in "L'Edifice mexicaine," Revue d'Ethnologie 8 (1889):192-200. 53. This is argued by Herzfeld in his analysis of ancient Greek archaeology: M. Herzfeld, Anthropology through the Looking-Glass: Critical Ethnography in the Margins of Europe (Cambridge, 1987), 7. ## 7. Mexican Art and Architecture in Paris 1. See Ramírez, "Dioses," 201-53; Ramírez, "Acotaciones iconográficas," 15-85; and Ramirez, "Vertientes nacionalistas." See also Fernández, El arte del siglo XIX. 2. José María Velasco, "Memoria grupo primero," manuscript, 28 December 1889, EXP, Box 18, Exp. 12. 3. For an example of parallel phenomena in India, see Tapati Guha-Thakurta, The Making of a New "Indian" Art: Artists, Aesthetics and Nationalism in Bengal 1850-1920 (Cambridge, 1992). 4. For a description of the interior of the Argentine building, see RUP 2:213-14. See also Vitali, "1889," 29-37. 5. RUP 2:213-32. 6. Mier, México en la Exposición Universal, 220. For the 1900 Paris fair, see chapter 11. 7. For shifts in European taste, see Raymond Rudorff, Belle Epoque: Paris in the Nineties (London, 1972), chap. 3; and Debora L. Silverman, Art Nouveau in Fin-de-Siècle France: Politics, Psychology, and Style (Berkeley, 1989), 1-11. 8. Ignacio Manuel Altamirano, "La pintura histórica en México," El Artista 1 (1874):8, reprinted in Ida Rodríguez Prampolini, La crítica de arte en el siglo XIX, vol. 2 (Mexico City, 1964). 9. Luis Miguel Aguilar, La democracia de los muertos (Mexico City, 1988), 106. 10. For an itemized description of the various styles, see Israel Katzman, Arquitectura del siglo XIX en México (Mexico City, 1973), 63-219. 11. In this regard, see Çelik's analysis of Oriental pavilions at world's fairs: Çelik, Displaying the Orient, 135-37. See also chapter 11. 12. For an analysis of the arquitectura de la ingeniería, see Renato de Fusco, Historia de la arquitectura contemporánea (Madrid, 1992), 30-63. 13. Çelik, Displaying the Orient, 136. 14. Garnier's dislike is referred to by Katzman (Arquitectura del siglo IX en Mé-xico, 256) and by Tepozcaconetzin Calquetzani, the pseudonym used by the opponent of Luis Salazar's pro-pre-Hispanic article, "Bellas Artes: Arquitectura, arqueología y arquitectura mexicana," El Arte y La Ciencia 1 (December 1899), reprinted in Rodriguez Prampolini, La crítica, vol. 2, 379-80. 15. See Ballu, "La arquitectura en la Exposición Universal," 370-71 on Mexico, 377 on Argentina. 16. Minutes, session of the Mexican commission, 1 June 1889, EXP, Box 12, Exp. 3. 17. El Nacional, 11 September 1890, 7 November 1890, reprinted in Rodriguez Prampolini, La crítica, vol. 3, 254.