35. On the relationship between technology and style, see Cuadriello Aguilar, "La arquitectura en México," 24; regarding construction, see Katzman, Arquitectura del siglo XIX en México, 63-220. 36. See Robert Goldwater, Primitivism in Modern Art (Cambridge, 1986); and Jullian, Triumph of Art Nouveau. 37. Fausto Ramirez also points out the generational aspect as an important role in the consolidation of a new aesthetic vision that eventually concluded in modernism. See Ramirez, "Vertientes nacionalistas," 114-15. 38. Nicolas Mariscal, "Bellas Artes: Arquitectura," El Arte y la Ciencia 1 (April 1899):49. 39. See Luis Salazar, "La arqueología y la arquitectura," in Actas del XI Congreso Internacional de Americanistas (Mexico City, 1895), 137-49. In 1898 he published the same essay as a pamphlet, and in 1899 he presented the last version of the paper in El Arte y la Ciencia 1 (1899):1-3; 2 (1899): 113-14; 3 (1899): 129-30. 40. Salazar, "La arqueología y la arquitectura," El Arte y la Ciencia 1 (1899): 130. The three parts of this article are reprinted in Rodriguez Prampolini, La crítica, vol. 3, 367-77, quotation on p. 376. 41. Of course, the revival of the past in architecture was only a part of the general construction of a nationalistic ideology. In Mexico, Salazar's attempts were paralleled by various efforts to reconstruct Hispanic architecture. See Tepoztecaconetzin Calquetzani, "Bellas artes, arquitectura, arqueología, y arquitectura mexicana," El Arte y la Ciencia 1, 11-12 (1899), reprinted in Rodriguez Prampolini, La crítica, vol. 3, 377-80. Fausto Ramirez has interpreted this debate in his lucid essay on nationalism (Ramírez, "Vertientes nacionalistas," 111-67). 42. Fausto Ramirez has pointed this out, although he supports the idea of a clear and definite distinction between nationalists and cosmopolitans. See Ramírez, "Vertientes nacionalistas," 114-15. 43. See Simmel's concept of architecture as a battle between spirit and nature, always won by nature in George Simmel, "Las ruinas," Revista de Occidente 2 (June 1924):304-7. 44. For an example of this consciousness, see Nicolás Mariscal, El desarrollo de la arquitectura en México (Mexico City, 1901); Álvarez, Las ruinas de Mitla, 257-59; and El Nacional, 11 September-7 November 1890, reprinted in Rodríguez Prampolini, La crítica, vol. 3, 252-75. 45. Lecture delivered in the 1910s and included in Acevedo, Disertaciones de un arquitecto, 53. 46. Federico E. Mariscal, La patria y la arquitectura nacional (Mexico City, 1915), 10. 47. I have benefited from Fausto Ramírez's lucid analysis of the inherent problems that originated in Peñafiel's historic-nationalist project and in Contreras's aesthetically cosmopolitan concepts. See Ramirez, "Dioses." 48. See Cecilio A. Robelo, Diccionario de mitología nahuatl (Mexico City, 1951), 344-45. 49. Robelo argues that in the Códice Tetleriano, Centeotl is pictured as a man married to Xochiquetzalli; in the Vatican Codice, this deity is represented as a woman. See Robelo, Diccionario, 54. 50. Clendinnen believes that Chalchiutlicue was represented as a woman at the lake, as a sort of natural "visible presence personified for easy intelligibility": Inga