Clendinnen, Aztecs: An Interpretation (Cambridge, 1991), 251. According to Ramírez, these images were taken by Peñafiel from Durán's book. See Fray Diego Durán, Historia de las Indias de la Nueva España, vol. 2 (Mexico City, 1951), which includes, as an appendix, Alfredo Chavero, Explicación del Códice geroglífico de M. Aubin (Mexico City, 1951). 51. Peñafiel, Explication de l'édifice, 7. 52. Robelo, Diccionario, 474. 53. Ibid., 47. 54. Clendinnen, Aztecs, 164, 168. 55. Ramírez, "Dioses," 227. 56. Peñafiel, Explication de l'édifice, 9. 57. Orozco y Berra, Historia antigua. 58. For a detailed description of the aesthetic aspects of this combination, see Ramirez, "Dioses," 233-41. 59. EXP, Box 1, Exp. 7. In his report to Gustavo Baz, Minister of Justice, Contreras told of his studies in Spain and France in the workshops of Gagbot and the House of Allard Hodot, in which he obtained his Placa de Obrero de Primera. See also DO, November 1889, 1-2; Justino Fernández, El arte moderno en México: Breve HistoriaSiglo XIX (Mexico City, 1937), 192-98; and Patricia Pérez Walters, "Jesús Contreras (1866-19o2): Imágenes escultóricas y personalidad artística" (Tesis de Licenciatura, Universidad Iberoamericana, 1989); and the summary of this thesis in the text prepared for an exhibit of Contreras's works (México, Consejo Nacional para la Cultura y las Artes, Jesús Contreras, 1866-1902: Escultor finisecular [Mexico City, 1990]. 60. This was true for all nations. For instance, leading American sculptors, such as Augustus Saint-Gaudens and Daniel Chester French, were in France in the 1880s. See Kathryn Greenthal, "Late Nineteenth Century American Sculpture in Its International Context," in La scultura nel XIX secolo, edited by Horst W. Janson (Bologna, 1981), 241-47. 61. See BEMP 1 (1888):188-94. 62. In the UIA-Díaz are letters from Diaz Mimiaga to Porfirio Díaz and from Contreras to Porfirio Díaz. Despite differences with Porfirio Díaz (in the beginning of 1889), Contreras was personally recommended by Diaz Mimiaga to Díaz. Contreras visited Diaz in January 1890 with a letter of introduction by Diaz Mimiaga. See UIA-Díaz, Leg. 15, Box 6, Doc. 2501; Leg. 15, Box 3, Doc. 1278; and Leg. 15, Box 6, Docs. 2610-12. 63. El Diario del Hogar, 3 January 1892, quoted in Pérez Walters, Jesús F. Contreras, 23. Contreras also was involved in real estate and in the urban transformation of Mexico City. 64. Contreras did not break completely with classicism, although he introduced romantic and eclectic tendencies. For analyses of the French sculpture of the era, see William Hauptman, "'La Mélancolie' in French Romantic Sculpture," in Saloni, gallerie, musei e loro influenza sullo sviluppo dell'arte dei secoli XIX e XX, ed. F. Haskell (Bologna, 1981), 111-15; Ruth Butler, "Nationalism, a New Seriousness, and Rodin: Some Thoughts about French Sculpture in the 1870s," in Haskell, Saloni, 67. 65. See the discussion of liberal aesthetics and the explanation of romanticism in Mexican sculpture in Mario Monteforte Toledo, Las piedras vivas: Escultura y sociedad en México (Mexico City, 1965). See also Fernández, El arte del siglo XIX, 196-97;