and Salvador Moreno, "Un siglo perdido de la escultura mexicana: El siglo XIX," Artes de México, no. 133 ( 1970) :5- 93. 66. Léon Cahun, "L'Exposition Universelle. VII. Le Mexique (ier article)," La Phare de la Loire, 20 June 1889. Part of this article was reproduced in El Mundo of Mexico City (15 August 1889), but the name of the author was changed to León Satin. A portion of the article was reproduced in Rodriguez Prampolini, La crítica, vol. 3, 235-36. 67. See Ramirez, "Acotaciones iconográficas." 68. For an elaboration of Velasco's type of realism, see Juan de la Encina, El paisajista José Mafia Velasco (1840-1912) (Mexico City, 1943), 87-97. 69. See ibid., 97. On landscape painting as naturalistic exercise, see Yi-Fu Tuan, Topophilia: A Study of Environmental Perception, Attitudes, and Values (Englewood Cliffs, 1974); and Ann Bermingham, Landscape and Ideology: The English Rustic Tradition, 1740-1850 (Berkeley, 1986). 70. See Angela Miller, "Everywhere and Nowhere: The Making of the National Landscape," American Literary History 4 (1992):208. 71. Cahun, "L'Exposition Universelle." 72. For Velasco's archeological paintings, see Carlos Martinez Marín, "Jesús Velasco y el dibujo arqueológico," in Ramirez, José María Velasco, 203-32. For Velasco's scientific paintings, see Elias Trabulse, "Aspectos de la obra científica de José María Velasco," in Ramírez, José María Velasco, 123-80; and Elías Trabulse, José María Velasco: Un paisaje de la ciencia en México (Toluca, 1992). 73. See Ramirez, "Acotaciones iconográficas." 74. México, Catalogue officiel de l'Exposition de la République Mexicaine. 75. Claude Debroise, "José María Velasco y el paisaje fotográfico decimonónico (apuntes para un paralelismo)," in Ramírez, José María Velasco, 103-21. 76. Peter Hales, William Henry Jackson and the Transformation of the American Landscape (Philadelphia, 1988), 173-75. According to Hales, these pictures are in the U.S. Library of Congress, in the Detroit Company Collection. José Antonio Rodriguez argues that 600 of these pictures were published in the Album of Documentary Views of México, 4 vols., 1884-1885. See José Antonio Rodriguez, "Vues mexicaines, el libro perdido de A. Briquet," Dominical: El Nacional (17 November 1991):4-8; and W. Jones, "William Henry Jackson in México," American West 14, 4 (1977): 10-21. 77. See Debroise, "José María Velasco," 115. See also Claude Debroise, "Plein soleil: Le Cas mexicain," Photographies, no. 6 (1984):32-38. 78. Alan Trachtenberg, Reading American Photography: Images as History: Mathew Brady to Walker Evans (New York, 1989), 288. 79. See Rosa Casanova and Olivier Debroise, Sobre la superficie bruñida de un espejo: La fotografía en México en el siglo XIX (Mexico City, 1989), 12. See also Michel Poivert, "La Photographie artistique à l'Exposition Universelle de 1900," Histoire de l'Art, no. 13-14 (1991):60-66. 80. Velasco seems to have been fascinated by photography. During his sojourn in Paris in 1889, he became very interested in the development of photography. See Debroise, "José María Velasco," 120; and Islas García, Velasco. 81. See Patricia Massé, "Ilusiones compartidas entre la albúmina y el óleo: Las tarjetas de visita de Cruces y Campa," Anales del Instituto de Investigaciones Estéticas, no. 63 (1992):125-36. On Romualdo Garcia and Valleto, see Enrique Fernández