viewed as the monarchy of science, and the attendance of a scientist such as Thomas Alva Edison was therefore itself a great royal approbation: "If the kings of war have refused to visit the 1889 exposition, who cares? We have the king of science [Edison]." 15 Although the French fair did not succeed in attracting the participation of all Europe, it was proclaimed as a great moment for the imperial and colonial pursuits of France. The French colonies had an enormous display on the Esplanade des Invalides. Various pavilions represented Cochin-China, Cambodia, Algeria, and the "villages" of Senegal, Gabon-Congo, New Caledonia, and Tonkin. The products and people from these regions were brought to Paris to round out the material and human circus of the exposition.16 Indeed, France's geopolitical concerns were part of the whole event. The official and nonofficial invitations to African, Asian, and Latin American countries were imbued with French imperialist longing that dated back to the two Napoleons. From the French perspective of the time, the interests of France in Latin America were being seriously threatened by Germany, England, and the United States. In 1886, in La Revue Diplomatique, Auguste Meulemans candidly verbalized France's ambitions in Latin America on the eve of the international fair. For him, Hispanic American attendance at the fair would be rather sympathique (curious and entertaining). Such a presence would also be advantageous for France because, first, it could assure France's supremacy in a market of "forty million men who have our gustos [tastes], traditions, and aptitudes." Second, it could help France promote the collection of needed statistical data and the establishment of French chambers of commerce in Latin America. Both were important considerations in view of the proposed opening of the Panama Canal.17 In truth, in the late nineteenth century all worldwide events took place within the economic and political context established by imperialist expansions and rivalries.18 This was especially true for Latin American countries, which had acquired the very concept of Latinness from the imperialist ambitions of Napoleon III and which had been economically, and especially intellectually, tied to France.19 French efforts to encourage Latin American participation had particular import in Porfirian Mexico. Taking advantage of the European boycott to more prominently display their own advantages and promise, Latin American countries undertook costly exhibits at the 1889 Paris fair. After all, for non-European countries such as Mexico, the language of modern culture and politics was largely animated by the French Revolution and its consequent developments. Beyond a doubt, if modernity was the goal, France was the place to be in 1889.20 Hence, among the countries that officially accepted the French invitation were Argentina, Bolivia, Costa Rica, Chile, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay, El Salvador, Uruguay,