97. Ibid. 98. See France, Paris, Exposition Universelle de 1889, Catalogue officiel illustré de l'Exposition Centennale de l'Arte Français, 1800 à 1889, ed. Ludovic Bachet, reprinted by Garland (Paris, 1981). 99. On Velasco's dislike of impressionism, see Encina, El paisajista. 100. Among them, works by Puvis de Chavannes, Léon Bonnat, Carolus-Duran, William A. Bouguereau, Jules Lefebre, J. Felix Barrias, Benjamin Constant, Gaston Saintpierre, Aime Morot, and Alfred Roll. 101. In this regard, see the interesting opinion of the English critic Alfred Had-don, Evolution in Art (London, 1895). 102. Sala was a well-known British critic who wrote extensively on art in the late nineteenth century; he was also an illustrator for Dickens's writings. Pierre Fritel was a French painter known for his historical canvases, such as L'Enfance de Jeanne d'Arc. Guillon was a distinguished late-nineteenth-century French landscape painter. 103. Velasco, "Memoria grupo primero." 104. It seems that he disliked traveling, as shown by his impressions of his trip to Paris and, later, of his trip to the 1893 Chicago world's fair. Only two canvases resulted from his trip to Paris: one of Havana Bay; the other a view of the sea (see Is-las García, Velasco; and Velasco, "Memoria grupo primero"). See also M. Payno's letter to Riva Palacio, 5 November 1889, Vicente Riva Palacio's letters, Genaro García Collection, University of Texas at Austin. 105. Velasco, "Memoria grupo primero." ## 8. Statistics, Maps, Patents, and Governance 1. Condorcet, Fragment on the New Atlantis, or Combined Efforts of the Human Species for the Advancement of Science, reprinted in Condorcet: Selected Writings, ed. K. M. Baker (Indianapolis, 1976), 300. 2. In this regard, see Kuhn's use of what he calls the Merton thesis to explain the "geographical patterns" in science: Thomas Kuhn, "Mathematical versus Experimental Traditions in the Development of Physical Science," in his The Essential Tension (Chicago, 1977), 58-59. 3. Claude Nicolet, L'Idée républicaine, 310. 4. Gabino Barreda's educational reform in 1867 was the bedrock on which the scientific turn of the late nineteenth century was based. See Hale, Transformation of Liberalism, 141. 5. José Yves Limantour, Discurso pronunciado por el Sr. Lic. José Ives Limantour (Mexico City, 1901), 1. 6. México, Secretaría de Fomento, Reglamento económico de la Junta y personas auxiliares de la Comisión mexicana en la Exposición Universal de París EXP, Box 18, Exp. 8, p. 10. 7. Annotated circular, EXP, Box l, Exp. 18, p. 8. See also article 25 of Reglamento, EXP, Box 18, Exp. 8, p. 10. The article asked the directors of each of the nine groups of products to keep themselves up-to-date in their respective areas of production, scientific expertise, or artistic concerns. 8. I examined the symbolic aspects in chapters 5, 6, and 7.