9. In this regard, see K. Rose's review essay, "Governing by Numbers: Figuring out Democracy," Accounting, Organizations and Society 16 (1991):673-92; and Ian Hacking's books on the history of statistics and probability: The Emergence of Probability (Cambridge, 1975) and The Taming of Chance (Cambridge, 1990). 10. For instance, in 1851 the comparative tables on moral statistics of the French statistician A. M. Guerry won recognition during the Crystal Palace meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science: A. M. Guerry, Essai sur la statistique morale de la France (Paris, 1833). See Hacking, Taming of Chance, 77. ## 11. See RUP 9. 12. See Stuart Woolf, "Contribution à l'histoire des origines de la statistique: France, 1789-1815," in école des Hautes études en Sciences Sociales, La Statistique en France à l'époque napoléonienne (Brussels, 1980), 45-126; and Hacking, Taming of Chance, 28-34. 13. See the detailed account of the technical development of statistics in Stephen M. Stigler, The History of Statistics (Cambridge, 1986), 159-220. For the opposition to Quetelet's use of statistics in the 1830s and 1840s, see Gerd Gigerenzer et al., The Empire of Chance (Cambridge, 1989), 45-48. 14. See La Grande Encyclopédie (Paris, 1886-1902), vol. 30, 448. 15. Jesús Hermosa, Manual de geografía y estadística de la República Mejicana (Paris, 1857), vi. See also one of the first Mexican manuals for the making of statistics, José María Pérez Hernández, Curso elemental de estadística (Mexico City, 1874). Also in this regard, see Ramón Manterola, Ensayo sobre una clasificación de las ciencias (Mexico City, 1884), which developed the concept of probability in science. 16. Emiliano Busto, Estadística de la República Mexicana (Mexico City, 1880), iii. 17. Agustín Aragón, "La estadística," Revista Positiva, no. 23 (1902):484-93. 18. Antonio Peñafiel, "La estadística en la República Mexicana," Boletín de la Sociedad Mexicana de Geografía y Estadística, 4th epoch, 4 (1897):512-13. 19. Regarding this institution, see Enrique de Olivarría y Ferrari, La Sociedad Mexicana de Geografía y Estadística (Mexico City, 1901). 20. See Carlos Díaz Dufoo, México, 1876-1892 (Mexico City, 1893). 21. Quetelet established the concept of the "average man" in society and thus the idea of deviation. For my analysis of the creation of a modern nation, it is important to bear in mind that Quetelet was not only a great statistician but also, as Hacking characterizes him, "the greatest of international propagandists for the value of statistics." Small wonder that, as many did in England and Germany, in Mexico Peñafiel referred to him to justify the importance of statistics. See Hacking, Taming of Chance, 74; and Peñafiel, "La estadística.'' 22. See Antonio Garcia Cubas, Importancia de la estadística (Mexico City, 1871). 23. Juan de D. Bojorquez, Orientaciones de la estadística en México: Conferencia sustentada en la Sociedad Mexicana de Geografía y Estadística, el 14 de Mayo de 1929 (Mexico City, 1929); and Francisco Barrera Lavalle, Apuntes para la historia de la estadística en México, 1821-1910: Concurso Científico y Artístico del Centenario (Mexico City, 1911). 24. See annotated circular, EXP, Box l, Exp. 18, pp. 8-9. 25. See Godoy, México en París, 214-16, 221-22; and for the tables described here, see EXP, Box 51, Exp. 8-15; Box 52, Exp. 1-10; and Box 53, Exp. 1-11. 26. For instance, in 1888 the president of the Sociedad Agrícola Mexicana was asked about data on haciendas in Mexico City. He replied that such information was