completely unavailable (EXP, Box 8, Exp. 20). The general agricultural statistics prepared for the 1900 Paris fair included Mexico Gity, (EXP, Box 52, Exp. 2). 27. Argentina, Comisión, Exposición de Paris 1889, L'Agriculture et l'élevage dans la République Argentine d'après le recensement de la premiere quinzaine d'octobre de 1888 . . . ouvrage publié sous la direction de F. Latzina (Paris, 1889). The province of Buenos Aires produced Comisión Auxiliar Provincial, Exposición Universal de Paris 1889, Censo agrícola-pecuario de la provincia de Buenos Aires . . . para contribuir a la representación de la República Argentina en la Exposición Universal de Paris (Buenos Aires, 1889), which included information on the nationalities of people working on ranches. Previously, Argentina had prepared a statistical study for the 1867 Paris fair: Argentina, La Confederation Argentine a l'Exposition Universelle de 1867 à Paris, Notice statistique générale et catalogue (Paris, 1867). 28. See E. Levasseur, Le Brésil, 2d ed. (Paris, 1889). This collection of statistical and geographical data was also published as part of the Brazil entry in the Grande Encyclopédie. 29. See Rafael Reyes, Apuntamientos estadísticos sobre la república del Salvador (San Salvador, 1888). 30. Before the mathematical development of probability, the rule of large numbers was constantly invoked. See Gigerenzer et al., Empire of Chance, 39-40. 31. Hacking, Taming of Chance, 77. 32. E Galton, Natural Inheritance (London, 1889). 33. Manuel Orozco y Berra, Apuntes para la historia de la geografía en México (Mexico City, 1881), 428. See also Bernardo Garcia Martínez, "La Comisión Geográfico-Exploradora," Historia Mexicana 24, 4 (1975):485-555. 34. Document reproduced in Godoy, México en París, 220-21. See the particular catalogue of this commission by Díaz: Agustín Díaz, Catalogue des objets composant le contigent de la Commission, précédé de quelques notes sur son organisation et ses travaux (Paris, 1889). 35. DO, 28 March 1888. 36. See the report on the 1889 map: México, Secretaría de Fomento, Memoria para la carta general geográfica de la República Mexicana: Año de 1889 (Mexico City, 1890); and Garcia Martinez, "La Comisión Geográfico-Exploradora," 492-93 37. Indeed, before any lobbying of the wizards of progress, this display was awarded two grand prizes by the French jury. See México, Commission Géographique Exploratrice de la République Mexicaine, Catalogue (Mexico City, 1889), 26 and 52; and México, Secretaría de Fomento, Lista de los premios y recompensas obtenidos por Mé-xico en la Exposición Internacional de Paris de 1889 (Mexico City, 1891), 7. 38. About him, see Miguel A. Sánchez Lamego, "Agustín Díaz, ilustre cartógrafo mexicano," Historia Mexicana 24 (1975):556-65. 39. Díaz, Catalogue des objets, 4-5. See also Sánchez Lamego, "Agustín Díaz," 563; and Orozco y Berra, Apuntes, 429. 40. See EXP, Box 4, Exp. 28. Here García Cubas was appointed to write a geographical and statistical study of the country. 41. Based on this book, Antonio Garcia Cubas wrote Mexico: Its Trade, Industries and Resources (Mexico City, 1893) for Mexico's display in Chicago. For a history of Garcia Cubas's original maps and the development of his works until 1880, see Orozco y Berra, Apuntes, 421-34. See also Garcia Cubas's archive at the Sociedad Mexicana de Geografía y Estadística.