42. Castillo and Aguilera created the Instituto Geológico. As a result of Aguilera's initiative the institute was granted the building it possessed in Santa María, Mexico City. See Alberto María Carreño, "Un insigne geólogo mexicano: Ing. José G. Aguilera," in his Semblanzas, vol. 2 (Mexico City, n.d.), 5-22. See also Mexico, Secretaría de Fomento, Bosquejo de una carta geológica de la República Mexicana, 1:300,000,000 (Mexico City, 1889). 43. In this regard, see Gabriel Gohau, A History of Geology, trans. Albert and Marguerite Carozzi (New Brunswick, 1990), 99-110, 125-37. 44. See Catálogo de los trabajos de la comisión especial para la formación del Bosquejo de una Carta Geológica de la República, 22 April 1889, signed by Antonio del Castillo, EXP, Box l, Exp. 16, pp. 114-114bis. 45. EXP, Box 3, Exp. 12. 46. Ibid.; and EXP, Box 1, Exp. 16, p. 71. See also Teodoro Flores, "Panorama de la geología en México (1551-1951)," in Memoria del Congreso Científico Mexicano 3 (1953), 23-61. 47. Castillo's report in EXP, Box 1, Exp. 16. See also Antonio del Castillo's study: Catalogue descriptif des météorites (Paris, 1889). 48. EXP, Box 1, Exp. 15. See also the "Catálogo descriptivo de los meteoritos de México," La Naturaleza, 2d series, 1 (1887- 1890):328. 49. Regarding this unification of science and technology, see Thomas Kuhn, "The Relation between History and the History of Science," in his Essential Tension, 127-61. 50. See Alfred Chandler, Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism (Cambridge, 1990), 47-89; and David S. Landes, The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present (Cambridge, 1969), 196-201. 51. To Juan Andrés Velarade, for a new way to amalgamate metals. From the AGN Gobernación Leg. 132, quoted in Sánchez Flores, Historia de la tecnología y la invención, 291. According to Mexican patent laws, the president had to sign the patent and a fee of 50 to 150 pesos had to be paid. See Patent and Trade-Mark Laws of America, Bulletin 3 (Washington, 1891). 52. Previously, there were other regulations (the law of 7 May 1832 and the reglamento of 12 July 1852). See Juan de la Torre, Legislación de patentes y marcas (Mexico City, 1903); and Elf as Trabulse, Las patentes de invención durante el siglo XIX en Mé- xico, Boletín del Archivo General de la Nación, 3d series, no. 34 (Mexico City, 1988). See also the catalogue and research by Soberanis, "Catálogo de patentes de invención en México." 53. For instance, for the 1901 Buffalo world's fair, Mexican officials produced the following pamphlets (in English): Patent Law of the United States of Mexico; Law for the Promotion of New Industries in the United States of Mexico; and Trade Mark Law of the United States of Mexico, both mentioned in Albino R. Nuncio, "Informe relativo a la participación de México y a los trabajos de la Comisión Mexicana, en la Exposición Pan-Americana celebrada en Buffalo N.Y. en 1901," in México, Secretaría de Fomento, Memoria presentada al Congreso de la Unión per el Secretario de Estado y del Despacho de Fomento, Ing. Leandro Fernández, 1 de enero 1901-31 de diciembre de 1904 (Mexico City, 1909), 181-203. See also México, Comisión Nacional de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos para la Exposición Pan-Americana de Buffalo, Nueva York, Official Catalogue of the Mexican Exhibit at the Pan-American Exposition at Buffalo (Buffalo, 1901).