54. In the Patentes y Marcas I have been able to find the registration of only three inventions: Maximino Río de la Loza's device to avoid railroad accidents, Pugibet's machine to fabricate cigarettes, and a machine to process vegetable fibers (henequen). 55. See French requirements and rules for exhibitors in RUP 1. 56. EXP, Box 8, Exp. 24. 57. The products exhibited in the industry group are listed in México, Catalogue officiel de l'Exposition de la République Mexicaine. 58. These machines were important to the economy of Yucatán. In fact, during the 1860s a dispute took place regarding the patent of the first scraping machines. By the 1880s the debate was over and new technology was imported from the United States. In this regard, see Narcisa Trujillo, "Las primeras máquinas desfibradoras de henequén," in Enciclopedia Yucatanense, ed. C. Echánove Trujillo, vol. 3 (Mérida, Mexico, 1946), 627-56; and Cámara Zavala, "Historia de la industria henequenera hasta 1919," in Enciclopedia Yucatanense, vol. 3, 657-725. 59. Inventory of boxes in the steamship Chateau Margaux, EXP, Box 8, Exp. 27. 60. EXP, Box 3, Exp. 11. 61. EXP, Box 8, Exp. 26. 62. See the numerous entries of his name in Patentes y Marcas. 63. Jules Verne, "Five Weeks in a Balloon," translation quoted in René Dubos, Reason Awake: Science for Man (New York, 1970), 56. 64. See Jochen Hoock, "économie politique, statistique et réforme administrative en France et en Allemagne dans la deuxième moitié du 18e siècle," in Formation et transformation du savoir administratif en France et en Allemagne (18e/19e s.), ed. Guido Melis et al. (Baden-Baden, 1989), 34-35. 65. For an insightful analysis of the origins of rational politics in France during the attempt to reconstruct a "government culture" after the revolution and during the first decade of the nineteenth century, see Pierre Rosanvallon, Le Moment Guizot (Paris, 1985), 21-25. 66. As such, administration acquired a certain independence from politicians, but not from government. In this regard, and to explain the different traditions of administrative knowledge (that is, French, English, and American), see Rosamund Thomas, The British Philosophy of Administration (London, 1978). 67. Regarding public administration in France, see Guy Thuillier, Bureaucratie et bureaucrates en France au XIXe siècle (Geneva, 1980), 220-42, 479-98; and Guy Thuillier, La Bureaucratie en France aux XIXe e XXe siècles (Paris, 1987), 663-88. For the way in which scientific politics supported the origins of the French Third Republic, see Rosanvallon, Le Moment Guizot, 58-71. 68. See Nicolet, L'Idée républicaine, 287. 69. See Pierre Legendre, Histoire de l'administration de 1750 à nos jours (Paris, 1968) 87-90. 71. About him and his work, see C. Javier Guillén, "Emiliano Busto y su aportación a la investigación social en México" (Tesis Licenciatura, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 1977). 72. A contract was signed with the French editor R. Dupont for 10,453 francs for the publication of 2,000 copies of the book. See EXP, Box 1, Exp. 19.