73. Emiliano Busto, La administración pública en Méjico (Paris, 1889). 74. See Busto's reports to Díaz in UIA-Díaz, L. 14, c. 23, d. 11382, 11383; L. 14, c. 26, d. 12911, 12913; and L. 14, c. 14, d. 6700, 6701. 75. EXP, Box 1, Exp. 18. 76. News of this study was published in such media as Le Temps and Le Figaro. See EXP, Box l, Exp. 18. 77. Jules Josat, Le Ministère de Finances (Paris, 1883). This is exactly the same definition that Josat presented on p. 1. 78. Busto, La administración pública en Méjico, 117-18. 79. The book that Busto followed was Josat, Le Ministère de Finances. In 1894 Josat published Recueil de rédactions sur des sujets d'économie politique et sur des questions financières et administratives (Paris 1894). In 1883 he lamented the general lack of scientific manuals of administration in France, as did Busto in Mexico. But, as historian Omar Guerrero observed, Busto did not include Mexico's history of administrative thought, which included such authors as de la Rosa, Madrazo, Castillo Velasco, and Alamán. See Omar Guerrero, Introducción a la administración pública (Mexico City, 1985), 230-31. 80. Josat, Le Ministère de Finances, 1. 81. Busto transcribed Josat's tableau récapitulatif (graphic summary) for each French ministry and used the same format to develop the cuadros sinópticos for the Mexican ministries. 82. Busto, La administración pública en Méjico, 119. 83. For a list of previous studies on public administration in Mexico, see Guerrero, Introducción a la administración pública, 209-11. 84. Hale, Transformation of Liberalism, 21. 85. Studies by bureaucrats pointed out the need to control corruption, clientelism, and favoritism. Lorenzo de Zavala (1820s), Lucas Alamán (1830s), José María Luis Mora (1830s), Luis de la Rosa (1850s), Julio Jiménez (1880s), and others pointed out the problem of empleomanía (large bureaucracy) and corruption. See Guerrero, Introducción a la administración pública, 218-40. 86. See Gilles J. Guglielmi, La Notion d'administration publique dans la théorie juridique française (Paris, 1991); and Thomas, British Philosophy of Administration. ## 9. Natural History and Sanitation 1. See Francisco de Asís Flores y Troncoso, Historia de la medicina en México, vol. 3 (Mexico City, 1888). See also Alamán's description of work in natural history and its effect on the concept of a wealthy Mexico: Alamán, Historia de Méjico, vol. l, 114-16, 120-23. 2. See José María Velasco's explanation of the development of natural history in relation to the "new" peace, in La Naturaleza 6 (1882-1884):4-5. 3. EXP, Box 4, Exp. 27. He also wrote a study on pulque that was displayed in Paris. 4. EXP, Box 4, Exp. 27, pp. 6-7, Informe que tiene la honra de rendir el que suscribe al jefe del 5to. Grupo de Exposición. Mexico's exhibits at world's fairs disclosed the existence of a quiet but fecund and serious dedication of Mexican scientists to natural