history. Altamirano's botanical studies became an indispensable part of Mexico's presence at various world's fairs. See, for example, the English version of his study prepared for the 1904 Saint Louis fair: Francisco Altamirano, Materia Médica Mexicana (Saint Louis, 1904). 5. Among the material that was lost were: 28,625 samples of dried vegetables, 14,604 samples of insects, 908 birds, 165 reptiles, 47 mammals, 1,580 mollusks, 2,000 mineral rocks, 12,000 fossils, 293 kinds of wood, and 230 fruits. See Carlos Pacheco, Memoria presentada al Congreso de la Unión por el Secretario de Estado y del Despacho de Fomento, Colonización, Industria y Comercio, corresponde a los años transcurridos de enero de 1883 a junio de 1885, vol. 1 (Mexico City, 1887), 108. 6. The exhibition comprised 2,000 samples of fossils, 5,500 samples of plants, 30,445 samples of diverse insects, 15 samples of stuffed reptiles, 50 samples of reptiles in alcohol, 1,254 samples of stuffed birds, 6,631 of birds in skin, 50 samples of stuffed mammals, 112 samples of mammals in skin, and 3 skeletons. See México, Commission Géographique Exploratrice de la République Mexicaine, Catalogue, 59. 7. This was argued by Agustín Díaz, director of the commission, in the catalogue of the commission's exhibit in Paris. See ibid., 41. 8. This was the case with other countries; see, for example, the Chilean study by Adolfo Murillo, Plantes médicinales du Chile (Paris, 1889). 9. See Eli de Gortari, La ciencia en la historia México (Mexico City, 1965), 189-95; and Elías Trabulse, La ciencia en México (Mexico City, 1983), vol. 1, 46-49. 10. Mexico, Commission Géographique Exploratrice, Catalogue, 25. The collections exhibited were: Distrito Federal, Collection de mille plantes . . ., a French edition of Alfonso Herrera's Nouvelle pharmacopée mexicaine; state of Morelos, 100 samples of indigenous medicinal plants; state of Puebla, 216 samples of indigenous medicinal plants; state of Michoacán, 29 samples of indigenous medicinal plants; and state of Veracruz, 3 samples of indigenous medicinal plants. Previously, these types of collections had been sent to Philadelphia and New Orleans (see "Catálogo de la colección de productos naturales indígenas remitidos por la Sociedad de Historia Natural," La Naturaleza 3 [1876], 382). 11. See Godoy, Enciclopedia biográfica de contemporáneos, 107- 8. 12. See Mexico, Commission Géographique Exploratrice, Catalogue, 30 and 123. 13. EXP, Box 6, Exp. 9. He was also appointed the Mexican representative at the International Congress of Chemistry in Paris. 14. EXP, Box 6, Exp. 9. 15. DO, 16-18 October 1890. He analyzed the teaching and research qualities of laboratories, their architecture, and their location (EXP, Box 6, Exp. 9). Regarding the history of this first modern laboratory in Mexico, see José Joaquín Izquierdo, Balance cuatricentenario de la fisiología en México (Mexico City, 1934), 245-46. 16. See El Estudio, no. 2 (1889). 17. "A L'Exposition. Le Palais Mexicain. L'édifice et ses dimensions.-Une des plus curieuses expositions du Nouveau-Monde.-Le Pays des Aztéques.-Textiles et oiseauxmouches," La Lanteinier, n.d. 18. See Ory, Les Expositions Universelles de Paris, 9-27; and Ann-Louise Shapiro, Housing the Poor of Paris, 1850-1902 (Madison, 1985), 87. Regarding social economy at the 1889 exhibition, see X. Ryckelynck, "L'économie sociale dans le rapport d'Alfred Picard sur l'Exposition Universelle de 1889," Le Revue de l'économie Sociale (1990):97-