107; and Laure Godineau, "L'économie sociale à l'Exposition Universelle de 1889," Le Mouvement Social, no. 149 (1989):71- 87. For the 1900 exposition, see Marc Pénin, "L'économie sociale à travers le rapport de Charles Gide sur l'Exposition Universelle de 1900," Le Revue de l'économie Sociale (1990):137-157; and France, Paris, Exposition Universelle de 1889, Congrès International d'Assistance, tenu du 28 juillet au 4 août 1889, 2 vols. (Paris, 1889). For an analysis of the transformation of the concept of public assistance, see Jean-Baptiste Martin, Le Fin des mauvais pauvres: De l'assistance à l'assurance (Seyssel, 1985). 19. See Gide, économie sociale. For the origins of the concern with public assistance, see William Coleman, Death Is a Social Disease (Madison, 1982), 24-33; Catherine Jean Kudlick, "Disease, Public Health and Urban Social Relations: Perceptions of Cholera and the Paris Environment, 1830-1850" (Ph.D. diss., University of California, Berkeley, 1988), 18-97; and Gueslin, L'Invention de l'économie sociale, 151-60. 20. See Ann E Le Berge, Mission and Method: The Early Nineteenth-Century French Public Health Movement (Cambridge, 1992). For public health in the French Third Republic, see Martha L. Hildreth, Doctors, Bureaucrats, and Public Health in France, 1888-1902 (New York, 1987); the controversial interpretation by Bruno Latour, The Pasteurization of France (Cambridge, 1987); Jacques Léonard, La Médicine entre les savoirs et les pouvoirs (Paris, 1981), 149-85, 241-327; and Kudlick, "Disease," 18-34. 21. Regarding this issue, see Hildreth, Doctors, 1-35, 107-63; and kudlick, "Disease," 62-84. 22. See Léonard, La Médicine, 317. 23. See Jules Rochard, "L'Hygiéne en 1889," Le Revue des Deux Mondes 96 (November-December, 1889):54-85. 24. RUP 2:139-41. 25 See, for example, the opinions of three historians of French hygiene. Le Berge (Mission and Method, 2) argues that within scientism, "public hygiene was one of those areas that had to be transformed into a scientific discipline. . .. If the hygienists' method was scientific, their mission was hygienism, a kind of medical imperialism incorporating both the medicalization and moralization of society." Shapiro (Housing the Poor, 134) believes that during the second half of the century "hygienists abandoned their earlier romanticist aspirations to become therapeutic clergy administering to a regenerated population. Instead they were more likely to address problems of sanitary engineering and the control of contagious diseases." Finally, the controversial historian Bruno Latour maintains that not until the Pasteurian revolution, and not before 1895, did hygiene acquire a clear scientific and political status (Bruno Latour, "Le Théâtre de la preuve," in Pasteur et la révolution pastorienne, ed. Claire Salomon-Bayet, [Paris, 1986]), 341). 26. See Kudlick, "Disease," 79-81. 27. For a short analysis of the different forms of professionalization, see Jan Goldstein, Console and Classify: The French Psychiatric Profession in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge, 1987), 8-40; and Charle, La République des universitaires, 168-85. See also Hildreth, Doctors, 107. 28. Especially after the 1883-1884 cholera epidemic. 29. In this regard, see Andrew Aisenberg, "The enquête," in his "Contagious Disease and the Government of Paris in the Age of Pasteur" (Ph.D. diss., Yale University, 1993).