30. By 1889, however, Pasteur was already a national hero. He was received at the Congress of Hygiene in the Hotel de Ville of Paris with "Le Marseillaise." France, Paris, Exposition Universelle de 1889, Congrès International d'Higiène et de Démographie, 1889. Compte rendu (Paris, 1890). In this regard see also J. Léonard, "Comment peuton être pasteurien?," in Salomon-Bayet, Pasteur, 151-52. 31. The literature on this topic is vast. See the classical study by Erwin Ackerknecht, "Anticontagionism between 1821-1867," Bulletin of the History of Medicine 22 (1948): 562-93; and Le Berge, Mission and Method, 1-6. 32. It could be argued that the legacy of the early health movements was not completely overcome by the 1880s. See Le Berge, Mission and Method, 96. 33. This is argued in Shapiro, Housing the Poor, 154. Hildreth (Doctors, 19) observed that "the anxieties over population resulted [in the 1880s] from the comparison of France, Germany, and Britain." 34. See Rochard, "L'Hygiène en 1889"; and Latour, "Le Thèâtre," 353. 35. Among the duties of this council was to certify doctors' diplomas. See Mé-xico, Secretaría de Gobernación, La salubridad e higiene pública en los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, lxxvii. 36. From 1877 to 1879 the role of the council was briefly devaluated when it was incorporated into the Junta Directiva de la Benefiencia Pública (ibid., lxxvii-lxix). 37. México, Consejo Central de Salubridad, Memoria leída por el Secretario del Consejo Central de Salubridad el día 17 de enero de 1867 (Mexico City, 1867), 1. 38. See France, Congrès International d'Higiène et de Démographie, 1889. Dr. Gaviño presented this code at the congress. 39. See "Proyecto de Código Sanitario de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, sometido a la Secretaría de Gobernación, 30 de Junio 1889," reprinted in Gutiérrez et al., Historia de la salubridad y la asistencia en México, vol. 3 (Mexico City, 1960), 327-29. 40. Gayol was named general engineer of Mexico City in 1884, and he traveled abroad to study sanitary systems. See Eduardo Liceaga, "Progresos alcanzados por la higiene de 1810 a la fecha," in SSA, Box 9, Exp. 9. 41. See Miguel Angel de Quevedo, Memoria sobre el Valle de México (Mexico City, 1889). 42. See México, Catalogue officiel de l'Exposition de la République Mexicaine, 141-42. 43. For a detailed account of the pamphlets and books published by the institute for the year 1889, see Francisco Fernández del Castillo, Historia bibliográfica del Instituto Médico Nacional de México (1888-1915) (Mexico City, 1961), 32-33. 44. As Mexican envoys to the Public Assistance Congress, the archival material only mentions Alfredo Bablot, but the reports of the congress mentioned Pedro García and Angel Gaviño and reproduced Gaviño's speech. See France, Paris, Exposition Universelle de 1889, Congrès International d'Assistance, tenu du 28 juillet au 4 août 1889, vol. 1 (Paris, 1889), xxi-xxii. Regarding Angel Gaviño, see Rafael Heliodoro Valle, La drugía mexicana del siglo XIX (Mexico City, 1942), 250. See also France, Paris, Exposition Universelle de 1889, Congrüs International de Dermatologie et de Syphiligraphie, 1889 (Paris, 1890). According to Mexican sources, Pedro García, Manuel Flores, and José Ramirez attended the second congress, but no official Mexican envoy is mentioned in the French report of it. 45. They were joined by Angel Treviño. See France, Paris, Exposition Universelle de 1889, Congrñs International de Medicine Mentale tenu à Paris 2-20 août 1889 (Pads, 1890); and France, Congrès International d'Higiène et de Démographie, 1889.