46. See SSA, Box 7, f. 37, report by Alvarado that included the translation of sanitary codes from the states of Maine, Pennsylvania, Indiana, and New York. 47. See Manuel María Carmona y Valle, Leçons sur l'étiologie et la prophylaxie de la fièvre jaune (Mexico City, 1885). For the history of the disease, see Folke Henschen, The History and Geography of Diseases, trans. Joan Tate (New York, 1966), 36-39. 48. In this regard, see the analysis of Carmona y Valle's role in the international fight against yellow fever in François Delaporte, The History of Yellow Fever, trans. Arthur Goldhammer (Cambridge, 1991), 68-74. See Porfirio Parra, "Discurso pronunciado en la solemne inauguración del IV Congreso Médico Nacional Mexicano, por su presidente, Dr. Porfirio Parra," in México, Secretaría de Instrucciín Pública, Fiestas del centenario de la independencia, organizadas por la Secretaría de Instrucción Pública (Mexico City, 1910), 154-60. 49. See Rafael Lucio, Opúsculo sobre el mal de San Lázaro o elefantiásis de los griegos (Mexico City, 1889). 50. See El Estudio 1 (1889); and the translation of articles collected in one volume after the exhibition, México, Ministerio de Agricultura de México, Instituto Médico Nacional, Travaux publiés par El Estudio (Paris, 1892). Distinguished physicians and hygienists, among them José Ramirez, Francisco Altamirano, Francisco Rio de la Loza, Eduardo Armendariz, Domingo Orvañanos, and Secundino Sosa, were involved in El Estudio. 51. Francisco de Asís Flores y Troncoso, El himen en México (Mexico City, 1885), 22. 52. See Florencio Flores, Ligeros apuntes de pelvimetría comparada (Cuernavaca, 1881), 9-11, 55-56. 53. See A lain Corbin, Women for Hire, trans. Alan Sheridan (Cambridge, 1990), 3-29. 54. See Gaceta Médica de México 25 (1890):8-15; 25, 2 (1890):27- 39; 25, 3 (1890): 47-58; 25, 4 (1890):76-77; 25, 5 (1890):90; 25, 6 (1890):108; 25, 8 (1890):148-60; and 25, 9 (1890): 173-79. See also Manuel Acuña, Obras: Poesías, teatro, artículos y cartas, ed. José Luis Martínez (Mexico City, 1965), 20. 55. Regarding this congress and the interesting debate, see SSA, Box l, Exp. 2, 4. 56. In this regard, the story of Matilde Montoya is revealing. After many attempts and difficulties (which included having to work alone with corpses because it was improper for a woman to see naked bodies in the presence of a man), Montoya obtained her degree in 1887. She was the first woman doctor in Mexico, and for a long time the only one. See Laureana Wright de Kleinhans, Biografías de mujeres notables mexicanas de la época prehispáinica, la colonia y el siglo XIX (Mexico City, 1910), 541. 57. EXP, Box 6, Exp. 15. 58. See Domingo Ovañanos, Ensayo de geografía médica y climatología de la República Mexicana, 2 vols. (Mexico City, 1889). 59. El Estudio 1 (1889), 398. 60. Some of these letters and questionnaires were published by the BEMP. See, for example, BEMP 3:34-38, 72-75, 198-204, 271-76, 289-304, 432-51. 61. The treatment of climates was based on Orvañanos's previous work, "Apuntes para el estudio del clima en México," Gaceta Médica de México 14, 3 (1879):302. 62. Liceaga did not agree with this figure. He believed that it was actually higher than that, but he did not furnish an estimate. See Alberto Correa, Geografía de Mé-xico: Obra adoptada como texto en los escuelas públicas del Distrito y territorios federales (Mexico City, 1889).