Venezuela, and Mexico. Nevertheless, there were even more distinguished guests from the New World. The United States was among the "noble" guests. French media were less captivated by Latin America's products than by Edison's phonograph, Tiffany's glass, and the "Buffalo Bill Wild West Show." 21 They were impressed by both the prosperity and the industrialism of Americans, who were, in the words of a French art critic, "enfants prodiges'' who "undertake the conquest of science with a constant fever."22 For all countries of the New World, the pragmatic goal in joining international exhibitions was basically the sameto offer raw materials and to publicize a modern image of the nation in order to attract immigrants and investment. However, for the United Statesthe enfants prodigesEuropean world's fairs were occasions to certify already achieved strength, advertising, as an American historian candidly argued, "American power and greatness to the world."23 In essence, whereas Mexico and other Latin American countries had to produceindustrially, commercially, artistically, and scientificallythe image of a modern nation from zero, countries like the United States had to reproduce and redefine the American image as a military and industrial power and to work hard to gain acknowledgment as a modern nation in culture, the arts, and education. Mexico, Brazil, or Argentina could never equal the success of the United States in international fairs or match its theatrical capacity, of which the best example was Chicago's 1893 Columbian fair, a rough copy of the 1889 Paris exposition. While the United States was already the promised land, countries such as Mexico and Brazil were at least promising nations. Hence Mexican rhetoric made constant reference to unexploited resources and a benign climate that made Mexico "a country picturesque beyond description and beautiful beyond belief . . . with that indefinable charm which those indolent, lotus-eating lands exercise always over the sterner and colder nature of the northman."24 Throughout the Porfirian period this image of an unexploited and rich land was fostered nationally and reproduced internationally. Equally, Brazil was always portrayed as a "promising tropical country."25 Bolivia, in turn, aimed to lure European investors with its abundant mineral resources. Therefore, a tunnel of silver, which functioned as the entrance to Bolivia's pavilion, constituted both an exact copy of the entrance to the mine at Pulacayo and a Midas-like experience for visitors. In contrast, Argentina employed French sculptors, designers, and engineers to build the likeness of the "whitest" and richest of the Latin American nations. It constructed a monumental French-style pavilion, inside which Argentina introduced itself as a young woman reclining on a cow, having at her feet three male figures, denoting industry, commerce, and livestock.26 In Mexico, therefore, in an effort to construct a cosmopolitan and modern image of the nation, the Porfirian elite began a portrait of both their country and themselves. This, they believed, would have several useful func-