63. The population comprised 5 million mestizos, 4 million Indians, 2 million Europeans, and 250,000 Blacks (Geografía Médica, 14). 64. See, for example, D. Jourdanet, Du Mexique au point de vue de son influence sur la vie de l'homme (Paris, 1861), which deals with the relationship between altitude and diseases. 65. As quoted in Puebla: Su higiene, sus enfermedades (Mexico City, 1888). 66. Indeed, the results of this study were first presented to the Academia Nacional de Medicina de México (Gaceta Médica de México 24, 8 [1889]:281-87). 67. The microbe Mycibacterium Leprae causes leprosy, but the disease is transmitted by vermin, fleas, and lice. See Henschen, History and Geography of Diseases, 117-18. 68. His data were supported by the analysis of the Massachusetts State Board of Health and by émile Poincaré's Prophilaxie et géographie médicale des principales maladies tributaires de l'hygiène (Paris, 1884). 69. Ibid., 60. 70. Ibid., 83. 71. See Delaporte, History of Yellow Fever, 83-101. 72. For a complete list of hygienists in Mexico, see the list prepared for the Fourth Panamerican Medical Congress, Panama, 1904, in SSA, Box 6, Exp. 7. 73. See, for instance, Fernando Malanco, "Intereses profesionales, males y remedios," Gaceta Médica de México 24, 12 (December 15, 1889):465-80. 74. See Liceaga's memoirs Mis recuerdos de otros tiempos, ed. Francisco Fernández del Castillo (Mexico City, 1949); his speech in the Hygienic Exposition during the centennial celebration of Mexico's independence in 1910, "Progresos alcanzados por la higiene de 1810 a la fecha," in SSA, Box 9, Exp. 9; and the speech he delivered at the Sociedad Pedro Escobedo in 1911, "Algunas consideraciones acerca de la higiene social en México," SSA, Box 10, Exp. 3, also published with the same title (Mexico City, 1911). On how the vaccine against rabies was brought to Mexico, see Congreso Médico Panamericano, vol. 2 (Mexico City, 1896), 899- 905. On the way in which the vaccine was developed in Mexico, see N. Ramirez de Arrellano, "Higiene. Profilaxis de la rabia," Gaceta Médica de México 24, 6 (1889):206-9. 75. See, for example, Liceaga's command of the situation in SSA, Box 4, Exp. 21. Liceaga sent José Ramírez to the International Sanitary Conference in Washington in 1902, then to work on controlling bubonic plague in Mazatlán, and then, in 1903, to Brussels to the International Sanitary and Demographic Congress, where he fell ill and died. For Liceaga's success in fighting yellow fever, see SSA, Box 8, Exp. 4 (1907). 76. See, for example, Diario del Hogar, 2 January 1900 (editorial). Liceaga was active in the Porfirian reelectionist campaigns. 77. France, Congrès International d'Higiène et de Démographie, 1889, 336. 78. SSA, Box 4, Exp. 24. 79. Liceaga, as a doctor, appeared on the board of directors of various insurance companies and also lobbied on behalf of insurance companies with President Diaz (see UIA-Díaz, L. 14, Box 13, 6035-36, in which Liceaga requests appointments for the directors of the insurance company La Mutua). Liceaga was the personal physician of Porfirio Díaz's wife. 80. SSA, Box 8, Exp. 1. 81. México, Dictáimenes y resultados del Congreso Nacional de Higiene (Mexico City, 1884), 3.