82. SSA, Box 4, Exp. 24. 83. SSA, vol. 18, Edición especial documentos e informes presentados en la 20 reunión anual de la Asociación Americana de Salubridad Pública, Ciudad de Mé-xico, November 29-December 2, 1892, Concord, N.H., Republican Press Association, 1894. 84. Alberto. J. Pani, La higiene en México (Mexico City, 1916). 85. El Estudio l, 1 (1889):2. 86. See, for example, Perla Chinchilla Pawling, ''Introduction," in Trabulse, La ciencia en México, vol. 4, 9-25. She argues that between 1870 and 1914 Mexican science had its best chance to catch up with international modern science. ## 10. Irony 1. For Baudelaire's views, see Charles Baudelaire, "Exposition Universelle 1855: Beaux-Arts," in his Oeuvres complètes: Préface, présentation et notes de Marcel A. Ruff (Paris, 1968), 361-70. For Henry Adams's, see his beautiful account of the Chicago Columbian exhibition in his The Education of Henry Adams (New York, 1918), 331-45. 2. In this regard, see Hale, Transformation of Liberalism; Guerra, México, vol. 1 (Mexico City, 1988); and Alicia Perales Ojeda, Asociaciones literarias mexicanas: Siglo XIX (Mexico City, 1957). For an insightful parallel regarding the mutual creation of a particular polity and a public opinion, see Keith Baker, "Public Opinion as Political Invention," in his The Invention of the French Revolution (Cambridge, 1990), 167-99. 3. The Porfirian regime was active in repressing the press, but it was even more successful in "sponsoring" newspapers and journalists. According to Bulnes, by the end of the Porfirian period 70 percent of the intellectuals and journalists were on the government's payroll. Nonetheless, between 1889 and 1900 active opposition could be found in newspapers such as El Hijo del Ahuizote, El Diario del Hogar, El Monitor del Pueblo (1885-1893), El Popular (beginning in 1897), to a certain extent The Mexican Herald (beginning in 1895), and El Siglo XIX (until 1896). See González Navarro, HMM, 388; José Bravo Ugarte, Periodistas y periódicos mexicanos hasta 1935 (Mexico City, 1966); Florence Toussaint Alcaraz, Escenario de la prensa en el porfiriato (Mexico City, 1989); Henry Lepidus, The History of Mexican Journalism (Columbia, 1928), 47-80; and Maria del Carmen Ruiz Castañeda, "La prensa durante el por-firiato," in El periodismo en México: 450 años de historia, ed. María del Carmen Ruiz Castañeda (Mexico City, 1974), 209-64. 4. El Hijo del Ahuizote, 15 February 1989, 6. "Schnetz and Company" is a reference to E. Schnetz, a former member of the French tobacco company in Paris and Havana and an entrepreneur in Mexico who promoted French investment in manufacturing and in land-demarcation companies. 5. Ibid. ## 6. Ibid., 6. 7. El Diario del Hogar, 13 April 1888. For criticism of Pacheco's colonization policies, see El Diario del Hogar, 25 September 1889; 6, 8, 11, 12, and 26 October 1889; and 13 November 1889. In those editorials El Diario del Hogar analyzed the failure of colonization and the problems with Americans, French, Dutch, Germans, Italians, Chinese, Spaniards, and Blacks from Africa.