3. The total cost of disassembling was 111,600 francs (Díaz Mimiaga, EXP, Box 12, Exp. 6, p. 46). 4. See de Anza's recommendations for disassembling the Aztec Palace in BEMP 5 (1889):743-47, 781-800. 5. The old inventory of expositions shows several signs of the serious damage suffered by one of the main steel columns of the building. Those documents are lost. See Inventario, EXP, Box 102, Exp. 9. 6. In 1891 there were rumors that the Aztec Palace was to be reassembled on a site belonging to the School of Agriculture, in Tacuba and Popotla (see Pérez Walters, "Jesús Contreras"; and Ramírez, "Dioses," 253). Later, the sculptures of the palace were stored at the Artillery Museum in the Ciudadela in Mexico City. There were also rumors that the Aztec palace was going to be reerected for the 1893 Chicago fair (see IPBA, Box 236, Exp. 6, f. 1; and letter by Ramón Fernández, SRE 44-6-13, II). 7. Gustavo Casasola's collection includes pictures of the patio of the National Museum of Artillery and of Contreras's sculptures. See Gustavo Casasola, Seis siglos de historia gráfica de México, 1325- 1900, vol. 2 (Mexico City, 1967), 1082-83. 8. See México, Distrito Federal, Catálogo de monumentos escultóricos y conmemorativos del Distrito Federal (Mexico City, 1976). 9. Itzcoatl, Nezahualcoyotl, and Totoquihuatzin. 10. By the 1990s Contreras's sculptures had once again been relocated. Another sign of the epoch was that at the same time that Contreras was reappreciated and honored with an exhibition in the National Museum of Mexico City, the Mexican army reopened a museum in downtown Mexico City and located copies of Contreras's works at the side of the colonial building designed by Manuel Tolsathe Palacio de Minería. 11. Report, M. Caballero to George R. Davis, EXP, Box 83, Exp. 18. 12. See Report, Serrano to Davis, EXP, Box 84, Exp. 18; and Godoy, La ciudad de Chicago, 94-95. 13. Report, Serrano to Davis, EXP, Box 84, Exp. 18. 14. See José María Vigil, Poetisas mexicanas, siglos XVI, XVII, XVIII y XIX (Mexico City, 1893). 15. See Mexico, Comisión Geográfico-Exploradora, Exposición Internacional Colombina de Chicago en 1893, Catálogo de los objetos que componen el contingente de la comisión (Jalapa, 1893). This catalogue was also prepared by Agustín Díaz. 16. See the report sent by M. Serrano to George R. Davis, general director of the Chicago fair, EXP, Box 83, Exp. 12, pp. 5-12. 17. The old Inventario (EXP, Box 102, Exp. 9) also contains some evidence of the request for financial support made by Othón Tello from Chihuahua to exhibit an Indian or Aztec town in Chicago (see the old Inventario's classification, Exp. 2564, which is lost in the new organization of EXP). 18. Photographs of these replicas are found in The Columbian Exposition Album (New York, 1893). See also E. H. Thompson, The Chultunes of Labná, Yucatán, Peabody Museum Memoirs, vol. 1, no. 3 (Cambridge, 1897); Thompson's memoirs, Peoples of the Serpent: Life and Adventure among the Mayas (Boston, 1932); and Don D. Fowler and Nancy J. Parezo, "Mayans in Chicago, Mound Builders in Buffalo: Archaeology at World's Fairs, 1876-1915" (paper presented at the History of Archaeology Sympo-