sium, Society for American Archaeology Annual Meeting, Saint Louis, Mo., April 16, 1993). Regarding the exhibits of "exotic" peoples in Chicago, see R. Rydell, All the World's a Fair; and Rydell, "A Cultural Frankenstein? The Chicago World's Columbian Exposition of 1893," in Grand Illusions: Chicago's World's Fair of 1893, ed. Neil Harris et al. (Chicago, 1993), 143- 70. 19. James Gilbert, Perfect Cities: Chicago's Utopias of 1893 (Chicago, 1991), 109. The Midway Exhibit was based on Putnam's anthropological conception of evolution. 20. See Edward C. Relph, The Modern Urban Landscape (Baltimore, 1987); and Peter Blake, Frank Lloyd Wright: Architectural Space (Baltimore, 1965), 22-24. 21. The most remarkable example of Wright's Mayan influence was depicted in the Hollyhock House, constructed in 1928 in California. On Wright's Mayan inspiration derived from the 1893 Chicago fair, see Jack Quinan, "Frank Lloyd Wright in 1893: The Chicago Context," in Frank Lloyd Wright in the Realm of Ideas, ed. Bruce Brooks (Carbondale, 1988), 119-32; and, especially, D. Tselos, "Exotic Influences in the Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright," Magazine of Art, April 1953, 163. 22. See Walter G. Cooper, The Cotton States and International Exposition and South, Illustrated (Atlanta, 1896), 49-5o. Col. Isaac W. Avery was sent to South America and Mexico. For Mexico, Charles H. Redding was the special agent. 23. See the report by Gregorio G. González in Mexico, Secretaría de Fomento, Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento, 1892-96 (Mexico City, 1898), 59, 282-89. 24. Cooper, Cotton States, 90. 26. James B. Haynes, History of the Trans-Mississippi and International Exposition of 1898 (Omaha, 1910), 90-91. 27. Mexico earned a total of 611 awards. To put it in perspective, see the table presented in Nuncio's report of Mexico's presence at the 1901 Buffalo fair. According to this table, the largest numbers of prizes won by Mexico were at the 1893 Chicago fair (l,177) and the 1900 Paris fair (1,088). But in terms of number of Mexican exhibitors who won awards, Buffalo was the most successful presence: 71 percent of exhibitors received prizes, in contrast to 51 percent at the 1900 Paris fair and 32 percent at the 1893 Chicago fair. See Albino R. Nuncio's report, in México, Secretaría de Fomento, Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento, 1901-1904 (Mexico City, 1909), 191. See also México, Official Catalogue of the Mexican Exhibit at the Pan-American Exposition at Buffalo. 28. For a detailed list of the personnel involved in this fair, see México, Comisión Nacional Mexicana, Catálogo oficial de las exhibiciones de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, Exposición Internacional de St. Louis Mo., 1904 (Mexico City, 1904). 29. Chavero exhibited Apuntes viejos de bibliografía mexicana (1903); La piedra del sol. Estudio arqueológico (1886); Pinturas jeroglíficas, primera parte (1901); and Calendario o rueda del año de los antiguos mexicanos: Estudio cronológico (1901). Peñariel displayed, among other studies, Teotihuacán: Estudio arqueológico e histórico, texto y láminas, 2 vols. (1901-1902), Indumentaria antigua: Manera de vestir de los antiguos mexicanos, guerreros y civiles (1903), Colección de documentos para la historia mexicana, and his 1890 study, Monumentos del arte mexicano antiguo. See México, Comisión Nacional Mexicana, Catálogo oficial de las exhibiciones de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, 291-92. 30. See pictures and explanation in David R. Francis, The Universal Exposition of 1904, 2 vols. (Saint Louis, 1913).