31. M.J. Lowenstein, ed., Official Guide to the Louisiana Purchase Exposition (Saint Louis, 1904), 134. 32. See the analysis of the importance of this exhibit for Eliot's fascination with "primitivism," as he saw it in the 1904 Saint Louis fair, in Narita, "Eliot and the World's Fair of St. Louis: Collateral Evidence of His Fairoutings"; and Narita, "Eliot and the World's Fair of St. Louis: His 'Stockholder's Coupon Ticket.''' 33. For detailed descriptions of Mexico's presence at the New England fair, see the report by 'Albino R. Nuncio in México, Secretaría de Fomento, Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento, 1908- 1909 (Mexico City, 1910), 74-87. According to Nuncio, for Mexico the total cost of this fair was U.S.\$.8,274. For the 1909 San Antonio fair, see México, Secretaría de Fomento, Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento, 1909-1910 (Mexico City, 1910), 101-9. No cost was reported. 34. I develop the analysis of this exhibition more fully in M. Tenorio, "1900: At the Gates of Hell: Mexico and the 1900 Paris Fair" (manuscript). 35. See EXP, Box 64, Exp. 9, pp. 265-268; and Mier, México. 37. Inspired by the emphasis on electric light, Mexican authorities commissioned Rafael R. Arizpe to undertake a study of Mexico City's electrification. As a result, Arizpe produced the book El alumbrado público en la ciudad de México: Estudio histórico (Mexico City, 1900). 38. Rearick, Pleasures of the Belle Epoque, 144. See also Mandell, Paris 1900, ix. Man-dell maintains that the 1900 Paris fair "was the last time any one tried to include all of man's activity in one display" (p. xi). 39. Arnold J. Mayer, The Persistence of the Old Regime: Europe to the Great War (New York, 1981), 189. 40. George Steiner, In Bluebeard's Castle: Some Notes towards the Redefinition of Culture (New Haven, 1971), 5, 27. 41. Silverman, Art Nouveau, 266. The author quotes the French poet Maurice Rollinat. 42. For the idea of fin de siécle, see Carl E. Schorske, Fin-de-Siècle Vienna: Politics and Culture (New York, 1980), xvii-xxvii. 43. Mier, México, 28. 44. See Circular 9, by Minister Fernández Leal, reproduced in ibid., 195-97. Regarding mining, see Carlos Sellerier, Data Referring to Mexican Mining, Prepared in View