of the Participation of Mexico in the Universal Exposition of Paris in 1900 (Mexico City, 1901). 45. The second most successful Mexican display, in terms of percentage of exhibitors winning awards, was that staged for the 1893 Chicago fair (32 percent). See Nuncio's report in Mexico, Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento, 1901-1904, 191. For a detailed list of exhibitors winning awards, see EXP, Box 55, Exp. 10, pp. 83-114. 46. See Mier's letter (25 April 1899), in which he writes about Contreras's petition to hire a French architect for the construction of the Mexican pavilion, in EXP, Box 69, Exp. 5. 47. See Mier's letter to Fernández Leal, 7 May 1889. He describes this conflict and acknowledges having received "three or four" projects by Contreras based on "la capilla del posto en Guadalupe" and in "la casa de los azulejos" in Mexico City. See EXP, Box 58, Exp. 2. 48. See Mier, México, 83 ff. 49. EXP, Box 31, Exp. 9, p. 65. 50. EXP, Box 31, Exp. 9, pp. 66-68. 51. For a description of the building, see Mier, México, 220-29; and for a detailed report of the construction, see de Anza's report to Minister Fernández Leal, in EXP, Box, 31, Exp. 9, PP. 85-104. 52. Reproduced in Mier, México, 227. 53. See Mariscal, El desarrollo de la arquitectura, 19. According to the author, Rodriguez Arangoity received a prize from Napoleon III at the imperial exhibition of 1859 for his plan for a port and naval school in Tehuantepec. See also Katzman, Arquitectura del siglo XIX en México (Mexico City, 1973), 375-76. 54. Reproduced in Mier, México, 229. 55. This was the description found in the anonymous, long manuscript report titled "La participación de las potencias extranjeras en la exposición de Paris. Mé-xico," in EXP, Box 59, Exp. 12, pp. 158-204. 56. On the illumination of the building, see EXP, Box 32, Exp. 6, pp. 34-46. 57. See "Contrato para la ejecución de los modelos en yeso de la decoración del pabellón mexicano en la Exposición Universal de Paris de 1900," in EXP, Box 32, Exp. 2, pp. 52-54. 58. Certificado, 31 July 1900, EXP, Box 58, Exp. 3. 59. See Yeats's poem "Nineteen Hundred and Nineteen," in W. B. Yeats, Símbo-los, bilingual ed. (Mexico City, 1977), 150-57. 60. "I am the one who yesterday used to say no more than / the blue verse and the profane song. . . / and being very eighteenth century and very antique / and very modern; bold, cosmopolitan / with strong Hugo and with ambiguous Verlaine, / and with an endless thirst of hopes" (Rubén Darío, "Yo soy aquel que ayer decía," in his Cantos de vida y esperanza [Buenos Aires, 1940 (first published in 1905)], 25-30). 61. "Science is in bankruptcy! So proclaims/A cry of the moribund century, / once again this is the time to grab the oriflamme / of illusion in its infinite term" (Jesús E. Valenzuela, "Poesía pronunciada por su autor en la velada organizada en honor del eminente filósofo don Gabino Barreda " La Revista Moderna, no. 7 [1900]:102-5). 62. Amado Nervo, letter to Salado Ádvarez, December 1897, in his Obras Completas (Madrid, 1973), 340.