63. About the 1915 San Francisco world's fair, see Allwood, Great Exhibitions, 117-122. For an analysis of the ethnographic and anthropological aspects of San Francisco's exposition, see the essays collected in Benedict, Anthropology of World's Fairs; and the insightful study by Rydell, All the World's a Fair. After San Francisco's world's fair, a comprehensive five-volume work was published which includes data and pictures on all aspects of the fair: Frank Morton Tood, The Story of the Panama-Pacific Exposition, 5 vols. (New York, 1921). For pictorial records, see Donna Ewald and Peter Clute, San Francisco Invites the World: The Panama-Pacific International Exposition of 1915 (San Francisco, 1991). 64. EXP, Box 94, Exp. 1. For Mexico's plans to participate in San Francisco's world's fair, see EXP, Box 94, all Exp.; Box 95, all Exp.; and Box 98, Exp. 1-16, 96, 97. 65. "Lista de expositores, FOTOGRAFIA (Photographers)," EXP, Box 94, Exp 5. It is not clear whether they agreed to participate. 66. For detailed data on U.S.-Mexican relations in the troubling years of 1913, 1914, and 1915, see Mark T. Gilderhus, Diplomacy and Revolution (Tucson, 1977); Berta Ulloa, La revolución intervenida: Relaciones diplomáticas entre México y Estados Unidos (1910-1914) (Mexico City, 1971); and the short but detailed work by James L. Tigner, "The Relation of the U.S. and Mexico, 1909-1914" (M.A. thesis, Stanford University, 1949). For a profound analysis of the real effectiveness of American intervention in times of tumult in Mexicoand of Mexico's nationalism in this contextsee Alan Knight, U.S.-Mexican Relations, 1910-1940 (San Diego, 1987), 103-42. 67. In this regard, see the important explanations of 1914 as the year zero in economic terms in Womack, "Mexican Economy during the Revolution." 68. Tood, Story of the Exposition, vol. 1, 9-10. 69. Adams, Education of Henry Adams, 331-32. 70. Amado Nervo, "Discurso pronunciado en una distribución de premios," Teatro Abreu, Mexico, in his Obras Completas, 494-96. The phrase, he said, was inspired by an Argentine poet whose name he did not mention. 71. E. L. Doctorow, World's Fair (New York, 1985), 253. 72. See Louis Marin's views on Disneyland in Utopiques, 297-324. ## 12. The 1922 Rio De Janeiro Fair 1. See Pesavento, "Exposições universais," 63-85. 2. On the 1922 Rio exposition, see Jornal do Commercio, O Livro d'Ouro, Edição Comemorativa, 1822-1922 (Rio de Janeiro, 1922); Annie S. Peck, "The International Exposition of Brazil," Current History 15, 5 (1923): 1042-49; Findling, Historical Dictionary; Marly Silva da Motta, A nação faz 100 anos (Rio de Janeiro, 1992); and Lúcia Lippi Oliveira, "As festas que a República manda guardar," Estudos Históricos 2, 4 (1989):172-89. 3. In 1903 this sanitary reform began in Rio de Janeiro. See Jaime Larr Benchimol, Pereira Passos: um Haussmann tropical: a renovação urbana da cidade do Rio de Janeiro no início do século XX (Rio de Janeiro, 1990); and Jeffrey D. Needell, A Tropical Belle Epoque: Elite Culture and Society in Turn-of-the-Century Rio de Janeiro (Cambridge, 1987).