4. The U.S. government authorized \$1 million to be spent in Brazil, of which \$350,000 was for the construction of the building (NYT, 28 May 1922). 5. According to the Mexican reports, France authorized an expenditure of 5,136,000 francs (SRE 18-5-72, I). See J. P. Curtis, "Architecture of the Brazil Centennial Exposition," Art and Architecture 5 (September 1923):95-104. 6. For a summary account of the Brazilian First Republic, see Boris Fausto, "Brazil: The Social and Political Structure of the First Republic (1889-1930)," in The Cambridge History of Latin America, ed. L. Bethell, vol. 5 (Cambridge, 1987), 779-830. 7. See Torre Diaz's economic and political reports to the Mexican Ministry of Foreign Affairs for 1922 and 1923, SRE 41-7-23. 8. Daniel Pécaut, Entre le peuple et la nation (Paris, 1988), 18. See also pp. 11-46. 9. For a short review of the development of Brazilian intellectual life in this period, see Alfredo Bosi, "As letras na Primeira República," in História Geral da Civilização Brasileira, ed. Sérgio Buarque de Holanda, vol. 8 (São Paulo, 1977), 295-319; and Martins Wilson, História da Inteligência Brasileira, vol. 6 (São Paulo, 1915-1933), 272-376; Aracy Amaral, Artes plásticas na Semana de 22 (São Paulo, 1970); Pécaut, Entre le peuple et la nation; and Sergio Miceli, Intelectuais e classe dirigente no Brasil (1920-1945) (São Paulo, 1979). 10. So argued the organizers of the exhibition, according to Silva da Motta, A nação faz 100 anos, 71. 11. An explanation of this dichotomy can be found in ibid., 94-102; also in Nicolau Sevcenko, Literatura como missão (São Paulo, 1983). 12. "Mexican Ulysses" is the title of José Vasconcelos's autobiography (Ulises criollo, 3d ed. [Mexico City, 1935]). 13. See Helen Delpar, The Enormous Vogue of Things Mexican: Cultural Relations between the United States and Mexico, 1920- 1935 (Tuscaloosa, 1992). 14. In La raza cósmica (Paris, 1925), Vasconcelos writes about a diplomatic encounter with Hughes in a tense environment (see pp. 115-16). 15. The Westinghouse Corporation displays were especially remarkable. See Peck, "International Exposition of Brazil." 16. Torre Diaz sent classified letters to the Mexican Ministry of Foreign Affairs reporting on his talk with Pessoa, who, he argued, was promoting a Society of Nations, which he believed was too pro-American (SRE 7-16-67, II). 17. Ibid. For insights into how this excuse was constructed within the government, see the account of one of the actors in the drama, Alberto J. Pani, Mi contribución al nuevo régimen (1910-1933) (Mexico City, 1936), 292-98. 18. For this official appointment, see SRE 5-20-524. 19. In El desastre (Mexico City, 1951), Vasconcelos argued that Obregón aimed to put him far from Mexico in order to be free to maneuver politically and also to limit his growing prestige as minister of education (see pp. 145-48). Alberto J. Pani, then minister of foreign affairs, argued that he himself had suggested Vasconcelos's name to Obregón, bearing in mind that Vasconcelos had expressed his desire to be appointed. See Pani, Mi contrbución, 292-98. In addition, there is evidence that Vasconcelos lobbied to be appointed to this position, both in the AGN Obregón-Calles and in SRE 18-5-72, I-III. 20. See Gen. Manuel Pérez Treviño's long report on this delegation's activities: