tions. It would serve as Mexico's passport to modernity's paradise, as their own sense of identity and unity, and as a source of domestic legitimacy. ## The Mexican Paradox of Afrancesamiento Despite the abortive and resented French-supported empire of Maximilian in Mexico (1864-1867), by the 1880s France was the foremost cultural and intellectual model for the Porfirian elite. Whereas Mexican liberals after the 1860s were ambivalent toward Europe as a whole, most shared a nationalistic republicanism which responded sympathetically to the reestablishment of the republic in France. And once positivist ideaswhich were unmistakably Frenchwere widely accepted, the concept of scientific politics embraced by Mexican elites could not be dissociated from the French milieu. In fact, cultural and intellectual analyses of the period often have been written as the history of Mexico's afrancesamiento (Francophilia). It is important to bear in mind, however, that Mexican elites were not seeking to be French specifically, merely to be modern. Thus Mexican emulations were an echo of a wider process that included many other nations and, even within France, the Paris-like modernization of rural areas. 27 France, as arbiter of late-nineteenth-century culture and politics, was a process of colonization and homogenization of which the ostensible center was Paris but which in fact had no center. Ideas, products, and people circulated throughout the world in an uncontrollable fashion. Mexican and French elites, as well as those of other Western nations, were simultaneously colonizers and colonized in this process. For Mexico, this process of cultural and political colonization was composed of a twofold perspective: on one hand, Mexico's somewhat idealized view of France; and on the other, France's own striving to be the ideal picture of progress and cosmopolitanism, of which the world's fairs, and Mexico's presence in them, were the main expressions. The events of the French Third Republic were followed closely by the emerging Porfirian elite. The new French republic paralleled the consolidation of a stable political status quo in Mexico.28 As historian Charles Hale has shown, the consolidation of the opportunistic French republic was very well received by intellectuals like Justo Sierra, Santiago Sierra, and Francisco Cosmes. Indeed, in achieving a peaceful political balance marked by conservatism, France became again an unparalleled model. According to the newspaper of the Porfirian avant-garde liberal group, La Libertad, the French Third Republic was an example of a liberal party that, in turning into a party, of government, had also somehow become conservative.29 Throughout the 1880s the emerging Porfirian elitemore urban and cosmopolitan than ever beforereadily absorbed and idealized French thought. For the elite of Mexico at this time, Hippolyte Taine's scientific