29. SRE 18-5-72, I, II. Informe del comandante del cañonero Nicolás Bravo en su viaje por América del Sur, SRE 18-5-72, II; and the letter to Obregón in AGN Calles-Obregón 104-b-30 (20, 21). 21. See SRE 18-5-72, II. 22. SRE 18-5-72, I, letters of November and December. 23. Jornal do Commercio, 21 November 1921. 24. SRE 7-16-67, II. 25. Ibid., I. Tiffany was hired even though Williams Inc. offered a better deal (May 1922). Porfirio Díaz's regime hired Tiffany, among other things, for the crystal curtain of the National Theater (Palacio de Bellas Artes). 26. There is no record of these medals in SRE, but Vasconcelos (El desastre, 149) mentioned that they were distributed (both to the Mexican and Brazilian presidents as well as to Pani). 27. Regarding Torri's trip to Brazil see Julio Torri, Diálogos de los libros (Mexico City, 1980), 240-43. 28. Vasconcelos, El desastre, 149. 30. Obregón Santacilia grew up in the Porfirian aristocracy and was educated at the School of Fine Arts of San Carlos. He was, first, a great promoter of a colonialist revival in Mexico, inspired by a member of the Ateneo de la Juventud, Jesús T. Aceredo; and he followed the teachings of Federico E. Mariscal. Later he experimented with art deco and, finally, with functionalist mechanist architecture. With his building for the 1922 Brazilian exhibition, and with his friendship with Pani, he began his successful career as one of the architects of the postrevolutionary regimes. Among his main works are the transformation of the Porfirian Legislative Palace into the Monument of the Revolution, the building for the Ministry of Sanitation, the Re-forma and del Prado hotels, and the offices of the Bank of Mexico in the former Guardiola plaza. See Carlos Obregón Santacilia, Cincuenta años de arquitectura mexicana (Mexico City, 1925); and Carlos Obregón Santacilia, El maquinismo, la vida y la arquitectura (Mexico City, 1939). About him, see Maria Luisa Adame, "Arquitecto Carlos Obregón Santacilia," cultural supplement to Novedades, 16 October 1955; Israel Katzman, Arquitectura contemporánea mexicana: Precedentes y desarrollo (Mexico City, 1963); Mexico, Partido Revolucionario Institucional, Tradición de la cultura: Nacionalismo cultural: Carlos Obregón Santacilia (Mexico City, 1988); Ramón Vargas Salguero, "La arquitectura de la revolución," in México: 75 años de revolución, Educación, Cultura y Comunicaciones, vol. 2 (Mexico City, 1988), 437-77; and Enrique X. de Anda, La arquitectura de la revolución mexicana: Corrientes y estilo en la déada de los veinte (Mexico City, 1990). 31. In the interior of the British pavilion, Vasconcelos argued, " [there] were represented the four parts of the world, in the customary way in which the British depict the world, only to remind us that they are the masters of the world" (Vasconcelos, La raza cósmica, 82). 32. Margaret Hutton Abels, "Painting at the Brazil Centennial Exposition," Art and Archaeology 16 (Summer 1923):108. 33. In this regard, see Justino Fernández, Roberto Montenegro (Mexico City, 1962); and Ramírez's analysis of the artistic and cultural debate between 1914 and 1921 (an examination of journals and newspapers published during that period): Fausto Ramirez, Crónica de las artes plásticas en los años de López Velarde, 19141921 (Mexico