arte no Brasil, ed. Walter Zanini, vol. 2 (São Paulo, 1983), 825- 32; and Octaviano C. De Fiore, Architecture and Sculpture in Brazil (Albuquerque, n.d.), 20-23. 47. May 1922, meeting of Torre Diaz and Pessoa, SRE 18-5-72, I. 48. Vasconcelos, La raza cósmica, 83. 49. Jornal do Brasil, newspaper clipping in SRE, no exact date. 50. Regarding the aesthetic transformation that favored the consolidation of indigenism, see chapters 6 and 7. 51. See, for example, Ethnos 1, 3 (1920). 52. Ignacio Bernal, Historia de la arqueología en México (Mexico City, 1962), translation presented in an English edition (1980), 183. 53. See José Clemente Orozco, Apuntes autobiográficos (Mexico City, 1966). For a discussion of Vasconcelos's official support of mural paintings, see Fell, José Vasconcelos, 401. In a letter to Gómez Morín, Vasconcelos confessed his regret at having supported the "pintor plebeyo de la revolución"Rivera (from Gómez Morín's archive, quoted in Skirius, José Vasconcelos, 35). 54. José Vasconcelos, Indología (Paris, n.d.), 200-229. G. E Nicolai seems to have been well known in Argentina, especially by intellectuals like José Ingenieros. Some of Nicolai's works were translated in Argentina; Vasconcelos's knowledge of Nicolai's works very likely derives from these translations. M. Leclerc du Sablon was a well-known biologist in the last part of the nineteenth century. See G. F. Nicolai, La base biológica del relativismo científico (Córdoba, 1925); and Mathieu Leclerc du Sablon, Les Incertitudes de la biologie (Paris, 1919). 55. He and Manuel Gamio were lecturing together. See José Vasconcelos and Manuel Gamio, Aspects of Mexican Civilization: Lectures on the Harris Foundation 1926 (Chicago, 1926). 56. Ibid., 85. 57. Ibid., 89. 58. Ibid., 100-102. 59. Ibid., 96. 60. This rhetorical piece was reproduced in Livro d'Ouro, 358-59 and was published in Mexico by Julio Jiménez Rueda, "El discurso de Vasconcelos a Cuauhtémoc," in his Bajo la cruz del sur (Mexico City, 1922), 112-21. Blanco both refers to and briefly interprets Vasconcelos's speech in Brazil: see José Joaquín Blanco, Se llamaba Vasconcelos: Una evocación crítica (Mexico City, 1977), 117-22. 61. José Vasconcelos's speech on Cuauhtémoc, in Jiménez Rueda, "El discurso de Vasconcelos," 112-21. 62. Letter to Obregón, AGN Obregón-Calles, 104-b-30 (21), 17 September 1922. 63. In fact, official indigenism was not very different from Vasconcelos's type of indigenism. The official indigenism of Manuel Gamio (both positivistanthropologically and archaeologicallyand liberal) exemplified by Forjando Patria (1916) was indeed, as David Brading has shown, as integrationist as Vasconcelos's position, although less Catholic and more liberal. See Basave Benítez, México Mestizo, 130-36; and Alberto Guaraldo, "Indigenismo e investigación etno-antropolôgica en México," in America Latina: Dallo Stato Coloniale allo stato nazione, ed. Antonio Annino, vol. 2 (Turin, 1987), 822-37. See also David Brading, "Manuel Gamio and Official Indigenism in Mexico," Bulletin of Latin American Research 7, 1 (1988):75-89. 64. Vasconcelos, El desastre, 150.