65. See Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Anais do XX Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, 3 vols. (Rio de Janeiro, 1922); and "Notes on the Brazil Centenary Exposition," Hispanic American Historical Review, 2 ( 1922):506-12. 66. According to Christopher J. Hall's translation of Bartra's La jaula de la melancolía, the literal meaning of pelado is "shorn one." It refers to "a Mexican social type from the working class noted for his coarse, uneducated, uncouth language and behavior" (The Cage of Melancholy: Identity and Metamorphosis in the Mexican Character, trans. Christopher J. Hall [New Brunswick, N.J., 1992], 33). 67. Alfonso del Toro, "La bella ciudad carioca," Revista de Revistas, 20 October 1922, 11-13. In La raza cósmica (pp. 52-60), Vasconcelos suggested that the official Brazilian personnel tried to guide him in order to avoid black and poor sections in the various cities he visited. 68. For data on Vázquez Schiaffiano, a petroleum engineer, see SRE Le. 1006. 69. México, Secretaría de Industria, Comercio y Trabajo, México, sus recursos naturales, su situación actual (Mexico City, 1922). 70. Documentary, México, Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, México en las fiestas del centenario de Brasil (Mexico City, 1922). 71. Fell (José Vasconcelos, 449-56) believes that because it was internationally recognized, Mexican popular art acquired "credibility in aesthetic, economic, social, and most of all, cultural aspects." But its international credibility was only because of its exoticism. For an illustrative analysis of the discovery of popular art in Mexico, see John F. Scott, "La evolución de la teoría de la historia del arte por escritores del siglo XX sobre el arte mexicano del siglo XIX," Anales del Instituto de Investigaciones Estéti-cas, no. 37 (1968):71-104. Scott deals with the national and international recognition of the artistic works of the lithographer José Guadalupe Posada. 72. See the report by Vázquez Schiaffiano in SRE 18-5-72, III. On Guillermo Kahlo, a German photographer and father of famous Frida, see the catalogue and study by the Museo Nacional de Arte, Guillermo Kahlo: Viday obra: Fotógrafo 1872-1941 (Mexico City, 1994). 73. It is extremely difficult to estimate the cost of Mexico's presence at the Rio de Janeiro fair. Expenditures seemed to have been made with no clear budget approval but through direct request to President Obregón. At times the Mexican delegation in Rio de Janeiro exhausted its resources. According to Vasconcelos, what was especially expensive was maintenance of the military delegation. Vasconcelos himself directly and urgently requested U.S.\$16,000 from Obregón in September 1922 (AGN Calles-Obregón, 104-b-30 [21]). See also Vasconcelos, E1 desastre, 151- 52. 74. See the article in the Chilean newspaper El Diario Ilustrado, 4 November 1922. This incident resulted in an apology by the Mexican minister in Chile, Carlos Trejo Lerdo de Tejada, that was published in El Mercurio (Santiago, Chile), 6 November 1922. 75. Folha do Norte, 19 November 1922. 76. See Revistas de Revistas, no. 2 (1922), an issue devoted to Brazil. 77. See Jiménez Rueda's account of this trip in Bajo la cruz del sur. 78. Regarding race, Knight has lucidly shown the continuity of racism in prerevolutionary and postrevolutionary indigenism: Alan Knight, "Racism, Revolution, and Indigenismo: Mexico, 1910- 1940," in The Idea of Race in Latin America, 1870-1940, ed. R. Graham (Austin, 1990), 71-113.