79. See Enrique Krauze, Caudillos culturales de la revolución mexicana (Mexico City, 1985), 104-10. See also Luis González's analysis of this generation in La ronda de las generaciones (Mexico City, 1984), 66-80; and Carlos Monsiváis, "Notas sobre cultura mexicana en el siglo XX," in El Colegio de México, Historia General de México, vol. 2, 1417-21; and, for the specific case of artists vis-à-vis generational change, Ramírez, "Vertientes nacionalistas," 111-67. 80. See Vasconcelos's discussions of racial theory in his Raza cósmica and in Vasconcelos and Gamio, Aspects of Mexican Civilization. In addition, see Mariátegui's review of Vasconcelos's Indología: José Carlos Mariátegui, Temas de nuestra América (Lima, 1960), 78-84. Mariátegui supported Vasconcelos's utopianism but opposed its almost mystic faith in the future without action in the present. 81. "Los problemas de México," reprinted in Boletín de la Secretaría de Educación Pública, 28 August 1922. 82. In this regard, see Knight, "Racism, Revolution, and Indigenismo," 78-98. 83. Vasconcelos, La raza cósmica, 3. 84. On this point, as on many others in this chapter, I have benefited from David Brading, "Social Darwinism and Romantic Idealism: Andrés Molina Enríquez and José Vasconcelos in the Mexican Revolution," in his Prophecy and Myth in Mexican History (Cambridge, 1984), 63-83, 92-95. 85. The issue of Vasconcelos's self-deceit during his trip to South America is also briefly noticed by José Joaquín Blanco, who argues that Vasconcelos "let himself be deceived" by the democratic regimes of Argentina, Brazil, and Chile (in sharp contrast to Mexico's antidemocratic government). See Blanco, Se llamaba Vasconcelos, 117-22. 86. Vasconcelos and Gamio, Aspects of Mexican Civilization, 12. 87. See the opening quotation in this chapter. 88. The last entry in the diary of Antonieta Rivas Mercado, quoted in Martha Robles, Entre el poder y las letras (Mexico City, 1989), 103. ## 13. The 1929 Seville Fair 1. See Alfredo Serrano, "La originalidad en las grandes exposiciones internacionales: Un comentario a la maravilla del pueblo español," Revista de las Españas, no. 36-37 (1929):340-44. 2. Originally it was called Exposición Hispanoamericana, but it was renamed in order to include Brazil, Portugal, and the United States. See Blanca Ríos de Lampérez et al., Nuestra raza es española (Seville, 1926). On the fairs in Barcelona and Seville, see Allwood, Great Exhibitions, 135-36; Findling, Historical Dictionary, 254-57; Seville, El libro de tyro iberoamericano, vol. 1 (Seville, 1929); Arthur Stanley Riggs, "The Spanish Exposition," Art and Archaeology, no. 27 (1929):156-64; Fernando Real Balbuena, La Exposición Ibero-Americana: Origen y gestación de la magna empresa (Seville, 1961); Encarnación Lemus López, La Exposición Ibero-Americana a través de la prensa local (1923- 1929) (Seville, 1987); and the chronology of events included in Manuel Trillo de Leyva, La Exposición Iberoamericana: La transformación urbana de Sevilla