(Seville, 1980), 183-204. For the origins and problems confronted by the Seville fair since 1905, see Narciso Ciaurriz, Origen y primeros trabajos de la Exposición Iberoamericana (Seville, 1929); Eduardo Rodriguez Bernal, La Exposición Ibero-Americana de Sevilla de 1929 a través de la prensa local (Seville, 1981). For an analysis of the fair in view of Seville's urban transformation, see Alberto Villar Movellán, Arquitectura del regionalismo en Sevilla, 1900-1935 (Seville, 1979), 412-75. 3. "Inauguración de la Exposición Iberoamericana de Seville," Revista de las Es-pañas, no. 33 (1929):157. 4. Rodriguez Bernal, La Exposición Ibero-Americana de Sevilla, 269. 5. Trillo de Leyva, La Exposición Iberoamericana, 35. 6. Rodolfo Reyes, "Una interpretación de la Exposición Iberoamericana," Revista de las Españas, no. 42 ( 1930): 129-30. 7. Villar Movellán, Arquitectura del regionalismo, 452-53. 8. See El libro de oro iberoamericano, vol. 1. For the transformation of the notion of social economy, see Gueslin, L'Invention de l'économie sociale. 9. Informe General, Consul Mexicano, Barcelona, SRE IV-294-I. 10. NYT, 25 January 1999, announced that the United States was going to build a pavilion "which will later be used for the consulate." In addition, Archer M. Huntington, president of the Hispanic Society of America, donated a statue of E1 Cid Campeador. 11. SRE, letter of invitation to the competition [the prize for which was 20,000 pesetas], SRE EMESP, 531. 12. Reported by the Mexican consul in Barcelona (SRE IV-294-1). 13. México, Comité Organizador de la Participación de México en la Exposición Ibero-Americana de Sevilla, México (Mexico City, 1929), iii. 15. In Spanish the legend is "Madre España: porque en mi campo encendiste el sol de tu cultura, yen mi alma la lámpara devocional de tu espíritu, ahora en mi campo yen mi corazón han florecido. Méjico" (SRE IV-295-I). 16. For the context of social unrest and the exhibition, see Shlomo Ben-Ami, Fascism from Above: The Dictatorship of Primo de Rivera in Spain, 1923-1930 (Oxford, 1983), 353-56. 17. Ibid., 202-5; and Leandro Álvarez Rey, Sevilla durante la dictadura de Primo de Rivera (Seville, 1987), 235-38. 18. See Pike, Hispanism, 35-47, 178-84; and Pérez Montfort, Hispanismoy Falange. 19. See Miguel Rodriguez, "El 12 de octubre: Entre el IV y el V centenario," in Cultura e identidad nacional, ed. Roberto Blancarte (Mexico City, 1994), 145-51. I thank Victor Arriaga for access to this material. 20. Enrique González Martinez, La apacible locura (1951), included in his Obras Completas (Mexico City, 1977), 780. This work is the second part of González Martínez's autobiography. The first part, El hombre buho: Misterio de una vocación, was first published in 1944. About his days in Spain during the Seville fair, see Obras completas, pp. 775-80. 21. For a brief review of the socioeconomic history of this period, see Raymond Carr, Oxford History of Modern Europe: Spain, 1808-1939 (Oxford, 1966), 581-602. 22. This tune was composed by Guty Cárdenas, who was then a popular singer