and composer from the Yucatán and one of the first radio stars of Mexico City's urban culture. 23. The figure of 750,000 pesetas was announced by the Ministry of Industry and Commerce in October 1927 and published in Excélsior, 2 November 1927. It should be considered a minimum figure, and though the final total is unclear, it is very likely that it was significantly larger than this sum. See Appendix 2. 24. México, Comité Organizador, México, 2. 25. For instance, in 1930 Ortiz de Montellano published an article in Los Contemporáneos in which he explained the growing American and European interest in Mexico's literature: Bernardo Ortiz de Montellano, ''Literatura de revolución y literatura revolucionaria," Los Contemporáneos 7, 23 ( 1930):77-81. 26. La Libertad (Madrid), 17 May 1929. 27. SRE IV-295-I. 28. SRE IV-295-I, II. See also Boletín de la Secretaría de Industria, Comercio y Trabajo. . ., 22 April 1926. The projects were exhibited at the National Academy of Fine Arts. 29. See the explanation and illustrations of this building in Excélsior, 8 May 1926. As a "Porfirian" architect, Marquina designed two aristocratic mansions along the Paseo de la Reforma and in the Colonia Juárez of Mexico City. Later he became a great advocator of pre-Hispanic-style architecture. 30. Confidential letter, 6 May 1926. 31. SRE IV-295-I, II. 32. Regarding Obregón Santacilia's proposal, see Ramón Vargas Salguero, "La arquitectura de la revolución," in México: 75 años de revolución, educación, cultura y comunicaciones, vol. 2 (Mexico City, 1988), 437-77; and Partido Revolucionario Institucional, Tradición de la cultura. 33. The total cost of the building was 300,000 pesos, 10 percent of which went to Amabilis (SRE EMESP 525). 34. Godoy, México en Sevilla. I have dealt with Godoy in previous chapters. By 1929 he was a veteran member of the Porfirian exhibition team, and in that year he was still an active writer for Excélsior in Mexico City. He died in 1930. See also Francisco Sáenz, Comité Organizador de la Participación de México en la Exposición Ibero-Americana de Sevilla (Mexico City, 1929); and México, Secretaría de Industria, Comercio y Trabajo, Exposición iberoamericana de Sevilla 1929: La participación de México (Mexico City, 1928). 35. Vasconcelos, El desastre, 378. 36. SRE EMESP 539. These changes may have been caused by the defeat of Aarón Sáenz as a presidential candidate and by the conflict between Portes Gil and Luis N. Morones. 37. Amabilis's letter to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, 15 July 1928 (SRE EMESP 532). See also letter to Amabilis, 3 February 1928, from Emilio Narváez asking him to take great care of the budget (SRE EMESP 528). For a detailed explanation of expenditures between 1927 and 1930, see "Libro Mayor," SRE EMESP 530 (which included calls not to repeat the mistakes of Mexico's presence at the Rio de Janeiro fair, which caused considerable economic troubles); SRE EMESP 752. 38. The Mexican consul in Seville paid the fine and freed Amabilis. The incident took place in July 1929 (SRE EMESP 534). 39. Some replies by Orozco Ramirez affirm these accusations. Enrique González