45. Ibid., 97. Martinez promised an investigation. There are no more records or final results about this incident. See SRE EMESP 539. 40. See Katzman, Arquitectura del siglo XIX, 267. 41. For this monument, and for Amabilis's works in Mérida city, see Carlos Echánove Trujillo, ed., Enciclopedia Yucatanense (Mexico City, 1946), vol. 4, 445-48, and vol. 6, 553-62, quotation on p. 554. 42. Manuel Amabilis, El pabellón de México en la Exposición Ibero-Americana de Sevilla (Mexico City, 1929). This book was proposed by Amabilis in April 1928 (SRE EMESP 529) and approved and paid for by the Mexican government in June (SRE EMESP 531). 43. Amabilis's "Propuesta para una monografía sobre el edificio mexicano en la exposición de Seville," April 1928, SRE EMESP 529. For his ideas on the revolution, see Manuel Amabilis, Mística de la revolución mexicana (Mexico City, 1937). 44. Amabilis, Elpabellón, 23-24. 46. Amabilis acknowledged that he took the general idea of the concentric squares from the notion of Sección Aurea articulated by Macody Lund in his Teoría Real de la Arquitectura and in his studies of the geometric structures of the ancient and medieval religious architectural forms found in the Nodarós Cathedral (see Amabilis, El pa-bellón, 32). 47. Ibid., 38. 48. Ibid., 50. 49. Ibid., 50-51. 50. Ibid., 55-56. The other two jambas were La Jamba de los Sacerdotes and La Jamba de los Constructores. 51. In addition, Reyes painted three murals which represented miners, farmers, and people from Yucatán. 52. Amabilis, El pabellón, 76-77. 53. Argentina constructed a neocolonial type of building, designed by Martin S. Noel, which combined baroque aspects with Inca and Calchaquís motifs. Manuel Piquerons Cotolí constructed the Peruvian pavilion in what he called neo-Peruvian style: extravagant but rational. See Cherif-El-Maldini, "El pabellón peruano en la Exposición Ibero-Americana: Una interesante charla con el arquitecto autor del proyecto . . .," El Liberal (Seville) 6 September 1927, quoted by Villar Morellán, Ar-quitectura del regionalismo, 457. The United States constructed its main pavilion in neocolonial California style. It was designed by William Templeton Johnson, a follower of Bertram G. Goodhue, who built the 1915 San Diego world's fairthe zenith of colonial California style. Chile constructed a building which imitated the majesty of the Andes. See Villar Morellán, Arquitectura del regionalismo, 453-65. 54. La Unión, 2 September 1928. 55. Reported to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, SRE EMESP 533. 56. See Gonzalez Martínez's account of his troublesome meeting with the Spanish king, in González Martínez, La apacible locura, in Obras Completas, 775-80. 57. La Libertad, 22 May 1929. 58. Reyes, "Una interpretación de la Exposición Iberoamericana," 129-30. 59. In ElLiberal (Seville), in ElNoticiero Sevillano, originally published in Industria y Comercio, Mexico.