60. El Liberal (Madrid), 17 May 1929. 61. The legends were written by Reyes without the permission of either Amabilis or Gonzalez Martinez. In fact, it seems that even the legend "Madre España" was put there without their permission. Both Gonzalez Martinez and Amabilis disliked the legends, not for their connotations but because of their tacky prose. Thus all of those letreritos (little signs), as Amabilis called them, were removed by order of González Martinez in 1928, except "Madre Patria" that had already been read by Spanish authorities, who were very pleased with it. For the legends, see SRE IV-295-I, II; for the debate about them, see SRE EMESP 533. 62. Letter to Gonzalez Martinez, 2 January 1929, SRE EMESP 537. 63. See M. Alfonso Rivera, Sevilla y su exposición, 1929 (Seville, 1992), 64. 64. Godoy, México en Sevilla. 65. About this week, see Gonzalez Martínez's report, 26 June 1930, SRE EMESP 539. He, of course, did not like the spirit of the Mexican week because of its radicalism and because of its lack of Mexican presence. 66. See Luis Araquistáin, La revolución mejicana: Sus orígenes, sus hombres, su obra (Madrid, 1929), 353. 67. See the reprints of Fernando de los Ríos, El sentido humanista del socialismo (Madrid, 1976); and Fernando de los Ríos, Escritos sobre democracia y socialismo (Madrid, 1974). For the role of these intellectuals in Spain during the late 1920s and their fascination with Mexico, see Genoveva Garcia Queipo, Los intelectuales y la dictadura de Primo de Rivera. (Madrid, 1988), 181-84, 525-30. 68. For instance, the book México was the counterpart of the many propaganda books published during the nineteenth century. It was published by the Comité Organizador de la Participación de México en la Exposición Ibero-Americana de Sevilla in 1929. Of the 3,000 copies printed, 80 were dedicated to Spanish and international authorities: it had been prepared by Luis A. Herrera with the collaboration of distinguished intellectuals, such as Salvador Novo, director of the Propaganda Section in the Ministry of Industry. 69. See "Inauguración de la Exposición Iberoamericana de Sevilla." The American pavilion was indeed three buildings: one in Spanish colonial styleto be made into the American consulate following the fairanother industrial gallery, and a movie theater. 70. These films were requested by the Mexican Embassy in Belgium in January 1928. They seem to have been exhibited throughout Europe. SRE EMESP 528. 71. See SRE EMESP 523. 72. Ibid. 73. For the exhibit, see the list of products and objects awarded in SRE EMESP 539; and Sáenz, Comité Organizador. 74. Report, 4 April 1930, SRE EMESP 539. The highest Spanish award was the grand prize (followed by honor diploma, gold, silver, bronze, and finally honorable mention). 75. Regarding the continuity of business in prerevolutionary and postrevolutionary Mexico, see Haber, Industry and Underdevelopment. 76. See Jaime Noyola Rocha, "La visión integral de la sociedad nacional (1920-1934)," in La antropología en Míxico: Panorama histórico, vol. 2, Los hechos y los dichos (1880-1986), ed. Carlos Garcia Mora (Mexico City, 1987), 133-222; Guaraldo,