"Indigenismo e investigación etno-antropológica"; Juan Comas, "Historia del indigenismo en México," América Indígena 8 (1948): 182-86; and, for Gamio's conflict with Calles, González Gamio, Manuel Gamio, 79-92. 77. In this respect, see Moyssén, "El nacionalismo y la arquitectura." 78. In the late 1920s international interest in Mexican archaeological ruins was widespread, especially among American institutions. Thus a Maya building in a world's fair helped to popularize this interest. However, architecturally there were already some examples of European or American uses of pre-Hispanic motifs the California buildings of Frank Lloyd Wright, for example. In addition, interestingly enough, between 1927 and 1934 the American architect Robert B. Stacy-Judd promoted the use of Maya architecture in order for American architecture to come out with a real "all-American" style. This bizarre American architectwho believed that "Christ's last words were pure Maya"constructed various buildings with Maya inspiration in California, including, in about 1927, the Aztec Hotel in Moraga and the First Baptist Church in Ventura. For instance, see articles by Robert B. Stacy-Judd in the journal of The Architect and the Engineer from October 1933 to November 1934, and the summary of his impressions on Maya architecture in his The Ancient Mayas: Adventures in the Jungles of Yucatan (Los Angeles, 1934). See also the recently published interpretation of Stacy-Judd's Mayism: David Gebhard, Robert B. Stacy-Judd: Maya Architecture and the Creation of a New Style (Santa Barbara, 1993). 79. See SRE III-236-3, especially the opinions of Jaime Torres Bodet and Marte R. Gómez regarding the advantages of Mexico's presence at the 1937 Paris fair. Compare Mexico's presence at the 1939 New York world's fair, at which Mexico exhibited a "graphic synthesis" of President Lázaro Cárdenas's six-year plan as well as traditional clothing on models that represented "the most typical characteristics of the autochthonous races of Mexico" (México, Secretaría de la Economía Nacional, Memo-ria de la Secretaría de Economía Nacional, 1939-1940 Mexico City, 1940], 17). 80. In this regard, see the analysis of the vivid intellectual discussion that took place in 1925 in Victor Diaz Arciniega, Querella por la cultura "revolucionaria" (1925) (Mexico City, 1989). ## Epilogue 1. Examples of this alternative approach are: for Mexico and from an anthropological synchronic perspective, Claudio Lomnitz, Exits from the Labyrinth (Berkeley, 1992), esp. chap. l, and Guy P. C. Thomson, "Bulwarks of Patriotic Liberalism: The National Guard, Philharmonic Corps and Patriotic Juntas in Mexico, 1847-1888," Journal of Latin American Studies 22 (February 1990):31-68; for Bengal India, Partha Chatterjee, The Nation and Its Fragments (Princeton, N.J., 1993), 3-12, 158-99; and for France, the classic study by E. Weber, Peasants into Frenchmen (Stanford, 1976). 2. Of course, there are authors who disagree in this assertion. For an example, see John Breuilly, Nationalism and the State (Chicago, 1982). 3. Too much has been written about identity. By identity I refer solely to the abstract notion of a people's own sense of attachment and belonging, be it an ethnic, cultural, geographical, or religious sense of communal existence.