determinism was the model for the construction of scientific politics, even though Taine's ideas were being seriously challenged in France at the same time. These challenges eventually were raised in Mexico as well, especially in the 1910S with the intellectual group of El Ateneo de la Juventud (see chapter 12), but in the 1880s Mexicans still saw France as an unstoppable economic, intellectual, and political wave of progress. Mexico's presence at the 1889 Paris fair, therefore, represented more than the achievement of economic advantages. It also symbolized Mexico's quest to be recognized as a nation that formed part of the cosmopolitan world. It was to be part of Zola's France, from which, as Justo Sierra later argued, Mexicans learned "the brutal and sinister poem of matter." 30 It was a dream come true, epitomized in a poem composed by Rafael de Zayas Enríquez for the awards ceremony to honor Mexican exhibitors in Paris 1889: Thanks my God! It came true, the dream I conceive in my delirium, patriotic and poetic, Juárez and Porfirio's Anáhuac I have seen honored by the France of Thiers and Gambetta.31 However, in honoring and making use of French culture and history, Mexicans had to make them fit the epic structure of their own intellectual landscape. In 1899 Francisco Bulnes observed that France had hypnotized Mexico and the rest of the "Latin" countries.32 In the same way, in his poem entitled "Le Mexique, a la France," Auguste Genin, a Franco-Mexican writer and entrepreneur resident in Mexico and a long-time freelance writer for the Mexican government, paid poetic tribute to France on behalf of Mexico in verses that simultaneously and candidly expressed the Mexican idealization of France and Mexico's intellectual self-conformation to that idealization: O France! It is from thee that books come, it is from thy lucid spirit that my spirit becomes intoxicated, my voice is the echo of your voice; my sons love thy sons; thy festivities are my festivities and it is through thy singing that today my poets fascinate their lyres in Mexico. Their accents touched upon thy heart because their genius is born under the sun of thy infinite glory from a spark inspired by the vision of thee, Alarcón and Corneille have walked together, Ignacio Ramírez resembles Voltaire, as Juárez resembles Gambetta. France, I have Juan de Dios Peza, my sweet François Coppée; Guillermo Prieto sings my epic poem,