4. See Étienne Tassin, "Identités nationales et citoyenneté politique," Esprit, no. 198 (1994):97-111. 5. I thank Paolo Riguzzi for his comments on this point. 6. See Edmundo O'Gorman's Destierro de sombras: Luz en el origen de la imagen y culto de Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe del Tepeyac (Mexico City, 1986). 7. See William Tobin, "'A Shrine to Which All May Worship': The Making of the Lincoln Memorial and the Representation of the Modern American Nation-State" (manuscript, 1992). 8. There are various studies on the emergence of these popular patriotisms. For an excellent synthesis of these patriotisms, see Knight, U.S.-Mexico Relations; Thomson, "Bulwarks of Patriotic Liberalism"; and Guy P. C. Thomson, "Movilización conservadora, insurrección liberal y rebeliones indígenas, 1854-1876," in America Latina: Dallo Stato Coloniale allo Stato Nazione, ed. Antonio Annino, vol. 2 (Turin, 1987), 592-614. 9. See Musil's collection of essays published in German as Gesammelte Werke, ed. Adolf Frise (Hamburg, 1978). I used the Spanish translation of the collection, published as Ensayos y conferencias, trans. José L. Arántegui (Madrid, 1992), 95-108, quotation on p. 107. 10. Chatterjee, The Nation, 6. 11. Lêdo Ivo, "Acontecimento do sonêto" (1949), from Acontecimento do sonêto (Rio de Janeiro, 1965), 10. 12. François Xavier Guerra argues that Spanish American countries "belong in their own rightat least in terms of their elites' origins and culturewithin a European cultural area. Countries which were among the first within this cultural area to set up modern political regimes." F. X. Guerra, "The Spanish-American Tradition of Representation and Its European Roots," Journal of Latin American Studies 26 (1994):1. 13. Knight distinguishes goals and means in nationalist social actors; I follow this distinction. See Alan Knight, "Revolutionary Project, Recalcitrant People: Mexico, 1910-1940," in Revolutionary Process in Mexico, ed. J. E. Rodríguez (Los Angeles, 1990), 227-64. 14. Ramón López Velarde, Obras (Mexico City, 1971), 232. 15. Jorge Cuesta, "Carta a Portes Gil" (1940), in Cuesta, Poesía y crítica (Mexico City, 1991), 233. 16. López Velarde, Obras, 232.