. Los ferrocarriles mexicanos. Mexico City: Filomeno Mata, 1881. Bartra, Roger. La jaula de la melancolía. Mexico City: Grijalbo, 1987. Batres, Leopoldo. Monografías de arqueología mexicana: Teotihuacán; o la ciudad sagrada de los toltecas. Mexico City: Talleres de la Escuela de Artes y Oficios, 1889. Baz, Gustavo, and E.L. Gallo. History of the Mexican Railway: Wealth of Mexico, in the Region Extending from the Gulf to the Capital of the Republic, Considered in Its Geological, Agricultural, Manufacturing and Commercial Aspects, with Scientific, Historical and Statistical Notes. Translated by George E Henderson. Mexico City: Gallo and Co., 1876. Beezley, William H. Judas at the Jockey Club and Other Episodes of Porfirian Mexico. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1987. Ben-Ami, Shlomo. Fascism from Above: The Dictatorship of Primo de Rivera in Spain, 1923-1930. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983. Benedict, Burton. The Anthropology of World's Fairs: San Francisco's Panama Pacific International Exposition of 1915. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983. . "International Exhibitions and National Identity." Anthropology Today 6 (June 1991):5-9. Benjamin, Walter. "Paris, Capital of the 19th Century." In Illuminations, edited by Peter Demetz, translated by E. Jephcott, 146-58. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1986. Bernal, Ignacio. Historia de la arqueología en México. Mexico City: Porrúa, 1979. Bertier-Marriot, Clement. Un parisien au Mexique. Paris: E. Déntu, 1886. Best, Alberto. Notice sur les applications de l'electricité dans la République mexicaine. Paris: Secretaría de Fomento, 1889. Bianconi, F. Le Mexique à la portée des industriels, des capitalistes, des négociants, importateurs et exportateurs et des travailleurs avec une carte du Mexique commerciale, boutière, minière et agricole. Paris: Imprimerie Chaix, 1889. . Texte et carte commerciale des États-Unis du Mexique. Paris: Imprimerie Chaix, 1889. Blanco, José Joaquín. Se llamaba Vasconcelos: Una evocación crítica. Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1977. Brading, David. "Héroes republicanos y tiranos populares." Cuadernos Americanos, nueva época, 11 (1988):9-28. . "Manuel Gamio and Official Indigenism in Mexico." Bulletin of Latin American Research 7, 1 (1988):75-89. . The Origins of Mexican Nationalism. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1985. . Prophecy and Myth in Mexican History. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1984. Breckenridge, Carol A. "The Aesthetics and Politics of Colonial Collecting: India at World Fairs." Comparative Studies in Society and History 31, 2 (1989): 195-216. Breuilly, John. Nationalism and the State. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982. Brinton, Daniel. Races and Peoples: Lectures on the Science of Ethnography. New York, 1890. Bueno Fidel, María José. Arquitectura y nacionalismo: Los pabellones españoles en las ex-posiciones universales del siglo XIX. Mádaga: Universidad de Málaga, Colegio de Arquitectos, 1987. Bullock, William. A Description of the Unique Exhibition, Called Ancient Mexico: Collected