A Béranger close to my national symbols, Gorostiza, for me, is Collin d'Harleville; Sierra is Saint-Beuve and Casasus, Delille; Altamirano, Mirabeau! 33 In turn, the French media considered almost all aspects of Mexico's presence in Paris not so much a self-serving Mexican extravaganza as a "great manifestation in honor of France."34 The idealized France emulated by Latin American republics in fact existed in, and only in, the terrain of the world's fair, and indeed the 1889 exhibition helped France persuade itself of its greatness. Beyond the fairgrounds, however, and beyond the apparent political and social consensus they epitomized, France was still recovering from the aftermath of its disastrous defeat at the hands of Prussia: Alsace and Lorraine had been lost. In addition, the consequences of the French commune could still be felt in the Paris of the Third Republic. Nonetheless, for France the 1880s were an era of striking economic growth and resurgent nationalism. Just as the debt to Germany was paid early, "La Marseillaise" was made the French national anthem in 1879, and July 14th was proclaimed the national holiday. It was the era of debates regarding patriotic monuments, especially to honor the French Revolution, an era that combined republicanism with nationalism and both with positivism.35 Yet political instability was such that arrangements for the celebration of the centenary of the 1789 revolution were only finalized at the last moment.36 In truth, the year 1889 may be analytically viewed as a small fragment of the rapid process of transformation of late-nineteenthcentury French society. In the late 1880s France underwent simultaneous and accelerated changes, including the growth of the working class in both size and importance. Political protests by socialists and anarchists were common and frequently violent, eventually resulting in the assassination of President Sadi Carnot in 1894.37 The perception of contemporaries about the fragility of the social balance of their era was expressed in the Paris exposition of 1889. Great emphasis was placed on the well-being of the working classa sign of modernism. To be socially and politically enlightened within a modern idealized world meant, hence, to be committed to an intricate combination of sanitary, anthropological, criminological, industrial, Saint-Simonian, and educational concerns about the lower classes, or at least to advertise such concerns. The utopian picture of a world rationally ordered and guided both by the entrepreneurial spirit and by science was not at odds with the frank economic, imperialist, and racist aspects of the French world's fair. Indeed, the socialism of French fairs ought to be understood as a part of the attempt to produce an idealized portrait of the modern world; that is, it furnished the