. The Transformation of Liberalism in Late Nineteenth-Century Mexico. Princeton, NJ.: Princeton University Press, 1989. Hall, Joy H. "Sheetiron, Syphilis, and the Second International: The Paris International Exposition of 1889." Proceedings of the Western Society for French History, no. 11 (1984):244-54. Hamon, Philippe. Expositions: Literature and Architecture in Nineteenth-Century France. Translated by Katia Sainson-Frank and Lisa Maguire. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992. Hamy, E. T. Décades américanae: Mémoires d'archéologie et d'etnographie américaines. Paris: E. Leroux Editeur, 1884. Harcourt, Raoul d'. L'Américanisme et la France. Paris: Librairie Larousse, 1928. Harriss, Joseph. The Tallest Tower: Eiffel and the Belle Époque. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1975. Harris, Neil, et al., eds. Grand Illusions: Chicago's World's Fair of 1893. Chicago: Chicago Historical Society, 1993. Havard, Louis. Maison salubre et la maison insalubre a l'Exposition Universelle de 1889: Étude sur l'exposition du service de l'assainissement. Paris: Imprimerie de C. Noblet et fils, 1890. Hawley, J. R. "The Value of International Exhibitions." North American Review 149 (September 1889):313-20. Heidegger, Martin. The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. Translated by William Lovitt. New York: Harper & Row, 1977. Henschen, Folke. The History and Geography of Diseases. Translated by Joan Tate. New York: Seymour Lawrence Book, 1966. Hermosa, Jesús. Manual de geografía y estadística de la República Mejicana. Paris: Librería de Rosa, Bouret y Cía., 1857. Hernández Martín, Vicente. Arquitectura doméstica de la ciudad de México. Mexico City: Escuela Nacional de Arquitectos, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 1981. Herzfeld, M. Anthropology through the Looking-Glass: Critical Ethnography in the Margins of Europe. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1987. Hidalgo. Junta Correspondiente de la Exposición Universal de Nueva Orleans. Re-seña relativa al Estado de Hidalgo que la junta correspondiente remite a la Exposición Universal de Nueva Orleans. Pachuca, Mexico, 1884-1885. Hildreth, Martha L. Doctors, Bureaucrats, and Public Health in France, 1888-1902. New York: Garland Publishing, 1987. Hobsbawm, Eric. The Age of Empire, 1875-1914. New York: Pantheon Books, 1987. . Nation and Nationalism. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1990. Hodeir, Catherine. "L'Expo des expos." Histoire 60 (1983):96-100. Honour, Hugh. The New Golden Land: European Images of America from the Discoveries to the Present Time. New York: Pantheon Books, 1975. Hulbert, William Henry. France and the Republic: A Record of Things Seen and Learned in the French Provinces during the "Centennial" Year 1889. London: Longman, Green, and Co., 1890. Iguiniz, Juan Bautista. Bibliografía biográfica mexicana. Mexico City: Instituto de Investigaciones Históricas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 1969.