utopian ingredients indispensable for a worldview that could remain an alluring hope despite all odds. Through its churches and philanthropism, Saint-Simonian thought generated a sort of socialist education that was the ideological point of reference for numerous middle-class professionals, and not merely in France. They, in turn, started to play an important role in the growing technocratic states of the late nineteenth century. The international fairs were, as historian Pascal Ory argues, the common experience of these professionals. 38 Economists such as Le Play, a Catholic monarchist who had a great concern for the situation of workers and who institutionalized sociological inquiry to measure the true situation of the lower classes, fulfilled the state's technocratic tasks during the middle of the nineteenth century. Le Play himself organized the imperial French exhibition of 1855, and his follower, Jean-Baptiste Krantz, directed France's first republican fair. Alfred Picard, the force in the organization and architectural works of the 1889 fair, together with George Berger, director-general of operations, was inspired by Le Play's legacy. In 1889 Picard helped include a class in hygiene and public charity in the fair as well as a special exhibit on social economy.39 In addition, the social recruitment of political elites in latenineteenth-century France was changing. The old military men and politicians began to share power with a bureaucracy of technocrats, and French world's fairs echoed this social change. Civil engineering influenced and in turn gained strength from world's fairs and their industrialist and Saint-Simonian inspirations. Engineers, as well as doctors, architects, and other professionals, obtained a well-defined political place more or less linked to their particular expertise. Thus the growth of technocracy created an illusion of non-ideological politiciansneutral and scientifically objective expertswho reinforced the idea of "scientific politics" as nothing more than management of the state.40 For late-nineteenth-century France (or Mexico) to achieve modern government organization, it was necessary to develop the ideology of scientific politics. To do so, a technocracy was required. However, universal scientific politics proved to be a selective ideological discourse that depended on both the circumstances of each specific country and the interests of its national elite. In fact, Mexico's attendance at Parisian fairs also illustrates the emergence of a Mexican technocratic elite. By the late 1880s the political group known as the Científicos was emerging as the elite that claimed to rule the country scientifically. Economists (including Joaquin Casasus, josé Yves Limantour, and Emiliano Busto), engineers (such as Gilberto Crespo, Antonio de Anza, and Luis Salazar), and doctors (for example, Domingo Orvañanos, Eduardo Liceaga, and José Ramírez) were in attendance at the Mexican exhibit in Paris and very much a part of Mexican politics.