The social concerns of Mexican technocrats, however, did not echo those of the France they aspired to imitate in 1889. In fact, in 1888 Manuel Flores, a member of the Mexican exhibition team, was commissioned to evaluate the French plans for an exhibition of social economy. After reviewing the plans, he argued: "As can be seen, the Exposition on Social Economy is . . . a vast statistical work about the present and real conditions of the working class." For Flores, Mexico had no cooperative societies or any sort of workers' organization that could be exhibited in a social economy display, and Mexico especially lacked fabricated hygienic housing for workers. Social economy, understood as an elaborate French combination of Saint-Simonianism, socialism, and social Catholicism, was not a Mexican preoccupation. 41 Flores's advice was, in the last analysis, to exhibit the benefits that came from having no social concerns at all: "Mexico cannot join the exposition of social economy. . .. The statistical data that Mexico is able to submit in this regard . . . should only appear in the official section of the Mexican exposition, as a way of making the world learn about the conditions of our workers from the point of view of their meager salaries, their austerity, resistance, and working capacity; these are qualities that distinguish them from European workers."42 Porfirio Díaz himself was aware of workers' protests in Europehe was informed by Mexican diplomats and travelers. He expressed concerns regarding the workers' discontent, but he wished his country to remain exempt from these problems. In 1891 he wrote to Vicente Riva Palacio, "Of course I am aware of labor protests in Europe" andno matter that Mexicans' daily workload exceeded eleven hoursadded, "I believe that European governments ought to give workers the eight-hour day they request." His ambivalence was such that he acknowledged the prudence of workers in their protests but believed it to be the consequence of official repression. Díaz, like the wizards of progress, thought that this type of bourgeois European concern did not apply to Mexican workers. In the last analysis, he said to Riva Palacio, the workers' victory over the bourgeoisie would mean that "they [will] all become bourgeoisie."43 Mexican indifference to French social concerns can also be observed in Mexico's participation in the congresses affiliated with the 1889 exposition. Of the thirteen congresses that dealt with social issues, Mexico attended only five, whereas Mexican representatives were present at nearly all of the artistic and scientific congresses, including those dealing with pigeon breeding and with colonial questions.44 The condition of women was another concern that Mexican Científicos did not seriously consider. French world's fairs gradually included concern with the condition of women in the social economy exhibits, whereas U.S. fairs contained women's pavilions and buildings. At these, in addition to the traditional domain assigned to women, suffrage and social issues were ad-