dressed by women themselves. Mexico's displays at the women's exhibitions in Philadelphia (1876), New Orleans (1884), and Chicago (1893) illustrate the growth of a female Porfirian aristocracy. Whereas in Philadelphia and in Paris 1889, numerous women individually sent samples of their woven or embroidered textiles, in Chicago a Ladies' Board (Junta de Señoras) was created and was headed by no less than Carmen Romero Rubio, Porfirio Díaz's wife. But these Mexican exhibits only reinforced traditional female roles. 45 The social implications of modernity, then, were at the bottom of the modernization agenda of Porfirian Mexico. The year 1889 can also be viewed as an especially meaningful time in the political transformation of the French Third Republic. The stable and scientific French republic that was featured in Mexican accounts was at odds with both the perceptions of the French people and the European view of France. By the 1880s republicanism had lost its utopian appeal for some sectors of French society. The republicreduced to political bargaining among numerous factionsfaced economic and military failure. In addition, the republican spirit was seriously threatened by waves of scandals that began in 1887 and continued through the Dreyfus affair in 1894. Illegal traffic in Legions of Honor brought about a government crisis that concluded with the dismissal of President Grevy in 1887. In turn, the Panama Canal Company started to collapse in 1889, exposing a Pandora's box of corruption in the French government. Political discontent and what might be called revenge nationalism finally threatened to disrupt the political status quo of the 1880s French republic. The traditional opposition between radicals and opportunists was seriously endangered by the emergence of Gen. Ernest Jean Marie Boulanger.46 By January 1889 the fragile French republic seemed about to succumb to the peculiar Boulanger, whose party knew how to appeal to popular nationalistic sentiments, to the appetite for revenge against Bismarck's Germany, and to the exposure of republican corruption. Despite Boulanger's political strength, his expected coup d'état never occurred. Instead, after being exiled, he died in the arms of his lover, an ending worthy of the French belle epoque. Hence it was Sadi Carnotthe obscure president who emerged in 1889 as a compromise among the republican factions and the victor over Boulangerwho inaugurated the 1889 world's fair. Carnot undoubtedly gained public confidence and political strength as a result of the fair's pomp and glitter, a fact that was not lost on William Henry Bishop, a U.S. journalist at the Paris exposition: "If the Exposition can serve as a bond for keeping the peace for even six months, its promoters will have built better than they knew."47 In addition, in the late 1880s French nationalism drew strength from France's expanding colonial empire. The isolationist nationalism of the conservatives was overcome, and colonialism began to be seen as part of the nation's strength. This was especially true after the resignation of Bismarck in