1890 and the signing of the Russo-French pact that established a new European balance of power which permitted France to embark on more colonial adventures. By 1889 the French economy showed signs of slow recovery, and controversy began regarding the merits of the different projects for national economic development. There were good reasons for this debate: in the early 1880s France had been second only to Britain as an industrial power, but by the end of the nineteenth century it had declined to fourteenth place. 48 In addition to increasing anxiety about industrial weakness vis-à-vis Germany, England, and the United States, there were also worries about the constant decline in France's birthrate.49 Small wonder that a wellestablished rhetorical faith in the free market came to be challenged by protectionist policies designed to encourage national development. French precariousness in the 1880s is best demonstrated in the cultural and intellectual realm. In French intellectual circles the 1880s saw the questioning of the belief in science and progress. The positivist consensus, which the world's fair epitomized, started to be attacked by an "antipositivist reaction in science."50 By the early 1890s French intellectuals started to talk about the bankruptcy of science.51 Nationalism nevertheless remained a strong, though ambiguous, component of French cultural life. It included, on one hand, the universalist tradition rooted in the French Revolutionthat is, a belief in rationalistic, democratic, and liberal valuesand, on the other hand, a more parochial nationalism based on local interests and on racial arguments. Nonetheless, throughout the Third Republic universalist tendencies seemed to dominate the political and intellectual life of Paris.52 Victor Hugo's funeral ceremonies in 1885 were a grandiose extravaganza of French national pride understood as a universal patrimony; they honored a national poet but indeed celebrated a universal man.53 However, nationalism started to be influenced by certain social concerns which in turn were saturated by new scientific theories. This was especially noticeable in literaturefor instance, in Émile Zola's naturalistic fiction. Yet by the late 1880s naturalism came under attack in French intellectual circles, and the love-hate relationship with naturalism eventually became the important underlying factor of the intellectual life of fin-de-siècle France. Then symbolismas pioneered by Verlaine and Mallarméemerged as the new intellectual vogue, at the same time as Baudelaire was canonized. In art, although impressionists and their existential anguish for the temporariness of modern life had been visible since 1874, high culture was formed by the approved bourgeois taste of the salons' dogmatic style, neoclassical sculpture and architecture, and the imitation of Henry II's decorative style. The 1880s brought the consolidation of a noncanonical culture: in 1889, while the exposition's art gallery exhibited Roman-like marble sculptures, the Moulin Rouge opened its doors, and