the Chat Noir and Le Mirliton cabarets offered a new kind of Bohemia for the bourgeoisie escaping modern life. 54 For outsiders, French culture was often understood as a high cultural production which readily became a universal canon, making it difficult to distinguish between what was merely an expression of French nationalism and what were actually universal values. In history, Michelet had solved this distinction by making France equivalent to the universe. In literature, Victor Hugo had resolved this confusion by making France the world in his panegyric to the 1855 Paris exposition: "O France, adieu! You are too great to be merely a country . . .. You are so great that you soon will no longer be. You will cease to be France, you will be Humanity . . .. Resign yourself to your immensity . . . O my country, and, as Athens became Greece, as Rome became Christendom, you, France, become the world."55 The 1889 fair combined both universalist (French)conservative art and progressive industry and science. Technology in 1889 was already more than mere machine making. It included its social appreciation, experience, and suffering.56 For France, as for industrialized Europe, technology was a generous, albeit aweinspiring, promise. This was expressed, for instance, by an ironic prayer directed to the Eiffel Tower by Émile Goudeau: "Oh iron lady, pray for us, you who are in heaven, Turrisferrea, ora pronobis, peccatoribus [iron tower, pray for us sinners]."57 In short, beyond the fairgrounds, beyond the Boulevards Pigalle, Montmarte, and Saint Germain, beyond the cafés, a France of insurmountable economic difficulties, political instability, and cultural uncertainty lay hidden from visitors such as the Latin American elites who went to Paris to learn the majestic lesson represented by the exposition. At the time, France was experimenting with unorthodox doctrines to catch up with industrialization, improvising political alliances to maintain stability, undertaking social reforms in fear of revolution, and questioning the positivist and neoclassical intellectual and cultural canon. Latin American elites did not see this Franceit was beyond their view of the modern world picture as learned through the extravagant fairs of Paris. As for instability, poverty, and chaos, Latin Americans must have thought that such weaknesses were exclusively theirs, along with marginality. The world's fair of 1889 was an illusory lesson in progress, but nonetheless a great lesson in comparison with which everything else seemed to be secondary.