## Two ## The Imperatives of Mexican Progress Mexico began its great performances at world's fairs in the 1880s. The same decade saw the end of the turbulence that had characterized the country since independence and the beginning of the modern Mexican nation-state. 1 Progress thereafter was a bizarre amalgamation of the collective hopes of the elite, actual industrial and social changes, rhetorical consensus, and constant accommodation between modern and traditional patterns. To trace the modern connotations of progress in Mexico, I analyze the political and economic centralization of power in the 1880s as an inherent component of the formation of those who created the image of the modern Mexican nation. What characteristics of latenineteenth-century Mexican political life made possible the conscious and sophisticated attempts to summarize the idea of the nation in Paris 1889, Chicago 1893, or Paris 1900? What economic interests and conditions permitted and benefited from these Mexican displays? Were these exhibits mere facades orchestrated with Machiavellian cleverness to support the economic interests of the elites, or did they indeed constitute the only substance from which nationhood could have been made? To answer these questions it is necessary, first, to abandon the idea of establishing a clear cause-and-effect relationship between the Mexican extravaganzas in Paris and the political and economic condition of the country. Let us instead look for the common ground that simultaneously supported and was promoted by events like Mexico's presence in Paris 1889, Porfirio Díaz's third election, the emergence of the Científicos, and the promotion of foreign investment and immigration as part of an elite plan for economic development. In search of this common ground, we must examine what I term the political, intellectual, and social commonplaces and the dineros (economics) of those times.