## Commonplaces On 1 December 1888 Diaz began his third presidential term, the second in a row after the Manuel Gonzalez interim. Díaz was in power, as Justo Sierra cynically argued, ''less by the vote than by the national will." 2 By this date, the caudillos of the first years of the Porfirian regime had become less caudillo-like. Through military, political, and economic means the revolutionary group had established a relatively homogenous power base. As different political groups, especially those headed by Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada and José María Iglesias, were reconciled and absorbed into the Liberal Party, shared interests gave rise to a relatively cohesive elite. Furthermore, the old economic oligarchies were gradually becoming as one with the new political and economic groups.3 The tone this elite gave to urban life created the impression that Mexico was enjoying a belle epoque.4 With political opposition either dissipated or mastered, with increasing international recognition, andafter 1885with relative economic stability, Porfirian Mexico was indeed embarked on the creation of a modern (that is, nineteenth-century) national economy, society, and image. By 1889 this elite was so linked by mutual interests as to make any attempt at a quarrel treacherous for them all. They had begun to consolidate their wealth with that of the northern and central mining interests, of the railroad magnates, and of the speculators in central Mexico. Most of them, in addition, played a role as intermediaries with foreign interests. Increasingly, this elite started to look to the world outside. They were, as one German commissioner called them, the cosmopolitans.5 The 1880s were the years in which the Porfiriato started to exhibit itself as the inevitable, necessary, and optimal political solution. Although the Científicos did not become consolidated until the middle of the 1890s, by 1889 technocrats were already replacing the old caudillos, and the battle cry of the decade was more administration, less politics.6 Díaz himself, having married Manuel Romero Rubio's aristocratic daughter, resembled a statesman more than a caudillo. Underscoring this transformation, Díaz, a mestizo from Oaxaca, began to be portrayed as whiter and whiter on the countless canvases that were painted of him at this time.7 In addition, a new generation of intellectuals and politicians began to influence the direction of this elite. The early ideas of Mariano Otero and Gabino Barreda were echoed by the group called La Libertad, headed by the brothers Santiago and Justo Sierra.8 Justo characterized this period as one of "diplomatic discipline, of order, of peace." These qualities were necessary for the achievement of the "only supreme goals"freedom and "patria" (country). But colonization, an ample labor force, abundant capital, and efficient means of communication were also needed to achieve those goals in Mexico.9 Therefore, the legal equality of all citizens (including Indians),