strong government, and liberalism's harmony of proprietors were considered natural ingredients in the emergence of a scientific management of politics. 10 For Mexico this era was, as Alan Knight has argued, "the end of ideology."11 The centralization of power and administration achieved during the 1880s, though more comprehensive than before, still could not encompass the diversity and distances of the country. Vast sectors of the population remained cut off. Even so, the 1880s saw unprecedented efforts to achieve a centralized and coherent administration, a more or less consolidated political elite, a unified internal market, and a well-defined and well-promoted national culture. A rhetorical piece may serve to recapitulate the commonplaces of late 1880s Mexican polity. In May 1889 Alfredo Chavero, a longtime member of the Porfirian exhibition team, addressed a panegyric to ex-president Lerdo de Tejada, Díaz's former enemy, who had died in exile in April: Lerdo may rest at ease in this land which is his own; Juárez the indomitable, Ocampo the inflexible, Zaragoza who taught the world with how much glory one can be defeated, they all rest within it. This land of Mexico is worthy of the distinguished maestro [Lerdo de Tejada], accustomed as it is to guarding the purest silver and dazzling gold in its entrails. In closing this grave, an altar is erected, watched in silence under the shadows of the night, by science, freedom, and la patria.12 In this sermon, as in countless political speeches, all of the political components of the late-nineteenth-century Porfirian formula for a modern nation were included. First, an official requiem for Lerdo de Tejada, leader of the Lerdista group, adversary of Díaz's group, epitomizes the idea of reconciliation, which was understood as national maturity. The nation had grown up; previous conflicts were part of its unstable adolescence. This belief was constantly repeated regarding not only politics but economic and social issues as well. The truth, especially the new truth in a recently built nation-state, was a matter of repetition. Reconciliation, in fact, meant the achievement of an internal political balance after the defeat of the Lerdista liberals. Although the Diaz regime did not overcome what some authors have termed political and economic atomization,13 it did institute a central authority, a central command based, above all, on solid, common material interests. It was an order founded on mutual elite convenience, and their solidarités, whether modern or traditional, were rooted in the inherent pragmatism, amodern and atraditional, demanded by the exercise of power.14 Second, Chavero's discourse alluded to the crystallization of an Olympus of heroes for a modern nation: Juárez and Ocampo as national idols of pristine liberal justice, Zaragoza as military hero of a nation that, with no victories in war to venerate, had to create the national epic out of losses, an epic