of triumphant capitulations to consummate the greatest victorypeace and stability. This national epicas we will see in the examination of the Mexican Aztec Palace in Paris 1889was crucial in the creation of a symbolic horizon where regional and ideological differences could be surmounted. But in fact one of the mandatory roles of the national stateand perhaps its ontological raison d'êtrewas theatrical: to invent, re-create, and manage the national mythology. Third, Chavero raised the idea of a nationalism constituted by both the economic potential and the beauty of the Mexican territory. As Francisco Xavier Clavijero or Alexander von Humboldt or Bernardo de Balbuena had in earlier times, by the 1880s the Porfirian elite had come to regard the country as immensely rich, unexploited, and naturally splendorous. 15 By this date the great economic potential and scenic grandeur of the nation had become even more well known with the development of charts of all sorts, statistics, paintings, photographs, and exhibitions of products. Immigrants would surely come, Mexicans believed, if only they heard about Mexico's beauty and wealth. Fourth, Chavero incorporated the unifying ideas and myths that had composed the Porfirian liberal consensus of the 1880sthat is, science, patriotism, and freedom. Together, these three safeguarded Lerdo's grave in the same way they protected the nation as a whole. This conception of science included a complex network of collective certainties that explained and enforced educational, political, and daily-life decisionsa view related to the emergence of positivism and of a particular Mexican Darwinism, both of which have been widely studied.16 But this conception of science went beyond a mere consumption of foreign ideas; it included attempts to be a part of and to understand the comprehensive and dominant world-view of modern times. No nation was modern if it did not follow the naturalthat is, scientific-order of things and possess a scientific organization. By the late nineteenth century the notion of patria was directly linked to a weighty generational historical experience that included both the old criollo patriotism and the liberal nationalism fortified by two painful wars of intervention.17 The Porfirian elite, however, added to the old understanding of patna a more intelligible historical, political, and geographical content: the first comprehensive synthesis of patriotic history, the reorganization of bureaucracy at all levels, and the increasing scientific study of Mexico's territory. Freedom, in contrast, was the most ethereal of the rhetorical resources of the Porfirian elite. They assigned to the Western idea of freedom only a few narrow connotations: political (freedom from violence), international (freedom from the oppression of other nations), and economic (freedom of the market). Finally, Chavero's oration was expressed in the eloquent style of the period, which, far from being merely an accessory of latenineteenth-century