culture, was an intrinsic component of the ideals mentioned abovepolitical reconciliation, nationalism, and scientism. For the idea of a modern nation could hardly be conceived without its rhetorical style. In constructing a nationalist ideology, the distinctions between form and content vanished. The so-called imagined communities of the late nineteenth century were, as was cultural modernity itself, a matter of form; that is, a question of style. Thus the Mexican exhibits in world's fairs fought for the form they believed to be the closest synonym of the modern form. And this effort was managed by politicians and technocrats who simultaneously were poets, writers, and his-torians 18at best, truly men of letters; at worst, picos de oro (silver tongues), as historian Luis González characterized them.19 The national project articulated by the Porfirian elite for such fairs as the 1889 Paris exhibition was but a miniature version of the above-mentioned features. When Chavero honored Lerdo, and when the exhibitions team prepared Mexico to join the Paris world's fair of 1889, the country had attained a political and economic stability unknown throughout the nineteenth century. Peace seemed to be the most significant achievement of those years. Peace meant political and economic reconciliation after decades of political unrest and economic chaos. But once achieved, peace also constituted the first substantial political consensus since independence, and to maintain it and protect it became a collective goal. An Argentine observer of Mexico's display at the 1900 Paris exposition clearly saw this in commenting on Diaz's regime: "The need for repose is a social sensation that precedes the emergence of these arbitrary regimes; when peoples are tired of civil unrest, such a caudillo-like regime is the consequence of the search for peace at all costs."20 For a long time, peace was considered a primary requirement for the consolidation of a governing elite. Oddly enough, once peace was visible it became the reason for this elite's unity and relative cohesion. Yet peace alone was not enough; it had to be transformed into productive and manageable tranquility. Thus, above all peace was the sine qua non for economic progress. Because foreign capital, Northern European immigration, and improved communications were considered economic necessities, domestic peace was viewed as an indispensable component of the economy. Hence the enjoyment of peace became the construction of a modern nation. In essence, peace meant the nation, as shown by the spirit of the 1889 exposition:21 only in the aftermath of war, Mexicans believed, could the nation develop its natural attributes. In sum, in the late 1880s the Porfirian elite achieved a clear awareness of the coherence and unity of its interests and, therefore, a collective expression of its ambitions. It must have seemed as though the past had been overcome and as though, for the first time in independent Mexico, the present and the future had an articulate and palpable affinity.