## Dineros For Mexico, the last two decades of the nineteenth century were a time of unique economic transformation that, despite its failures and problems, can be depicted as a profound process of modernization in the contemporary sense of the term. In fact, twentieth-century Mexican industrial development is inconceivable without its nineteenth-century origins, especially without Porfirian industrial development. 22 While so-called traditional economic structures merged with modern patterns, the characteristic problems of nineteenth-century world economies started to appear in Mexico. What historian Stephen Haber has called "obstacles to industrialization"insecure property rights, low per capita income growth, precapitalist agricultural organization, lack of a national marketwere recognized and addressed at the end of the 1880s.23 In the 1880s the Mexican economy seemed to have entered a period of sustained growth; the first part of the decade saw substantial investment in railroads and overall economic growth. The economy experienced a severe financial crisis in 1884,24 but within the whole Porfirian erafrom the 1870s to the 1910sthe period between 1885 and 1891 can be seen as a time of relatively healthy economic growth. In contrast, a combination of factorsamong them the decline of international silver prices and a series of bad years for agricultureled to a profound economic crisis in the 1890s, which, among many other things, prevented Mexico from repeating at the 1893 Chicago exposition the lavish expenditure for the 1889 fair. Thus when Mexican politicians, scientists, and writers arrived in Paris 1889, they had left in Mexico what seemed to be a promising economic situation. For them, railroads, mining output, certain industries (textiles, cigarettes, and alcoholic beverages), and export crops (henequen, coffee, and cacao) were leading economic sectors. Railroad construction went from 640 kilometers in 1876 to 12,172 kilometers in 1898. Foreign investment was expanding within the framework of an increasingly interrelated world economy whose main actors were Great Britain and the United States.25 The textile industry, cigarette manufacturing, and beer production all enjoyed high rates of growth.26 Overall, from 1884 to 1900 the average annual rate of economic growth approached 8 percent. The 1880s were also a period of transition for the economicadministrative concerns and approaches of the Porfirian elite. The circle led by Romero Rubio had acquired expertise and sophistication, and it attempted to diversify Mexico's foreign investment. New laws were passed to favor foreign ownership of land and mining, as well as possibilities for incorporation. A technocratic class was growing in size and complexity.27 In this sense, for Mexico the world's fairs were laboratories in which to test at an international level the national administrative achievements as well