as to learn of new worldwide trends and methods for managing the economy and the government. Thus advertisements heralding the country's progress not only included material advancement but also stressed social, administrative, and political progress. Mexico's publicists often spoke of the accomplishment of scientific politics. For example, Rafael de Zayas Enríquez, in his book especially written in French for Mexico's presence at the 1889 Paris world's fair, argued that administration through the study of sociology and economics was helping Mexico solve all of its problems with "tact, honesty, and good faith, with a clear direction, with no political factions, only one national, scientifically ruled party." 28 As has been the case throughout the history of independent Mexico, a main goal of the Diaz administration was to attract foreign investment, not only for its economic and "civilizing" benefits but also because such sums indirectly represented Mexico's main source of income, through customs duties on the goods that were imported and taxes on the precious metals that were exported. Mexico's presence at world's fairs like that of Paris 1889 was, in this sense, part of a commercial attempt to diversify Mexico's international links. The growing importance of U.S. capital challenged European interests in Mexico. English and French yearly economic almanacs reported with concern the growing superiority of the United States as a source of imports and capital for Mexico, as well as a customer for Mexican exports.29 British investment, more indirect than its American and French counterparts, found ways to coexist with American investment, but English entrepreneurs were nevertheless concerned with their loss of influence in Mexico.30 In 1890 a British observer believed that Mexico was rich and stable and "only need [ed] English capital and English energy to reap one of the richest harvests which history can show."31 French interestsin the amount of some 165 million francs32also felt seriously challenged by American and German investments. The French community in Mexico, composed of large-scale industrialists and others who were an important part of the commercial sector, was prosperous and influential.33 Cautiously, the French invested largely in wholly owned types of businesses. Their investment in state funds, concentrated in banks, railroads, and, in the 1880s, mining, was relatively low compared to that of other countries.34 After 1890 this investment started to expand, in part due to the publicity efforts by the Porfirian elite at events such as the international fairs. In a book distributed in Mexico's pavilion in Paris 1889, F. Bianconi discussed the growing commercial weakness of France in Mexico. He believed this weakness was the result of a "stupid colonial policy" that was "a very serious mistake" in a country like France. The French government, he argued, ought to oppose the colonial ventures of competing countries and should not undertake more colonial ventures itself. What France needed instead, he claimed, was a commercial policy; in it, Mexico deserved special attention.35