Mexico's presence in world's fairs was also part of a Porfirian import-substitution policy under which emerging Mexican industry received tariff protection and government subsidies. 36 Ricardo de Maria y Campos, in charge of the Mexican commerce commission in Paris 1889 and Paris 1900, distributed many Renseignements commerciaux about Mexico. De Maria y Campos's commercial books were devoted mainly to an explanation of import tariffs and the costs of transportation, manufactures, and raw materials in Mexico. High tariffs were imposed on cigarettes, paper, cotton and woolen textiles, some live animals, manufactures of precious metals, diamonds, emeralds, and certain chemicals, while technological apparatus were exempted.37 The other main socioeconomic goal of the Diaz regimeespecially stressed in world's fairswas the inducement of Northern European immigration. Although Mexico's population increased from 9.3 million in 1877 to 15.1 million in 1919, the figure masks the ups and downs of an endemic demographic stagnation. Mexican physicians and journalists complained of the high level of infant mortality, unsanitary conditions, and poor medical services.38 Foreign immigration never was significant enough to have an important impact on the entire economy and culture of the country. This was not through lack of trying. Beginning in the 1880s, the Mexican government made an intense effort to attract foreign immigrants, offering land and tax exemptions as the main incentives. Toward that end, vast stretches of public land were surveyed by private companies to be sold to foreign colonizers. 39 But fiscal and military exemptions were not enough to attract foreigners, or at least not sufficient to lure the type of foreigners desired by the Porfirian elite. By and large, the relatively few immigrants attracted to Mexico came from Spain, Italy, the United States, and China.40 American immigrants, albeit "racially correct" by the racist standards of the Porfirian elite, were nevertheless feared as part of U.S. expansionism. Historical memory played a role in this phobia. Spanish colonists were all too common for the comfort of some Mexicans and, though officially welcomed, were not numerous enough or culturally capable of Europeanizing Mexico. Chinese and black immigrants have long been neglected in Mexico's bizarre melting pot. Overall, not even American, Spaniard, and Chinese immigrants were numerous, and the long-desired massive wave of Northern European colonists never arrived.41 Mexican presence in world's fairs pointed up the strenuous effort made during this period to attract immigrants. Special books and pamphlets were written to explain Mexican immigration facilities and procedures. Those books aimed to overcome Mexico's longstanding reputation as an inhospitable, savage nation.42 In a book produced especially for distribution at the Paris fair of 1889, Antonio Garcia Cubas, the well-known Mexican geographer, argued that Mexico offered colonists franchises and land for sale at a