"very low price." Immigrants were also "exonerated from military service and from the payment of all taxes for ten years." 43 Countless propaganda books that explained Mexico's advantages for immigrants were printed or sponsored by the Mexican government. For example, in 1886 a French journalist traveling in Mexico remarked that Diaz wanted him to say that the economic crisis of González's time was over. He stated that Diaz was especially committed to French immigration.44 Other books, such as Archibald Dunn's, which was dedicated to President Diaz for his "honesty of purpose," argued that Mexico wanted immigrants with capital to invest, small farmers who were willing to work, and agricultural workers who were willing to be guided by capitalists.45 Other books contained information about prevailing land prices and detailed explanations of the tax policies of the Mexican government.46 As the Porfirian elite saw it, Mexico's failure to attract immigration stemmed in part from the nation's bad reputation as an unstable and unsanitary region, a legacy of previous political and economic chaos. According to the perception of Mexican authorities, immigrants did not come simply because they were unaware of the advantages Mexico offered in terms of vast lands, cheap labor, and plentiful natural resources. Mexico's presence at world's fairs was a unique way of overcoming its bad reputation.47 By 1889, however, a new generation of politicians and intellectuals was articulating other ideas about immigration. LaLibertad pointed out that much of Mexico's unsettled territory, far from being an immensely rich land, was in fact inhospitable. Immigration, according to this group, was of course needed, but in order to procure it several issues had to be addressedland tenure, religious freedom, sanitation, allocation of the labor force, and, especially, the so-called Indian problem.48 The Porfirian elite thus discussed unused lands, campaigns against vagrancy, methods for recruiting workers, and ways of civilizing Indians. There was a consensus about the scarcity and low productivity of mestizo and Indian workers and about the cultural and physical superiority of white immigrants. These last, it was believed, would eventually produce the economic, cultural, and racial modernization of the country. With white immigrants slow to arrive, however, throughout the second part of the nineteenth century Chinese and black immigration was considered by the Mexican government. Nonetheless, it was abandoned as a project in the first part of the Porfirian period. In 1879 the prolific philologist and writer Francisco Pimentel responded to a request of the Mexican minister of foreign affairs regarding the convenience of black immigration: "The presence of Blacks in Mexico would increase all the problems we already face due to the heterogeneity of races. . .. Because our country needs industrialists rather than farmers, Blacks are not useful because they do not belong to the class of industrialists."49 In 1889 the possibility of bringing in