black workers was again rumored, but opposition, headed by Justo Sierra and E. M. de los Ríos, was promptly voiced. 50 Nevertheless, Chinese immigrants did begin to arrive in the late nineteenth century. They became part of a cheap labor force that, in addition to exploitation, had to face constant discrimination.51 At the 1889 Paris world's fair, Mexican officials witnessed one of the main causes of Mexico's failure to attract foreign immigrants, namely, competition from democratic countries. Because of Mexico's low wage structure, throughout the 1880s and 1890s Argentina and the United States were better destinations for wouldbe immigrants. Mexican officials were aware of this, but instead of marketing an attractive image of a country of good salaries for lowincome European workers, the Mexican elite emphasized the advantages of a country of vast land and low wages, aiming to captivate middle- and high-range investors (who very rarely migrate). Unlike Mexico's, Argentina's propaganda at the 1889 exposition emphasized good salaries, democratic rights, and the overall coexistence of various European nationalities. Argentina estimated that nearly 200,000 immigrants would arrive in 1889, and these immigrants, it was argued, would obtain, in addition to goods and property, all the guarantees of a liberal democratic nation as granted by the Argentine constitution.52 In Mexico, therefore, foreign investment did indeed arrive, but not the rush of immigrants that would have translated into population growth and cultural learning. If only for this blindness about the reasons why people migrate, which reflected a lack of democratic discussion of national and international realities and options, the Porfirian elite was to be blamed, as José Vasconcelos noted in the 1930s.53 The imperatives of progress were as much a part of Mexico's displays at world's fairs as was their nationalistic symbolism. The pragmatic goal of attracting foreign investment and immigrants was not at all at odds with the allegorical role played by world's fairs for Mexican nationalism. In fact, they were complementary: the economic goals would have been inconceivable without the unifying myths of the nation and its nationality, while the theatrical duties of the state could not have been understood without its economic imperatives.