## Three ## Mexico and the World at Large Mexicans believed that "in the world at large, a community yet exists for us." 1 By 1889 Mexico had acquired some experience as a participant in world expositions, especially during the Porfirian peace. In fact, Mexico's involvement in world's fairs paralleled the process of political and economic consolidation of the Porfirian elite. The accumulated experience, common interests, and international links of this elite made possible the emergence of a group of professional world's fair experts who were able to construct the image of the modern nation at all levels (see Appendix 1). These wizards of progress staged their first major performance at the New Orleans exposition of 1884. Nonetheless, their long history of trial and error included not only Mexico's participation in American and European expositions but also the idea of a Mexico City world's fair. ## Mexico at the Philadelphia and New Orleans Fairs Many Mexicans viewed participation in world's fairs as one of the best ways of changing the widespread perception that Mexico was violent and uncivilized. During the first years of the Porfiriato the Ministry of Economic Development maintained that "[Mexico has been] splendidly endorsed by nature. . . . To show such riches and thereby open a wide road for the development of industry and commerce is a patriotic deed that we can achieve only by means of world's fairs."2 Although the belief that progress would be encouraged by participation in fairs appeared in the 1850s, not until the Philadelphia world's fair of 1876 did Mexico begin its official participation in international exhibitions. And not until the New Orleans world's fair of 1884 did Mexico undertake a major effort to postulate the ideal type of a modern Mexican nation.3