West into the great industrial development of the United States. In the meantime, those who constructed Mexico's national image moved their equipment and interests to the great European fairsthat is, to Paris. ## Mexico at Early London and Paris Fairs Mexico's participation in European world expositions began in the 1860s, but its presence became significant only at the Paris fair of 1889. In fact, Paris 1889 was to be the largest and most expensive of Mexico's international performances. Even Mexico's presence at the 1900 Paris fair, though less costly than that of 1889, was impressively expensive in relation to the national budget for that year. Few traces remain of Mexico's participation in London's Crystal Palace fair of 1851. Though some products and private exhibitors came from Mexico, apparently no official Mexican commission attended. 27 Mexican antiquities, natural products, and exotic peoples had been exhibited especially in London, where the naturalist and entrepreneur William Bullock organized an inclusive Mexican display in 1824.28 In the 1855 imperial exposition of Paris some Mexican products were exhibited, although Mexico's economic and political chaos did not permit a significant undertaking. The Mexican government did, however, appoint a commission to represent the nation in the 1855 exposition.29 Pedro de Escandón, head of the commission, claimed that Mexico's greatness ought to be admired, not only for the "tropical nature" which was one of its "most powerful industrial agents" but also for the potential the country would develop if it "were able to calmly devote itself to progress and development."30 Mexico had 107 exhibitors in 1855, in contrast with the 130 from the United States, 7 from Guatemala, 6 from Argentina, and 4 from the Brazilian Empire. The Mexican displays were largely samples of mineral and agricultural products. In addition, five cigarettemanufacturing machines were displayed, as were plans for "a musical machine that simultaneously [produced] sound and [transcribed] musical notes," a device that, Escandón claimed, could not be finished in time.31 All of the machines were inventions by Juan Nepomuceno Adorno, a peculiar Mexican inventor who kept submitting all sorts of inventions to Mexican authorities throughout the 1860s and 1870sfrom armament, accounting devices, and hydraulic plans for Mexico City, to a "kaleidoscopic machine" to avoid falsification of official documents.32 Mexico also exhibited the saddle that had been given to Prince Albert of England by Mariano Arista.33 All in all, Mexico's presence in Paris 1855, though somewhat weak and insignificant, launched the symbolic and propagandistic display of what were to become the main aspects of Mexico's presence in later international fairs: mining, agriculture, and native peoples and products.