Evidence of Mexican participation in European world's fairs between 1855 and 1867 is scattered, so it is difficult to draw a clear picture of the nature of its involvement. 34 We do know that a pre-Hispanic Mexican-style building was exhibited at the Paris universal exhibition of 1867. Just as Napoleon the Great had sent an archaeological commission with the army that invaded Egypt, Napoleon III sent a French scientific commission to Mexico during the intervention. This scientific group delineated and copied, among other pre-Hispanic ruins, the temple of Xochicalco.35 The resulting model, constructed by French private interests, was exhibited at Paris in 1867 to demonstrate that "there exists thus a social life and an art in Mexico, over which Europeans have put their foot."36 Few other traces of Mexico's participation in this world's fair remain. Eleven years later, Paris hosted another universal exhibition. Despite French efforts to encourage Mexico's participation, Ignacio L. Vallarta, then minister of foreign affairs, strongly opposed attendance because of the continuing strain on Franco-Mexican relations in the wake of the French intervention of the 1860s.37 Diplomatic complications made it impossible for France to officially invite Mexico to attend the Paris world's fair of 1878.38 Mexico took some part in various later European and American world's fairs, notably the Hispanic fair of 1883 in Buenos Aires and Berlin's fair of the same year.39 Along similar lines, temporary and permanent Mexican exhibitions of this sort in European and American cities became quite common during the last two decades of the nineteenth century.40 Mexico's exhibits were often forced to compete with other Latin American exhibits, so much so that Mexican official Mariano Bárcena complained in 1889 that "for Mexico, it is inconvenient to confuse its products with those of other countries, and to establish competition in such a limited ground as the one presently being offered."41 ## A Mexico City Fair? The staging of a world's fair in Mexico City was much discussed throughout the Porfirian period, for the project was supported by various political and economic interests. To many people, a fair in Mexico City was a contradiction in itself: Mexico needed to approach the world; the world was not going to come to Mexico. But others, who thought that Mexico needed to organize its own universal exhibition, made their case by voicing a common economic concern of the time: Mexico's economic difficulties derived not from lack of production but mainly from the weak and traditional patterns of consumption. A world's fair in Mexico City, they believed, would be influential in transforming Mexican consumption habits. The project never materialized, however. The high cost of the enterprise, coupled with the main goal assigned to world's fairsto serve as a backdrop for Mexico's display of