its optimal image, not simply of itselfmade the realization of a universal exposition in Mexico City impossible. Creating a picture of Mexico to be exhibited at fairs attended by all the world was one thing; making the world come to an old city full of problems was quite another. Nevertheless, brief mention of these projects will highlight the importance that Mexican elites gave to these events. During the first years of the Porfirian period, world's fairs were used to demonstrate national stability and progress, both of which were indispensable for international recognition. Therefore, in March 1878, a month before the United States formally recognized the Díaz regime, Manuel Maria de Zamacona came up with the notion of a "Mexican-American" fair. 42 Because Zamacona was the main architect of American recognition,43 a key member of the exhibition team, and an astute political actor, a fair along these lines would have further enhanced his personal prestige. Although Zamacona's idea was initially approved, it was later rejected, much to his disappointment. In what seems to be a sequel to Zamacona's project, in 1879 the engineer Ramón Rodríguez y Arangoity, together with the American firm Edge Moor Iron Company, conceived the idea of an international exposition in Mexico City for the year 1880 (see Fig. 2). They proposed that the exposition be situated in the area surrounding the monument to Columbus on Mexico City's most elegant avenue, the Paseo de la Reforma.44 This fair, however, never amounted to more than another unsuccessful promotional scheme, perhaps linked to real-estate interests in Mexico City. Another project for a world's fair in Mexico City emerged in 1889, when Antonio A. de Medina y Ormaechea, founder of the Sociedad Mexicana de Consumo (Mexican Society for Consumption), proposed a universal exhibition for the year 1910.45 Medina y Ormaechea argued that not only would a Mexican world's fair take advantage of Mexico's national and international experience, but an exposition on native soil would have fruitful educational results. For whereas Mexico's displays in American or European cities demonstrated the progressivism of the Mexican elite to the world, a universal exhibition in Mexico itself would help to educate and modernize Indians who were "satisfied with a shirt and a calzón de manta [cheap cotton trousers] to cover their flesh, with a pair of sandals for their feet . . . with a bowl of chiles, beans, and tortillas and a ration of pulque."46 In the 1890s the growth of companiesoften funded by American capitalthat specialized in the management and organization of world's fairs, together with Mexican and international private interests in Mexico City's profitable urban development, came together to envision a Mexican fair. René de Cornely interested a group of Mexican politicians and industrialists (including some members of the Porfirian exhibition team) in staging an international exhibition from September 1895 to April 1896 in Mexico City.