scious of the major economic interests that supported the idea of a fair in Paris. Despite this realization, Mexico hesitated to officially announce its participation because of the prospect of being compelled to exhibit collectively with the other Hispanic nations, as had been the case for the Latin American countries that had taken part in the Paris exhibition of 1878. 48 Mexico's dilemma was resolved when, as a result of diplomatic pressure by Ramón Fernández, Mexican minister in Paris, the French minister of commerce assured Mexico of its right to a separate exhibit, together with all requisite facilities.49 Thus, in August 1887 the Mexican government appointed Manuel Díaz Mimiaga, the oficial mayor (chief officer) of the Mexican Ministry of Foreign Affairs and a former Mexican minister to Guatemala, as its delegate to the French exhibition.50 This diplomatic process can be considered an expression of willingness on both sides to end the long years of tension that had characterized Franco-Mexican relations after the French intervention. Even after Maximilian's death, Mexico could not even attempt to reestablish diplomatic relations with France until Napoleon III died in 1870. Not until the Porfirian regime achieved a certain domestic political balance did the international arena regain importance for the Mexican government and did Emilio Velasco successfully negotiate the reestablishment of Mexican diplomatic relations with France.51 Mexico's attendance at the Paris world's fair of 1889 thus appeared to be a way of promoting internationally both Mexico's republicanism and its socioeconomic maturity. It also meant the final symbolic act of reconciliation with the ever-admired French nation. Díaz put the Ministry of Economic Development in charge of all matters relating to Mexico in Paris 1889.52 The ministry was then headed by Gen. Carlos Pacheco, one of the few surviving old friends of Díaz, and thereafter all dispatches, products, and suggestions related to the fair were directed to Pacheco.53 From 1887 to 1891 the Díaz regime made a major effort to produce an image of modern Mexico. Every pamphlet, book, building, statistic, and speech displayed was meant to be part of this image. Diverse metaphors and allegories echoed a rather meager set of shared values (that is, progress, science, a cosmopolitan style, a search for uniqueness); a modern Mexican savoir faire was in the making.