Four The Wizards of Progress Paris 1889 Creating a bureaucratic class proved to be anything but natural or harmonious in Mexico. The new class emerged only through continual trial-and-error, which included learning technical processes as well as the art of political bargaining. The development of the Porfirian exhibition teamthe wizards of progressshowed how growing technical and administrative expertise could be harmonized with the autocratic, centralized organization of caudillo rule. Technical skills were needed to create and maintain the modern Mexican nation. The wizards were quick to realize that modernity understood as the maximizing of power advantageswas, on one hand, a diverse and comprehensive set of techniques to be mastered and, on the other, a means of showing that their interests coincided both with those of the nation and those of the modern civilized world. 1 The wizards' job included the setting in motion of an intricate set of relationships that extended from the local level to the municipal, state, and national levels. They had to promote private participation from remote parts of Mexico, to collect statistical data, and to gather images of people and places for the graphic construction of an acceptable national past. At times personal relations made this task simple. For instance, it was easy for the minister of economic development to ask for photographs of and data about railroads because he was involved in their construction. However, on other occasions questionnaires were sent to the entire country to acquire necessary demographic, agricultural, educational, and sanitary information. The Mexican exhibition team was both extremely competent and inefficient. It could produce a complete, comprehensive, accurate, and up-to-date image of the modern Mexican nation in a matter of a few months. Yet it was often disorganized and expensive. Recruitment of the wizards was based on familial, personal, and political connections, as well as on particular profes-