sional expertise. As an organization, the team functioned in an extremely centralized and hierarchical fashion, but the various components enjoyed a certain autonomy, again depending on personal and political connections and the field of expertise. Because the team was so small, each individual on it could have direct access to the top without going through many intermediaries. Its effectiveness was based on fidelity to a set of shared interests and to the values of modern cosmopolitan nationalism, as well as on loyalty to the authority of the president. This chapter analyzes the structure and functioning of the wizards of progress, taking as its focus of analysis the 1889 Paris fair: Information on individual wizards is included in Appendix 1. ## The 1889 Wizards of Progress As preparations for Paris 1889 began in earnest, numerous tasks were distributed among old and new wizards of progress. 2 A central organizing committee was approved: Alfredo Bablot of the Ministry of Justice; Emiliano Busto of the Treasury; Rodrigo Valdés and Joaquín Beltrám of the War Ministry;3 Manuel Zapata Vera of the Foreign Affairs Ministry; José Yves Limantour, first, and later Ramón Rodríguez Rivera of the Ministry of the Interior;4 and, finally, Manuel Díaz Mimiaga as delegate of the Mexican government in Paris.5 The central committee began to meet in February 1888. During that year and the next, it named numerous individuals to various positions of responsibility, including directors for the nine groups at the Paris exhibition, delegates to congresses, architects, artists, draftsmen, servants, and clerks. Before the exhibition team departed for Paris, this committee discussed and decided all aspects of the Mexican display, in direct consultation with Porfirio Díaz. The Mexican display was governed by a general regulation, by which the second section of the Ministry of Economic Development was in charge of all Mexican affairs at Paris 1889 and of all other Mexican presences at international fairs for the rest of the century. In February 1888 a provisional budget for Mexico's exhibit in Paris was offered. The projected total of 398,000 pesos6 served as the point of reference during the first year of preparations for the Paris display.7 But even before the budget was proposed, the Mexican government had authorized the central committee to make monthly expenditures of 10,000 francs (about 3,500 pesos) toward Mexico's participation in the fair. In fact, Mexico's actual expenditures far exceeded the estimates made by the wizards of progress, because the official figures do not reflect numerous expenses that an examination of the available archival material brings to light.8 Sebastián B. de Mier, director of Mexico's display at the 1900 Paris fair, estimated that approximately 605,318 pesos had been spent in 1889 (see Appendix 2), but even this sum seems too modest. The official French report of the fair, written by