Alfred Picard, maintained that Mexico agreed to a government subsidy of 5 million francs (almost 1.5 million pesos), the largest sum spent by any foreign country on the 1889 exposition. 9 Whatever the precise figure, this fair was an extremely expensive event for Mexico, as it was for France. In addition to submitting the budget, the central committee, following the French classification, appointed the directors of the various groups of displays. Leandro Fernández was put in charge of the arts (Group 1); Fernando Ferrari Pérez, of education (Group 2); Manuel Flores, of furniture (Group 3); Eduardo Zárate, of textiles (Group 4); Gilberto Crespo, of raw and manufactured products (Group 5); José María Velázquez, of general mechanics and electricity (Group 6); Antonio Peñafiel, of food products (Group 7); Pedro Sentíes, of agriculture (Group 8); and Mariano Bárcena, of horticulture (Group 9).10 In addition, there was a large and capricious number of honorary members.11 Between 1888 and 1889 three significant changes in the original configuration of the team occurred. In January 1889 Leandro Fernandez resigned as chief of Group 1 (works of art). Fernández argued that, though he had collected the artistic works, an artist should judge their qualities, and José María Velasco was appointed in his stead.12 Another significant change occurred when the Mexican consul in Paris, Díaz Covarrubias, died in May of 1889. His place was filled in September by the writer Manuel Payno, then consul in Barcelona and Santander.13 A final change occurred when José María Velázquez was replaced by Rodrigo Valdés as chief of Group 6. There is no evidence about the political or technical reasons for this last modification.14 Minister of Economic Development Carlos Pacheco and President Díaz frequently asked Díaz Mimiaga to employ Mexican citizens who were living in Paris. In fact, on several occasions Díaz Mimiaga was compelled to accept new members as auxiliaries to the central committee due to the patronage of high-ranking Mexican personalities. For instance, Bernardo Reyes, then governor of the state of Nuevo León, recommended Abraham P. de la Garza, a Mexican engineering graduate from a Paris university, who was included as an honorary member in March 1888.15 Similar pressure was exerted on many occasions, especially by President Díaz's wife, Carmen Romero Rubio, and by José Yves Limantour, who in 1889 was living in France, reportedly for reasons of health.16 In addition, although not every Mexican state sent a special emissary, virtually every state appointed a member of the exhibition team or a Mexican citizen resident in Paris as its delegate. For instance, Julio Limantour was appointed representative of the Federal District (Mexico City).17 There were also some individuals who, though not officially listed, were nevertheless part of the Mexican team in Paris. Among them was Auguste Genin, the Franco-Mexican writer and entrepreneur mentioned in chapter 1.18 He was the prototype of the entrepreneur of propaganda and images