among the wizards of progress. 19 By September 1889, in addition to the Mexican central committee, numerous Mexican exhibitors and officials were in Paris, including the powerful northern landowners Evaristo and Francisco Maderoof the family that initiated the revolution of 1910and the influential economist José Yves Limantour (and his wife).20 The central committee included, among other commissions, a press commission, an essential part of the propaganda network of the team. Its members were in charge of ''writing or requesting and publishing articles, magazines, studies, etc. about the Mexican exhibition."21 Later in this chapter I will address this type of commission. Almost all of the wizards of progress were distinguished personalities of Porfirian Mexico. For this reason, salaries were high, especially for the directors of groups and for the persons in charge of special commissions. Most group chiefs and commissioners secured more than one income. One salary might be paid for employment in the public administration, another for being part of the exhibition teamand thus as an employee of the Ministry of Economic Developmentand still another from service as deputy or in some other official post. To be part of the exhibition team was to enjoy a lucrative position,22 in addition to the status and cachet derived from having experienced the Parisian belle epoque firsthand. Within Mexico, an intricate network for the location and collection of products and data was organized, and all states and districts were asked to encourage local participation. Local fairs took place in the states of Jalisco, Morelos, and Nuevo León in order to preselect the products to be sent to Paris.23 In addition, special commissioners traveled around the country looking for specific commoditiesminerals, medicinal plants, raw materials, and exotic products and people. To stimulate participants, the Mexican government offered a medal to all those who took part, as well as a grant of 100 pesos.24 During the collection process, each group's chief was in direct contact with Gen. Carlos Pacheco and Manuel Fernández Leal, minister and vice-minister of economic development, who made most of the final decisions, often in consultation with Porfirio Díaz. Through a rather disorganized and complicated bureaucratic process at the Paris end of this chain of location and collection, products were somewhat arbitrarily secured by the directors of the various groups. All exhibitors had to fulfill some requirements, and most of them had to do with the Mexican government's main goal of promoting immigration and foreign investment.25 One requirement was for each group to distribute all published materials to the main European libraries and museums, as well as to the other countries' committees at the exhibition.26 Although private participation was strongly encouraged, it was clear to the Mexican government that only the state was able to provide an accurate