and complete view of the modern nation. 27 The coherent and homogeneous representation of the nation could only be a task for the state to fulfill. But what aspects ought to be emphasized in this representation? How should they be displayed in order to put forward the idea of a nation simultaneously cosmopolitan and unique? In responding to these questions, the Mexican exhibition team frequently adjusted its already pragmatic goals to its cultural and ideological objectives, especially to the changing requisites for entrance into the select club of modern nations. ## The Wizards' Goals Originally, the Mexican government designed a profile of what the Mexican exhibit ought to include. This general plan clearly expressed the Mexican elite's concept of a modern nation as well as their particular interest in world's fairs. In the end, this plan was carried out only in part, and each group, in a rather chaotic fashion, organized its own exhibit. What the government wanted to emphasize were Mexican crafts and raw materials that would fill European needs or appeal to European tastes. In 1888 Minister Pacheco sent a memorandum to the Porfirian cabinet and to the exhibition team, arguing that "various industries in Mexico, as in all new countries, are still too primitive." However, he continued, "the modest conditions of the product say nothing against its quality." Therefore, Mexican small producers were to follow the example of the sombrero makers at the New Orleans exhibition, where ''our modest palm-sombrero manufacturers found . . . a market that was as important as it was unexpected." Toward that end, Pacheco asked the state governments to finance the efforts of small producers who could not themselves afford to join the Mexican exhibit in Paris.28 In fact, in 1889, 1893, and 1900 the Ministry of Economic Development received numerous requests for assistance from small producers.29 The orientation and tone of the Mexican exhibit, however, necessarily had to be provided by the various agencies of the Mexican government. Thus, overlapping and crossing the French classification and beyond the private displays of railroad companies, agricultural entrepreneurs, tobacco companies, and textile industrialists, the Mexican government targeted those aspects of the nation that were to be stressed. The idea was to create an image of Mexico that could be easily grasped by both nationals and foreigners. This goal required that the physical, economic, and social diversity of the country be reduced to an analytical reality through the massive production and ordering of maps, photographs, albums, almanacs, artistic canvases, and especially statistics, which included the "inflexible logic of numbers."30 In addition, those who created this image had to rearrange the stubborn national characteristics to fit the criteria of a cosmopolitan modern nation.