Therefore, on one hand, the Indian past was selectively interpreted and utilized to construct a modern secular, liberal, and republican epic for Mexico. The Mexican wizards of progress intended the uniqueness of the country, interpreted in a universal fashion, to be sufficient for admission into the cosmopolitan modern world. On the other hand, the strategic aspectstropical fertility, good sanitation, and overall civilized developmentwere emphasized in order to overcome foreign prejudices. A fundamental part of the official participation of Mexico was thus composed of samples and collections of "the most promising products already being exploited," 31 namely, gold, silver, henequen, coffee, cacao, tobacco, cedar, and so forth. Regarding manufacturing, the Porfirian team had a pragmatic approach: first, it acknowledged and protected small-scale industry; second, it recognized the general backwardness of Mexican industry vis-à-vis France, Germany, and the United States, not to mention England. These factors combined to create a sort of official disinterest in Mexican industrial development. Thus, from the beginning the attempt was to show Mexico's "imperfect and expensive industrial products" and the facilities offered by Mexico for improvement and investment in those areas.32 For the Mexican team, however, the most important component of Mexico's image were public works, of which the Porfirian elite was so proud, for railroads, bridges, and factories were clear signs of progress and civilization. Consequently, numerous photographs of railroads and bridges were requested of railroad companies. Textile and other industrial manufacturing plants were also asked to send pictures of their buildings and technology. The Mexican government also aimed to give proof of its consolidation as a national republic by exhibiting pictures of national monuments and buildings, both actual and projected. At the Paris exposition it was necessary to manipulate not only the Indian past but also the reality of a country with a large Indian population. The Mexican exhibit was therefore designed to show Europeans at one and the same time the exoticism, the nobility, and the hygienic characteristics of the Mexican Indian people. The goal was to show the good faith of Indians, which often implied the Indians' willingness to be mastered. Accordingly, the Mexican government thought to display at Paris a study of the way of life of Mexico's inhabitants, especially of the "moral and material conditions of the Mexican proletariat and peasantry." This task was originally assigned to one of the few Indians who had achieved recognition within the Porfirian eliteIgnacio Manuel Altamirano, perhaps the most important literary figure of the second half of the nineteenth century. Finally, the Mexican exhibit in Paris had to invent Mexico's cosmopolitanism. Hence, there were plans to offer a "summary of the current stage of modern Mexican culture."33 This very ambitious original plan was only partially fulfilled. What took