place was a rather rapid collection of objects by each ministry. Each ministry had its own special program to assist the general exhibition project, with an individual in charge of the works collected under its auspices. These delegates were invariably already part of the exhibition team and occupied other posts within it. The Ministry of Finance, represented by Emiliano Busto, was in charge of exhibiting Mexico's advancement in the scientific management of both the government and its finances. Accordingly, in addition to the official bulletin and general publications, this ministry collected photographs of the machines used to print tax stamps, descriptions and designs of the fiscal offices throughout the country, and two general volumes of statisticsCuadro estadístico, by Bodo von Glümer, 34 and a compilation of agricultural, mining, and industrial statistics under the direction of Busto himself. In order to collect these statistics, Busto suggested conducting a commercial and economic census. Toward this end, a questionnaire was to be sent to all commercial agents by way of local fiscal authorities, customs administrators, and post office employees. In addition, as part of the original plan, Busto proposed what eventually became the major display of the Ministry of Finance's in Paris 1889: a comprehensive comparative study of the public administration of France and Mexico (see chapter 8).35 The War Ministry, represented by Rodrigo Valdés, who was also chief of Group 6, exhibited arms, uniforms, and tools. The Museo del Hospital Militar also contributed in a major way to the exhibit on education, science, hygiene, and medicine. Included were several human organs infected by various diseases and, especially striking, the head of the Apache Indian Juan Antonio, a trophy gained by the Porfirian army during its repression of northern Indian tribes.36 In addition to the displays of the ministries, a commercial commission was created by initiative of Ricardo de Maria y Campos. This commission was in charge of making available and displaying a wide range of data of interest to potential immigrants and investors. Data on political organization, economic and social statistics, commercial tariffs, and legal issues in migration were widely distributed.37 Not all of Mexico's elaborate plans were successfully carried out, however, largely because they were too ambitious and because implementation was hampered by time pressure, inefficiency, and bad organization. Indeed, the Mexican exhibit was finished so late in mid-1889 that it could not be included in the general French catalogue of the exposition.38 To trace the extent to which the integrity of the original master plan survived we would have to analyze its piecemeal implementation by the various groupsa long and detailed task. A review of the essential content and key personalities of Mexico's exhibit at the 1889 Paris fair will suffice to make my points.