## Mexico on Display The core of Mexico's display in the 1889 Paris fair was found in the exhibits of arts, education, textiles, and extractive arts (Groups 1, 2, 4, and 5). Group 1, works of art, was directed by the wellknown artist Jose Maria Velasco, a distinguished landscape painter whose work had been greatly admired at the Philadelphia and New Orleans fairs. 39 Indeed, Velasco, rivaled only by the sculptor Jesùs Contreras, was the most prominent plastic artist of late-nineteenthcentury Mexico.40 Because of his expertise as a painter and his links with intellectual circleswhich dated from the middle of the nineteenth centuryVelasco occupied a high position in the cultural bureaucracy and in the exhibition team, despite his humble origins.41 In March 1888, several well-known personalities were assigned to Velasco's group. Among them were Cayetano Ocampo, a medal engraver; Santiago Rebull, a classical painter who had been Emperor Maximilian's official painter; and Gabriel Guerra, a distinguished sculptor. All were professors at the Academia de San Carlos.42 In addition, in September 1889, Antonio Rivas Mercado was nominated as member of this group. He was a French-trained architect and eventually became the official Porfirian architect of many buildings and monumentsamong them the Columna de la Independencia, inaugurated in 1910 for the centennial celebration of independence, which still stands on Mexico City's Paseo de la Reforma. On this occasion, Rivas Mercado was commissioned to study European architectural improvements.43 Later, in May 1889, Díaz Mimiaga suggested that Contreras be appointed auxiliary to this group for his valuable services as sculptor in charge of statuary for the Mexican pavilion.44 The French descriptions of the Mexican art exhibit reveal a fascination with the numerous paintings by Velasco and with the canvas entitled El Senado de Tlaxcala. They represented, French critics argued, a real Mexican style. In truth, in the 1889 Paris fair the core of the display of Group 1 was formed by sixty-eight Velasco paintings, five canvases by Cleofas Almanza (Velasco's student), and other works by Alberto Bibriesca, José Obregón, Adolfo Tenorio, Juan Ortega, Alberto Herrera's design of Cuauhtémoc's monument, and Contreras's busts of Porfirio Díaz and Manuel Díaz Mimiaga. In architecture, the project for a legislative palace by Anzorena y Agreda, as well as Luis G. Molina's project for a national theater, were ostentatiously exhibited.45 Group 2, education, was directed by Fernando Ferrari Pérez, a teacher in various Mexico City schools and a distinguished naturalist. The well-known Mexican geographer Antonio Garcia Cubas and the historian, archeologist, and writer Alfredo Chavero were also assigned to this group.46 In addition, in April 1888, Justo Sierra, then aged forty and a prominent educator, intellectual, and politician, became an active member,47 though there is no evidence that he traveled to Paris in 1889 (he was present at the 1900 Paris fair) .48