The main part of the education exhibit consisted of educational statistics, issues of major Mexican newspapers and journals, and numerous copies of works from countless schools. The exhibit as a whole was designed to portray the image of a free, liberal, wellfunded, and positivist national educational system. Indeed, various French newspapers took this image more or less at face value. 49 The statistics had been prepared through a general questionnaire, supposedly sent to all educational institutions in Mexico, that was designed to elicit information on endowment, government subsidies, expenses, study programs, demographic composition, schedules, sanitary conditions, support for students, and library size. Another part of this group's exhibit dealt with natural history and included paintings of native animals, many of which were by Velasco. But what most amazed visitors was the collection of dissected small Mexican birds. Mexico exhibited a total of 1,763 articles in this group, according to the French report. Many were grouped in Class 8organization, methods, and appliances for higher instructionbecause of the important role played by professional schools and scientific societies. However, education was of such importance for nineteenth-century Mexican liberals that, in the number of objects exhibited, Mexico was second only to France itself. Another important exhibit was that of Group 4, textile fabrics. It was directed by Eduardo Zárate, a lawyer and professor at the Escuela de Artesanos, who had been a member of Philadelphia and New Orleans commissions as well. One of the first persons assigned to this group was Emiliano Busto, as representative of the Ministry of Finance.50 In Mexico, the textile industry had been well established since the colonial period, and to exhibit its products in Paris was of major significance for the Mexican government. Eduardo Zárate prepared a detailed description of products for eventual exhibition, together with an inventory of textile producers, both of which were compiled by research teams that traveled to the important textile centers of the country. Eventually this research led to the compilation of a general handbook of textile statistics for the Chicago world's fair of 1893. Zárate believed that three aspects of the textile industry should be stressed by the Mexican exhibit. First, samples of textile production of all kinds and from all regions of the country should be gathered for display. Second, the statistical compilation should be displayed for maximum impact in what Zárate envisioned as "a great statistical table of the textile industry, artistically laced at the center of the display of this branch's products in such a way that the industry's situation in our Republic will be made evident at a glance."51 Finally, in his view, the exhibit should highlight popular Mexican clothes and costumes.52 On this last point, Zárate wished to harmonize the industrial and economic interests that spurred the Paris fair with the great cultural and ethnographic concerns of the late nineteenth century, likewise so evident at the