exposition. Thus he proposed that dresses made of Mexican textiles be displayed on mannequins that were faithful representations of the size and physical characteristics of the inhabitants of the different regions of Mexico (that is, tipos populates). 53 In all, Mexico exhibited 403 objects in this groupalso second only to the great French textile exhibit. Group 5, extractive arts, was directed by Gilberto Crespo, an engineer and a former member of the New Orleans commission. The most important part of this group's exhibit was formed by various samples of mining products, statistics, photographs of mines, and specimens of all kinds of wood. The mining aspects of this exhibit were highlighted in the French catalogue over all other Mexican products.54 This group contained specimens provided by various public figures, including Porfirio Díaz himself, who sent various samples of minerals from mines in which he had some interest, including silver and gold.55 Other mineral products on exhibit were copper and onyx.56 The Mexican government was anxious that tobacco be prominently featured in this group's exhibit, because Mexico's tobacco producers, domestically protected, asked for official help to promote their product in Paris for possible use in the European market. Therefore, Ignacio Mariscal visited the Gros Caillou tobacco factory to investigate what type of tobacco the management of the French tobacco monopoly was looking for. He reported that Mexican tobacco, especially that produced by the El Valle Nacional company, was of sufficient quality to compete with Brazilian and U.S. tobacco. Acting on this report, Mexican tobacco producers named Auguste Genin as their commercial representative in Paris. Obstacles had to be overcome in Paris, however: American, Brazilian, and Cuban competition. Even worse, La Régie (the stateowned French tobacco company) attempted to prohibit trade in tobacco at the fair. Responding to pressure by Mexico, La Régie proposed a solution: all countries would be allowed to sell tobacco in their respective pavilions, but "La Régie will set up a large deposit where all tobacco for the exposition will be placed."57 According to Genin's final report, Mexican tobaccos enjoyed great success in Paris. "Our tobacco has been remarkably welcome by the cosmopolitan public of the Exposition," he claimed, adding that better packages and publicity were needed to surmount Cuban dominance in this realm in the future.58 In fact, E. Gabarrot and Cía., proprietor of El Valle Nacional, won two gold medals for its cigars, and M. Rivero and E. Pugibet were awarded silver medals for their cigarettes. A total of 358 different products in Group 5 were exhibited. The larger part of the Mexican exhibit was concentrated in Classes 41 and 44products of mining and metallurgy, and agricultural products not used for food. Mexico exhibited many other items at the various displaying groups, for a total of 3,206 different products, according to the French count. After France and its colony Algeria, Mexico's display was the largest, though not the most suc-