Mexico's display at the 1900 Paris fair, for which E. Levasseur, a well-known French publicist and economist, edited the expensive two-volume work Le Mexique au début du XXe siècle. 70 In it, prestigious writers, politicians, and scientists were paid to write wonderful things about Mexico. The general commissioner for the 1900 Paris exposition, Alfred Picard, wrote about Mexico's industry, commerce, and transportation; the greatest of the nineteenth-century French geographers, Elisée Reclus, wrote a geographical description of Mexico; Prince Roland Bonaparte, a distinguished traveler, ethnographer, and collector, dealt with population and colonization; the ideologue of solidarité, Louis Bourgeoisie, wrote about Mexico's institutions; and the French senator and former minister of agriculture, Hippolyte Gomot, wrote on agriculture. This anthology aimed to portray the new Mexico for the new century, and although it is impossible to calculate the total cost, one can assume it was not cheap to collect papers from those personalities, although most of them seem only to have lent their names and signatures to what was otherwise customary propaganda, with the brilliant exception of Reclus, who included a section on Mexico in his geography of the world.71 By far the most important part of the propaganda network had to do with newspapers. In Paris 1889, and again in Paris 1900, the Mexican government hired the French-Polish-Mexican publicist Gustave Gostkowski as a media agent.72 In July 1889 Gostkowski signed a contract with Díaz Mimiaga to publish articles in Parisian newspapers. These articles, it was agreed, would not only praise Mexico's exhibit but also provide data of interest to capitalists, industrialists, and businessmen. Gostkowski agreed to pay numerous writers to publish articles in such newspapers as La Liberté, Petite République, Le National, Paris, Justice, Échos de Paris, La Nation, Le XIXe Siècle, and L'Événement Petit National. In return, Gostkowski received 3,500 francs for his services.73 Throughout 1889 he sent newspaper clippings from Paris containing very favorable articles about Mexico.74 At American expositions, the wizards of progress preferred the services of José F. Godoy, but in France Gostkowski and, to a certain extent, the Mexican-French entrepreneur Auguste Genin, were the main organizers of Mexican propaganda. In 1900 Gostkowski was again hired, and he produced another propaganda book, one that included a new target: tourism. The book's title suggested the new emphasis: Au Mexique: Études, notes et renseignements utiles au capitalistes, a l'immigrant, e au touriste.75 Overall, the propaganda network was expensive and ineffective.76 The wizards of progress complemented this propaganda function with their own lobbying for Mexico in different instances. Nothing illustrates this better than the bargaining for awards at the 1889 Paris exposition. French honors had to be ardently and painfully negotiated. As soon as Díaz Mimiaga obtained the official list of awards to be granted by the French organizers, he began to lobby for many more prizes than those originally announced.77