In the same way he negotiated honors for various wizards of progress, obtaining a total of 94 recognitions and 37 diplomas. 78 Thus the Legion of Honor and similar awards began to be distributed for Mexicans.79 In sum, judged by the results obtained in immigration and foreign investment, the exhibition team was modestly successful. But judged by the speed, efficiency, and accomplishments in term of propaganda and lobbying, one could argue that Mexico did not assemble a team of similar quality until the 1990s, when the Mexican government undertook a successful and expensive campaign for an international free trade agreement. ## The Rhetoric of Conflict and the Conflict of Rhetoric The wizards of progress, though a well-articulated and organized team, were divided by internal conflicts. Most members had direct personal economic and political reasons for safeguarding the world's fair. Those with interests in mining, agriculture, or manufacturing tried to earn the favor of international capitalists and to promote their own companies. Bureaucrats and scientists were prompt to foster their own political or scientific areas of influence within the Mexican government. All personal interests operated within a small and tightly linked framework of relationships. Conflicts were often incited by personality differences or by the alltoo-common attempts to bypass the hierarchical order. Because all of the members were so closely related, it was easy for almost anyone to gain the ear of Minister Pacheco or even President Díaza frequent occurrence in the many years during which the group labored for the success of Mexico's presence at world's fairs. Devotion to Díaz's authority was what ultimately unified the group. Nationalism and professionalism were understood as loyalty to a set of principles and ideas. In the application of their ideas and in their loyalty to authority, they were quite a complex and disciplined team; that is, one could say that, though full of conflicts, they formed a modern team. The wizards of progress weathered many personal difficulties during the course of their service. Except for the serious economic problems they experienced in preparing for the 1893 Chicago exhibition, the greatest conflicts among the members of the exhibition team had to do with the 1889 world's fair. Most of the problems were caused by the very structure of the team, and the fashion in which those conflicts were expressed is fundamental to understanding the nature of the Porfirian political organization. No conflict was openly discussed until all avenues of reconciliation were exhausted. Once a conflict became public, the first priority of all factions was to express loyalty to Díaz and/or Pacheco, which meantthrough bizarre rhetorical twistings and turningsloyalty to the country they represented. Finally, whenever friction rose, language was both the weapon and the battlefield, and, as with the whole Porfirian political culture, an eloquent style was in-