dispensable because, as argued before, style was far from a mere rhetorical accessory, it was what late-nineteenth-century culture was all about. Countless frictions emanated from Díaz Mimiaga's difficult personality. He seems to have been pretentious and authoritarian, and, although Porfirio Díaz trusted him, he never achieved a position higher than that of oficial mayor in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. His status within the Porfirian hierarchy can be judged by the fact that his biography appears in only one of the many biographical dictionaries of the epoch: Ireneo Paz's Hombres prominentes de México, for which, as mentioned above, those who wished to be included had to pay 50 pesos. 80 Díaz Mimiaga died in Italy in 1891, while serving as Mexican minister to that country.81 Díaz Mimiaga's angular personality impeded the work of the exhibition team on more than one occasion. Quarrels with various team members prompted Alfredo Bablot, general secretary of the Mexican commission in Paris, to write a letter to the minister of economic development in April 1890 in which he blamed Díaz Mimiaga for much of the delay in the inauguration of the Mexican pavilion. Bablot characterized Díaz Mimiaga as "a real disaster."82 Another scandal erupted among the wizards of progress when Ramón Fernandez accepted a Bolivian invitation to attend what was billed as a dialogue to foster scientific discussion among the Latin American nations. Fernandez informed the Mexican minister of foreign affairs of his plans in order to guard himself against the wrath of Díaz Mimiaga, who had forbidden his colleagues to attend meetings at which he could not also be present. Díaz Mimiaga tried to censor all memoranda directed to Pacheco and Porfirio Díaz.83 He considered Fernández's action an affront to his authority. The subsequent debate among the commission members was resolved only when Fernández, ordered by Pacheco, apologized, even though the wizards of progress present at Paris declared themselves unable to achieve a final verdict.84 In all conflicts the final decision was made after consultation with President Díaz himself. So it was in the case of Jesús Contreras, the famous Mexican sculptor who tried to have a hand in the construction of the Mexican pavilions at both the 1889 and the 1900 Paris world's fairs.85 Not until Díaz ordered that Luis Salazar and Antonio de Anza were to be in total control of the construction did Contreras cease all artistic and entrepreneurial efforts, including plans prepared with the assistance of a French engineer.86 One other conflict illustrates both the issue of loyalty and the significance of language. In November 1889, according to the session's minutes, a great debate took place among the members of the commission regarding the feasibility of fulfilling all of the conditions established by the Reglamento económico for the Mexican display in Paris. Zárate verbalized his interpretation of the Reglamento, making clear that it was impossible to complete what had originally been mandated. He acknowledged Bablot's good intentions in preparing this document and praised him highly. But at the same time he called