Bablot and his Reglamento an ''extremely compassionate father of a brutal son," 87 and in an eloquent speech he assailed various aspects of the Reglamento as infeasible. Bablot, no less well spoken, said of Zárate's criticism that "it is a pity that so much beauty is not true." He maintained that Zárate and those who agreed with him aimed to "innocently cast me, expiatory victim, into eternal flames." However, in his defense Bablot pointed to his loyalty to President Díaz and Minister Pacheco and said he would go to the "dark Avernus in good company" because both Díaz and Pacheco had approved the Reglamento. Bablot then argued that labeling his Reglamento a monstrum horrendum had been unfair, and in rebuttal he reviewed the Reglamento item by item. For instance, regarding article 16, which mandated that group chiefs keep themselves up-to-date concerning the different aspects of the production of their particular products, Bablot responded to Zárate's criticism by arguing that indeed group chiefs were constantly comparing Mexican products with their foreign counterparts. Thus, he ironically asserted, "not even remotely could it be assumed that Mr. Zárate thinks that his colleagues are so unconscious as to comply with Article 16 the same way Mr. Jourdain in Molière's drama spoke in prose without being aware of that fact." To Zárate's complaint regarding the impossibility of having each chief write a report on the development of his disciplines, Bablot replied that the travel impressions of each were sufficient. Sarcastically, Bablot commented: 'And surely we needed Mr. Zárate to tell us his story to know that today it is an insufferable sacrifice to travel through Europe in a sleeping car, with toilet, shower, dining room, boudoir, salon, smoking room, and all those unbearable discomforts invented by that cannibal Pullman." Bablot concluded the defense of his Reglamento by accusing Zárate of stigmatizing, "through the annihilating rays of his eloquence," the Reglamento with "touches of rhetorical flowers called exaggeration." In fact, Bablot was, as poet Manuel Gutiérrez Najera characterized him, the prototype of the orator who "distracts the enemy with fast moves, zigzagging, making the enemy feel drowsy, and, at precisely the right moment, opens the joints of the armor and calculates and nails the rapier from there."88 The rhetoric with which this conflict was expressed caricatured the role of style in a courtlike bureaucratic structure. Zárate's speech and Bablot's response not only made references to but also created the common reality over whose details the two men quarreled. Thus both proclaimed their loyalty to Pacheco, to Díaz, and to the idea of progress. Moreover, this conflict demonstrated how, in an openly eloquent era, the human pecking order worked through rites of intimidation expressed with pure and penetrating selection of words. By 1889 Mexico's exhibition team was more or less consolidated. The wizards of progress constituted a group that eventually included a large portion