Empire along European lines. The Ottoman reformers came to equate progress with "a return to the true spirit of Islam." 9 Mexican liberals, in contrast, were too Europeanized to even conceive of a modern milieu that would be Indian or to use the concept of Indianness in the cause of modernity (not, at least, until the 1910s). After the overthrow of Maximilian's empire and the definitive establishment of the Reform laws in the 1860s, liberal factions began to rewrite Mexico's past and map out its future. This was a process of ideological and historiographical negotiation, for liberals did not have a golden ageas Alamán had found in the Hispanic colonial erato look back on, at least until the crystallization of the Reform as an epic moment. In the middle of the nineteenth century, liberal romanticssuch as Manuel Payno, a great synthesizer whose history textbook became quite influential in the 1870scould not look to the colonial period as their paradise lost, especially because the independence movement was too close to them, both chronologically and emotionally. Instead, they turned to the Spanish Conquest and portrayed Indians as brave and noble warriors.10 By the 1880s, once various regional and political factions had established a relative status quo, Porfirian liberals realized that a comprehensive nationalistic history was a sine qua non both for the consolidation of the nation and as a proof of stability and civilization.11 They were especially aware that such a history had to be taught and disseminated if a national consciousness was to form.12 For them, if history was not a lessonin both an exemplary and an educational senseit was not history. The nation, it was claimed by the Porfirian government, would be consolidated in the classrooms. However, the liberals soon learned to be unfaithful to their goal, restricting themselves to making the nation not by teaching it to a dispersed and illiterate population but, rather, by exhibiting it both domestically and internationally. In any event, not until the 1880s did concise liberal histories of the nation start to materialize.13 Then came the first general and comprehensive synthesis of Mexico's past: México a través de los siglos, a collective, reconciliatory, and conclusive enterprise that included authors from different liberal factions. The Aztec Palace in Paris was the steel version of México a través de los siglos. In its walls, as well as in the displays they sheltered, the story told by the new history text was echoed. The book was a five-volume compendium written by the victorious liberals, headed by Vicente Riva Palacio and including Alfredo Chavero, Julio Zárate, Juan de Dios Arias, Enrique de Olavarría y Ferrari, and José María Vigil. It was published by Santiago Ballesca, then a wellknown Catalan publisher who lived in Mexico and published many important books in the late nineteenth century.14 Although it is not clear how the book was originally conceived, it seems to have been fostered by a conscious will to reorder and put together the whole Mexican history in one