3,000 by 1889. 30 On the other hand, the book was meant to be, like the Aztec Palace, a modern monument, as Riva Palacio put it, "a monument worthy of the advancement that typography has achieved in our century."31 The picture of the country the book presented sought to resolve internal disparities and to foster nationalism, but it also aimed to fit together the parameters of the political, social, and economic ideas, many of them foreign, that inspired the multivolume book. And it did so in a beautiful and colorful Catalan edition, subsidized by the Mexican government, that made use of all of the representational resources then available to the printing arts. Lithographs and pictures were as much part of the late-nineteenth-century literature as were romantic novels and travel descriptions, and the lithographs by F. Fuste and R. Canto in México a través de los siglos produced a vivid, animated, and pedagogic impression.32 In addition, photographs and lithographs from national and international expeditions, as well as descriptions and reproductions from foreign historians and archaeologists, were included and so became part of the national symbolism.33 México a través de los siglos was thus an object lesson on the importance of books to the modern world (see Figs. 3a and 3b).34 The nationalism that México a través de los siglos synthesized and that the Aztec Palace expressed was simultaneously paralleled by international political and cultural trends that in some way fostered this reargumentation of the Mexican past. Oddly enough, this growing radical nationalism coincided with the growth of cultural cosmopolitanism, because an international common model of values and fashions had emerged among the middle classes. On one hand, cosmopolitanism was considered an attribute of the adventurous and tolerant, the conquest and appreciation of the exotic. In this sense, cosmopolitanism meant open-minded European acknowledgment of other values, things, and peoples. As Baudelaire himself claimed when he commented on the 1855 Paris world's fair, "That divine grace of cosmopolitanism" meant that "beauty is always bizarre."35 On the other hand, cosmopolitanism was a set of European values, things, and attitudes that had to be adopted if one was to be modern. Mexico's elite was linked to the transformation of nationalism as well as to both notions of cosmopolitanism. Accordingly, they raciallyscientifically redefined Mexican nationhood by supplying Mexico with an acceptable national uniqueness and a degree of exoticism. The two proposals for a 1889 Mexican pavilion that were submitted sought to represent the Indian past faithfully and to make it coincide with modern progress, and both were historically supported and inspired by the historical synthesis introduced by México a través de los siglos. Both proposals attempted to satisfy the cosmopolitan and exotic appetites of the modern