a harmonious, all-inclusive world. 2 But what was civilized and what was not? What was primitive and what was modern? The fair tried to answer these questions conclusively, but in doing so it made them all the more sonorous and unsolved. In 1889 the Aztec Palace was only one of the many exotic aspects of the fair. For example, various peoples were brought to Paris and used as subjects of anthropometrical research. Racial hypernationalism required this sort of show, composed not only of the exoticism of others but also of the European nations' own folk peoples.3 In this sense modern nationalism constituted regardless of each country's particularitiesa twofold mandate: to create one's own self by reviewing geographical, cultural, and temporal others; and to make one's self at home in modern nationalism by recounting and inventing one's own traditions. The nationalism of the late-nineteenth-century industrialized nations was also embraced by the modernizing elites of so-called exotic and backward countries. That is, the mandate was followed by both the modern observers of the "precipices of time" that were world's fairs and the observed exotic Others.4 If what was modern was the mandate, then both the fair and the Mexican pavilion were countenances of modernity. The French organizers suggested that Mexico and other exotic countries display their national styles in the architecture of their pavilions. For France an Aztec Palace was a complement, albeit minor, to its fin-de-siècle orientalisma combination of anthropological, archaeological, aesthetic, and nationalistic concerns that conformed to a graphical ethnology.5 In Paris 1889 the "Rue du Caire" and the exhibit on the "History of Habitation" were the foremost examples of this orientalism. Visitors walked through a replica of an historical street in Cairo that was so perfect it caused Eugène-Melchior de Vogüé to exclaim: "Here are our slaves."6 In contrast, Gypsy and Javanese dances and music were performed all around the fair. All of that was just a facade, however, a scenario that displayed European architectural, ethnological, and artistic concerns and done in a way that could easily become daily fare for late-nineteenthcentury Parisians.7 Behind the facade rested the belief in, and the will to try, another expressionharmonious progress. In effect, latenineteenth-century world's fairs displayed not only modern nationalism but also modernity's unavoidable component: the selfdefeating awareness of its stylistic experimental nature. This irony permeated the entire fair. The facade of the Aztec Palace simultaneously satisfied French oriental-ism and reconstructed Mexican national history. In contrast, its interior was more a statement about the present and the future than it was an assertion about the past. If one overlooked the overall French style in decoration, the interior of the Mexican pavilion contained an impressive anthropological, archaeological, and natural history display (see Fig. 7). In effect, in the interior of the Aztec Palace the issue of race was treated in the same fashion