## Conclusion One question that is constantly raised with regard to contemporary graphic design and typography is this: What is the raison dՐtre, the conceptual core, of current practice? Throughout this book, disparate design groups have been surveyed, all of whom had a commitment of one sort or another, be it aesthetic or ideological. Nineteenth-century designers wanted to raise the quality of industrial goods, the Dadaists wanted to subvert Western society, the practitioners of the New Typography wanted to create a universal language of the machine, followers of the International Style wanted to create modern design solutions for their clients, and the postmodernists of the 1970s and 1980s wanted to reject the orthodoxy of the International Style and experiment with new technology. The question remains: What is the purpose, other than the obvious day-to-day work of meeting deadlines and serving commercial clients, of contemporary graphic design? The first generation of postmodernists was united by the thrill of breaking the rules of the International Style, but this iconoclasm played itself out in the 1990s. Are there really any rules left to break? If postmodernism has ended, what has replaced it? Some designers nave discovered a sense of purpose in political activism. Following in the footsteps of Tibor Kalman or Jonathan Barnbrook, they have found themselves in the uncomfortable position of attacking the very profession that supports them. This type of self-loathing cannot in itself be a solution. At the sam time, can keeping up with continual technological change while negotiating the mounting complexities of contemporary marketing be an answer in itself? The quest for meaning in graphic design is partly a product of its rich artistic side; while accountants or engineers may not usually be beset with finding larger meaning in their work, graphic designers often have asked abstract questions along these lines. One thing that is abundantly clear is that there willbe a continuing demand for designers who have a sophisticated awareness of history, technology, and contemporary culture.