## Glossary ## A Aesthetic movement A British corollary to the French Symbolist movement in literature and the arts. Artists who were part of the movement—such as Oscar Wilde—reveled in sensuality, mysticism, and beauty. It was sometimes disparagingly referred to as the Decadent movement. Agitprop Short for "agitation propaganda," this term originated with the Russian communist campaign to spread their ideology. Appropriation To borrow; this term refers to the way in which postmodern artists often borrow imagery from outside the art and design worlds and include them in their work. Arabesque The term denotes the geometric patterns that were a popular part of Art Nouveau style. Arbeitsrat für Kunst Founded in 1918, the activist group of artists and architects who called themselves the "Workers for Art" sought to participate inthe restructuring of German society after the collapse of the government upon its defeat in the First World War. Architectonic Relates to a composition structured in such a way that its forms are suggestive of the elements of architecture. Art Deco An English-language term established in 1968by Bevis Hillier. It is derived from the name of the “Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs et Industriels Modernes," held in Paris in 1925. Art Deco is a style characterized by geometric regularity, planar surfaces, rectilinear compositions, and an overall elegant Machine Aesthetic. Art Nouveau Literally "new art," a late nineteenth-century decorative arts movement in Europe andthe United States that favored a unified design style based on organic forms, and featured asignificant Asian—particularly Japanese--formal influence. Arts and Crafts A late nineteenth-century decorative arts movement in Europe and the United States that rejected industrial production in favor of handcrafted goods with simple, often geometric, designs. Avant-garde From a French military expression, the term refers to artists who are at the revolutionary edge of stylistic and conceptual experimentation. ## B Bauhaus The "House of Building," a statesponsored school of the arts founded by Walter Gropius in Weimar, Germany, in 1919. The Bauhaus was closed by the Nazis in 1933. Bézier curve A digital smoothing algorithm used in vector graphics and animation. Bijin-ga A subset of Ukiyo-e woodblock prints that showcase images of beautiful young women, mainly courtesans. Bit-mapped Bit-mapped letters are made up of an array of pixels (tiny dots); they do not have the smooth, unbroken contours of earlier type. For this reason, 1980s bit-mapped type had very low resolution, and the coarse letterforms could not be scaled outside a limited range. Blackletter The general term for typefaces that resemble the forms of medieval script; the positive space formed by black ink overwhelms the negative white space of the paper. Bolshevik Literally a member of the "majority," the Marxist-inspired Bolshevik party led by Vladimir Lenin that seized control of Russia in 1917. It later formed the Communist Party that controlled the USSR for most of the twentieth century. ## C Cabaret Voltaire A modest nightclub in the back room of a restaurant in Zurich made famous by the Dada gatherings held there in 1916. Chromolithography Color lithographyi the process whereby a color image is reproduced using flat stones that have been drawn on with greasy ink of crayons. A separate stone is used for each color. Commedia dell'Arte A kind of vernacular, often improvisational, folk theater that originated in Italy in the sixteenth century and soon spread to Britain and France. Commercial Modern Almost a synonym for Art Deco, the term refers to designs that borrow from the modern movement in the fine arts, especially Cubism and Futurism. Constructivist Term for an avant-garde artist who utilized geometric abstraction, or an adjective describing their style; includes the artists of De Stijl and Russian Constructivism. Constructivist Congress A gathering of Constructivist artists held in Weimar, Germany, in 1922 at the behest of Theo van Doesburg. It was partially disrupted by the arrival of a number of Dadaists. Cubism An art movement focusing on painting that originated in Paris between 1908 and 1911. Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso were the key figures who developed a new type of abstraction that would influence generations of future artists. Curvilinear A design characterized by fluid, curving lines. ## D Dada A constellation of social protest and art movements that originated in Zurich, Switzerland. Dada was formed as a protest against the First World War as well as the European culture that had fomented it. De Stijl Literally “The Style," a Dutch art movement influenced by Neoplatonism, from the era after the First World War. De Stijl promoted a distinct type of reductive geometric abstract art. Détournement Literally, "deflection or redirection," a strategy pioneered by the Situationists of subverting ideas or images so as to undermine their authority. Deutscher Werkbund A German organization founded in Munich in 1907 with the intention of raising the quality, both aesthetic and functional, of the nation's industrial production. ## E Em box A unit of measurement in typography that corresponds to the size of the implied frame round a letter. Entartete Kunst Literally "Degenerate Art," a term used in 1930s Nazi Germany to denigrate modern art, which the regime asserted had a corrupting influence on the national culture. Expressionism Generally speaking, any artistic style that focuses more on reproducing the way the world feels than on how it looks. ## F Foreshortened The result of a drawing technique that allows for the accurate representation of elements perpendicular to the picture plane, such as a finger pointing at the viewer. Fraktur Blackletter type characterized by "fractured" forms that originated in Germany in the early sixteenth century; also used as a general synonym for blackletter type. Full-bleed photograph A photograph that completely covers the page all the way to the edges. Futurism An Italian art and political protest movement founded in 1909 by Filippo Marinetti. The Futurists hoped to revolutionize Italian society, returning it to its historical position as a dominant force in Europe. ## G Gesamtkunstwerk A "total work of art," meaning a piece—originating with the music dramas of Richard Wagner—that collapses every possible aesthetic experience into a unified whole. Gothic An alternative name for blackletter type that imitates medieval script; alternatively, in the United States it commonly refers to sans serif type. Grotesque A synonym for sans serif type commonly used in Europe. Grunge An unofficial category describing contemporary graphic design that appears in a holistic sense to be unpolished, grungy, and scruffy. Gutter The inner margins of two facing pages of a magazine or book. ## H Halftone A commercial method for printing images so as to preserve their tonal scale. Heimatschutz A term used in Nazi Germany to refer to the "preservation of regional tradition" as opposed to the cosmopolitan, urban culture of greater Europe. Historicism A strategy whereby designers reference styles from the past. Hoarding Akin to a billboard, a hoarding is an exterior space (such as a wall) intended for the presentation of posters. Horror vacui Literally, a fear of empty space. The term refers to a composition that completely fills the frame. ## I Incunabula (singular “incunabulum") Books printed before 1501. Industrial RevolutionThe process beginning in the eighteenth century whereby Europe experienced a transition from a predominantly agrarian economy to an industrial economy. International Constructivism Distinct from, althoughstrongly influenced by, Russian Constructivism, this term refers to the very broad group of designers and artists interested in geometric abstract art in Europe during the 1920s and after. International Style A term coined in 1931 by Museum of Modern Art curators Philip Johnson and Henry-Russell Hitchcock to explain the new geometric style in architecture. International Typographic Style Design style based on constructivist principles that came to prominence in the 1960s as an expansion of the Swiss Style Isotype An acronym meaning "International System of Typographic Picture Education," devised by Otto Neurath, an Austrian sociologist, in the 1920s. ## J Japonisme The European, especially French, adoption of Japanese art and fashion during the late nineteenth century. Jobbing printer A general term for a printing house and-its employees working "job to job," without apparent specialization. Jugendstil A German synonym for Art Nouveau meaning "young art," derived from the magazine Jugend. Justified The spacing of text so that the ends of lines are even. ## K Kunstgewerbeschule A school dedicated to the theory and practice of the decorative arts. Kunstschule A school devoted to the theory and practice of the fine arts, as opposed to the decorative arts. ## L Letterpress Printing technique whereby the ink is supported on a raised surface, such as the letters of metal type. Linotype An industrial machine, developed in 1886, that facilitated mechanical typesetting by setting an entire line of type. Lithography A planographic printing technique invented in 1796 by Alois Senefelder. Logotype A visual symbol that identifies a given company or institution, such as a trademark. Lubok (plural lubki) A Russian folk art print often featuring religious stories. ## M Machine Aesthetic Most often used in reference to the art of the 1920s, the term refers to works that reproduce the sleek, shiny surfaces and geometric regularity of industrial machines. Mai Soixante-Huit A French term alluding to the widespread civil unrest that shook the country in May 1968. Modern Eighteenth-century roman type that is characterized by extreme contrast in stroke thickness, staunchly vertical stress, and hairline serifs. Monotype An industrial machine, developed in 1887 that facilitated mechanical typesetting by producing type character by character. ## N Neo-Plasticism A term used by Piet Mondrian to denote his universal aesthetic, and especially his rejection of contemporary Expressionism. Neoplatonism A loosely defined philosophy popular with artists in the 1910s and 1920s that posits a transcendent world of universal harmony best represented in the arts through mathematically structured forms. New Typography A term originally expressed in German—Die neue Typographie—that was coined by László Moholy-Nagy in 1923 and soon made popular by Jan Tschichold. It denotes theprogressive changes in typography that occurred during this era; the stylistic attributes of the New Typography include orthogonal compositions, bold rules, dynamic asymmetry, and sans serif lettering. New Wave A term that developed out of the Punk music scene. New Wave later became associated with a type of diluted mainstreaming of Punk culture. Often used in reference both to late 1970s electronic pop music as well as to the punchy, colorful graphics of that era. Nieuwe beelding Literally "new imagery," this term was used by the members of De Stijl to indicate their plan for revolutionary change in the visual arts. Non-objective A non-objective artwork bears no direct relationship to the natural world; it is totally abstract. ## 0 Old Style Roman type originally devised in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries that is characterized by understated contrast, bracketed serifs, and oblique stress. OpenType A font format that allows for crossplatform utilization and increased flexibility versus its predecessors PostScript and TrueType; OpenType was developed by Adobe and Microsoft, and released in 2000. Organic form A form in art that is derived from the natural world through its shape, which is often curving, irregular, and plant-like. Orphism A name coined by the poet Guillaume Apollinaire c. 1910 in response to the Cubist artwork of Robert and Sonia Delaunay. Orthogonal Relates to a design that is structured mostly with right angles, such as a grid. ## P Photomontage A composite work made up of photographs that have been combined in any Serif A small stroke at the end of the major lines of a character. Silkscreening A commercial printing technique later adopted by artists whereby ink is forced through a screen made of fabric framed by a hard stencil. Situationist Internationale A Marxist influenced French avant-garde group that arose in 1957 and played a major role in the events of May 1968. Slab serif A typeface that features heavy rectangular serifs. Small capitals Uppercase letters that are sized equal to the “x height” of a given typeface and therefore smaller than the standard uppercase letters. Socialist Realism Conventionally styled, heavily didactic artworks favored by the Russian communist leader Josef Stalin, who rejected the abstract strategies favored by the Russian Constructivists. Soft marketing Marketing a product or service without directly pitching it to the consumer. Soft marketing often involves engaging the customer through entertainment, such as in product placement in a film or by creating an internet game. Streamlining A characteristic element of the Art Deco style, streamlining refers to the shape of objects that have been modified to appear as if they could smoothly flow through space, like the bow of a ship. Street art Any manifestation of unofficial art in public spaces. Street art can take many forms, including graffiti, stickers, and installations. Stress In a typeface, this denotes the angle of the major axis around which the strokes of a letter ate structured (not the angle of the strokes themselves). Stylized Designs that appear to be structured round a set style or group of compositional rules. Suprematism The term used by Kasimir Malevich to indicate the spiritual, Neoplatonist underpinnings of his abstract paintings of the 1910s. Surrealism A movement in art, literature, and politics led by André Breton in the 1920s. Arising out of the Dada movement and inspired by the work of Sigmund Freud, the Paris-based Surrealists exalted and explored the terrain of the unconscious mind. Swiss Style A graphic design style that arose in Switzerland in the 1950s, the Swiss Style focused on clarity and legibility. Heavily indebted to De Stijl and Constructivism, the Swiss Style led to the creation of the International Typographic Style. Symbolism A late nineteenth-century movement in literature and the other arts based in France, which focused on themes of spirituality, sensuality, and the artist's subjective experience of the world. ## T Transitional Seventeenth-century roman type that is characterized by vertical stress, significant contrast, wide proportions, and thin, elegant serifs. Typophoto A term coined by László Moholy-Nagy in 1925 to denote the set of aesthetic principles that would govern the integration of typography and photography as the new basis for graphic design. ## U Ukiyo-e Literally "pictures of the floating world, the term generally refers to Japanese woodblock prints that feature images of actors, courtesans, or landscape. ## V Vernacular Refers to a style or source that is ordinary, as opposed to artistically exalted. Vienna Secession A group of young artists in late nineteenth-century Vienna who rejected the conservative artistic conventions of the era. Vorticism A British offshoot of the Futurist movement, founded by Wyndham Lewis in 1913. ## W Weimar Republic The liberal democratic government based in the city of Weimar that governed Germany from soon after the end of the First World War (1914–1918) until the rise of the Nazis in 1933. Whiplash curve A defining stylistic element of Art Nouveau, it is an S curve that is suggestive of the pent-up energy of a whip suspended in mid-air. Wild Style Graffiti letterforms that are exuberantly expressive and visually complex. The individual letters are often woven together. Wiener Werkstätte The "Viennese Workshops," a group of artists spun off in 1905 from the Vienna Secession who wanted to raise the quality of Austrian decorative arts. Woodcut Relief printing in which the image is carved into a block of wood to facilitate reproduction. ## X X-heightA standandized type measurement based on the size of a lowercase letter (excluding any ascenders or descenders) such as the letter x.