## General Armstrong, Helen, Graphic Design Theory: Readings from the Field (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009). Aynsley, Jeremy, A Century of Graphic Design (Hauppauge, NY: Barron's Educational Series, 2001). Bain, Eric K., The Theory and Practice of Typographic Design (New York: Hastings House, 1970). Baines, Phil, and Andrew Haslam, Type and Typography (London: Laurence King, 2005). Bennett, Audrey, ed, Design Studies: Theory and Research in Graphic Design (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2006). Berry, W. Turner, The Encyclopaedia of Type Faces (Poole, Dorset: Blandford Press, 1953). Bierut, Michael, William Drenttel, and Steven Heller, eds, Looking Closer 4—Critical Writings on Graphic Design (New York: Allworth Press, 2002). Bierut, Michael, William Drenttel, and Steven Heller, eds, Looking Closer 5—Critical Writings on Graphic Design (New York: Allworth Press, 2007). Bierut, Michael, William Drenttel, Steven Heller, and D.K. Holland, eds, Looking Closer—Critical Writings on Graphic Design (New York: Allworth Press, 1994). Bierut, Michael, William Drenttel, Steven Heller, and D.K. Holland, eds, Looking Closer 2—Critical Writings on Graphic Design (New York: Allworth Press, 1997). Bierut, Michael, Steven Heller, Jessica Helfand, and Rick Poynor, eds, Looking Closer 3— Classic Writings on Graphic Design (New York: Allworth Press, 1999). Birdsall, Derek, Notes on Book Design (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004). Blackwell, Lewis, 20th-century Type (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004). Bogart, Michelle, Artists, Advertising, and the Borders of Art (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995). . L1 Bringhurst, Robert, The Elements of Typograpnı Style (Point Roberts, WA: Hartley & Marks, 2004). Blirger, Peter, Theory of the Avant-garde (Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota University Press, 1990). TI Byars, Mel, and Terrence Riley, eds, 1 ne Design Encyclopedia (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2004). Carter, Rob, Typographic Design: Form and Communication (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2006). Clark, Hazel, and David Brody, eds, Design Studies: A Reader (Oxford: Berg, 2009). . Craig, James, Thirty Centuries of Graphic Design: An Illustrated Survey (New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1987). Cramsie, Patrick, The Story of Graphic Design: From the Invention of Writing to the Birth of Digital Design (New York: Abrams, 2010) Dodd, Robin, From Gutenberg to Opentype: An Illustrated History of Type from the Earliest Letterforms to theLatest Digital Fonts (Vancouver, BC: Hartley& Marks, 2006). Doordan, Dennis, ed, Design History: An Anthology (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995). Drucker, Johanna, and Emily McVarish, Graphic Design History: A Critical Guide (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2009). Elam, Kimberly, Grid Systems: Principles of Organizing Type (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2004). Fallan, Kjetil, Design History: Understanding Theory and Method (Oxford: Berg, 2010). Ferebee, Ann, and Jeff Byles, A History of Design from the Victorian Era to the Present: A Survey of the Modern Style in Architecture, Interior Design, Industrial Design, Graphic Design, and Photography, 2nd ed (New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2011). Fiell, Charlotte, and Peter Fiell, Graphıc Design for the 21st Century / Grafikdesign im 21. Jahrhundert / Le Design Graphique au 21e siécle: 100 of the World's Best Graphic Designers (Cologne: Taschen, 2003). Δ Frampton, Kenneth, Modern Arcnueuur-Critical History, 4th ed (London: Thames & Hudson, 2007). A.1:.Darimn Gatta, Kevin, Foundations of Grapru Dug (Worcester, MA: Davis Publications, 1991). .Li. Desion: Fifty Years of Gluck, Felix, Woria Urupra Advertising Art (New York: Watson Guptill Publications, 1968). 1. 100 Classic Graphic Godfrey, Jason, Bibliograpnıc: Design Books (London: Laurence King 2009). Wmen of Design: Gomez-Palacio, Bryony, w.... Influence and Inspiration from the Original Trailblazers to the New Groundbreakers (Cincinnati, OH: HOW Books, 2008). Gomez-Palacio, Bryony, and Armin Vit, Graphic Design, Referenced: A Visual Guide to the Language, Applications, and History of Graphic Design (Beverly, MA: Rockport Publishers, 2009). Gray, Nicolete, A History of Lettering: Creative Experiment and Letter Identity (London: Phaidon, 1986). Harris, Robert L., Information Graphics: A Comprehensive Illustrated Reference (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999). Heller, Steven, Design Literacy (Continued): Understanding Graphic Design (New York: Allworth Press, 1999). Heller, Steven, Graphic Design Time Line: A Century of Design Milestones (New York: Allworth Press, 2000). Heller, Steven, Merz to Emigré and Beyond: Avant-garde Magazine Design of the Twentieth Century (London: Phaidon, 2003). Heller, Steven, and Georgette Ballance, Graphic Design History (New York: Allworth Press, 2001). Heller, Steven, and Seymour Chwast, Illustration: A Visual History (New York: Abrams, 2008). Heller, Steven, and Louise Fili, Typology: Type Design from the Victorian Era to the Digital Age (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1999). Heller, Steven, and Marie Finamore, eds, Design Culture: An Anthology of Writing from the AIGA Journal of Graphic Design (New York: Allworth Press, 1997). Heller, Steven, and Philip Meggs, Texts on Type: Critical Writings on Typography (New York: Allworth Press, 2001). Heller, Steven, and Christine Thompson, Letterforms Bawdy, Bad and Beautiful: The Evolution of Hand-drawn, Humorous, Vernacular, and Experimental Type (New York: Watson-Guptill, 2000). Heyman, Therese Thau, Posters Ameruu (Washington, DC: National Museum of American Art, Smithsonian Institution, 1998). t1. C-ashis Holland, D.K., Design Issues: riow urup… Design Informs Society (New York: Allworth Press, 2001). …1-nd Chin Holland, D.K., Jessica rietauu, … Kidd, Grapbic Design: America 2 (Rockpor, MA: Rockport / Allworth Editions, 1997). MA: Hollis, Richard, Graphic Design: A Concise History (London: Thames & Hudson, 1993). Jhally, Sut, The Spectacle of Accumulation (New York: Peter Lang, 2006). Jobling, Paul, and David Crowley, Graphic Design: Reproduction and Representation since 1800 (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1996). Jubert, Roxane, Typography and Graphic Design: From Antiquity to the Present (Paris: Flammarion, 2006). Kinross, Robin, Modern Typography: An Essay in Critical History (London: Hyphen Press, 1994). Kirkham, Pat, ed, Women Designers in the USA, 1900-2000: Diversity and Difference (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000). Kruft, Hanno-Walter; transl Ronald Taylor, Elsie Callander, and Antony Wood, A History of Architectural Theory: From Vitruvius to the Present (London: Zwemmer, 1994). Livingston, Alan, and Isabella Livingston The Thames & Hudson Dictionary of Graphic Design (London: Thames & Hudson, 1992) Lupton, Ellen, Thinking with Type: A Critical Guide for Designers, Writers, and Editors (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2004). Lupton, Ellen, and J. Abbot Miller, Design, Writing, Research: Writing on Graphic Design (New York: Kiosk; distributed by Princeton Architectural Press, 1996). Macmillan, Neil, A-Z of Type Designers (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006). Marchand, Roland, Creating the Corporate Soul: T'he Rise of Public Relations and Corporate Imagery in American Big Business (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001). Marcus, George H., Masters of Modern Design: A Critical Assessment (New York: Monacelli 2005). Margolin, Victor, ed, Design Discourse: History, Theory, Criticism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989). McQuiston, Liz, and Barry Kitts, Graphic Design Source Book (London: Macdonald Orbis, 1987). Meggs, Philip B., Type and Image: The Language of Graphic Design (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1989) Meggs, Philip B., and Alston W. Purvis, Meggs History of Graphic Design, 4th ed (Hoboken, NJ: J. Wiley & Sons, 2006) Museum of Design Zurich and Angela Sachs, Global Design International Perspectives and Individual Concepts, Exh Cat (Baden: Lars Müller, 2010). Paul, Ned, and Drew Sternberger, By its Cover: Modern American Book Cover Design (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2005). Perfect, Christopher, Rookledge's Classic International Type Finder: The Essential Handbook of Typeface Recognition (London: Laurence King, 2004). Petersen, Robert, Comics, Manga, and Graphic Novels: A History of Graphic Narratives (Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger, 2010). Purvis, Alston W., and Martijn F. Le Coultre, Graphic Design 20th Century (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2003). Reyes, Jesse Marinoff, Next: The New Generation in Graphic Design (Cincinnati, OH: North Light Books, 2000). Rickards, Maurice, Banned Posters (Park Ridge, NJ: Noyes Press, 1972). Shaughnessy, Adrian, How to be a Graphic Designer, without Losing your Soul (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2005). Sivulka, Juliann, Soap, Sex, and Cigarettes: A Cultural History of American Advertising (Florence, KY: Wadsworth, 1997). Swanson, Gunnar, ed, Graphic Design and Reading: Explorations of an Uneasy Relationship (New York: Allworth Press, 2000). Thompson, Bradbury, The Art of Graphic Design (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1988). Thomson, Ellen Mazur, American Graphic Design: A Guide to the Literature (Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 1992). Triggs, Teal, Fanzines the DIY Revolution (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2010). Tufte, Edward, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information (Cheshire, CT: Graphic Press, 1983). Tufte, Edward, Envisioning Information (Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press, 1990). Tufte, Edward, Visual Explanations. Images and Quantities, Evidence and Narrative (Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press, 1997). Twemlow, Alice, What is Graphic Design for? (East Sussex: Rotovision, 2006). Tyson, Lois, Critical Theory Today: A User Friendly Guide (New York: Routledge, 2006). Vervliet, Hendrik D.L., ed, The Book Through Five Thousand Years (London: Phaidon, 1972). Waggoner, Diane, ed, "The Beauty of Life": Wiliam Mo Lndon: Thames & Hudson, 2003). on Typography (Cleveland: World Pubisers. 1956). Weill, Alain, Graphic Design: A History (New York: Abrams, 2004). Williams, Raymond, Problems in Materialism and Culture: Selected Essays (London: New Left Books, 1980). Wlassikoff, Michel, Paris, City of Graphic Deign (Corte Madera, CA: Gingko Press, 2005 --, ←νν}. Wlassikoff, Michel, The Story f Graphic Deign in France (Corte Madera, CA: Gingko, 2006). Wrede, Stuart, Modern Poster (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1988). Zapf, Hermann, Manuale Typographicum: 100 Typographical Arrangements with Considerations about Types, Typography and the Art of Printing Selected from Past and Present, Printed in Eighteen Languages (Frankfurt: Z-Presse, 1968). ## Introduction Bain, Peter, and Paul Shaw, eds, Blackletter: Type and National Identity (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1998). Bartram, Alan, Five Hundred Years of Book Design (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2001). Benton, Josiah H., John Baskerville: Type founder and Printer, 1706–1775 (Bristol: Nico Editions, 1998). Carter, Harry Graham, Fell Types; What Has Been Done in and about them (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1968). Chappell, Warren, Short History of the Printea Word (New York: Knopf, 1970). 1 Ing, Janet Thompson, Johann Gutenberg anu his Bible: A Historical Study (New York: Typophiles, 1988). . 1 Din nf Lowry, Martin, Nicholas Jenson and the Ku Venetian Publishing in Renaissance Europ (Oxford: Blackwell, 1991). Loxley, Simon, Type: The Secret Hister of L (London: I.B. Tauris, 2004). -11150- Morison, Stanley, The Typographu Dww 1935(Chicago: University of Chicag Pr 1963). 1903). n.. Pettegree, Andrew, The Book in the Rentissant (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2010). Thorpe, James Ernest, The Gutenberg Bible: Landmark in Learning (San Marino, CA: Huntington Library, 1999). Vervliet, Hendrik D.L., French Renaissance Printing Types A Conspectus (New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2010). ## Chapter 1 Appelbaum, Stanley, ed, Scenes from the 19th-century Stage in Advertising Woodcuts (New York: Dover, 1977). Coote, Stephen, William Morris: His Life and Work (Stroud: Alan Sutton, 1996). Dougharty, Katharine, Charles Harvard Gibbs-Smith, and John Frederick Physick, The History of the Victoria and Albert Museum (London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1976). Ferry, Kathryn, "Printing the Alhambra: Owen Jones and Chromolithography," Architectural History, vol. 46 (2003), pp. 175–188. Gere, Charlotte, and Michael Whiteway, Nineteenth-century Design: From Pugin to Mackintosh (New York: Abrams, 1994). Hearn, M.F., ed, The Architectural Theory of Viollet-le-Duc: Readings and Commentary (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990). Hutchings, Frederick, The Impact of William Morris (Toronto: Copp Clark, 1968). Gloag, John, intro, Crystal Palace Exhibition; Illustrated Catalogue, London 1851—An Unabridged Republication of the Art-journal Special Issue (New York: Dover, 1970). Jay, Ricky, Extraordinary Exhibitions: The Wonderful Remains of an Enormous Head, the Whimsiphusicon Death to the Savage Unitarians; Broadsides from the Collection of Ricky Jay (New York: Quantuck Lane Press, 2005). Jones, Owen, The Grammar of Ornament (London: B. Quaritch, 1868). Kaufmann, Edgar, Jr, "Nineteenth-century Design," Perspecta, vol. 6 (1960), pp. 56–67. Kriegel, Lara, Grand Designs: Labor, Empire, and the Museum in Victorian Culture (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007). Landow, George, The Aesthetic and Critical Theories of John Ruskin (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1971). Leathlean, Howard, "The Archaeology of the Art Director? Some Examples of Art Direction in Mid-nineteenth-century British Publishing," Journal of Design History, vol. 6, no. 4 (1993), pp. 229–245 LeBeau, Bryan F., Currier Ives: America Imagined (Washington, DC: Smithsonian, 2001). Marien, Mary Warner, Photography: A Cultural History, 3rd ed (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2010). Mayor, A. Hyatt, Popular Prints of the Americas (New York: Crown, 1973). McKean, John, Crystal Palace: Joseph Paxton and Charles Fox (London: Phaidon, 1994). McLean, Ruari, Victorian Book Design and Colour Printing (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972). Naylor, Gillian, The Arts and Crafts Movement: A Study of its Sources, Ideals, and Influence on Design Theory (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1980). Needham, Paul, William Morris and the Art of the Book (New York: Pierpont Morgan Library, 1976). Pevsner, Nicholas, High Victorian Design—A Study of the Exhibits of 1851 (London: Architectural Press, 1951) Pugin, Augustus W.N., Gothic Ornaments, Selected from Various Ancient Buildings, both in England and France, during the Years 1828, 1829, and 1830 (London: H.G. Bohn, 1840). Pugin, Augustus W.N., The True Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture: Set Forth in Two Lectures Delivered at St Marie's, Oscott (London: J. Weale, 1841). Siegel, Elizabeth, Playing with Pictures: The Art of Victorian Photocollage (Chicago: Art Institute of Chicago, 2009). Thomas, Julia, Pictorial Victorians: The Inscription of Values in Word and Image (Athens, OH: Ohio University Press, 2004). Thomson, Ellen Mazur, Origins of Grapnıc Design in America, 1870–1920 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1997). Vries, Leonard de, and Ilonka van ssı, Wonderful World of American Advertisements, 1865–1900 (London: John Murray Publishers, 1973). OUChistanhe Whiteway, Michael, Shock of we m. .. Dresser's Design Revolution, Exh Cat (London: V&A Publications, 2004). ## Chapter 2 Anderson, Stanford, Peter Behrens and a New Architecture for the Twentieth Century (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000). Arwas, Victor, Berthon and Grasset (New York: Rizzoli, 1978). Aynsley, Jeremy, Designing Modern Germany (London: Reaktion Books, 2009). Beardsley, Aubrey, Le Morte d'Arthur: Selected Illustrations (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2001). Brandstätter, Christian, Wiener Werkstätte: Design in Vienna, 1903–1932: Architecture, Furniture, Commercial Art, Postcards, Bookbinding, Posters, Glass, Ceramics, Metal, Fashion, Textiles, Accessories, Jewelry (New York: Abrams, 2003). Calloway, Stephen, Aubrey Beardsley (New York: Abrams, 1998). Calloway, Stephen, ed, The House of Liberty: Masters of Style and Decoration (London: Thames & Hudson, 1992). Campbell, Colin, Beggarstaff Posters: The Work of James Pryde and William Nicholson (New York: Abbeville Press, 1993). Chipp, Herschel, Jugendstil and Expressionism in German Posters (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1965). Crawford, Alan, Charles Rennie Mackintosh (London: Thames & Hudson, 1995). Denscher, Bernhard, Österreichische Plakatkunst, 1898–1938 (Vienna: Brandstätter, 1992). Duncan, Alastair, Art Nouveau (London: Thames & Hudson, 1994). Forster-Hahn, Françoise, ed, Imagining Modern German Culture, 1889–1910 (Washington, DC: National Gallery of Art, 1996). Gillon, Edmund Vincent, Art Nouveau: An Anthology of Design and Illustration from the Studio (New York: Dover Publications, 1969). Greenhalgh, Paul, Essential Art Nouveau (London: V&A Publications, 2000). Hiesinger, Kathryn Bloom, Art Nouveau in Munich: Masters of the Jugendstil from the Stadtmuseum, Munich, and other Public and Private Collections (Philadelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Ar, 1988). Jackson, Anna, Japanese Textiles in tpe vuwru and Albert Museum (London: V&A Publications, 2000). C. : da Doriad Srles: 400 Years of British Art and Design (London: V&A Publications, 2002). Kaplan, Wendy, ed, Charles Rennie Mackintosh (New York: Abbeville Press, 1996). Lambourne, Lionel, Japonisme: Cultural Crossings between Japan and the West (London: Phaidon, 2005). Mackintosh, Alastair, Symbolism and Art Nouveau (London: Thames & Hudson, 1975). Meech, Julia, and Gabriel Weisberg, Japonisme Comes to America: The Graphic Arts 1876-1925 (New York: H.N. Abrams in association with the Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum, Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, 1990). Murray-Robertson, Anne, Grasset: Pionnier de l'Art Nouveau (Paris: Bibliothèque des Arts, 1981). Museen der Stadt Wien, Ver Sacrum: Die Zeitschrift der Wiener Secession, 1898-1903 (Vienna: Museen der Stadt Wien, 1982). Reade, Brian, Art Nouveau and Alphonse Mucha, 2nd ed (London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1967). Rennhofer, Maria, Koloman Moser: Master of Viennese Modernism (London: Thames & Hudson, 2002). Schwartz, Frederick J., The Werkbund: Design Theory and Mass Culture before the First World War (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1996). Selz, Peter, and Mildred Constantine, eds, Art Nouveau; Art and Design at the Turn of the Century (New York: Museum of Modern Art, by Arno Press,1972). Sturgis, Matthew, Aubrey Beardsley: A Biography (Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press, 1998). Timmers, Margaret, ed, The Power of the Poster (London: V&A Publications, 2003). Varnedoe, Kirk, Vienna 1900: Art, Architecture, and Design (New York: Museum ofModern Art, 1986). Weisberg, Gabriel P., Art Nouveau Bing Paris Style 1900 (New York: Abrams, 1996). Weisberg, Gabriel, Edwin Becker, and Évelyne Possémé, eds, The Origins of L'Art Neuveau: The Bing Empire (Amsterdam: Van Gogh Museum; Paris: Musée des arts décoratifs; Antwerp: Mercatorfonds, 2004). Windsor, Alan Peter, Behrens, Architect and Designer (New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1981). Chapter 3 Ades, Dawn, The Dada Reader: A Critical Anthology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006). Aulich, James, War Posters: Weapons of Mass Communication (London: Thames & Hudson, 2007). Aynsley, Jeremy, Graphic Design in Germany: 1890–1945 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000). Barr, Alfred H., Jr, ed, Fantastic Art, Dada, Surrealism (New York: Museum of Modern Aπt, 1936). Dachy, Marc, Dada: The Revolt of Art (New York: Abrams, 2006). Greenberg, Allan C., Artists and Revolution: Dada and the Bauhaus, 1917–1925 (Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1979). Huelsenbeck, Richard, Memoirs of a Dada Drummer (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991). Huelsenbeck, Richard, ed, The Dada Almanac (London: Atlas Press, 1993). Motherwell, Robert, The Dada Painters and Poets: An Anthology, 2nd ed (Boston, MA: G.K. Hall, 1981). Paret, Peter, and Beth Irwin Lewis, Persuasive Images: Posters of War and Revolution from the Hoover Institution Archives (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992). ## Chapter 4 Arwas, Victor, Art Deco (New York: St Martin's Press, 1976). Bownes, David, and Oliver Green, eds, London Transport Posters—A Century of Art and Design (London: Lund Humphries, 2008). Cassandre, A.M., The Poster Art of A.M. Cassandre (New York: Dutton, 1979). Copley, Frederick S., Art Deco Alphabets: A Treasury of Original Alphabets from the 1920s and 1930s (Pittstown, NJ: Main Street Press, 1985). D'Harnoncourt, Anne, Futurism and the International Avant-garde (Philadelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Art, 1980). Delhaye, Jean, Art Deco Posters and Graphics (London: Academy Editions, 1977). Drucker, Johanna, Visible Word: Experimental Typography and Modern Art, 1909–1923 hcago: University of Chicago Press, 1994). Duncan, Alastair, Modernism: Modernist Design, 1880–1940: The Norwest Collection (Woodbridge, Suffolk: Antique Collectors' Club, 1998). Garland, Ken, Mr Beck's Underground Map (Harrow, Middlesex: Capital Transport Publishing, 1994). Green, Oliver, Underground Art: London Transport Posters 1908 to the Present (London: Laurence King, 2001). Haworth-Booth, Mark, Edward McKnight Kauffer: A Designer and his Public (New York: Abrams, 2005). Howes, Justin, Johnston's Underground Type (Harrow, Middlesex: Capital Transport Publishing, 2000). Humphreys, Richard, Futurism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999). Kery, Patricia Frantz, Art Deco Graphics (New York: Abrams, 1986). Kozloff, Max, Cubism/Futurism (New York: Charterhouse, 1973). Lattarulo, Leonardo, "Biblioteca nazionale centrale di Roma, and Ministero per i beni culturali e ambientali," Edizioni Elettriche: La Rivoluzione Editoriale e Tipografica del Futurismo (Rome: De Luca, 1995). Lupton, Ellen, and Elaine Lustig Cohen, Letters from the Avant-garde: Modern Graphic Design (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996). Mouron, Henri, Cassandre (London: Thames & Hudson, 1985). Perloff, Marjorie, The Futurist Moment: Avantgarde, Avant Guerre, and the Language of Rupture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003). Silver, Kenneth E., Esprit de Corps: The Art of the Parisian Avant-garde and the First World War, 1914–1925 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989). Weisenfeld, Gennifer, Selling Shiseido (MIT Visualizing Culture, 2009). http://ocw.mit. edu/ans7870/21 f/21f.027/shiseido\_01/ index.html ## Chapter 5 Ades, Dawn, Posters: The 20th-century Poster: Design of the Avant-garde (New York: Abbeville P’ress, 1990). Arp, Hans, and El Lissitzky, eds, The Isms of Art (Zurich: Eugen Rentsch, 1925). Ash, Jared, et al, The Russian Avant-garde Book 1910–1934 (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2002). Blotkamp, Carel, De Stijl: The Formative Years, 1917–1922 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986). Bojko, Szymon, New Graphic Design in Revolutionary Russia (New York: Praeger, 1972). Chernevich, Elena, et al, Russian Graphic Design, 1880–1917 (New York: Abbeville Press, 1990). Cooke, Catherine, ed, Russian Avant-garde Art and Architecture (New York: St Martin's Press, 1983). Dabrowski, Magdalena, Leah Dickerman, and Peter Galassi, Aleksandr Rodchenko (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1998). Dickerman, Leah, Building the Collective: Soviet Graphic Design, 1917–1937: Selections from the Merrill C. Berman Collection (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996). Doig, Allan, Theo Van Doesburg: Painting into Architecture, Theory into Practice (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986). El Lissitzky, Monuments of the Future: Designs by El Lissitzky (Los Angeles: Getty Research Institute, 1998). Fabre, Gladys, and Doris Wintgens Hötte, Van Doesburg and the International Avant-garde: Constructing a New World (London: Tate Modern, 2010). Friedman, Mildred S., ed, De Stijl, 1917–1931: Visions of Utopia (New York: Abbeville Press, 1989). Jaffé, Hans L.C., De Stijl: Extracts from the Magazine (London: Thames & Hudson, 1970). affé, Hans L.C., De Stijl, 1917–1931: Visions of Utopia (Minneapolis, MN: Walker Art Center, 1982). Lissitzky-Kuppers, Sophie, El Lissitzky: Life, Letters, Texts (London: Thames & Hudson, 1980). Lodder, Christina, Russian Constructivism (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1983). Margolin, Victor, The Struggle for Utopia: Rodchenko, Lissitzky, Moholy-Nagy, 1917–1946 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997). Milner, John, Vladimir Tatlin and the Russian Avant-garde (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 198² ,170). Mount, Christopher, Stenberg Brothers: Constructing a Revolution in Soviet Design (New York: Museum of Modern Art and Abrams, 1997). Perloff, Nancy, Monuments of the Future: Designs by El Lissitzky (Los Angeles: Getty Research Institute, 1998). Perloff, Nancy, and Brian Reed, eds, Situating El Lissitzky: Vitebsk, Berlin, Moscow (Los Angeles: Getty Research Institue oon msuute, 2005). Petric, Vlada, Constructivism in Film: The Man with the Movie Camera: A Cinematic Analysis (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987). Purvis, Alston W., Dutch Graphic Design, 1918– 1945 (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1992). Purvis, Alston W., H.N. Werkman (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004). Purvis, Alston, and Cees W. de Jong, Dutch Graphic Design: A Century of Innovation (London: Thames & Hudson, 2006). Rothschild, Deborah, Ellen Lupton, and Darra Goldstein, Graphic Design in the Mechanical Age: Selections from the Merrill C. Berman Collection (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998). Typitsyn, Margarita, with contributions by Matthew Drutt and Ulrich Pohlmann, El Lissitzky: Beyond the Abstract Cabinet: Photography, Design, Collaboration (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1999). White, Stephen, Bolshevik Poster (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1988). Wye, Deborah, and Margit Rowell, Russian Avant-garde Books, 1910–1934 (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2002). ## Chapter 6 Bartram, Alan, Bauhaus, Modernism, and the Illustrated Book (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004). Benson, Timothy O., Expressionus wp. Paradise, Metropolis, Architectural Fantasy (Los Angeles: Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 1993). Borchardt-Hume, Achim, ed, Auers um Moholy-Nagy—From the Bauhaus to the New World (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006). Burke, Christopher, Paul Renner: The Art of Typography (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1998) Burke, Christopher, Active Literature: Jan Tschichold and New Typography (London: Hyphen, 2007). Cohen, Arthur Allen, Herbert Bayer: The Complete Work (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984). Ehrlich, Frederic, The New Typography and Modern Layouts (New York: Frederick A. Stokes, 1934). James-Chakraborty, Kathleen, ed, Bauhaus Culture: From Weimar to the Cold War (Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota University Press, 2006). Kostelanetz, Richard, ed, Moholy-Nagy: An Anthology (New York: Da Capo Press, 1991). Lupton, Ellen, and J. Abbott Miller, eds, The ABCs of [Triangle Square Circle]: The Bauhaus and Design Theory (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1991). Mansbach, Steven A., Visions of Totality: László Moholy-Nagy, Theo Van Doesburg, and El Lissitzky (Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1980). McLean, Ruari, Jan Tschichold: Typographer (Boston: D.R. Godine, 1975). McLean, Ruari, Jan Tschichold: A Life in Typography (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1997). Moholy-Nagy, László, Painting, Photography, Film (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969). Moholy-Nagy, Sibyl, Moholy-Nagy: Experiment in Totality (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969). Passuth, Krisztina, Moholy-Nagy (London: Thames & Hudson, 1987). Pevsner, Nikolaus, Pioneers of the Modern Movement from William Morris to Walter Gropius (London: Faber & Faber, 1936). Rowland, Anna, Bauhaus Source Book (INew York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1990). Scheidig, Walther, Crafts of the Weimar pausaw, 1919-1924: An Early Experiment in Industrial Design (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1967). Schuldenfrei, Robin, and Jeffrey Saletnık, eds, Bauhaus Construct FashioningIdentity Discourse and Modernism (London: Routledge, 2009). Sharp, Dennis, Baubaus, Dessau: Walter Gropius (London: Phaidon, 1993). Spencer, Herbert, Pioneers of Modern Typography (London: Lund Humphries, 1969). Tschichold, Jan, Asymmetric Typography (London: Faber & Faber, 1967). Tschichold, Jan, New Typography: A Handbook for Modern Designers, transl Ruari McLean, with intro by Robin Kinross (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995). Wingler, Hans Maria, Das Bauhaus: 1919–1933: Weimar, Dessau, Berlin und die Nachfolge in Chicago seit 1937 (Bramsche: Gebr. Rasch Publishers, 1962). ## Chapter 7 Barr, Alfred H., Jr, Cubism and Abstract Art (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1936). Barron, Stephanie, ed, Degenerate Art: The Fate of the Avant-garde in Nazi Germany (New York: Abrams, 1991). Bayer, Herbert, ed (with Walter Gropius and Ise Gropius), Bauhaus, 1919–1928 (New York: Museum of Modern Ar, 1938). Chanzit, Gwen Finkel, From Bauhaus to Aspen: Herbert Bayer and Modernist Design in America (Boulder, CO: Johnson Books, 2005). Constantine, Mildred, and Alan Maxwell Fern, Word and Image: Posters from the Collection of the Museum of Modern Art (New York: New York Graphic Society, 1968). Crowley, David, Posters of the Cold War (London: V&A Publications, 2008). DeNoon, Christopher, Posters of the WPA (Los Angeles: Wheatley Press, with the University of Washington Press, 1987). Ellis, Estelle, Cipe Pineles Golden, and Carol Burtin Fripp, Cipe Pineles: Two Remembrances (Rochester, NY: RIT, Cary Graphic Arts Press, 2005). Friedman, Mildred S., et al, Graphic Design in America: A Visual Language History (Minneapolis, MN: Walker Art Center 1989). Grundberg, Andy, Brodovitch (New York: Abrams, 1989). Heller, Steven, Iron Fists: Branding the 20th-century Totalitarian State (London: Phaidon, 2008). Heller, Steven, and Louise Fili, Streamline: American Art Deco Graphic Design (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1995). Heller, Steven, and Louise Fili, Cover Story: The Art of American Magazine Covers, 1900–1950 (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1996). Hitchcock, Henry-Russell, and Philip Johnson, The International Style (New York: W.W. Norton, 1966). Lesser, Robert, Pulp Art: Original Cover Paintings for the Great American Pulp Magazines (Edison, NJ: Castle Books, 2003). Marchand, Roland, Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity, 1920–1940 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986). Pachnicke, Peter, and Klaus Honnef, eds, John Heartfield (New York: Abrams, 1992). Remington, R. Roger, American Modernism: Graphic Design, 1920–1960 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2003). Remington, R. Roger, Lester Beall: Space, Time, and Content (Rochester, NY: RIT, Cary Graphic Arts Press, 2003). Remington, R. Roger, Will Burtin: The Display of Visual Knowledge, Graphic Design Archives Chapbook Series (Rochester, NY: RIT, Cary Graphic Arts Press, 2009). Remington, R. Roger, Will Burtin, and Robert S.P. Fripp. Design and Science: The Life and Work of Will Burtin (Aldershot, Hampshire: Lund Humphries, 2007). Remington, R. Roger, and Barbara Hodik, Nine Pioneers in American Graphic Design (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1989). Scotford, Martha, Cipe Pineles: A Life of Design (New York: W.W. Norton, 1998). Thompson, Bradbury, The Art of Graphic Design (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1988). ## Chapter 8 Aicher, Otl, Typographie (Berlin: Ernst Lüdenscheid, 1989). Berry, John, ed, Uélc: Influencing Design and Typography (New York: Mark Batty, 2005) Chermayeff, Ivan, and Geismar, Thomas H., Watching Words Move (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2006). Conradi, Jan, Unimark International: The Design of Business and the Business of Design (Baden: Lars Müller, 2009). Drew, Ned, et al, Purity of Aim: T'he Book Jackets of Alvin Lustig (Rochester, NY: RIT Cary Graphic Arts Press, 2010). Fletcher, Alan, Graphic Design: Visual Comparisons (New York: Reinhold, 1964) Fletcher, Alan, Colin Forbes, and Bob Gill, Graphic Design. Vergleiche, Beispiele Kommentare (Ravensburg: Maier, 1968) -1 Gerstner, Karl, and Kutter, Markus, The New Graphic Art (Teufen: Arthur Niggli, 1959) Harris, Neil, et al, Art, Design, and the Modern Corporation: The Collection of Container Corporation of America (Washington, DC: National Museum of American Aπt, 1986) Heller, Steven, Paul Rand (New York: Phaidon, 1999). Hollis, Richard, Swiss Graphic Design: The Origins and Growth of an International Style 1920–1965 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006). Hustwit, Gary, Helvetica, documentary film (Swiss Dots production, 2007). Janser, Andres, and Junod, Barbara, eds, Corporate Diversity: Swiss Graphic Design and Advertising by Geigy, 1940–1970 (Baden: Lars Müller, 2009). Johnson, Philip, et al, The Architecture of Philip Johnson (Boston: Bulfinch Press, 2002). Kirkham, Pat, Saul Bass (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007). Lavin, Maud, Clean New World: Culture, Politics and Graphic Design (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001). Meggs, Philip B., Six Chapters in Design: Saul Bass, Ivan Chermayeff, Milton Glaser, Paul Rand, Ikko Tanaka, Henryk Tomaszewski (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1997). Müller, Lars, and Malsy, Victors, eds, Helvetica Forever (Baden: Lars Müller, 2008). Müller-Brockmann, Josef, Grid Systems (New York: Hastings House, 1981). Müller-Brockmann, Josef, The Graphic Designer and his Design Problems (New York: Hastings House, 1983). Müller-Brockmann, Josef, Josef Müller Brockmann, Designer: A Pioneer of Swiss Graphic Design (Baden: Lars Müller, 1995). Museum of Design Zurich, Paradise Switzerland Exh Cat (Baden: Lars Müller, 2010). Nunoo-Quarcoo, Franc, Paul Rand: Modernis Design (New York: Distributed Art Publishers, 2003). Pentagram Design, Living by Design: The Partners of Pentagram (New York: W'hitncy Library of Design, 1979). Poynor, Rick, Typographica (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2002). Purcell, Kerry William, Josef Müller Brockmann (London: Phaidon Press, 2006). Rand, Paul, Paul Rand: A Designer's Art (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2001). Ruder, Emil, Typographie (New York: Hastings House, 1981). Shaw, Paul, Helvetica and the New York City Subway System: The True (Maybe) Story (New York: Blue Pencil Editions, 2010). Spencer, Herbert, The Liberated Page: A "Typographica" A nthology (San Francisco: Bedford Press, 1987). ## Chapter 9 Barthes, Roland, Mythologies (New York: Hill & Wang, 1972). Barthes, Roland, Image Music Text (New York: Hill & Wang, 1978). Baudrillard, Jean, Simulations (New York: Semiotext(e), 1983). Best, Steven, and Douglas Kellner, Postmodern Theory Critical Interrogations (New York: Guilford, 1991). Bicknell, Julian, and Liz McQuiston, eds, Design for Need: The Social Contribution of Design: An Anthology of Papers Presented to the Symposium at the Royal College of Art, London, April, 1976 (Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1977). Brody, Neville, and Lewis Blackwell, G1: New Dimensions in Graphic Design (New York: Rizzoli, 1996). Chwast, Seymour, The Left-handed Designer (New York: Abrams, and London: Booth-Clibborn Editions, 1985). Chwast, Seymour, Push Pin Graphic: A Quarter Century of Innovative Design and Illustration (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2004). Debord, Guy, The Society of the Spectacle (Detroit: Black & Red, 2000). DeKoven, Marianne, Utopia Limited: The Sixties and the Emergence of the Postmodern (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2004). Derrida, Jacques, Of Grammatology (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998). Fella, Edward, Edward Fella—Letters on America (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2000). Fletcher, Alan, The Art of Looking Sideways (London: Phaidon, 2001). Foster, Hal, ed, Anti-Aesthetic: Essays on Postmodern Culture (Seattle: Bay Press, 1983). Frank, Thomas, The Conquest of Cool: Business Culture, Counterculture, and the Rise of Hip Consumerism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997). Friedman, Dan, Dan Friedman: Radical Modernism (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994). Glaser, Milton, Milton Glaser: Graphic Design (Woodstock, NY: The Overlook Press, 1973). Glaser, Milton, Graphic Design (New York: Overlook Press, 1976). Glaser, Milton, Art Is Work: [Graphic Design Interiors, Objects, and Illustrations] (New York: Overlook Press, 2000). Gottschall, Edward M., and Aaron Burns, Typographic Communications Today (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989). Gottschall, Edward M., and Aaron Burns, Graphic Design and Typography in the Netherlands: A View of Recent Work (New York: Herb Lubalin Study Center of Design and Typography; Cooper Union, and Princeton Architectural Press, 1992). Greiman, April, Hybrid Imagery: The Fusion of Technology and Graphic Design (New York: Watson-Guptill, 1990). Grushkin, Paul, The Art of Rock: Posters from Presley to Punk (New York: Abbeville, 1987). Hall, Peter, and Michael Bierut, eds, Tibor Kalman, Perverse Optimist (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1998). Harper, Laurel, Radical Graphics / Graphic Radicals (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1999). Jameson, Fredric, Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1990). Jubert, Roxane, et al, Massin et le livre: La Typographie en Jeu (Paris: Archibooks, 2007). King, Emily, Robert Brownjohn: Sex ana Typography: 1925–1970, Life and Work (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2005). Kruger, Barbara, Ann Goldstein, and Kosaryn Deutsche, Barbara Kruger (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999). Labuz, Ronald, The Computer in Graphic Design: From Technology to Style (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993). Lupton, Ellen, Mixing Messages: Contemporary Graphic Design in America (New York: Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum, Smithsonian Institution, and Thames & Hudson, 1996). Marcus, Greil, Lipstick Traces: A Secret History of the Twentieth Century (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990). Massin, Robert, Letter and Image, transI Caroline Hillier and Vivienne Menkes (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970). Massin, Robert, Catalogue Raisonné de l'oeuvre typographique de Massin (Chartres: Ville de Chartres, 1998). McCoy, Katherine, and Michael McCoy, eds, Cranbrook Design: The New Discourse (New York: Rizzoli International, 1990). McLuhan, Marshall, The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1962). McLuhan, Marshall, and Quentin Fiore, The Medium is the Massage: An Inventory of Effects (New York: Bantam Books, 1967). McQuiston, Liz, Graphic Agitation: Social and Political Graphics since the Sixties (London: Phaidon, 1995). McQuiston, Liz, Suffragettes to She-devils: Women's Liberation and Beyond (London: Phaidon, 1997). Moscoso, Victor, Sex, Rock and Optical Illusions (Woodacre, CA: Electric City, 2002). Pentagram Design, The Compendium: Thoughts, Essays and Work from the Pentagram Partners in London, New York and San Francisco (London: Phaidon, 1993). Plant, Sadie, The Most Radical Gesture: The Situationist International in a Postmodern Age (London: Routledge, 1992). Poynor, Rick, ed, Communicate: Independent British Graphic Design since the Sixties (New Haven, CT: Yale UniversityPress, 2004). Poynor, Rick, Jan Van Toorn: Critical Practice (Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 2008). Reid, Jamie, and Jon Savage, Up they Rise! Incomplete Works of Jamie Reid (London Faber, 1987). Resnick, Elizabeth, ed, The Grapbic Imperative: International Posters for Peace,Social Justice and the Environment, 1965–2005 (Boston: Massachusetts College of Art, 2005). Ross, Kristin, May '68 and its Afterlives (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002). Sabin, Roger, ed, Punk Rock, So Wbat?: The Cultural Legacy of Punk (Hove, East Sussex: Psychology Press, 1999). Scher, Paula, Make it Bigger (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2005). Snyder, Gertrude, and Peckolick, Alan, Herb Lubalin: Art Director, Graphic Designer and Typographer (New York: American Showcase, 1985). VanderLans, Rudy, and Licko, Zuzana, Emigré: Graphic Design into the Digital Realm (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993). VanderLans, Rudy, et al, If we're Standing on the Shoulders of Giants, What are we Reaching for? (Sacramento, CA: Émigré; and New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2003). Venturi, Robert, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour, Learning from Las Vegas: The Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1977). Weingart, Wolfgang, Typography (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2000). Wolff, Laetitia, and Robert Massin, Massin (London: Phaidon, 2007). Wozencroft, Jon, Brody: The Graphic Language of Neville Brody (Eastbourne, East Sussex: Gardners Books, 1988). ## Chapter 10 Barnbrook, Jonathan, Barnbrook Bible: The Graphic Design of Jonathan Barnbrook(New York: Rizzoli, 2007). Bellantoni, Jeff, and Matt Woolman, Type in Motion: Innovations in Digital Graphics (New York: Rizzoli, 1999). Blackwell, Lewis, and David Carson, The End of Print: The Graphic Design of David Carson (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1995). Caban, Geoffrey, World Graphic Design: Contemporary Graphics from Africa, the Far East, Latin America, and the Middle East (New York: Merrell, 2004). Design Museum, Web Wizards: Designers who Define the Web, Exh, London: November 30, 2001, to April 21, 2002 (http:// designmuseum.org/exhibitions/online/webwizards). Drate, Spencer, and Jutka Salavetz, Extreme Fonts: Digital Faces of the Future (NewYork: Madison Square Press, 1999). Elam, Kimberly, Expressive Typography:The Word as Image (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1990). Ganz, Nicholas, Graffiti World: Street Art from Five Continents (New York: Abrams, 2004). Grushkin, Paul, The Art of Modern Rock—the Poster Explosion (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2004). Helfand, Jessica, and John Maeda, Screen: Essays on Graphic Design, New Media, and Visual Culture (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2001). Heller, Steven, and Véronique Vienne, eds, Citizen Designer: Perspectives on Design Responsibility (New York: Allworth Press, 2003). Hongxing, Zhang, and Lauren Parker, eds, China Design now (London: V&A Publications, 2008). Klein, Naomi, No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Bullies (New York: Picador, 2002). Koyama-Richard, Brigitte, One Thousand Years of Manga (Paris: Flammarion, 2008). Kozak, Gisela, and Julius Wiedemann, Japanese Graphics now! (Cologne: Taschen, 2006). Lasky, Julie, Some People Can't Surf: The Graphic Design of Art Chantry (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2001). Lewisohn, Cedar, Street Art: The Graffiti Revolution (New York: Abrams, 2008). Lucas, Gavin, and Michael Dorrian, Guerilla Advertising Unconventional Brand Communication (London: Laurence King, 2007). Macwilliams, Mark W., ed, Japanese Visual Culture: Explorations in the World of Manga and Anime (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2008). Maeda, John, Maeda @ Media (London: Thames & Hudson, 2000). Maeda, John, The Laws of Simplicity: Design, Technology, Business, Life (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006). Mau, Bruce, Massive Change (London: Phaidon, 2004). McQuiston, Liz, Graphic Agitation 2: Social and Political Graphics in the Digital Age (London: Phaidon, 2004). Meggs, Philip, and Roy McKelvey, eds, Revival of the Fittest: Digital Versions of Clatssic Typefaces (New York: RC Publications, 2000). Minick, Scott, and Jiao Ping, Chinese Graphic Design in the Twentieth Century (L.ondon: Thames & Hudson, 2010). Napier, Susan J., From Impressionism to Anime: Japan as Fantasy and Fan Cult in the Mind of the West (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007). Plunkett, John, and Louis Rossetto, eds, Mind Grenades: Manifestos from the Future (San Francisco: HardWired, 1996). Poynor, Rick, No More Rules: Graphic Design and Postmodernism (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2003). Sweet, Fay, Metadesign: Design from the Word up (New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1999). Thornton, Richard S., Japanese Graphic Design (London: Laurence King, 1991). Tomato, Bareback: A Tomato Project (Corte Madera, CA: Gingko Press, 1999) Triggs, Teal, Type Design: Radical Innovations and Experimentation (New York: Harper Design International, 2003). Re, Margaret, et al, Typographically Speaking: The Art of Matthew Carter (Baltimore, MD: University of Maryland, Baltimore County, 2002). Sagmeister, Stefan, Things I have Learned in my Life so far (New York: Abrams, 2008). Sagmeister, Stefan, and Peter Hall, Sagmeister: : Made you Look (London: Booth-Clibborn Editions, 2001). Saville, Peter, and Emily King, Designed by Peter Saville (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2003). Sherin, Aaris, Sustainable: A Handbook of Materials and Applications for Graphic Designers and their Clients (Beverly, MA: Rockport Publishers, 2008). VanderLans, Rudy, Emigre No. 70: The Look Back Issue: Selections from Emigre Magazine 1–69, 1984–2009 (Corte Madera, CA: Ginko Press, 2009). Velden, Daniel van der, and Vinca Kruk, Uncorporate Identity (Baden: Lars Müller, 2010). Vienne, Véronique, Chip Kidd (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2003). Walker, Rob, Buying In: The Secret Dialogue between Wbat we Buy and Who ue Are (New York: Random House, 2008). Wolfe, Shawn, Uncanny: The Art and Design Shawn Wlfe (Corte Madera, CA: Gingko. 2001).