# Foreword and Acknowledgments A new formula for the re-publication of Muthesius's Das englische Ilaus had to be found, as the production of three separate volumes would have made the whole exercise unviable. 'The first English-language version, which comes out incidentally on the 75th anniversary of its original publication, has been under discussion for many years. In consultation with Professor Sir Nikolaus Pevsner and myself, the publishers agreed to its publication on the basis that it would be a single volume and the text shortened to make it a more manageable - and marketable - proposition. In agreeing to this conclusion and hoping that with thę book produced as one volume it would meet a much wider public, I was, as editor, faced with the problem of what to leave out. Although Muthesius's original text is complex, well-linked and tight, there were two obvious areas for pruning. 'The two most drastic cuts to the original text were in those sequences where Muthesius was dealing with the history of the English house and its interiors. Muthesius's use of historical examples was of course interesting and pointed, but his general historical analysis is well known to anyone acqúainted with the architectural literature on the English house, cf. Gotch and Brown, Eastlake, Statham, Fergusson, Rickman, Gwilt, Kerr and others. Clearly he drew on material from these and other sources, such as Robert Dohme's book Das englische Haus published in Berlin in 1889. What is interesting about his histories is his display of preferences. For example, he disliked the neo-Palladians because they were plagiarists who did not represent cultural achievements' but only provided imitations. Cultural achievement, for Muthesius, was the sine qua non of architecture which, in his words: 'comes through an independent artistic achievement'. He greatly admired the work of Vanbrugh and Kent and the 'true Gothicism of Pugin'. (He shared the belief of Ruskin and Morris that 'salvation must come from the middle ages'.) 'T’he love of medievalism shown in the work of William Morris and in the writings of John Ruskin seems to Muthesius to preface the new free architecture of his champion Shaw and his followers. 'This admiration is clearly expressed in the sections retained for this new version of Das englische Iaus. Where other omissions have been made it is to cut out a few superficialities and to tighten the meaning of the text itself. I trust that these cuts will not appear too drastic for those who have always wished Muthesius to be read in full, but history has indicated that if we wait for that opportunity, then time will take us and Muthesius over. T'he books themselves have had a long and honourable publishing history in Germany. The first two volumes were published by Wasmuth, the Berlin architectural publisher later associated with Frank Lloyd Wright's magnum opus, in 1904 and the last volume in the trilogy issued in 1905, also by Wasmuth. A second edition, on which this single volume is based, was revised and brought up to date and published between 19o8 11. Muthesius himself explains the reasons for this in his introduction to the second edition and also reproduces the original introduetion, outlining the structure of the book. 'There is little point in repeating that information here. However for those readers who wish to refer to the earlier German books it is probably sufficient to record that the following sections from the original versions have been omitted, viz., pp. 11-94 and pp. 210–18 from Volume 1 ; pp. 165–235 from Volume 11 and pp. 1–66 from Volume 11I. All the illustrations have been retained that accompanied those parts of the original German text which are included in this English edition - photographs, drawings and plans. The plans have had their extremely detailed legends converted into English. In laving out this new single-volume edition, the designer has attempted, as have the translator and editor, to respect the original, yet to give it a breath of new life. Julius Posener, who has graced this new edition with an elegant preface, has probably done more for Muthesius and his ideas than any other writer in the English language, yet his accounts have been limited. It would be most appropriate in this new edition also to acknowledge what he has done in Berlin in persuading the Akademie der Künste to create a full exhibition of Muthesius's work, and of course his own personal efforts in conserving many of Muthesius’s villas in Berlin itself. He has kindly supported the whole formidable task of converting Muthesius into English, and although not party to any of the necessary editorial cuts, has given encouragement at all times to the making of this book. I would also gratefully acknowledge the information, advice and help of Herr Eckart Muthesius, Hermann Muthesius's third son; Herr Wolfgang Muthesius; Dr Stefan Muthesius of the University of East Anglia; Herr Eckhard Siepmann of the Werkbund Archive, Berlin; Dr Hans-J. Hubrich, Münster-Wolbeck, who has recently completed a thesis on Muthesius; Dr Friedenthal, London; Mrs W. Dernbach, London and various English friends and colleagues who have specialised over the years in the history of the Arts and Crafts movement, the Werkbund, and what is still loosely called the architecture of the English free school. I am greatly indebted to Mr John Taylor and Miss Charlotte Burri of Lund Humphries Pubłshers Ltd for the great care they have taken over the whole production of this book, for their patience and fastidious attention to detail, and of course to Professor Sir Nikolaus Pevsner, for his initial and continuing encouragement of the idea to have the work published in English. Dennis Sharp Epping Green, Hertford January 1979