# Preface to the first edition Credit for having been the first observer in Germany to draw attention to the cultural importance of the English house must go to R. Dohme. Dohme's treatment in his excellent little book, Das englische Haus (Brunswick 1888), although aphoristic and rather untechnical, provides a clear picture and an acute characterisation of the nature of the English house. Among English books, that of Robert Kerr, The English gentleman's house (1861) at least gives an exhaustive account of what English opinion of the 186os expected of the large country-house. But quite apart from their piecemeal treatment of the material, both books are already out of date, since their authors had not witnessed the enormous increase in house-building in England during the past ten or twenty years. Nor has there been a new book on the subject in England. It is true that a mass of illustrative material in English periodicals dealing with English domestic architecture has reached Germany recently, but since it is scattered and lacks explanatory text, the non-English reader can gain no idea of the subject. Furthermore the illustrations havę usually been reproduced from drawings instead of from photographs, which alone provide a true picture. My longer book, Die englische Baukunst der Gegenwart (Leipzig and Berlin 19o2),-of course, contained many large illustrations of houses from photographs taken specially, but they only appeared with other, mainly public, buildings to form a survey of English architecture as a whole. The idea of writing a book on the English house thrust itself upon me almost from the moment when I began my tour of duty at the Germany Embassy in London seven years ago. It has only been the magnitude of the undertaking that has delayed by years the conclusion of the work I began at that time. My original intention was to deal only with the modern house, that is to say, the type that has developed since about 186o. But because the modern house has simply reverted to historical traditions, without a knowledge of which it would be unintelligible, it became necessary to summarise its whole historical development. Besides, the history of the house is also the history of a culture, and the modern English house engages our attention largely because of the high level of culture it expresses. But only in history can we trace the steps by which the domestiç culture that is so highly evolved today has developed. This has meant that instead of the two parts originally planned, the material has had to be divided into three, the first dealing with the development of the house, the second with the conditions governing it, its planning and building, the third with its interior. Volume I contains the actual historical section\*, which occupies the first half of the volume, in condensed form. But it seemed desirable to describe the development of the present-day form of the English house that began around 186o in greater detail, not only because it proves to be one of the most pleasing manifestations of contemporary culture but also because its successive phases permit us to draw many parallels with the movement now beginning on the continent; indeed, it more or less points the way to this movement. The first main section of Volume 2 contains an account of the geographical, social and all the other conditions governing the English house that are rooted in the life-style of its occupants, and thus seeks to illuminate the connection – so often overlooked - between form and character; I also discuss the extremely important laws of land-tenure and the building laws. A second main section contains a detailed consideration of the layout and all the individual rooms of the larger country-house and its outbuildings as the most highly evolved form of the English house. Similar consideration is given to the small countryhouse; special chapters are devoted to the town and the suburban house. A long chapter describes the garden, which is so extraordinarily important and highly developed in England, together with all its associated terraces, summer-houses, gateways and ornamental beds.\* The third main section of the volume deals with the building of the house in both the constructional and aesthetic sense and discusses technical and sanitary arrangements.\* Volume 3 is entirely devoted to interiors. It contains a historical section† dealing with rooms and furniture from Elizabethan times to the present day, but the main section is devoted to contemporary interiors. Walls, ceilings, floors, windows and doors, fire-places (a detailed section), also furnishing fabrics, wallpapers and modern furniture are all discussed fully; the final section includes a discussion of the special fixtures and furniture of the individual rooms of the English house. Each of the three volumes contains a wealth of illustrative material specially commissioned for the book; there was in fact so much that I had to select the best and most typical. Despite the number of illustrations, the book is not intended to be a picturebook like the pattern-books that currently dominate the booktrade or the series in which, according to one publisher, the text only exists to facilitate the making-up of the plates. The immensely greater ease with which illustrations can 'now be produced brings its own hazards as does the projector at lectures : it may lure one into superficiality. Before all else this book is intended to be read. Today especially, when so many people are beginning to feel the need to retreat from the ever-increasing turmoil of life into the quiet of a home of their own, the conditions of English domestic life become more interesting than ever. Englishmen have a vision of the peacefulness of life, they live as their natural philosophy dictates, governed by no minor considerations, restricted by no social trammels. The Englishman lives only as he does because he believes that it is for the good of his inner self and of his family that he shall make the most of his life and develop his individuality. If we are to give an illuminating account of conditions in England we must widen our scope beyond a bare description of the house; we must describe the conditions that govern it, i.e. English domestic life, its mores and, indeed, the Englishman's whole philosophy of life. This means discussing everything from the English attitude towards nature down to table-manners. The proverbial German hankering after things foreign has today in the case of England generated a reaction which, however welcome it may be from the point of view of national selfawareness, is once again beginning to blunt our perception of what is really good there so that we are failing to make good use of it. For some years now German opinion of England has lurched back and forth between over-estimation and its opposite. Similar vacillations occur in our appraisal of English art. Soon after the new movement in art which originated in England had focussed the attention of the whole world on that country, word went round that England had been overtaken by the new continental movement: a rash judgment that must astonish all who know the circumstances. As though our artistic development were a matter of rivalry and sensation-seeking stunts! For the past forty years events in England have been quietly pursuing their course and continue to do so without quickening their pace. The reflection of this silent development is to be found in the English house. A sound and unostentatious but finely developed taste is so firmly rooted therein that it has now produced an up-to-date national art – a cultural achievement for which England is certainly to be envied. Admittedly there are no startling exhibition-pieces and there is, thank heaven, no trace of art nouveau. Everything breathes simplicity, homeliness and rural freshness, occasionally, indeed, verging on the vernacular. But a fresh breath of naturalness wafts through the house and a sound down-toearth quality is combined with a sure feeling for suitability. What we principally find here is a practical, indigenous and preeminently friendly house; and instead of a sham modernity expressing itself extravagantly in whimsical artificiality we find purely functional, unaffected design that many may already regard as more modern than all the fantastic excesses of a socalled modern style. However, to avoid misunderstandings, let it be said at the outset that the type of house that is considered here is still not entirely general, even in England. England has its full quota of tasteless speculative housing, in the cities whole acres are covered with wretched, absolutely uniform small houses and the urban terrace-houses of the well-to-do often hide behind trivial façades designed without understanding. Indeed, even in the interiors of houses there are still tasteless elements in England as elsewhere. However, it has not been my concern to discover the bad examples but to present the good features of·English housing in the proper light. My remarks therefore cover such houses as are valuable as models, having been built by artists for highly cultivated clients. Though they may appear superfluous in themselves, these explanations have been necessitated mainly by the failure to understand on the part of persons of a certain type who have hastened to counter my occasional remarks with their experiences in low cultural classes in England. Moreover, it must be stressed, first, that the number of modern houses in England that are artistically eligible for consideration is very large, perhaps many hundred times larger than in Germany, so that even twenty years ago they could prompt R. Dohme to write the general survey of architecture that we have mentioned; and second, that the spread of a new artistic culture has after all embraced far wider circles in England than has so far been the case with us. As I have worked on the subject I have tried to present the material in such a way that the book shall also appeal to a wider public, for I believe that in this sphere more can be learnt from the general than the particular. My concern has been less to recommend imitation of the English house or any part of it than to make the thinking behind it accessible to the German reader. If something of its freedom and naturalness should put down deeper roots in Germany, if the numbers of those who are already attempting something similar at home should be increased, I should consider my labours to have been richly rewarded. Sincere thanks are due to my English colleagues for the exceptionally courteous way in which they have helped in the preparation of this book, especially in procuring illustrative material, sometimes at the cost of considerable trouble to themselves. I must also thank all the owners who have allowed me to look over their houses and to photograph them. I cannot omit to mention specially the extraordinary kindness and hospitality that has been shown me and has enabled me to do everything that I wished to do. Especially I owe most heartfelt thanks to my appointed superiors, whose moral support alone enabled me to undertake work on such extensive material. The book forms as it were the summing up of my long years of study in England, for which my official position afforded me such a good opportunity and to which I look back as work that was not only instructive but also pleasurable and enjoyable with the hope that it will not fade away and leave things quite unchanged. Hermann Muthesius Nikolassee near Berlin, March 1904