# Preface to the second edition Barely two years after the completion of the first edition of Das englische Haus a second edition has been called for. It could hardly have been foreseen that so long and, by its very nature, so expensive a book would enjoy such success. The only explanation can be that there is a lively interest in housing problems of all kinds and in the owner-occupied house in particular. After all, an extraordinarily fresh movement has begun during recent years in Germany itself, already with most gratifying results. It will be seen to be a parallel movement to the somewhat earlier English movement, the progress and fruits of which are described in the chapters of this book. Admittedly in many cases we still lack the clear understanding of practical principles which is observable in England and which must be regarded principally as a result of a long tradition of living in detached houses. It will improve in Germany as the habit of living in owner-occupied houses becomes more general and as we gradually turn away from stylistic and other external questions that bedevil our judgment of works of architecture and address ourselves to the heart of the matter. So short.a period has elapsed between the first and second editions that the moment has not seemed ripe for fundamental changes. The text has been revised and brought up to date, but the illustrations remain for the present those of the first edition. If later on further editions should become necessary, the illustrations too would need to be supplemented, if only because in the interval there has been new work in England too and many new houses of exemplary quality have been built. Hermann Muthesius Nikolassee, August 1908 ## Individuality of the English a result of the country being an island A deeper insight into English life confirms what one has heard, that in all its ideas and feelings, in its mores, its philosophies and in its whole outlook on life, England stands apart from the countries of the continent of Europe, that it is a world of its own displaying an individuality of a quite special character in every aspect of culture. Examples of island kingdoms that lie close to the mainland and yet possess a fundamentally different style from it are not uncommon in themselves : one has only to think of Japan and China, Ceylon and India, Venice and Italy. At one and the same time the sea separates the island from its nearest neighbour and links it with the remotest. Separation from its nearest neighbour gives the island its independent development; links with the remotest bring influences from afar which are bound to intensify its individuality. Islanders are formed by the sea, those who live in large continents by the land. Thus England too is something special, different from anything on the mainland of Europe. Even the differences between the Germanic and Latin peoples of the continent, striking though they are, are as nothing compared with the rugged English individuality. The traveller from Germany to France and even to Italy finds basically the same customs and practices, the same political institutions, social and philosophical ideas. But in England at every turn he comes up against differences in every feld. ## Living in private houses On the purely superficial level this difference is nowhere more striking than in the style of living. England is the only advanced country in which the majority of the population still live in houses, a custom that has survived all the political, social and economic changes that European civilisation has undergone in the past hundred and fifty years. Whereas on the continent these changes caused mass migration into the cities, where people became imprisoned in giant multi-storeyed barrack-like blocks, in England, where, indeed, industrial development had started so much earlier, they barely touched the inborn love of country life; on the contrary, the necessity of working in the city appeared to strengthen it. The riches that poured into the country as a result of the new order of things, from commerce, wholesale trade and from the opening-up of vast territories by colonisation, created no spectacular urban developments like those of the continental countries; instead, they streamed into the rural areas, creating dwelling-places for individuals, making them into little separate worlds and concentrating and incorporating all the comforts of life in them. Except for Edinburgh, therefore, which is favoured with a magnificent position, the British Isles have produced no real metropolis in the continental sense; and London itself is no more than an immense village, a vast unplanned and haphazard congeries of houses, with no streets, squares or public buildings of note. To judge by the situation in England, one would be justified in asserting that the Anglo-Saxon race has been denied the gift of building cities: and this demonstrates another well-known element in its character: the inability of the individual to subordinate himself and his belongings to the whole. But this failure is largely a result of the uncommonly highly developed independence of the individual, which means that, as is so often the casé, it is simply the outcome of virtues that have been cultivated too one-sidedly. ## Preference for living in the country The great store that the English still set by owning their home is part of this powerful sense of the individual personality. The Englishman sees the whole of life embodied in his house. Here, in the heart of his family, self-sufficient and feeling no great urge for sociability, pursuing his own interests in virtual isolation, he finds his happiness and his real spiritual comfort. Outside pleasures, the hubhub of the metropolitan streets, a visit to a Bierkeller or a café, are almost hateful to him. This, incidentally, is the reason for the desolate monotony of English cities that every continental has felt, for the hurried and purely commercial dealings in the city streets, for the absence of inviting places where a drink and a rest may be had and which are so highly evolved on the continent. The Englishman hurries up to town for the sole purpose of doing business. In the evening he hastens back to the heart of his family and makes no bones about travelling for up to an hour by railway in order to spend his few hours of leisure as far away as possible from the bustle of the metropolis. In England one does not live' in the city, one merely stavs there. England differs from all the other countries in the world in that even the royal residence is not in the capital, but far awav in the country and the town palace is now used only for overnight stays. All the aristocracy and every well-to-do commoner lives in the country in his well-appointed countryseat, some of them of royal dimensions and most in splendid, though remote and isolated, natural surroundings. These men possess smaller town houses where they stay on visits to the capital and for a brief period during the so-called season, that is, during the spring months. Those whose daily work takes them to the city seek their place of residence as far out as possible in a suburb that has retained its rural appearance and they do not begrudge the sacrifices that this entails. Others who are obliged to live in the city at least rent a coúntry-house in some pleasantly situated village, either for the summer months or for the whole vear, where they regularly spend the time between Saturday and Monday and where they leave their family throughout the warm season. All this indicates a flight from the metropolis and an instinctive urge on the part of each individual to preserve his direct link with nature and to seek his life's contentment nowhere but in his own house. ## Proverbial love of home. Names of houses The Englishman's love of his home has become proverbial. Many common expressions describing $\mathrm { i t } ^ { 1 }$ have also passed into the language of the continental peoples and we univèrsally use the English word for the quality that the Englishman looks for specially in his house, namely comfort', in its English form – for it is as difficult to translate its precise meaning into a foreign language as is that of our German word 'Gemütlichkeit'. Another purely external reflection of the Englishman's love of his house strikes one immediately. This is his habit of giving it a name, which is so general that very few house-owners use the number alone. In itself the number is shorter and more practical but it does suggest a measure of indifference to the house, vhereas a name springs from a special affection. ## The Englishman's sense of independence one of the reasons for living in a house As all national characteristics can be explained in terms of two basic causes - inherited qualities and climatic influences - it would not be difficult to discover a connection between the Anglo-Saxon fondness for living in houses and these two formative forces. But it is certainly not easy to establish which of the present characteristics are inherited and which have simply been acquired through the habitation and its special conditions. Very generally it is probably true to say that throughout the course of its development in England, the Anglo-Saxon.race has displaved one fundamental characteristic: this is its pronounced sense of self-sufficiency and its attendant powerful urge to independence. Both are closely connected with the custom of living in houses, which, moreover, is restricted to England proper, that is, the part of the country that is largely inhabited by Anglo-Saxons, for in Scotland and Ireland most people live in multi-storeyed buildings. The English sense of self-sufficiency has been the cause, for example, of the extraordinarily early political independence for which England is outstanding and the reason for the proliferation of religious sects; it is the key to many striking qualities, such as the Englishman's self-confidence (which, alas, all too often becomes self-satisfaction), his assurance in outward demeanour, the determination and imperturbability with which he pursues his plans, his commonsense and the dislike of abstract brain-work and purely scientific research that goes with it. But it also explains his instinctive urge to be master in his own house, to be able to live a full life there, and there to enjoy the highest degree of personal freedom that our social order permits. This urge is suitably reinforced by the decidedly conservative sense of the Anglo-Saxon, who seems scarcely to recognise the charm of change and finds any alteration in his way of life – such as we experience automatically and all too frequently in our life in multi-storeyed buildings - doubly disturbing. These people ask relatively little of external life, a circumstance which has enabled them to preserve a certain countrified quality in the midst of their great prosperity and helps to make rural life acceptable; and the pronounced lack of sociability which makes the Englishman so different from the continental prevents him from finding anything objectionable in the seclusion of his lonely abode. ## Climatic influences The damp English air and perpetually overcast sky are surely important among the purely climatic influences likely to foster the Englishman's love of his house. Though the climate is temperate and free of extremes it is still unfriendly and the constantly damp-laden air oppresses the spirit. Gathered round the fire in the seclusion of the room, the family seeks refuge and comfort. For there is not the temptation to spend time out of doors that there is in southern countries; nature does not seduce them into idleness in the open air. But oppression of the spirit prompts a definite reaction that anyone who has lived in England will have felt: a desire for physical exercise. Physical exercise is the only lasting antidote to the depressing influence of the English climate. Games have been played in the open air since time immemorial but have recently become a veritable passion and there are the further pleasures of hunting, fishing, walking and cycling, all of which can well be explained as consequences of climatic conditions. The climate forbids a leisurely pause by the wayside even in the streets of the city and precludes those long hours spent idly in the piazza beloved of the southerner and the Parisian's stroll down the boulevard - even supposing the English character were disposed to such enjoyments. Thus the need for physical exercise in the open air itself makes it desirable to live in the country. ## The beauty of nature in England Yet another element that contributes to the English preference for life in the country is the beauty of the English countryside. The extreme moisture of the atmosphere combined with a temperature made mild by the Gulf Stream and even by the fact that the country is an island has produced a luxuriant plant-life unrivalled by any continental country. The damp atmosphere preserves the green in all its lushness until late autumn and prevents dust settling and leaves withering prematurely as they do by high summer on the continent. This is why every English hedgerow, every patch of garden fronting a labourer's cottage looks so uncommonly fresh and clean. Although climatic conditions must always have made nature powerfully attractive, this has been much increased at the present time by the progressive dwindling of agriculture until almost the whole of the countryside has been transformed into a vast green field. Summer and winter alike the meadows lie resplendent in the same fresh green and the trees stand singly or in groups with their magnificent dark green crowns so that the whole countryside is in fact one great park. Anyone who sets foot in this countryside, or even traverses these fields in a train, must be enchanted by it – so how much more so those who walk or cycle through it! This English meadow landscape with its lush groups of trees is one of the most unusual and most beautiful that any traveller can hope to see, and this despite the lack of sunshine, which rarely breaks through the cloud cover: in its way it can stand comparison with the finest mountain landscape of more favoured lands. In view of its great beauty it is hardly surprising that a man-made feature, the country-house, has been added to the meadows and trees, the two natural elements of the English landscape as proof of man's love of nature. Country-houses large and small are scattered over the whole landscape; some are surrounded by parks that extend far into the fields, other more modest dwelling-houses sufficing for the needs of the middleclasses are clustered together in estates. They lie fresh and trim amid the natural greenery. And together with this garden-like landscape they reflect the wellbeing of the country, the comfortable life-style of a people that has remained close to nature, for whom a fresh breath of country air blowing across the fields is worth more than the refinements of an artificial city life. One glance at an Ordnance Survey map can teach us something about the remarkable character of the country, for in certain counties, such as Surrey, Kent, Somerset, Cheshire and Derbyshire, the countryside is simply one great succession of estates, the parks and fields of which abut closely on one another.' ## Urban living The house is also the rule in English cities and every house has its garden, however small. In certain parts of London the houses are built round a garden for the communal use of the inhabitants; it lies sometimes behind, sometimes in front of the house, when it becomes the characteristic garden-like London square. The inhabitants have, of course, to cross the street to reach the garden. On the whole these gardens are of more use to the general public than to the inhabitants. London's first blocks of leasehold flats have been built only quite recently. But this trend is not of any great consequence, on the whole it appears to be a temporary phenomenon or a product of special circumstances. Should the custom become more widespread, however - which at the moment seems unlikely – this could only be a sign of economic recession and, even worse, would spell the demise of one of the best aspects of the English heritage. ## The advantage of living in a private house For there can be no doubt that to live in a private house is in every way a higher form of life. Its most important qualities are ethical and are virtually incalculable. Just as a higher force determines that a man shall found a family, so he certainly has an inborn instinct to create a permanent dwelling-place for himself and his family, his own little kingdom in which he may rule, spread himself and blossom. This natural urge moves men at every level of culture, it is the root of every human order of society, the basis of every culture and every higher moral development of mankind. To a man, even a man of modest circumstances, it has always been a matter of course that he should live in his own house and it was only with the advent of the metropolis with all its artificiality that the situation changed. Thus if the individual of todav with his allegedly numerous cultural achievements were no longer to be in a position to build a house for himself, if current economic circumstances were to cease to allow it, this would be an indictment of a period which prides itself on the most unheard-of progress and yet is unable to honour the simplest human rights. For one cannot expect the present-day urban flat to replace all the moral and ethical values that are inherent in the private house, the family home. Accommodation from which we can be given notice at the next quarter-day is hardly likely seriously to engage our domestic interest. We accept it with the same indifference that we show towards an hotel room. The calm certainty of having our own four walls', the feeling of contentment, the development of our personality and the fostering of all our natural talents that derive from it and must be regarded as our mission in life, can hardly find a place in the nomadic life of metropolitan removals. Like the metropolis itself, so in the narrower sense, metropolitan living conditions make for instability, dissipation and shallowness in human society. Flat-dwelling can only be regarded as an emergency substitute for living in a private house and every time a country’s economy takes a turn for the better, the number of those who wish to return to live in their own house is bound to increase, a process that is beginning in the present rapid economic upswing in Germany too. Every thoughtful person must groan under the pressure of the barrack-like life of the city. Those who have had thé, good fortune to grow up in their parents’ own house, in whom all the memories, all the poetical impressions stored in their hearts as children in the old type of family house are still alive, cannot begin to imagine the gaping emptiness that must strike the soul of the city child who has been dragged round five or six lots of rented accommodation during the same period. The economic and commercial changes to which the present-day world is subject, together with the tempting pleasures of the metropolis drive innumerable men daily into the arms of the city's prostitutes. Yet the value of what they exchange against their own more modest, but nobler qualities of life is more than questionable from the point of view of the higher political economy. The imponderable reservoir of national strength that has been built up through generations of the contented tranquility of a fortifying country life is all too soon squandered in the maelstrom of city life. It takes but a single generation for sturdy country-dwellers to become the characterless population of the metropolis. The results of urban inbreeding are no better at higher social levels. It is a well-known phenomenon that the great majority of men who are active promoters of culture come from country or small-town families and that the metropolis could not survive spiritually without continual fresh influxes from this source. We must look upon our people', said Goethe, as a storehouse from which the energies of failing humanity are continually replenished and refreshed'. If the influence of the metropolis is dulling in itself, to allow children to grow up in urban multi-storeyed dwellings can only intensify the influence, for it cuts people off from their rightful world as unnaturally as a cage does an animal from its home in the wild. The most valuable gain from living in a private house is this closer contact with nature and the greater bodily and spiritual health which it brings. Even the house in the city has this great advantage over the multi-storeyed dwelling. It has some connection with the ground at least and it is easier to breathe fresh air. If it also has a garden, contact with nature is already assured, for the owner, and especially the growing generation, cannot help taking some interest in it and so has a means of escape from the sad fate of the city-dweller whom Bismarck described as having to grow up among houses, paving-stones and paper. And this is quite apart from the greater elbow-room enjoyed by the dweller in a house by virtue of his closeness to the outer world, no matter if his rooms are smaller than those of the ostentatious urban flat. ## Living in private houses necessary to an artistic culture And not least, there is another drawback that is indissolubly linked with it and is of the greatest importance, especially now when there is so much talk about the re-awakening of an artistic culture — and indeed, if this were achieved, a foundation for human happiness that had been submerged in the whirlpool of modern times would have been built afresh. Where should art for the individual start but in his house? Could one imagine such a thing happening in the present-day urban flat, tainted as it is with the taste of the parvenu speculator? It is inexplicable, but significant of the nadir at which contemporary culture stands, that people with even a rudimentary artistic sensibility can survive in this flashy but mean environment at all. Yet not only do they do so, they also feel at ease in it. There must be something in the concept of culture in disorder, for the aesthetic sensibility that is lacking today has always been part of this concept. 'The occupants of the showy flats would all indignantly reject any attempt to doubt their culture on this account. We must be clear about one thing: for all our efforts on behalf of art, an artistic culture can only begin with the individual and the individual can only exercise his artistic sense by shaping his immediate surroundings, his living-rooms and his house - assuming that he has any interest in those general questions of art that lie close to our heart. We shall not achieve our aim by studying the history of art, learning about styles, visiting museums or other newly discovered substitutes for the practice of art. If the individuals that make up our society do not begin to think in an artistic way, all its artistic knowledge will be useless, it will remain as inartistic as, for example, an un-musical person who seeks to make himself musical by studying musical history. Artistic education is loudly advocated today but obviously its only basis can be the privately owned house. A man's house – he may even have built it himself – is bound to need furnishing and so he is directly faced with involvement in the practice of art. This should give everyone the key to the art of others and at least provide a foundation for an understanding of the work of the artists of the day. For the house-owner is now something of an artist himself, as were we all in our natural state, until the relevant part of the brain was allowed to atrophy. Nothing is more significant of the atrophied artistic sense of contemporary society than its total inability to establish any kind of attitude towards architecture. People are interested in the anecdotic element, at least, in painting and sculpture, but architecture remains entirely unintelligible. Should not the torn threads of understanding of architecture be used to develop a link with the lost feeling for the family house? If domestic architecture were to regain acceptance this would certainly build a bridge by which general questions of art could be brought closer to the people. But a revival of interest in the dwelling-house is absolutely essential if the applied arts are to persist in their renewed activity and to thrive. The house is their only possible home; the sole aim of any arts and crafts movement must be to furnish the dwellingplace and the house. ## Influence of its way of life on English culture Looking back at England, which, as we have said, has retained a close interest in the house and an appreciation of the private house to this day, we are bound to ask whether there is any evidence in the character of the present-day English of the advantages we have extolled of living in private houses. While I do not underestimate the hazards that the observer may encounter in formulating consequences that rest on more or less fluctuating values, I can say for certain, following on from the point about the recent revival of the applied arts, that this could never have become as widespread as it is without the practice of living in houses. The work of William Morris, the revival of arts and crafts in England, began quite specifically in the house and only began to appear in periodicals and exhibitions after ten years or more of silent development had produced tangible results. How different from the stir the new movement is causing with us at home! But there are other characteristics that may be observed in England today which originate in the practice of living in houses; these include the sedulous reading of books and the associated widespread interest in fine literature; the relatively high degree of religious observance that is found in England today; the highly developed family life that is expressed in good domestic practice, the striking harmony between all the occupants of the house and the excellen upbringing of children. The connection between living in a house and the upbringing of children is particularly enlightening; the English upbringing based on independence, good manners and moral rectitude is quite inseparable from the English habit of living in houses. For as a country's good upbringing of its children is quite certainly a proof that its family life is good, both must unquestionably be regarded as the results of living-conditions. ## Restricted access to diverting amusements Yet there is no mistaking the fact that the two-fold advantages of living in a house – one on the side of health and ethics, the other on that of the emotional life - also demand certain sacrifices, which might appear to favour urban flat-dwelling. The most serious of these are the quite long journeys that those who live in houses in the country have to face. They make social life difficult, complicate visits to the theatre and to concerts and the physical effort that such journeys entail effectively restricts all visits to the inner city. But it must be said that our transport systems are constantly improving and are doing much to reduce these difficulties, so that the restriction of life outside the house is perhaps not as great a disadvantage as at first appears. This immense increase in the excitements offered by the modern city tends to make city-dwellers indifferent. Nobody can digest and assimilate the intensive intellectual pleasure offered to a receptive mind by plays rightly enjoyed or good concerts in such swift succession as the modern theatre- or concert-going citydweller is apparently able to do. An evening of music-making at home, an evening's reading en famille is more rewarding to thoughtful natures than three visits a week to the concert-hall or opera-house. Such performances should be regarded as redletter days in the round of home-produced art and not every-day fare. It is noteworthy that it is in fact those who are indifferent who cannot do without these constant intellectual diversions, whereas more thoughtful people taste them sparingly. Thus, while life in the more isolated house entails restrictions, these must if anything be regarded as salutory. ## Economic questions However, the economic side of life in the private house is another story and if dimensions are to be similar to those of rented accommodation (as is usually the case in Germany since the owner wishes it so) it becomes decidedly unfavourable. The English house offers useful pointers on this question as to how the private house can also meet more modest needs; indeed, this might have been expected, since in England people of every level of income live in private houses. The chief reason for the greater number of such houses, lies, of course, in the English conditions of land-tenure, which have not been established in Germany because of the speculation in building-sites that goes on. But a powerful contributory reason is the Englishman's more modest requirements as to the size of rooms. The cubic capacity of the English house is always much smaller than that of the smallflat in Germany. But this is no hardship and is, indeed, justified by the fact that in areas where there are country-houses the air is better than it is in cities and therefore the space for air in the rooms can be smaller; and also by the circumstance that the occupant of a private house is in touch with nature on all sides, whereas the flat-dweller is more or less isolated on his own floor and therefore finds more difficulty in resolving to go out into the fresh air. ## Exemplary qualities in the English house English houses, as we can see, are wisely reduced to essentials and adapted to given circumstances; the point, therefore, that is worth copying from them is the emphasis that is laid on purely objective requirements. The Englishman builds his house for himself alone. He feels no urge to impress, has no thought of festive occasions or banquets and the idea of shining in the eyes of the world through lavishness in and of his house simply does not occur to him. Indeed, he even avoids attracting attention to his house by means of striking design or architectonic extravagance, just as he would be loth to appear personally eccentric by wearing a fantastic suit. In particular, the architectonic ostentation, the creation of ‘architecture' and ‘style' to which we in Germany are still so prone, is no longer to be found in England. It is most instructive to note at this point that a movement opposing the imitation of styles and seeking closer ties with simple rural buildings, which began over forty years ago, has had the most gratifying results. This same downto-earth quality which we see in the design of the house is apparent too in its siting and in the way in which it relates to the country round it. The aim is to adapt the house closely to its surroundings and to attempt to make house and garden into a unified, closely-knit whole. A fairly recent movement in garden design has revolutionised the surroundings of the house and in particular has removed from the scene the erroneous views of impersonal landscape gardening. Like the changes to the exterior, changes to the interior of the house have simplicity, objectivity, plainness and unobtrusive comfort as their aim. Àt the same time a very highly developed recognition of sanitary requirements has much of interest to teach us. Thus in many respects the English house gives us food for thought and much of it will provide pointers for our own development. ## The English house a product of English conditions On the whole, however, it will probably be as well to note at the outset that the greatest merit of the English house as it stands completed before us is that it is English, that is, it conforms totally to English conditions, embodies totally English ways of life, is totally suited to local climatic and geographical conditions and in its artistic design it must be considered totally a product of a native artistic development. Its exemplary qualities for us are therefore limited. And as we have also to develop the German house to conform to German conditions, the prime purpose of a study like the present one must be to show how closely all the external forms of the English house meet the natural conditions obtaining in England, rather than to pick out fine examples that would be worth copying in our situation. But the great instructive value of such an investigation must lie in the discovery of the manner in which this adaptation has taken place. To face our own conditions squarely and as honestly as the English face theirs today, to adhere to our own artistic tradition as faithfully, to embody our customs and habits in the German house as lovingly – these are the lessons we can learn from the English house.