# INTRODUCTION

I HIS BOOK IS NOT INTENDED TO BE A COMPREHENSIVE HISTORY OF lithography. It is a study of the various techniques used by artists in England and France for making drawings on stone, and of the use inade of these methods in topographical and landscape prints. My main concern has been to describe what seem to have been the accepted techniques of the professional lithographic draughtsman and the way these developed with improvements to the process and with the changing needs of artists. I have not discussed the work of the great painters who occasionally turned to lithography, nor have I described the many commercial aspects of the process; the work of the painter-lithographer has been the central interest of most writers on lithography, while a study of the commercial development of the process would have opened up an entirely different field which, I hope, may one day be the subject of a companion volume.

The period covered by this book is roughly the first fifty years of lithography, but I have concentrated on the decades after 1818 when the process became widely known through the publication of treatises by the inventor and other lithographic printers. At the tine of writing, however, no serious introduction to the early history of lithography had appeared in English since J. and E. R. Pennell's Lithography and lithographers, which was originally published in 1898. In Part I of the book, therefore, I have discussed the invention of lithography and have given a short account of its development up to the year 1818 in Germany, England, and France, in order to provide some kind of background for the chapters on the early literature. I have included no illustrations for this section. Many of the more important items referred to in the text have been reproduced elsewhere and, tempting though it was to include a variety of plates, it seemed to me more valuable to concentrate on illustrating the main theme of the book.

Part II is concerned with the development of the actual techniques of drawing on stone as they were described in contemporary literature, from the patent specifications and early accounts in journals to technical treatises devoted to the subject. The first writers of notices about lithography in the journals were mainly concerned with making it known and describing briefly how it worked; for the most part, however, they seem to have known very little about the process, and their accounts are mainly ofinterest as records of the progress lithography was making in becoming recognized as a reliable graphic and printing process. Only later, with the publication of books entirely devoted to the subject, did descriptions become more informative. The first such manual appeared in Germany in 181o, but the turning point was really the publication of the inventor's own treatise in 1818, and thereafter technical handbooks on lithography were published regularly. Most of them were written by lithographic printers and were directed at either the prospective lithographic printer or draughtsman, or both. Apart from Senefelder's, the most influential of these manuals were first published in France and England. Lithography developed similarly in these two countries, and in terms of the literature on the subject it is almost impossible to treat them separately since the techniques described in the one country were almost immediately adopted by artists and writers in the other. Articles on lithography continued to appear in journals during this later period, and these sometimes contained accounts of new methods which were not described elsewhere, but it is in the technical manuals that we can best trace the growth of the various techniques used by artists in the first half of the nineteenth century for making drawings on stone.

In Part III of the book I have traced the development of one branch of lithography in England and France, the making of topographical prints. I have discussed the ways in which the techniques described in the treatises were actually applied and have tried to relate them to the requirements of contemporary painters and draughtsmen. My main reason for selecting this particular branch of pictorial lithography was that it was extremely popular and flourished equally strongly in both France and England throughout the period under consideration.

The artists who turned to landscape and topography tended to work along the lines of the techniques described in the manuals on lithography. This book is, therefore, largely concerned with the work of the craftsmanlithographer. It is not suggested that the methods described here applied to all artists who drew on stone in this period. We would not expect the great

## Introduction

painters of the period to approach lithography in the same spirit as the professional landscape lithographer. The evidence of the prints of Goya and Delacroix are sufficient testimony to this, even without the descriptions we have of their methods of drawing on stone; but neither of these artists could entirely escape from the recognized conventions of the medium, and the extent to which they departed from them can only be appreciated when we know what these conventions were.