# THE INVENTION AND SPREAD OF LITHOGRAPHY

VV HEN LITHOGRAPHY WAS DISCOVERED BY SENEFELDER TOWARDS the end of the eighteenth century no really new method of making prints had been evolved for over three hundred years. The older methods of woodcutting on the one hand and engraving and etching on the other were firmly established printing crafts—woodcutting being valued primarily because of its simplicity and economy, and etching and engraving for their greater precision and for the wider range of expression they allowed the artist. By the end of the eighteenth century, however, these original methods had been found inadequate. The requirements of painters had caused these processes to increase their range of effects so that in their turn the related methods of mezzotint, stipple engraving, aquatint, soft-ground etching, and engraving on box-wood were developed to cater for the new needs. But these were all still relatively slow, either in the production of the original plate or in the printing from it, and the growing demand for more and cheaper images encouraged the search for new and less laborious processes. The period around the turn of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was, therefore, one of considerable experimentation in the graphic arts and numerous ingenious processes were devised, either with a view to improving on existing methods or in the hope of finding cheaper ones. Lithography was the result of just one of these experiments and, at least at its outset, must fall into the second of these two categories.

The term lithography is a little misleading, for writing on stone, or even printing from it, is not what constitutes the invention. In retrospect it is looked upon as the first and principal method of planographic printing in which, in contrast to the relief and intaglio processes, the areas which print and those which do not are to all intents and purposes on the same level. The process rests on very simple chemical principles: the antipathy of grease and water, and the attraction of these two substances to their like and to a common porous ground. It is capable of considerable complication, and some of these developments will be considered in the following chapters, but it can perhaps be best understood in its very simplest form. If a cross is drawn with a candle or any other greasy substance on a slab of porous material, such as stone, it will adhere to it and be partially absorbed. If the whole surface is then moistened, the water will be attracted by the stone but repelled by the greasy cross. For the same reasons any subsequent application of greasy printing ink will be repelled by the damped surface of the stone except in those parts drawn with the cross. In this part alone, where there is no water, grease will be attracted by grease. It remains therefore to lay a piece of paper or similar material on to the surface of the stone and to apply pressure to its reverse side. The resulting print we should call a lithograph.

This was not the term originally used by either the inventor or by the earliest lithographers. Senefelder does not appear to have used it until 18o8 and even on the title-page of his treatise of 1818² it creeps in only as though to cover all contingencies. The French seem to have coined the word first and the term ‘imprimerie lithographique' is found on an undated piece of music printing which was registered as early as 1803.³ It appears again in the following year on a prospectus for André's press in Paris dated ‘1er Frimaire an 13',4 and the term ‘l’art lithographique'figures in literature at least by July 1807.⁵ From France the term seems to have spread to Germany where it was used in 18o5 by Mitterer for the title of a collection of lithographs,⁶ and later to England where it was fairly generally adopted after 1813. But everywhere the process went under à variety of names during the first twenty years of its existence. In Germany it was originally called ‘Steindruck', ‘Steindruckerey', or ‘chemische Druckerey' and even as late as 1814 these were the terms still in general use there.2 In England it was usually referred to as ‘polyautography’, but sometimes as just ‘engraving on stone' or printing from stone'. In France either ‘imprimerie chimique' or ‘polyautographie' were the most common early terms until the word ‘lithographie' came into something like general use there around 18ro. If Senefelder himself had coined a suitable term for his invention he might well have found no rival claimants for priority, for much of this variety in terminology reflected a confusion as to what really constituted the invention.

Alois Senefelder was born in Prague in 1771, the son of an actor from the Theatre Royal in Munich. He too wanted to become an actor, but at the insistence of his father was sent to study jurisprudence at the University of Ingolstadt. It was while still a student there in 1789 that Senefelder wrote a little comedy, Die Mädchenkenner, which was to provide him with an introduction to printing when he had it published in Munich in 1792. On the death of his father in 1791 he was forced to give up his studies, only too pleased it would seem to concentrate on his chosen professions of acting and writing. After two years as an unsuccessful actor he set out to try his fortune as an author, but again he came up against difficulties for his first play scarcely covered his printing costs. It was in an attempt to publish his own plays rather more cheaply that Senefelder began to learn about printing.³ First he studied letterpress methods, but lacking sufficient capital he was forced to experiment on his own account and, like so many others of his generation, tried various kinds of stereotyping. These, too, cost more than his limited means would allow, and so he turned to etching by the normal method on either copper or tin. While practising the rather awkward business of writing backwards for this process Senefelder was attracted by a piece of Kelheim limestone which he had been using as an inking slab. In the first instance it occurred to him that this would be much more economical than the copper for these practice attempts, and only later, when he realized that the stone could be obtained of sufficient thickness, that this too could be used as a printing surface. He was aware that this was not a new process, but he made two distinct improvements which he thought were of considerable importance. The first of these was the discovery of a method of giving the stone a higher polish, and the second the manufacture of an ink which could easily be wiped away from the surface once the image had been charged. It was in fact this ink, composed of wax, soap, and lampblack, which paved the way for the later discovery of lithography. But this did not come immediately, for there was yet another stage that the inventor had to go through before arriving at planographic printing; he had already tried an intaglio method, he was now to experiment with relief printing.

Senefelder explains in the most quoted passage from his treatise how he had just polished one of his stone plates ready to coat it with etching ground in preparation for his exercises in writing backwards when his mother came in with the now celebrated laundry list which, for want of suitable writing materials, he was forced to copy out on the stone with his specially prepared ink. Some time afterwards he was just about to obliterate this writing when it occurred to him that he might be able to put the image in relief by etching it with dilute nitric acid. He did so for five minutes, and found that the writing had been left in relief about one-twentieth of an inch. He made a number of further trials, inking the stone with a board covered with cloth, and produced results which he found greatly encouraging. Thus, writes Senefelder rather strangely, the new art was invented'.' What he meant by this is not quite clear, but if he meant that this was lithography then he cannot reasonably claim to have been its inventor, because relief printing from stone had certainly been practised before. It is true that he had constructed a new lever press, that he had discovered an ingenious method of inking with a flat board which enabled him to print from an image lower in relief than if he had used the normal inking balls, and that he had developed a new ink which acted as an acid resist; but none of these constituted the invention of a new process. This method of printing was certainly not lithography as we know it today for it depended principally on a difference of relief; moreover, in his account of these experiments, Senefelder makes no mention of either damping the stone or of applying gum arabic.

A similar process had in fact been practised by Dean Schmidt only a few years before and in Munich itself. Simon Schmidt of Miesbach had, according to his own testimony,² printed from relief-etched stone while he was professor of logic and natural history at the Military Academy in Munich (1787–8). He made a number of drawings for German school-books, including one on the human body and another on poisonous plants. There was nothing new therefore in printing from stone, and though Senefelder claimed no knowledge of Schmidt's process at the time of his own experiments he certainly knew about it when he came to write his treatise.³ By this time Schmidt was being acclaimed in some quarters as the inventor of lithography; and if this is taken to mean printing from stones then it must be admitted that Schmidt was working well before Senefelder began his own relief etching in July 1796. But in any case Schmidt never claimed the process as his own and freely admitted that he had been prompted to make experiments on seeing some tombstones in Munich which he thought had been produced by this method, and that he had even followed closely the instructions laid down in an old Nuremberg handbook.⁴ A similar idea of relief etching on copper seemed to have occurred quite independently to William Blake in England at much the same time, and others followed along similar lines in France and England. Relief etching, whether on stone or metal, had many of the advantages of stereotyping without the added inconvenience and expense of having to set up type. Senefelder was in fact neither the first nor the last to experiment on stone along these lines, but merely provides a link in a chain which was to lead from Schmidt to Duplat,' Girardet,² Tissier,3 and many others in the nineteenth century. At the time, however, relief etching was, so far as we are aware, new to Senefelder. But what is so surprising is that as late as 1818, long after the discovery of lithography proper, Senefelder insisted on referring to this relief etching on stone as his new invention.4 His treatise is full of such ambiguities, as though he himself was not quite sure what his real contribution was. But in this particular case, by maintaining that this relief method—a process in which we know Schmidt to have had priority—was his invention, Senefelder was providing later historians with a convenient tool with which to wrest from him the real invention of lithography.

For about two years, from 1796 to 1798, Senefelder practised his relief etching on stone. At the outset, in order to raise capital, he travelled to

Ingolstadt to enlist as a private in the artillery as a substitute for a friend. His application was rejected as he was not a Bavarian by birth, but his journey to Ingolstadt was not entirely in vain for he noticed a piece of badly printed music in a shop there, and it was this that suggested to him that his process could be applied to the printing of music. On his return to Munich he decided to approach a publisher, and would have done so had he not learned that an old musician friend of his, the composer Gleissner, was about to publish some pieces of sacred music. He called on Gleissner, showed him specimens of his work, and arranged to print an edition of some of his songs. One hundred and twenty copies of Gleissner's 12 Neue Lieder für's Klavier' (1796) were printed on a copper-plate press, the whole undertaking being completed with the help of one man in the space of a fortnight, and costing only 3o florins. Encouraged by this success Senefelder presented a copy to the Elector Karl Theodor and received a gift of 1oo florins. Another work for Gleissner followed, ‘Duetten für zwei Flöten', and everything appeared to be most promising until Senefelder decided to replace his existing rolling-press with an improved version. It was then that he met difficulties and was forced to experiment with a variety of presses, even resorting to rubbing by hand with a piece of polished wood. Eventually he got the backing of Falter, a music seller in Munich, and constructed a large cylinder press which enabled him to print much better. As soon as this press was completed he began to copy Mozart's Die Zauberflöte on to stone and started printing it with the help of Gleissner. All went well so long as Gleissner was there, but when he fell dangerously ill and was no longer available Senefelder had to train two soldiers to do the printing. It was when they took over that Falter decided to revert to copper-engraving.

At this stage Senefelder must surely have heard something of Schmidt's experiments,¹ for he came into contact with Steiner who, in the position of Direktor des Schulfonds-Bücherlags', had sponsored and printed several of the latter's publications. Steiner approached Senefelder with a project for printing some church music. The original intention was to insert the lines of music between the letterpress and print them both together, but this proved too difficult and eventually the two opcrations were separated.²

With the experience of Schmidt's illustrations behind him, Steiner saw more possibilities for Senefelder's relief etching than just the printing of music, and even Senefelder credits him with being one of the first to display a liberal and impartial spirit in encouraging his process. Senefelder had himself already drawn a small vignette on stone for a piece of music entitled 'Der Brand in Neuötting' in August 1797, and it was this which prompted Steiner to commission him to make some illustrations for a Catechism. According to Senefelder the resulting drawings were very ordinary, but at least Steiner had seen that there were greater possibilities in the process than the reproduction of writing and music. Senefelder was no great draughtsman and, consequently, when Steiner suggested that he should produce rather more ambitious religious scenes as a cheap alternative to engraving, he thought the time had come to teach others how to draw on stone. A number of young artists were instructed, but none of them showed sufficient patience to become skilled and they soon lost interest. So too it would seem did Senefelder, for he had just become interested in the experiments which were to lead him to the invention of planographic printing and lithography proper.

At the time he was engaged in writing a prayer book on stone, and this was causing him considerable trouble because all the letters had to be drawn in reverse. His normal method was to offset a whole page of text which had been written on paper in lead pencil, and then work over this image with his prepared ink; but the pencil marks were easily rubbed off the stone, and so he experimented with a variety of more permanent compositions. These trials led him to realize that it would be possible to compose an ink which would be sufficient for both purposes; that is, which could be transferred from the paper but would need no reworking on the stone. All together he claims to have made several thousand experiments before discovering a suitable recipe for the ink and a method of preparing the paper with gum which would allow this ink to be removed in its entirety. But having succeeded in this he was brought to the verge of the discovery of lithography, for he realized that the whole process of transferring ‘rested principally on the greater or less affinity of one ingredient to another'.' He noticed, for instance, that a viscous liquid like a solution of gum prevented the ink from attaching itself to the stone, and that if he drew with soap on a newlypolished stone and moistened its surface with gum-water an application of oil colour adhered only to those places covered with the soap. The main difficulty he found at this stage was that the stone was too highly polished to receive the ink, and that the image tended to spread. He therefore washed the stone with soap-water or linseed oil before beginning to write, and then, when the work was finished, cleaned the stone with a solution of nitric acid to prevent the surface taking ink during the printing. This is how Senefelder summarizes his invention:

My whole process was, therefore, as follows:—to wash the polished stone with soap-water, to dry it well, to write or draw upon it with the composition ink of soap and wax, then to etch it with aqua-fortis; and, lastly, to prepare it for printing with an infusion of gum-water. I had hoped to have been able to dispense with the gumwater, but was soon convinced that it really enters into chemical affinity with the stone, and stops its pores still more effectually against the fat, and opens them to the water. In less than three days after my first idea, I produced as perfect and clear impressions, as any that have since been obtained.

In this context Senefelder gives no date for his invention, but ten pages earlier he writes of the chemical printing, which I discovered in 1798'² and on one of the plates of the German edition of his treatise there is a reference to ‘Der Steindruck erfunden zu München von Aloys Senefelder 1796. Durch ihn zur chenischen Druckerey erhoben 1798.' In the text Senefelder records this with less excitement than he had shown for his earlier ‘invention' of relief etching on stone, and for the historian the account certainly lacks the drama of the laundry-list episode; but this was, nevertheless, the invention of lithography, and there can be little justification for the centenary celebrations which were held in various parts of the world in 1895 and 1896.1

The very first work Senefelder published by means of his new process was not produced by working in a direct manner with his specially prepared ink. Very soon after this discovery he perfected the chalk and engraved manners, and it was by using the second of these that he produced the title-page for Gleissner's Eine Symphonie von vier obligaten Stimmen'. With these researches behind him Senefelder at last seemed to be in a position to exploit his process. By 1799 he was receiving work from Steiner and others to the value of 10-12 florins a day, and he employed his brothers Theobald and Georg as well as two apprentices. On 3 September of the same year he was granted an exclusive privilege for the whole of Bavaria to last for a period of fifteen years,² and he now felt free to show his process to anyone who was interested in it.

One such person was Johann Anton André, a music publisher from Offenbach, who was so impressed by the speed³ and economy of the process that he offered Senefelder 2,ooo florins for a description of the process and for the right to exploit it. Senefelder accepted the offer and on 28 September 1799, within a month of his being granted the exclusive privilege, he and Gleissner signed a contract with André.4 The contract provided that they should explain the whole of the process in every detail and that Senefelder should travel to Offenbach to search for suitable lithographic stone there and, with the help of André's brother Friedrich, have all the necessary machinery and equipment made for the setting up of a lithographic printing works.

After an interval of three months Senefelder travelled to Offenbach and within a fortnight pulled his first proof there. André must have been most impressed by what he had seen of the process, for he suggested that Senefelder should leave Munich and enter into partnership with him. His idea was to establish presses at Vienna, London, Paris, and Berlin, and to take out privileges or patents in each of these capitals. Offenbach was to be the centre of the organization, and André intended to remain there himself, while Senefelder undertook to be in charge of the press at Vienna. With this in mind Senefelder returned to Munich and arranged to hand over his own press there to his brothers, reserving for himself a quarter of the profits. Back in Offenbach he found the new establishment in good order with five of André's old presses replaced by lithographic ones; everything appeared to be going well and soon afterwards André took the opportunity of a business trip to London to inquire about the taking out of patents there. In England they had hoped to apply lithography to the printing of cottons, especially as Senefelder had in mind a method of printing with stone cylinders. André had even intended taking out a patent for this idea, but he found that machines for printing cottons with cylindrical metal plates were already in use in England,² and was forced to abandon the project. André's plans for lithography itself were not to be interrupted though, and on his return to Germany he persuaded Senefelder to go to London with Friedrich André to lodge a description of the process and take out a patent for it. From late in 180o to the summer of 1801 Senefelder was in London, and on 20 June I8oi a patent was taken out in his name.³

In London Senefelder was met by Philipp André, another brother who was living there at the time, and Senefelder records rather bitterly that it was he who looked after his affairs during his stay. Senefelder left England before 10 August 18or, for on that date he signed a further document in Offenbach relinquishing all the privileges granted in the above-mentioned patent to Johann André for the sum of 3,ooo florins.⁴

On his return to Germany Senefelder found that his mother had gone to Vienna to obtain an exclusive privilege for his two brothers, and that as a counter-measure André had sent Gleissner's wife to act on behalf of their own partnership. Senefelder claims that he had been kept in the dark about this while he was in London, and that when André refused to allow him to go to Vienna to sort the affair out he tore up the contract of partnership which had been signed only the previous day.' The unhappy position in which he had found himself, of being a party to both sides of the squabble, was thus made a lot easier, and having made peace with his brothers he decided to take them with him to Vienna.

Thus ended a most promising liaison between the ingenious but unbusinesslike inventor² and the efficient and imaginative businessman André which, had it lasted, would almost certainly have seen lithography firmly established in the capitals of Europe within a few years. As it was, the rewards were divided, and neither party was able to take full advantage of his share. Senefelder had gained capital to the extent of 5,ooo florins, but had forfeited his right to print in England and had given André the necessary knowledge and equipment to do so in Bavaria; André on the other hand had lost the services of a skilled craftsman and technician who was still working to perfect and extend his invention and was, in all probability, the only man who really understood how it worked.

Senefelder left for Vienna in August 18o1³ and stayed there for five years. Gleissner's wife had already found him a likely patron in the form of von Hartl, who had seen the possibilities of lithography for calico printing, and as soon as he arrived Senefelder constructed a small press and pulled some proofs as a demonstration of the process. These so impressed von Hartl that he offered him a partnership with sufficient capital to equip himself for printing. The principal intention was to apply lithography to cotton printing, but until this could be begun they were to set up a press for printing music and works of art. Their first concern was to get an exclusive privilege to print by the new process, and as soon as possible Senefelder gave a demonstration before a commission set up by the Government of Lower Austria, and even made several trials on a little hand press before the Emperor himself. Meanwhile, stones were procured from Solenhofen and paper from

Augsburg; his old associate Gleissner was brought from Munich to help, and for nearly a year they printed virtually nothing but Gleissner's musical compositions. Eventually, on 13 January 1803, an exclusive privilege for ten years was obtained for Lower Austria and the way seemed open to success. The biggest difficulty was the sale of the works they produced, for large stocks of Gleissner's music remained on their hands, so instead of relying on agents they decided to sell their own products. Accordingly, a business company was formed between Senefelder, Steiner (the secretary of von Hartl), and a businessman called Grasnitzky. For a while Senefelder's hopes were rejuvenated, but they were soon dashed when he was told that no profits would come his way until he had paid back the capital of 2o,ooo florins advanced by von Hartl. In desperation, and without the financial means to defend himself, he sold out his share of the establishment to Steiner, and with it surrendered his Austrian privilege as well.

Senefelder's only hope now was the calico printing that had interested von Hartl. In fact, during the whole of his stay in Vienna he had needed to devote very little of his time to the routine running of the lithographic press for, in addition to Gleissner, he had brought one of his first apprentices from Munich, and also employed two local music writers. He had been mainly concerned himself with experiments in printing cottons by means of etched metal cylinders, and with the help of an English engineer had even constructed such a press at the cotton centre of Pottendorf. Unfortunately, just as he was in a position to sell his invention, supplies of English spun cotton were cut off because of the Napoleonic Wars and the demand on the spinning factory at Pottendorf was so great that they had to put aside any new project. Eventually, Senefelder managed to sell a model of his cylinder press to a calico printer in Vienna, and soon afterwards was commissioned by another firm to erect one at St. Pölten. He was on the point of leaving for St. Pölten to fulfil this obligation when there came a far more attractive offer from Abbot Vogler and Christoph von Aretin to set up, at their expense, a lithographic press in Munich with his old friend Gleissner. After arranging to delay the construction of his press at St. Pölten, Senefelder left with Gleissner for Munich in October 18o6.

Almost immediately the partnership was dissolved because Vogler refused to pay his share of the capital in cash; but Aretin, Gleissner, and Senefelder continued together for a period of about four years, producing a variety of jobbing printing, music, and maps, as well as what Senefelder refers to as‘works of art'. In this category must be included the most important production of the press, and the first of its kind, the facsimile edition of Dürer's marginal drawings for the Emperor Maximilian's Prayer Book, published in 18o8. There were five presses at this Munich establishment, but it was not an economic success as some of the work which Senefelder printed for the government had to be produced in enormous editions, and often in a great hurry, so that rather more presses and printers had to be kept than were really needed. All the same, this appears to have been the most settled period of Senefelder's career. Scholars, statesmen, and royalty visited his press, and it was in this period that he thought about writing a treatise on lithography and began printing the first collection of specimens for his Musterbuch über alle lithographischen Kunstmanieren in 1808.

In October of the following year Senefelder received his first real recompense from lithography. Despite his privilege a number of other presses had already been established in Munich, including one belonging to the Königliche unmittelbare Steuer-Kataster-Kommission'. The aim of this establishment was to survey and map the whole of the country, and between thirty and forty draughtsmen were employed to draw on stone the numerous plans that were needed. It appears that there was some dissatisfaction over the way the lithographic printing was being done, and Senefelder was invited to supervise this side of the establishment with an annual salary of 1,50o florins. Moreover, he was still allowed to continue his private press with Aretin. At last everything seemed to be going Senefelder's way; but just as his own lithographic press was beginning to flourish Aretin was appointed to a post in Neuberg and they were forced to sell the business.

This left Senefelder with more free time to devote to writing his treatise and to experiment with the many ideas he had for the improvement of lithography. Amongst these were the perfection of the transfer method, and particularly the transferring of leaves of old books and prints; the discovery of a method of colour printing; the construction of a printing press in which the damping, cleaning, and inking of the stone could be done mechanically; and, in Senefelder's view probably the most important of all, the application of lithography to metal and composition plates. These experiments must have been largely responsible for holding up work on the treatise; but eventually Senefelder was goaded into publication by allegations in the press that he was not the real inventor of lithography, and his book was at last published in Munich and Vienna in 1818. A year later translations appeared in London and Paris, and in connection with the French edition Senefelder made the first of a number of trips to Paris with his pupil Knecht, and there set up a press of his own to print the plates. While in Paris he took out a patent for his composition stone in 1819,² perfected his portable press, and experimented with a printing machine in which both the inking and damping were done mechanically. He finally returned to Munich in 1824 having resigned his share of the press to Knecht for an annual payment of 6oo francs.

In Bavaria, with his treatise published and with an assured income from two sources, Senefelder continued to experiment in the hope of perfecting his process. He even intended publishing another work on lithography to include descriptions of his latest improvements, and in a letter to Knecht about this project Senefelder writes:

J'enrichirai cette partie de mon ouvrage d’une foule d’inventions nouvelles qui sont toutes du domaine de l’impression, par exemple, une composition excellente de pierres artificielles, l’impression mosaique (invention inestimable), une nouvelle méthode de stéréotypie, une presse mécanique accélérée dont j’ai déjà obtenu des résultats, et sur laquelle l'encrage se fait mécaniquement . . . J'espère, par ces découvertes, avoir porté la lithographie au plus haut degré de perfection.³

But like so many of Senefelder's projects this too remained unfulfilled at his death in 1834. In any case, the things that occupied him in the twenties were still substantially the same as those which had done so in the previous decade; and it could hardly have been otherwise for, with the exception of the application of photography and the discovery of the principle of offset printing, Senefelder had already anticipated almost every other major development of his process.