# LITHOGRAPHY IN ENGLAND 1801-1818

NGLAND WAS THE FIRST COUNTRY OUTSIDE THE GERMAN states to have a lithographic press. As early as the winter of 18oo Senefelder travelled to London with a view to obtaining the exclusive right to use his process in this country, and on 2o June 18o1 a patent was granted for A new method and process of performing the various branches of the arts of printing on paper, linen, cotton, woollen and other articles.² The idea was obviously to cover the use of the process for the printing of fabrics, a field which Johann André had himself explored only a short while before in connection with Senefelder's proposed stone-cylinder machine, but in fact the very first use of lithography in England was for the multiplication of original drawings. While in London Senefelder stayed with Philipp André,³ one of Johann's younger brothers, and he complains bitterly in his treatise that he was kept ‘in a perfect seclusion from society, for fear of losing the secret' and that consequently his stay ‘had not the expected success with respect to establishing a lithographical office there'.' But this was not strictly true for, as Man has pointed out,² a passage in the original edition of the treatise refers to some chalk lithographs done by the Swiss artist Gessner while Senefelder was still in England. Certainly by the time he returned to Germany in the summer of 18o1 a press of some kind existed in London.

The original patents for England and Scotland filed in Senefelder's name were yielded to Johann André by an agreement dated 10 August 18o1,³ and it was his agent in London, Philipp André, who was responsible for promoting the first lithographs produced in this country. André had been instructed in the practice of lithography by Senefelder while he was still in London, and soon after the patent had been secured he began to explain the process to artists and to encourage them to visit his printing room. The result of all this was a publication of artists’ prints called Specimens of polyautography, the first number of which was published 30 April 1803.4 The original intention was to issue six parts, each consisting of six lithographs and costing half a guinea, but André did not stay in London long enough to see it realized. Many of the leading artists of the day contributed, including Benjamin West, then President of the Royal Academy, Academicians Henry Fuseli, Thomas Stothard, and James Barry, the Swiss artist Conrad Gessner, and Thomas Barker of Bath. The first of these lithographs to bear a date was drawn by Benjamin West in 18o1, and it is tempting to suppose that he was used as a bait to attract other artists to the new process. Like most of the earlier lithographs in the Specimens his was a simple pen and ink study drawn on the stone just as if it had been paper. Chalk lithographs were much more difficult to print, especially in large numbers, and it is possibly for this reason that they are rarely found amongst the incunabula of English lithography.⁵ Both Gessner⁶ and Benjamin West7 had made chalk drawings on stone, and some of these are dated as early as 18o1, but they were never published. It was not until 18o4 that two chalk lithographs by Chalon and Gessner were drawn for the Specimens of polyautography.

By the autumn of 1803 two parts of the Specimens had already appeared, and these represent the first attempt anywhere to publish a collection of original artists' lithographs. It was seen both in this country and abroad as an interesting experiment and even inspired a similar publication in Germany.² How far André progressed with the publication of his Specimens of polyautography before he left England cannot yet be decided with any degree of certainty, but in any case he must have been responsible for printing many other lithographs as well. Some of the early English lithographs in the polyautographic collection of the British Museum³ certainly belong to this period, and must therefore have been printed by André before he returned to Germany in 1805, as his was the only press known to have been working at the time.

In 18o6, after a lapse of eighteen months, André was succeeded as patentee by G. J. Vollweiler, who had previously been an assistant to Johann André in Offenbach.4 Vollweiler reprinted the first two parts of the Specimens in 1806 and continued the series to its completion in 1807.5 With the fourth part he issued a circular6 in which he announced that he had taken over the press previously directed by André and that he intended to continue with the work. It is not clear therefore who supervised the drawings of the third part of the Specimens, but preparations for this and perhaps some of part four as well must have been under way when Vollweiler took over, and he must have inherited some of the stones with the drawings already on them.' Vollweiler is known to have taken over some of the drawn stones, for in addition to inviting new artists to contribute to the publication he reprinted the lithographs of the first two parts. Whether for want of subscribers² or because he found it difficult to get artists to patronize the new process,³ Vollweiler returned home discouraged in August 1807.

The various parts of the Specimens of polyautography published first by André and then by Vollweiler, though the most important early application of lithography in this country, were by no means all that appeared before the end of 1807. Besides the thirty-six prints of the polyautographic albums Man lists well over 1oo lithographs produced under the direction of André and Vollweiler. Amongst those artists who produced more than an occasional drawing on stone were Richard Cooper,4 drawing-master at Eton, who specialized in landscapes; the engraver Charles Heath, who made figure studies in pen and ink;⁵ and Conrad Gessner, who was one of the first to experiment with lithographic crayon and produced a number of drawings of animals in this medium before he returned to Switzerland in 18o4.6 These, however, are the exceptions, and most artists seem to have produced only one or two lithographs as something of an experiment.

Particularly important as an indication of future trends in lithography was the drawing made on stone by the antiquary and topographical draughtsman J. T. Smith for his own book The antiquities of Westminster (London, 18o7).7 The plate, a rather weak pen drawing in the style of an etching, is the first known instance of a lithograph being used to illustrate a book. The original intention was to illustrate the whole edition with one plate only produced by lithography; but the process was obviously not quite so easy as it seemed, and after 3oo prints had been taken the stone was ruined and it was decided to revert to etching on copper for the remaining copies. The first 3oo copies of the edition have both the lithographed and etched versions as Smith decided to use his failure as an opportunity to describe the process.

Besides this isolated and unsuccessful use of lithography for the illustration of a book, one well-known artist drew on stone with apparently no view to publication. William Blake, who was a subscriber to Smith's book,2 and whose interest may even have been aroused by reading the description of the process there, made a pen drawing on stone in about 18o7 which is generally known as Job in Prosperity'.³ A number of amateurs also made lithographs in this period, the most distinguished being the Duc de Montpensier, younger brother of Louis-Philippe, who produced several chalk drawings on stone, dated 1805 and 1806, while he was staying in England at Twickenham.4 But there are also scores of miscellaneous sketches in the polyautographic collection of the British Museum by artists and amateurs who will probably never be identified, and some at least must have escaped the attention of Thomas Fisher who brought them together at the beginning of the century.

The contribution of the antiquary Fisher⁵ as a collector, draughtsman, and publicist of lithography has not been sufficiently appreciated, though it was partly due to his encouragement that the process was kept alive in England after Vollweiler's departure. It is not known how early he became interested in lithography, but in 18o7 he made a number of drawings on stone of some fresco paintings he had found three years earlier on the walls of the Chapel of the Trinity at Stratford on Avon.' The lithographs were drawn by Fisher himself with a pen and were printed by Vollweiler in an edition of 12o copies, after which the drawings were erased from the stones.2 The first two parts, consisting of plates without text, were published in 1807 with the title A series of antient allegorical, historical, and legendary paintings . . . on the walls of the Chapel of the Trinity at Stratford upon Avon in Warwickshire.3 The title-page itself was lithographed and this and the fifteen reproductions were coloured by hand. Before the third part could be published Vollweiler had returned to Germany, and all the remainder of the plates were engraved on copper except one, a large representation of the Painting of the Resurrection and Day of Judgement’ (pl. xix) which occupies a double spread. This was lithographed in the style of the earlier prints and is lettered ‘Drawn 1804, Etched and Published January the 1st. 1808 by Thos. Fisher, Hoxton'. Since Fisher himself records that Vollweiler left the country in the August of the previous year⁴ we can only assume that Fisher printed this plate with the help of Vollweiler's former assistant, D. J. Redman.¹

Fisher is also recorded as having used lithography in two other publications,² but for his major work on the county of Bedfordshire, begun in 1811 and lasting till the year of his death, he chose to use copper-engraving and aquatint.³ After Vollweiler's departure Fisher seems to have been more concerned with bringing the process before a wider public than with producing lithographs himself. In March 18o8 he wrote an article on ‘The process of polyautographic printing' which appeared in the Gentleman's magazine,⁴ and in which he pleaded for a revival of the process before the patent expired. Again in October 1815 he contributed a short note to the same periodical⁵ to accompany a specimen portrait drawn by Henry Winkworth and printed by Redman, and in this he took the opportunity of advertising the lithographic press which Redman had recently set up in London. Though Fisher continued to take an interest in lithography,6 he seems to have taken no further active part in promoting the process after 1815.

Until Vollweiler's departure lithography in England had been almost exclusively devoted to the multiplication of drawings by artists and amateurs,7 many of which found their way into Fisher's collection. The only indication that commercial work might have been undertaken is a claim which Vollweiler made in one of his own lithographed circulars for the Specimens of polyautography that the process had been considerably improved by its application to letter- and music-printing, of which the present advertisement, as well as the title page, and the enclosed sheet of music are specimens."8 In this respect the course lithography followed in England for the first few years was very different from the pattern established in Germany, where it was mainly used for commercial purposes. But when Vollweiler returned to Germany in 18o7 lithography took on a very different direction in England, for he sold the secret of the process and some of the materials to the Quarter-Master-General's Office in Whitehall where it was to be used for official and military purposes. At first little progress was made, the officer who had been initiated into the principles of the process being unable to make it work satisfactorily. It was only when Redman was discovered and persuaded to assist at the Horse Guards that they managed to print with reasonable success. D. J. Redman, who had previously worked for André, Vollweiler, and perhaps Fisher as well, was the first English lithographic printer, and it was with his help that experiments were made with a view to printing the kind of work that had already been produced in Germany during the previous few years. At this stage Redman was by no means a qualified printer, but he had picked up a smattering of the process while engaged as an assistant. Nevertheless, he began experimenting at the Horse Guards and the first successful production of the press, a plan of Bantry Bay, was published on 7 May 18o8. Other jobs of this kind soon followed, as well as circulars and diagrams, but it was not until a new Quarter-Master-General was appointed in 1811 that the lithographic press in Whitehall really began to flourish. The quality of the printing done there during the first few years was not particularly high, and could certainly not compare with similar work produced in Germany in the same period, but it gradually improved and lithography continued to be used successfully at the Horse Guards for the printing of maps, plans, and circulars for many years.²

To this same period (1808–12) belong the eight illustrations which James Forbes drew on stone and included as something of an experiment in his Oriental memoirs. They were rather coarsely printed by Redman in 1811 and 1812 and compare most unfavourably with the engravings and aquatints of the rest of the publication, but this was, all the same, an important venture in book illustration.² Artists continued to be attracted to the process, but far fewer than before: the brothers Cornelius and John Varley³ are known to have made a number of lithographs between 1808 and 1811, P. S. Munn produced a drawing book with lithographed sketches in 181o,⁴ and a few other isolated prints date from this time. Besides Forbes's illustrations Redman printed at least one of Cornelius Varley's lithographs (dated 181o)⁵ and it must be assumed that he was responsible for all those printed in this period, even though it is difficult to see quite how he could have done so while employed at the Horse Guards.6

Until 1812 there seems to have been only one set of lithographic equipment in England, for the press set up by Senefelder passed successively from André to Vollweiler and then to the Quarter-Master-General's Office. But at the close of 1812 or the beginning of 1813 Redman decided to branch out on his own and set up the first English lithographic press outside London at the fashionable city of Bath. No doubt the work he had been doing at the Horse Guards was thoroughly menial compared with the printing he had previously done with André and Vollweiler, and at Bath he directed his attention principally to the printing of artists' drawings. While there he came into contact with Bankes, who wrote and published the first English treatise on lithography at Bath in 1813.1 It is reasonable to suppose that it was Redman who instructed Bankes in the technical side of the process, for he is described in the text as being ‘under the patronage of the artists there, and at the service of the public, to provide the necessary materials, viz. the ink and pencil, and to prepare the stone, and take the impressions from drawings made on it'.² Moreover, it was probably through Redman that Bankes obtained some of the original stones of the Specimens of polyautography, for once again there is a suggestion that these should be reissued.3 With the removal of Redman from London, Bath was now the centre of lithography in England—at least for the printing of artists'drawings—and all the important productions for the next three years were printed by Redman there. One of his principal clients was the artist Thomas Barker, better known as Barker of Bath, who published two sets of his own drawings which are the first important‘one man' collections oflithographs to be issued in England. In 1813 appeared Forty lithographic impressions of rustic figures4 and in the following year Thirty two lithographic impressions of landscape scenery.s Both were drawn in the pen and ink style and were printed by Redman. From the same period (1813-15) date Eight lithographic impressions6 and a number of other prints by various amateur artists of Bath, but otherwise there is little record of Redman's activities there. Such publications would certainly not have been sufficient to keep Redman and his family for three years, and with the experience of the Quarter-Master-General's press behind him we must assume that he did some jobbing printing as well. All the same, after the initial enthusiasm of artists had worn off, the prospect could not have looked too promising, and by October 1815 Redman was back in London.²

For three years, therefore, Bath was the centre of lithography in England.³ It was at Bath that the first English treatise on the process was published and where it was first called lithography; the first attempts to find a suitable English stone to replace those imported from Germany were made in the limestone hills around Bath; and, excepting the Specimens of polyautography, most of the important early lithographed publications were issued there. But after Redman's return both the lithographic presses known to have been working at the time were in London, and for many years to come all the major developments took place in the capital

Redman appears to have been no more successful in London than he was in Bath.4 An article in the Gentleman's magazine⁵ accompanying a specimen of lithography mentions his assistance with some of Ackermann's publications, but points out that the specimen is included partly to further the interests of this poor but industrious man' who lives solely by his art. Despite this rather pathetic picture we have of Redman he continued printing until at least the end of 1823, producing plates for a minimum of five topographical volumes6 besides illustrations for The Freebooter.7 In 1819 Redman was awarded a Silver Isis medal by the Society of Arts for a lithograph executed on English stone. He was primarily a printer of pen and ink work; some of his chalk printing was very poor, and even the best of it could not compare with work produced by either the first generation of printers in England or by those who were to follow him. Nevertheless, he was largely responsible for keeping lithography alive in England after Vollweiler's departure, and he served as a link between the very first lithographic printers and the master technicians of the next decade.

The real growth of lithography in this country was delayed until contacts with Germany were once again established. For ten years following Vollweiler's departure in 1807 England had been completely cut off from the continent as far as lithography was concerned, and Redman and his successors at the Quarter-Master-General's Office must have continued to practise the process almost as it was known when first introduced to England at the beginning of the century.² An examination of the lithographs produced in this period shows in fact a steady decline in the quality of the printing, and especially in the printing of chalk drawings,³ from the Specimens of polyautography onwards. Even Fisher in his recommendation of Redman in the Gentleman's magazine admitted that he had not produced works of such delicacy and fineness as his predecessors.4 It was not until peaceful conditions were once again established in Europe after the Napoleonic Wars that advantage could be taken of the improvements made in Munich by Senefelder, Mitterer, and Mannlich; and it so happened that this coincided exactly with the expiration of the English patent.

The growth and spread of lithography in this country nearly twenty years after its first introduction was mainly due to two men who had both visited Senefelder in Munich—Rudolph Ackermann, the well-known publisher of aquatint books, and Charles Hullmandel, an artist. Ackermann was largely responsible for bringing lithography to the notice of the English public, while Hullmandel turned his attention more to the practical issues of improving printing methods and teaching artists to draw on stone.

A German by birth, Ackermann settled in London and in 1795 opened a print shop in the Strand which soon became a fashionable centre for the arts in Georgian England. There, at the Repository of Arts, he ran a drawing school and later opened an art library and held literary evenings. But besides being a successful publisher and patron of the arts Ackermann was always interested in novelties, and one of the many inventions which attracted his attention was the process of lithography. Ackermann's interest in the process went right back to the beginning of the century when he published lithographs which had been printed for him by André² and Vollweiler.³ A contemporary notice in the Englische Miscellen even claimed that he wanted to buy the English patent.4 Little more is known of his early interest in lithography, but Fisher recorded in both 1808⁵ and 181 56 that he made use of it in some of his publications. Ackermann may have decided, as Man has suggested,7 to bide his time until the reaction of the public proved more favourable, but from this point of view he could hardly have chosen a less opportune time to set up a press. When he began printing, probably right at the beginning of 1817,8 lithography was at its lowest ebb in England, and perhaps this was one of the reasons why Ackermann, an astute publisher, began to encourage the process in the country.9 One of the first and most important productions of Ackermann's press, a further facsimile edition of Dürer's marginal drawings for the Emperor Maximilian's Prayer Book,' provides ample proof of his awareness of what was going on in Germany, and this is supported by an article accompanying the first lithograph in his Repository of arts in which he admits to trying to emulate the productions of Munich presses.²

In the year following the establishment of his press Ackermann visited Senefelder in Germany, probably with a view to making arrangements for the publication of an English edition of the inventor's treatise. This appeared in 1819, but with the plates printed at Ackermann's own press as the import duty on prints from abroad would have made it too expensive for Senefelder to supply impressions from the original stones.³ Only a month after publication, on 6 April 1819, Ackermann presented a copy of the treatise to the Society of Arts and demonstrated the process before the Committee of Polite Arts on a small press sent by Senefelder himself.4 He also recommended that the Society should bestow an award on the inventor, and at a meeting of the Society held on the following day it was agreed that Senefelder should be presented with their Gold Medal.⁵ It was Ackermann, then, who really made the Society aware of the importance of the process which had already been practised in England for nearly twenty years,6 and, through the publication of Senefelder's treatise, brought it before an even wider public.

The other works issued from Ackermann's press are neither numerous nor of great importance, being mainly rather inferior plates for the Repository of arts.¹ Much the same can be said of the products of what was probably the fourth lithographic press to be established in London, that of Moser and Harris.2 It was not until Charles Hullmandel set up a press following his dissatisfaction with the way Moser and Harris had printed his Twenty-four views of Italy that a potentially good lithographic printer was working in England. Hullmandel's full importance will only become evident in later chapters, and it is sufficient to note here that he was in the first place a landscape painter who became interested in lithography when he met Senefelder in Munich in 1817 while on his way back from a sketching tour. In Munich he must have seen such examples of lithography as prints from the Oeuvres lithographiques and the Bayerische Gemnälde-Saal, for some of the first works he printed for himself were in the tinted style which was then virtually unknown in England.³ The high standard of printing he had seen while in Munich must have made him only too critical of the first lithographs printed for him by Moser and Harris; and so it was perhaps to this almost accidental contact with German lithography that we must attribute the founding of a press, either late 1818 or early 1819, by the man who was to direct the course of lithography in England throughout most of the first half of the nineteenth century.

The publication of Senefelder's treatise by Ackermann and the establishment of a press by Hullmandel signalled the real birth of English lithography. Hullmandel's press was so successful that within a few years Ackermann transferred his work there and confined himself once more to the role of publisher as far as lithography was concerned. From 1818 onwards other presses were set up in London and in the provinces as well, but Hullmandel's influence remained paramount in directing the course of lithography for another twenty years. An artist himself, he was mainly interested in using the process for pictorial purposes, and especially for those subjects which attracted many other Englishmen of the period—topography and landscape. The development of pictorial lithography in England over the next few decades can be traccd perfectly well in this type of work alone.