# LITHOGRAPHY IN FRANCE 1801-1818

I HOUGH INTRODUCED TO FRANCE AT ABOUT THE SAME TIME AS TO England, lithography was much slower in taking root there, and very little was produced in the first few years to compare in scale or quality with the Specimens of polyautography. At the outset the process was used mainly for the printing of music covers and, apart from a quantity of this sort of work, very little remains of the output of the French presses that were in existence before 1815. The beginnings of the process are still very confused, and even the first historians of the art in France, writing within twenty years of its introduction, knew so little about the early years of lithography that they erroneously considered it to have been brought to France in 18o7.¹ In fact, following Johann André's plan for setting up lithographic presses in the leading capitals of Europe, another brother, Peter Friedrich André, was sent to Paris to take out a patent and establish a press there right at the beginning of the century. Frédéric André, as he came to be called in Paris, applied for a brevet d’importation as early as 13 December 18o1. This was granted on

11 February of the following year, only eight months after a similar one had been secured in London.

The origins of lithography in France are still only very imperfectly revealed, but recent research by Élisabeth Lebeau on its use for music printing has helped to clear up a number of points.² She has shown that there was much more printing being done in Paris than had previously been supposed and that there were presses working at a number of addresses in and around Paris in the period 1802–6. The first of these seems to have been the one set up by Frédéric André at Charenton, just to the south-east of Paris, soon after he took out his patent in 1802. Most of the surviving works of this press were made for musical publications—a branch of lithography that had already proved successful in Germany. Many of André's publications were even by German composers, and were often merely editions in French covers of works which had already been sold in Offenbach by his brother Johann. Some twenty-three musical works with covers printed lithographically by André at Charenton have so far been traced.

The French painter Bergeret also worked on stone at André's Charenton press. He produced a simple pen and ink vignette on the cover of Mozart's Trent-cinq cadences in 1804,³ but he also had a hand in what was probably the most ambitious undertaking of André's press—the production of a series of lithographed reproductions of works in the Musée Napoléon. The lithographs were to have been drawn by Bergeret in pen and ink and published in monthly parts by John Bell in London. There is a copy of the prospectus for this venture in the British Museum,4 and one of Bergeret's lithographs for it, a pen drawing after Rubens's ‘Descent from the Cross', is preserved in the Bibliothèque Nationale.' At least two other prints are known to have been started, but the publication ran into difficulties owing to the problem of communication with England during the war, and eventually it appeared with copper-engraved plates.²

By this time, however, another press was operating in Charenton, for on I February 18o3 André sold the right to print from stone to a Mme Vernay, the wife of a paper manufacturer from Villeneuve-sur-Yonne. This press seems to have undertaken just the same sort of work as André's own, and twenty-two examples of its music covers have been traced, including another bearing a vignette by Bergeret.

André continued printing at Charenton and was still living there in May 18o4, but soon afterwards he must have moved to Paris. There are a few lithographed music covers in existence which bear the address rue Saint-Sébastien (either no. 24 or no. 48). André is known to have been living at the latter of these two addresses, though both refer to the same property as the numbering changed in 18o5. It was for this press that Bergeret probably drew the vignette of Mercury which was for a long while regarded as the earliest French lithograph extant.3 André continued printing in the rue Saint-Sébastien until the beginning of 18o6 when he probably ceased to produce music covers and may have left Paris.

In the course of her work on early lithographed music in Paris Élisabeth Lebeau has found some fifty-three such items: twenty-three of them having been produced by André at Charenton, twenty-two of them by Vernay at Charenton, and eight by André in Paris, rue Saint-Sébastien. The quantity of this type of work that has been traced suggests that this was the most important branch of lithography in Paris in the period 1802–6, and this may well have been the case, but it ought not to disguise the fact that some other kinds of lithography must also have been undertaken. The process was described in the Correspondance des amateurs musiciens for 3o July 1803 as being suitable for all sorts of drawings besides music printing,⁴ and there is every reason to suppose that artists made experimental drawings on stone in Paris just as they did in Germany and England. Very little pictorial lithography of this period has so far been traced, but the artist who seems to have been most attracted to the process was P.-N. Bergeret. Apart from the various items mentioned above there are also a number of lithographs by him in the Bibliothèque Nationale in both the pen and crayon styles which, though undated and without imprint, must have been printed at one of these early presses.

In the meantime there had been an attempt to set up another lithographic press in Paris. In the summer of 18o3 the composer Pleyel, who had already had some of his own music printed lithographically by Johann André in Offenbach, and was now settled in Paris as a music publisher himself, decided to invite Niedermayr to open a press in Paris. Niedermayr was one of the earliest lithographic printers in Germany. As a friend of the Senefelder brothers he had learned something of the process, and on the strength of this had established a press of his own, first at Straubing and then at Regensburg. Pleyel visited this second press with the geographer Jomard in 18o3 and persuaded Niedermayr to move to Paris; but the enterprise came to nothing as Pleyel was prevented from printing by André's patent, and in 18o4 Niedermayr was forced to return home to Germany.²

A press is also supposed to have been established in Paris by another German, François Johannot. He was a cousin of the André brothers and had been instructed in the process by Johann André before setting up a press of his own in Offenbach which soon became one of the centres for pictorial lithography in Germany. It seems very likely, therefore, that this press in Paris was set up with the full authority of the André family and, as Johannot soon stopped printing, it has been suggested that he may have gone there especially to prepare the way for the new lithographic business which Frédéric André was about to set up in Paris.

Why André stopped printing in the first instance is not known, but an examination of the description of the process which he made when taking out his patent reveals that he knew far less about the technical side of lithography than his brother Philipp in London, and this may well have been one reason why he decided to close down his first press. When he returned to Paris in 1807 and set up a new lithographic business in the rue du Pontaux-Choux he must have been better equipped to print, for while in Germany he would have become familiar with the improvements made to the process since he took out his patent. Certainly this second press of André's was more successful than the first in terms of reputation: examples of his work were sent to the Société d'Encouragement, and his press attracted the attention of some of the earliest writers on lithography in France.² Amongst the lithographs printed by André in this period were some plates for the atlas volume (18o7) of Millin's Voyage dans les départemens du midi de la France (Paris, 1807–11) and for the fourth edition ofJ. F. de Bourgoing's Tableau de l'Espagne moderne (Paris, 18o7).

All the same, André cannot have seen much chance of making a financial success out of printing from stone, for he seems to have been most anxious to sell the right to use his process to anyone who was interested in it. On one day alone, 9 November 1807,³ he sold licences to print to four separate parties for a total of 1,45o francs—only 250 francs more than the sum he had received from Mme Vernay four years earlier. On that day André sold the right to use his process in the following way: to Choron, Leduc, and Baltard for engraving and printing music; to an engineer named White for a publication called the Portefeuille du mécanicien; to a painter, Jean Gibèle, for printing on sheet metal and cardboard boxes. Whatever use these men may have made of the process they had bought they cannot have been very successful. The sale to the music publisher A. E. Choron and the engraver L.-P. Baltard is mentioned in one of the journals, where it is recorded that the latter soon gave up his experiments through lack of information.4 Choron, on the other hand, must have been a little more successful for he submitted some examples of his music printing to the Société d'Encouragement in 18o8.1 White is recorded as having constructed a lithographic press himself and as having produced all sorts of lithographed work, including all the plates for his own Recueil de tableaux de mécanique appliquée et d’élemens généraux de machines.² But the other parties, if indeed they ever did any printing, remained unnoticed by the journals.

Yet there must have been some presses active in Paris at this time, for one contemporary writer noted in 18o9 that the process was already being used by several artists in France.3 There seems to have been a growing interest in pictorial lithography with the decline in music printing, and this may help to explain why the process began to attract more attention after 1807. This shift of emphasis may also be one reason why the engraver Baltard, who had already bought from André the right to print music from stone, extended his licence on 21 April 18o9 to cover the printing of all kinds of drawings and pictures.⁴

André must also have granted a similar licence to the painter Guyot Desmarais at much the same time, for a prospectus of Desmarais's press headed‘par brevet d’importation' is preserved in the Bibliothèque Nationale.⁵ Desmarais seems to have been the most successful of the André licensees, and even though he was a painter he chose to mention the commercial advantages of lithography in his prospectus. He claimed that he could print more than 1,ooo copies a day of work like circulars and letterheads, and that he could do so more economically than they could be produced by any other method of printing. Nothing seems to have survived of the commercial work of this press apart from the rather impressive prospectus itself, which bears the signature C. Johannot, but Desmarais submitted a set of twelve of his own lithographs of animals to the Société d'Encouragement on 13 September 18o9 which, it was claimed, were of a delicacy ‘dont on n’avoit pas cru susceptible ce genre d’impression'.6 But in general French lithographs of this period could hardly have compared in quality with similar works produced in Germany, for Marcel de Serres, who had visited presses in Munich and Vienna, reported in 1814 that all lithographic prints produced in Paris up till then could only be considered more or less imperfect.

Although lithography never rcally established itself in France during the first decade of the century, a number of Frenchmen became interested in the process in this period through contacts with Germany. As early as 1803 Jomard² and Pleyel visited Niedermayr in Regensburg, where they saw the process being used for the printing of music, and later, during the occupation of Bavaria, a number of Frenchmen attached to the imperial army took the opportunity of drawing on stone at Munich presses. The first of these was Louis Napoleon, brother of the Emperor, who made a pen lithograph of Four men of the imperial guard talking' at the press of the Feiertagsschule on 18 October 18o5.3 Two of Napoleon's officers also made lithographs in Munich and were so enthusiastic about the process that they planned to open presses themselves when they returned to France; in 18o6 General Baron Lejeune (then a colonel) made a chalk drawing on stone of aCossack’ at the press of the Senefelder brothers,4 and in the following year Colonel Lomet made some lithographs, amongst them a drawing of the sculptured figure on the tomb of Jean Staininger at Braunau sur l'Inn.⁵ Both Lejeune and Lomet returned to Paris armed with proofs of their lithographs⁶ in the hope of arousing interest in the process. Lomet, who arrived back at the beginning of 1808, also brought with him examples of lithographs produced in various parts of Germany and offered to share the fruits of his experience in Munich with anyone who was interested. Lejeune went further and approached the Emperor himself, presenting him with his lithograph of the cossack and explaining some of the advantages which would result from the introduction of the new art into France. Napoleon was encouraging, and so were the painters David and Carle Vernet; the only person he found to be hostile to lithography at this stage was Vivant Denon, the director of the imperial museums.' Lejeune decided to continue with his plans for setting up a lithographic press, and was about to put them into operation when, like Lomet, he was called away for the campaign in Spain.

Despite Denon's alleged poor opinion of lithography his interest must at least have been aroused by the new process for, having accompanied Napoleon on the Fourth Coalition War, he stayed behind in Germany and spent some time in the autumn of 18o9 in Munich. While there he visited Mannlich's press where he tried to master the process in order to introduce it into France himself,² and made a lithograph of the Rest on the flight into Egypt'.³ The draughtsman who accompanied Denon on his tours, Benjamin Zix, also produced a lithograph, and both were later included by Mannlich in his Oeuvres lithographiques.4 From this time onwards Denon seems to have been thoroughly converted to lithography for, besides being one of the earliest French artists to produce prints of any real quality, he was instrumental in popularizing the process; and when Lejeune returned from Spain in 181I he found Denon encouraging fashionable ladies of Parisian society to draw on stone in his studio.5 It was probably at Denon's instigation that Mannlich sent some of the lithographs by Strixner and Piloty which later appeared in the Oeuvres lithographiques to the Classe des Beaux-Arts of the Institut Royal in Paris in October 18o9,6 and it was through the good offsices of Mannlich and Denon that permission was sought to establish a lithographic house in Paris with Senefelder as its director.7

This project came to nothing, and so did a similar attempt by Lasteyrie and Aretin to persuade Senefelder to come to Paris in 181o complete with pressmen and artists. These were not the most propitious times for establishing a press, and one early historian goes so far as to suggest that Napoleon was not anxious to promote an art that might have been used for the propagation of ideas.² Yet the attention of the government was repeatedly drawn to lithography by a series of articles contributed to the periodicals by Marcel de Serres, one of its own inspectors of arts and manufactures. In 18o9 he reported from Vienna on the progress of the art in Germany³ and sent back some prints and a number of stones showing the various manners of lithography; and again in 181o he wrote from Munich about the process as he had seen it used there and particularly about a method of printing cottons by means of stone cylinders.⁴ These and later trips to Austria and Bavaria provided him with information for the first comprehensive account of lithography in the French language which he later published between March and June 1814 in Annales des arts et manufactures.⁵ In fact, since the occupation of Germany, lithography seems to have aroused more interest in France than in England; a number of German lithographs found their way to France6 and the process attracted considerable attentionin periodicals. Yet the very circumstances that brought Frenchmen into contact with lithography in Munich and Vienna prevented it from becoming established in Paris; and, although influential people like Lejeune, Lomet, Denon, Lasteyrie, and Marcel de Serres had in their turn tried to foster the new process, the only press known to have been in existence in Paris after 18o9 was the one used by Denon for the multiplication of his own and amateurs' drawings. There was no lack of interest in the process, but the unsettled political state of France hindered its practice for several years.7 It was not until Louis XVIII was restored to the throne in the summer of 181 5 following Napoleon's abortive cent jours that the two presses were founded which heralded the real birth of lithography in France—those of Engelmann in Mulhouse, and Lasteyrie and Engelmann in Paris.

Charles Philibert de Lasteyrie (1759–1849) had taken an interest in lithography almost from the beginning and was one of the most persistent in his attempts to get it established in France. As early as 18o3 he bought some lithographic stones from Frédéric André when this first Paris press closed down. In 18o8 he presented some of André's prints to the Société d'Encouragement,² and again in 18o9 he is recorded as having found good lithographic stones in France near the forest of Montmorenci.³ In the, following year, with the help of Aretin, he tried to get Senefelder to bring workmen to Paris in order to establish a press there, but when this plan failed he determined to go to Munich himself and study the process at first hand. Lasteyrie made two journeys to the Bavarian capital, one in 1812 and the other in 1814.4 On the first of these he spent a month in one of the lithographic studios there, studying the process with a view to setting up a press of his own. When he had made himself sufficiently familiar with the process, he bought the necessary materials and engaged workmen to return with him to Paris. He had even started on his return journey when he heard of the disasters in Russia and realized that he would have to come to Munich again as he could count on neither the workmen nor the materials following him to France. The political events which followed delayed his second visit till 1814. But this time he was much more thorough, and in order to get a complete understanding of the process he tried everything himself, from the preparation of the stones to the printing. Even then his plan for getting one of Senefelder's brothers to direct a press in Paris was thwarted by the unsettled state of the capital, and it was not until the close of 181 5 that he finally reached his goal and set up a lithographic press in France.

Lasteyrie's first press was founded with the encouragement of the Conte de Cazes at the Ministry of the Interior, where it was used mainly for the reproduction of circulars and similar routine work connected with the administration. The first production was something of a prestige publication—the Lettres autographes et inédites de Henry IV (n.d.),2 a series of ten lithographed facsimiles with a crayon portrait of the King by Gérard in a rather debased form of the familiar eighteenth-century engraved oval. But the possibilities at the ministry for developing lithography must have been rather limited and, spurred on perhaps by what Engelmann was doing at Mulhouse, Lasteyrie set up a press of his own in Paris on 15 April of the following year. At this second press, rue du Four, Saint-Germain, no. 54, lithography prospered and broadened its scope, and in the same year Lasteyrie began to publish a collection of prints to demonstrate the versatility of the process: Recueil de différens genres d’impressions lithographiques qui peuvent avoir une application utile aux sciences et aux arts mécaniques et libéraux (Paris, 1816). The intention was to publish four parts of six plates each, but only two seem to have appeared.³ In these the emphasis is still on the useful aspects of the process, and examples of zoological and botanical illustration and the printing of music, maps, and manuscripts occupy half the collection. But there are specimens of both chalk and ink drawing, including a fine landscape by Michallon.

Lasteyrie continued to produce the type of commercial work that was the mainstay of German presses and that he himself had started with at the ministry, but he also began to turn more and more to the printing of book illustrations, caricatures, and, above all, the drawings of artists and amateurs. Bourgeois, Gros, Charlet, Marlet, Thiénon, Vauzelle, Carle and Horace Vernet, Michallon, J.-B. Isabey, Villeneuve, and Denon all made lithographs at his press in its first few years. Many amateurs also drew on stone there. Lasteyrie certainly had the right contacts in Paris; he knew exactly how to arouse interest in the process by lending stones out to the ladies of Parisian society, who were naturally delighted to see their masterpieces multiplied and distributed amongst their friends. Lasteyrie became, as Bouchot pointed out, 'l’imprimeur de la société',4 and for a time in 1817 he used the title Lithographe du Roi'. His approach to lithography, though by no means superficial, was that of the dilettante, and turning to the process in middle age after a distinguished career in a number of fields he appears to have been mainly concerned with popularizing it, and was generous even to the extent of encouraging his keenest rival.'

Godefroy Engelmann (1788–1839), on the other hand, trained first in business and then as an artist, took up lithography while still a young man and saw it as a means of making a living, and to this end was more concerned with perfecting the process and creating an efficient, well-known, and profitable business concern. Engelmann was born in Mulhouse where his family could trace back its origins some 3oo years.² His father, Godefroy Engelmann (1734-181o), was a well-to-do wholesale merchant there, and the last Conseiller Trésorier before Alsace became united with France in 1798. While still a young boy the younger Godefroy was sent to French Switzerland to learn the language he was to use for the rest of his life. After this he travelled to La Rochelle to gain some experience in business, and then to Paris where he studied painting and drawing under Regnault at the Académie des Beaux-Arts.³ On his return to Mulhouse Engelmann entered the large cotton-printing firm of Jean Thierry as a draughtsman, and in 1809 he married Thierry's daughter, apparently winning himself a partnership in the firm at the same time.

Engelmann first came to hear about lithography in 1813 when his friend Edouard Koechlin brought back with him from Germany a copy of Rapp's Das Geheimniss des Steindrucks⁴ and some examples of German lithography. He tells in the historical introduction to his own treatise how he at once became excited by the possibilities of the process.⁵ He read Rapp's instructions avidly and soon began to experiment on some stones, obtaining his prints by rubbing the back of the paper with a bookbinder's folder (plioir). After the success of these first trials he constructed a provisional press of his own and spent the winter of 1813-14 in further experiments. Finally, in June 1814, realizing that he needed more information, he decided to go to Munich to see the process at first hand.

For several weeks Engelmann studied the art in the studios of Stuntz where Strixner and Piloty worked. He had his own press constructed and produced some lithographs in the tinted style which had become so popular in Germany.² Like Lasteyrie, whom he is supposed to have met in Munich,³ Engelmann returned with a press, stones, and all the equipment needed to set up a lithographic establishment. In Mulhouse he looked around for partners in order to form a company; the Mayor of Mulhouse and the Prefect of the Department both took shares, and the Société lithographique de Mulhouse' was formed with Engelmann as its manager.4 The exact date of the foundation of Engelmann's press is not recorded, but he sent some of the earliest examples of his work to the Société d'Encouragement in

October 1815. Strangely enough it was Lasteyrie, then vice-president of the society, who reported on the works submitted and who generously congratulated Engelmann on his success, claiming that these prints left little to be desired even when compared with specimens of German lithography.

Despite this encouragement Engelmann must have realized that Mulhouse was not the best place in which to practise lithography, especially if he was interested in getting artists to draw on stone, and on 15 June 1816 he followed Lasteyrie to Paris and set up another printing works with his brother-in-law Pierre Thierry at rue Cassette, no. 18. Within two months he sent a set of lithographs (including some landscapes by Mongin and prints by or after Regnault and Carle Vernet) to the Académie Royale des Beaux-Arts for its meeting of 3 August 1816. The Academy thought fit to examine carefully the prints submitted by Engelmann and undertook to study the origins and progress of the new art. To do this a comnission was set up consisting of the architect Heurtier, the engraver Desnoyers, painters Regnault and Guérin, and with Castellan as its secretary. Their report was published in 1816,² and since extracts of it appeared in numerous publications it must have played an important part in establishing Engelmann as a lithographic printer, besides making the process as a whole far better known in France. The investigation seems to have been a thorough one, for in addition to studying the principles of the process some members of the commission tried drawing on stone for themselves. This was clearly the branch of lithography that Engelmann had been most anxious to promote in coming to Paris in the first instance, and by submitting lithographs of well-known artists he managed to draw attention to its autographic quality. The commission was not slow to see these possibilities and recommended the process particularly to painters, who could have their works multiplied comme par enchantement' instead of having to resort to the difficult and laborious task of engraving. It recognized in these works submitted by Engelmann almost all the qualities found in engraving as well as those belonging to original drawing, and ended its report with the hope that Engelmann's press in Paris would flourish so that artists could draw on stone there and thus multiply their original works. The Academy approved the commission's report and offered Engelmann all its encouragement.

Engelmann could hardly have hoped for a better reception and a more useful advertisement. Within a few years artists flocked to his press, and it soon far outstripped that of Lasteyrie in both size and reputation. Probably in the same year that Lasteyrie published his Recueil de différens genres d’impressions lithographiques Engelmann produced a similar Recueil d’essais lithographiques dans les différents genres de dessin.¹ It was a smaller but rather more competent production with a pen-drawn map, an imitation woodengraving, a sheet of transferred writing, two examples of tinted lithography, and drawings in either ink or chalk by Girodet, H. Vernet, Mongin, and Engelmann himself. The competition between the houses of Engelmann and Lasteyrie was obviously keen and, as a contemporary English writer observed, this helped the art to make rapid progress there.² In the long run it was Engelmann who took the lead. Lasteyrie's enthusiasm for lithography appears to have ended with the successful establishment of the process in France, and within a few years his press passed to other hands and his interests to different fields. Engelmann, however, was concerned with lithography throughout his life and at his death left a flourishing press to his son.³ For twenty years he was responsible for most of the major technical developments of the process and he wrote two important treatises. Already by 182o his was probably the leading press in Europe, and certainly so for that branch of lithography in which France has ever since led the world, the production of artists’ prints. More than anyone else in Europe it was Engelmann who, by virtue of his technical improvements, clear descriptions, and skilful printing, encouraged artists to draw on stone; and the real growth of lithography as far as the artist was concerned really dates from the establishment of his press in Paris.4

After 1816 lithography spread rapidly in France, and within a few years many other presses were founded there. Already in 1816 Delpech, Constans, and Villain broke away from Lasteyrie and began printing on their own account in Paris, and in the next few years Brégeaut, Noël, Langlumé, Motte, and others followed suit, most of them having been trained by either Engelmann or Lasteyrie. Presses were also set up in the provinces, and besides the business at Mulhouse, which continued to flourish, there were early lithographic houses at Bordeaux (1817),1 Dijon (1818),2 and Rouen (1819),³ and probably in many other provincial towns as well. By 1822 there were already eighteen lithographic presses in Paris and twenty-six in the provinces,4 and in 1828 there were, in the department of the Seine alone, twenty-four lithographic printing houses containing 18o presses and employing 420 workmen.⁵

The success oflithography was confirmed in 1817 from two very different standpoints: in that year the artistic possibilities of the process were first brought before the public when Lasteyrie sent a selection of lithographs to the Salon,6 and on 8 October 1817 the potential threat of lithography to the security of the state (and incidentally, therefore, to that of the printing trade) was acknowledged when it was subjected to the regulations already in force for letterpress and copper-plate printing.7 After an extremely slow beginning lithography had developed so rapidly in the hands of Engelmann and other skilful printers that Paris soon led the world. Encouraged by the recognition it received from well-known artists, and in a more material way by the awards of the Société d’Encouragement and of the national Expositions des Produits de l’Industrie, both the commercial and artistic sides of the process prospered to such an extent that those who wanted to study the process after 182o went to France rather than to Germany.

II

THE PROCESS OF LITHOGRAPHY AND THE TECHNIQUES OF DRAWING ON STONE