# THE EARLY LITERATURE OF LITHOGRAPHY

LITHOGRAPHY ALONE OF THE MAJOR GRAPHIC PROCESSES WAS discovered after the invention in Europe of printing from movable types, and because of this it benefited from an enormous technical literature which would clearly not have been possible at the outset of either relief or intaglio printing. In fact, the first treatise on the related techniques of etching and line engraving was published some 2oo years after their discovery around the middle of the fifteenth century, while woodcutting, the oldest of the graphic processes, was not the subject of a separate work until Papillon's treatise was published in 1766.² Yet within twelve years of Senefelder's discovering lithography the first independent treatise on the new process had been published in Germany, and in the following forty years some fifty further works were produced in France, Germany, England, and Italy, entirely devoted to explaining the process to printers and artists.

Even during this same period there were few practical descriptions of the other graphic processes. As far as England and France are concerned Partington,³ Perrot,4 Deleschamps,5 and Fielding6 produced general works on engraving which dealt with most of the known processes. Jackson and Chatto wrote the only book on wood-engraving, and there appears to have been only one treatise each on aquatint and mezzotint,² but no separate work on copper-engraving belonging to the first half of the century is recorded. The only established process to attract writers in any quantity was etching, and not more than ten handbooks can have been published even on this subject in the fifty years under discussion.³ The comparative wealth of technical literature on lithography can be partly explained by the rather mysterious nature of the process and its novelty; but it can also be accounted for by the fact that lithography appealed to the amateur artist and to the painter with no previous experience of the graphic arts, whereas the other processes were firmly established as professional crafts. In this respect it is worth noting that etching, the only other process with a similar appeal, was the subject of at least a few treatises. There was at the time, and there remains still, something of a distinction between the ‘liberal’ and the ‘mechanical’ amongst the graphic arts.

Unlike the other processes, lithography depends on chemical and not mechanical principles. This in itself appears to have been something of a mystery at the time and must explain why lithography attracted the attention, not only of artists, but also of scientists and men of fashion. The enthusiasm shown for the natural and physical sciences in the eighteenth century was gathering momentum, and writers on lithography were not slow to take advantage of this by emphasizing the essential chemical nature of the process. Much of the earliest literature on lithography is to be found in short notices in the scientific, literary, and fashionable journals of the first two decades of the nineteenth century.4 It was in these that lithography was first proclaimed. Such accounts are very unreliable; errors were perpetuated from one article to another, and it seems clear that very few of the writers concerned had any direct experience of lithographic printing, but were primarily concerned with keeping their readers in touch with the latest news in the polite arts'.

Far more important for the student of lithography are the early treatises. These were written with the specific intention of explaining to the prospective lithographic printer, or to the artist wanting to know how to draw on stone, exactly how the process worked. A great number were published from 181o onwards until the end of the century, and handbooks on the subject are still appearing. This section is principally concerned with those produced during the period 181o to 185o. Between these two dates at least fifty separate treatises appeared in nearly a hundred editions, details of which can be found in the bibliographies of this book. The majority of these treatises were published in Germany, France, and England, though a few Italian ones are also to be found; but national boundaries were to some extent broken down as a number of the most important treatises were translated into other languages within a few years of first publication.i The books themselves are usually quite slim volumes, octavo or smaller in size, though a few of the more important ones were produced on a rather grander scale. The general pattern is towards longer works as our period progresses and as the process itself became more complicated and also rather better understood. Most of these handbooks contain lithographed plates showing the materials used and methods of working, and many of them include specimen plates illustrating the various applications of the process. In this respect lithographic treatises merely followed the pattern already established by Bosse, and taken up by others, for technical manuals on etching and engraving.

Many of the earlier treatises were privately printed and must have appeared in quite small editions, limited in size perhaps by the obvious difficulty of producing large editions of a variety of plates by means of a relatively new process. It is not easy to assess the size of these editions lacking any certain information, but the earliest treatises could hardly have appeared in editions of more than a few hundred. They would not therefore have reached a very wide public, and some of them seem to have been almost unknown by succeeding generations of printers. Certainly, many are now very scarce.

Apart from a few pioneers the authors of these lithographic treatises were nearly all printers themselves and had vested interests in the process.

From the beginning lithography was veiled in secrecy, and this was lifted only when the inventor published his treatise on the subject. For some time the process became well known, and there followed a period of improvements made by individual printers. Again the veil ofsecrecy descended, and the authors of later treatises have an irritating habit of explaining only what was already common practice, while jealously guarding their own improvements. Nevertheless, these manuals provide us with our best means of studying the materials and techniques of early lithographers while it was still the accepted custom for an artist to work in the printer's studio and to be trained in his methods. They provide, too, in their short historical introductions, an interesting commentary on the progress of lithography and its various applications.

What we now know as lithography began as a number of imitative processes whose only common factor was the lithographic stone (though even the stone is not, and was not almost from the very beginning, an essential part of lithography). Sometimes the stone was etched or incised to imitate a wood-engraving, and sometimes it was etched or engraved as on copper. In the first case the image stood in relief, in the second it was lower than the surface of the stone. Alternatively, a number of complicated methods could be applied to the stone more or less imitating these other methods of printing. As we have seen, Senefelder arrived at his invention through the processes of intaglio and relief printing, and with the one so fashionable and the other so cheap and convenient it is hardly surprising that many of the earliest descriptions of the process of lithography include methods of engraving and etching on stone as well as the ordinary planographic method now generally accepted as being lithography. It took a long while before these other methods, which we now consider belong more properly to wood and copper, were finally abandoned. Descriptions can be found in treatises throughout the century, though in later works they appear more as curiosities. By 1825 the planographic method seems to have been generally accepted as the most natural method of printing from stone, except for specific types of work like lettering, mechanical drawing, maps, and architectural plans, where greater precision was required.

No doubt it did at first seem incredible to print from a flat surface, and this may have been one reason why these other methods were applied to the stone. But perhaps, as in Senefelder's own treatise, there was also a concern to stress the versatility of a new process. There must, too, have been difficulty in finding artists and craftsmen who were prepared to work on stone. Many of those who took up lithography were either engravers or artists who had been used to working for the engravers, and it was only natural that they should try to apply techniques they already knew and understood. This variety in the techniques applied to printing from stone is reflected in the confusion of terminology discussed in the previous section; for what we now call lithography went under a variety of names during its first twenty years.

Not only the techniques of working on stone, but the styles of drawing too were, in the first place, borrowed from other processes. The imitative stage is a natural one in the development of any process and, just as the earliest printers and woodcutters blatantly imitated the work of scribes and illuminators, so many of the earliest lithographic draughtsmen based their method of drawing on that of the copper engravers. There is a further analogy in that both lithography and the new inventions of the fifteenth century were intended as, and remained for some time, cheap substitutes for their predecessors, and attracted artists away from the already established crafts.

In lithography it was especially easy to imitate the styles of drawing for other media as the process itself was such a versatile one. Most of the earliest pen lithographs are drawn in the spirit of either etchings or copper-engravings, and many of the early treatises describe methods of imitating the style of woodcuts, engravings, or etchings. There were attempts, too, at getting the tonal effects of mezzotint and aquatint on stone. Even chalk drawing, which was the most original branch of lithography, began to develop along the lines of copper-engraving with its system of parallel swelling lines and carefully laid tones. Ivins is surely right in saying that with the invention of lithography the original artist was freed from the tyranny of the engraver's ‘nets of rationality';1 but it is only fair to say that the artist did not immediately realize his freedom. He was bewildered by the apparent lack of discipline and so, in the first place, borrowed his syntax froımn a wide variety of processes.

It is hoped that a study of these early descriptions of the process will show in the first place the gradual development of lithography as a medium in its own right, as a planographic medium depending not on physical difference of level, as in wood and metal engraving, but on chemical principles; and secondly, that it will show how the lithographic artist shed the traditional syntax of the engraver and began to find a variety of different methods of drawing for this new process.

## THE PATENT SPECIFICATIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS PRIOR TO THE TREATISES

IHE EARLIEST DESCRIPTION OF LITHOGRAPHY TO HAVE SURVIVED is the specification Senefelder himself deposited as a necessary part of his application for an English patent. At that time the specification had to follow within one month of the granting of Letters Patent and, accordingly, Senefelder enrolled his description in the High Court of Chancery on 18 July 18or.² It is a fairly complete account of the process and, though at times intolerably complicated, remains the only reliable record of lithography as it was practised by Senefelder right at the beginning of the century. The inventor's own treatise was written nearly twenty years afterwards and naturally incorporates the results of further experiments. Though not so complete as the treatise, however, the specification is in many ways a clearer guide to an understanding of the process as Senefelder does not confuse the issue by describing too many of its variants.

Right at the beginning of the specification Senefelder states that his invention consists of three parts. These can be summarized as follows: (1) the invention of the process itself, (2) the discovery of a new printing material, and (3) the construction of a new type of press.

The sections relating to the first of these three are the most interesting of the specification, for Senefelder deals here with the main principle on which his process rests; that is, the antipathy between all ‘fattish or resinous matters' and those which are not fat, and especially those liquids ‘which hold a vegetable gum or any acid in solution'.¹ He points out that a substance from either of these two categories can be used for drawing on the stone providing that the printing ink is compatible with it:

This partial colouring of the surface of the model or form is effected by covering or fixing upon those parts which are to receive the printing ink, colouring, or other matter, or by impregnating the said parts with such a substance, simple or compound, as is either of the same nature with the ink or colouring or other matter which is to be used or at least easily combined with and is received by it, whilst at the same time the other parts of the said surface are covered with, impregnated by, or have affixed upon them such other substance, simple or compound, as is different from the printing ink, colouring, or other matter, and of such a nature as not easily to combine with or be received by it.²

Senefelder then goes on to describe the normal lithographic method in which both the original drawing substance and the printing ink are composed of fatty or resinous matter, while the rest of the surface of the stone is treated with substances which are non-fatty. But he also propounds, apparently as a serious alternative, the reverse of this process whereby the drawing and printing are done with non-fatty substances:

. . . that is to say, those parts of the original forms, models, or printing blocks which are to be kept clear from the said printing colour, or other matter employed to print with, must be covered with fat, fattish, or resinous substances, that do not easily unite or combine with the said printing ink or other matter used to print with, at the same time that the figures, traces, or other delineations on the original forms, models, or printing blocks are impregnated with a substance capable of union with it.³

This is an ingenious, though less practicable, application of the principle underlying lithographic printing which could only have occurred to someone who really understood the essence of the process.4 Both methods rest on the same chemical principle and both are essentially planographic, for Senefelder explains that, whereas all existing printing methods depend on differences of relief, in his invention the printing surface is flat or at least the image is only imperceptibly raised. This was the feature that most clearly distinguished his process from existing ones, though he allows himself to mention something of its versatility as well:

. . . my Invention possesses at the same time this advantage, that the figures or traces may not only be even with the plate, original form, model, or printing block, or raised, but also etched or engraved, or cut in or made deeper than the surface of the plate . . . and still the effect will be the same, as before stated.

We see here the germ of many ideas which were to distract Senefelder from the most original part of his process when he came to write his treatise nearly twenty years later.

The second part of Senefelder's invention concerns the actual. materials from which prints can be taken.² At no stage in the specification does he refer to the term ‘stone printing' or, of course, to lithography', for he claims that any substance is suitable providing that it is compact enough and is capable of imbibing fatty substances and being acted upon by gummous and acidulous liquids. It is quite clear, however, that he regarded stone as the most natural material, and in a later passage he admits to preferring a finegrained limestone.3 But even at this early stage Senefelder was attracted by the idea of using other surfaces, and he devotes a short section to the use of metal plates⁴ and another to printing from paper and similar materials.⁵

The third part of Senefelder's invention was a new kind of printing press. Though he claims to have tried all the usual presses, Senefelder preferred the one of his own invention which he describes6 and illustrates with a sheet of coloured diagrams. This press is essentially the same as the one he refers to in his treatise as the upright-lever or pole press.7

These were the three aspects of the invention which Senefelder sought to cover with his English patent. In the following sections8 he goes on to give more specific practical details about how to print from the stone. He recommends a fine-grained limestone, at least two inches thick, which should be ground flat and polished. The drawing is made with a diluted ink (and he gives two recipes) by means of a common (i.e. quill) or steel pen, or painter's brush.9 When the ink has completely dried the stone should be washed with a solution of one part aqua fortis (nitric acid) to twenty parts water until the ink appears raised above the surface of the stone about the thickness of thin writing paper. The stone must then be gently wiped with a fine linen rag soaked in a solution of eight ounces of gum arabic to one quart of water, and in this state it may be kept until required. When printing is to begin this gum coating must be wiped away with a wet rag until only a trace of it remains, and then the surface must be moistened with another piece of cloth soaked in a solution consisting of one part gum arabic, one part aqua fortis, and 12o parts water. The stone can then be charged with ordinary letterpress ink by means of a printer's elastic ball and is ready to be pulled through the press. When printing is finished the image may be preserved by wiping it over with the gum solution, or the stone may be ground down to be used again. That is an outline of the process described by Senefelder within three years of its invention, and in its essential parts it does not differ from the process as used by artists today.

In the remaining paragraphs Senefelder describes a number of developments of his invention: the use of metal and other surfaces for printing, the preparation of transfer paper and the process of transferring writing and prints from copper plates, a method of printing by means of his process from plates already etched or engraved, and printing on fabrics with inks or mordants mixed with gum. In addition to these Senefelder describes ways of imitating etchings, engravings, and even aquatints on stone. This is the section² which amplifies the claim made right at the beginning of the specification, that the printing surface need not always be planographic but may also be intaglio or in relief:

. . . any person acquainted with the various methods used in the art of drawing, etching, and engraving will easily perceive that, generally speaking, they may be imitated on the stone slab . . . and are with more or less perfection applicable to my new method of printing.³

He then goes on to describe a variety of methods of imitating etchings, engravings, and aquatints, some of which are essentially intaglio processes. But in this same section he also describes what he calls Imitation of drawings with black or red chalk'.4 This was the most original part of the invention as far as the artist was concerned, and yet the account of it here occupies less than 2oo words. Senefelder himself clearly saw it as nothing more than a substitute for soft-ground etching or crayon engraving. Most of his short account is devoted to the manufacture of the crayons, but he does briefly mention that the stone should be given a uniform roughness by grinding it down with fine sand, and that the completed drawing should be given only a weak etch of one part aqua fortis to between forty and sixty parts of water.

There existed therefore, right at the beginning of the century, a comprehensive account of the invention. All the essential materials are mentioned, there is a detailed description of the press, and also a general survey of the actual method of printing from stones. Despite this the specification attracted little attention, and only a few references to it can be traced in contemporary journals. In 18oi the Repertory of arts and manufactures and Englische Miscellen² merely mention it in their lists of new inventions, though the Annales de chimie³ published a short notice about it in 18o2 which was reprinted in Annales des arts et manufactures.4 In this account the writer of a letter from London explains that a German there had just taken out a patent for a new method of printing. He then goes on to give a brief description of the process, which is accurate enough in its general pattern, but would hardly have been sufficiently detailed to instruct a beginner wanting to learn the art of printing from stone. There is no mention of either gum arabic or the use of an acid, and the description seems to have originated from actual observation of the process rather than from Senefelder's description.⁵

In fact, it must have been exceedingly difficult for anyone to hear about the process by way of the specification. Not until the 185os were patent specifications available in print, and up till that time there was apparently no system of indexing. Any person interested enough to find out how it worked would have been forced to consult the original patent roll. It is hardly surprising therefore that none of the earliest writers on lithography took the opportunity of studying Senefelder's own specification, and that it remained the most complete account of the process for nearly ten years.

Some mention should be made here of the description of lithography lodged in connection with the grant of a French brevet d’importation on II February 18o2. The process is merely referred to there as ‘une nouvelle méthode de graver et d’imprimer',¹ but no mention is made of any printing material other than calcareous stone. It is a very much shorter document than the English specification and runs to only about 1,50o words. There is no preliminary discussion of the chemistry of the process, and only very concise descriptions of the materials used and the method of preparing and printing from the stone; there are diagrams of Senefelder's pole press, but no description of how it worked. On the other hand the French specification is much more direct and practical in its instructions. The extraneous methods described by Senefelder are given far less emphasis so that the section on chalk drawing (or ‘la Manière noire' as it is called),² which is almost as long as the account of it in the English specification, assumes much more importance.

Apart from the specifications lodged by Senefelder and André, and the short notices in Annales de chimie and Correspondance des amateurs musiciens,³ the earliest traceable descriptions of lithography occur in German periodicals. The first of these appears in a short notice in the Englische Miscellen for October 18o3⁴ announcing the publication of the first two parts of André's Specimens of polyautography. The main concern was not therefore to instruct readers in the process itself, though in passing a short description is given of the normal practice in London: the artist draws with a specially prepared ink, or chalk if he prefers it, on a polished slab of stone, and when this is completed he hands the stone over to André who fixes the drawing by means of a simple chemical process. This process is not described, and the writer was clearly not well informed, for slight though this account is it still manages to convey a false impression:

After this, the stone is wetted with a sponge, in order to remove any dust. Then the printing ink is applied with the help of two printer's balls. Through the preceeding [sic] chemical treatment of the stone, the ink adheres only to the lines of the drawing, and the intervals remain untouched.s

There is no mention anywhere of the antipathy of grease and water on which the process rests. Yet the writer appreciates the fundamental difference between this new process and relief and intaglio printing, for he states that the printing is done from a flat surface. Amongst the advantages he claims for the process are the ease of drawing on stone, the speed of printing, the large number of prints that can be taken without harming the stone and, not least, the fact that each impression is identical with the original drawing. This claim was made earlier in the notice in the Annales de chimie, 18o2, but the slogan that lithographs are not reproductions but multiplications of an original drawing is repeated by nearly every writer on the process for twenty or thirty years.

Another early notice of lithography in a German periodical treats the actual process just as summarily. It is an article by Gotthelf Fischer in the Neues allgemeines Intelligenzblatt für Literatur und Kunst for 7 July 1804, which is in effect an advertisement for the press that François Johannot had recently set up in Offenbach. The description of the process is only given in the merest outline and no attempt is made to explain either why or how it works. The drawing is described quite simply as being done as on paper with either specially prepared ink or chalk, and the actual preparation of the stone is dismissed in the following words:

As soon as the drawing is finished it is fixed on the marble so that it cannot be rubbed off; this quick and sure chemical operation makes the plate ready for printing. . . .²

More attention is paid to the advantages of the process, and we find again the three main points mentioned in the previous article: the ease of drawing on stone, the number of prints that can be taken from it, and the fact that each print is in effect an original.

In the same year a very short notice about ‘Steinplattendruk' appeared in the Magazin aller neuen Erfindungen, Entdeckungen und Verbesserungen.3 It is specifically concerned with the printing done by Niedermayr at

Regensburg, and nothing is revealed about the process itself beyond the fact that a specially prepared ink is used on Solenhofen stone.

Of this same period from Germany there also exists an interesting description of lithography in the form of a letter, dated 17 July 1803, from the printer François Johannot to Wilhelm Reuter.¹ In this Johannot attempts to explain to Reuter how to draw on the two lithographic stones which he had sent to him in cases. One of them, he writes, is grained and should therefore be used with chalk, the other is polished and must only be used with ink. He explains how the chalk should be sharpened to a point and the ink thinned, and goes on to mention some of the precautions that should be taken when working on the stone. He suggests that books should be piled around the stone so that a board can be placed across them to act as a rest for the hand when working. The fingers must never be allowed to touch the surface of the stone, for the marks might take up the ink during printing, and no attempt must be made to rub out the image. This personal advice from a printer to an artist is the only indication we have of how the earliest lithographic draughtsmen might actually have worked on stone, but it is quite clear that the complicated instructions provided later in the treatises were already in the process of being worked out in practice.

The various descriptions mentioned above were all in some way connected with the initial dissemination of lithography. Thereafter, in the same way that the production of lithographic prints began to tail off, at least in England and France, so the literature of the period neglected the process for the next few years. But in 18o7 there seems to have been a new interest in lithography arising from the continuation of the Specimens of polyautography by Vollweiler in England and the setting up of presses by André in Paris and Strohofer in Stuttgart; and in the period 1807–9 a spate of articles and notices was published.²

One of these accounts appears rather improbably in J. T. Smith's The antiquities of Westminster³ to explain his use of the process for one of the plates. The original intention was for Smith to illustrate the whole edition with at least one plate produced by means of lithography, and he himself made the drawing on stone for it, but after only 3oo prints had been taken the image was ruined and he was forced to produce another version by the traditional method of etching on copper. Smith included both versions in the first 3oo copies of the edition, and in the text he describes what he knew about the process and how his own attempt came to grief.¹ Like most of the earliest artists to draw on stone in England, Smith seems to have understood only as much about the process as was necessary for him to work on the stone itself. He knew that either pen and ink or chalk could be used, though his own drawing was done with a common quill, not with the newly invented steel nib normally recommended for drawing on stone. This may well be one of the reasons why he felt that the process had not fully lived up to expectations, for he complained that ‘it required almost as much time to finish up a drawing on the stone as it would to have engraven it on copper' and that in any case the stone was so absorbent that it would not allow ‘very delicate strokes, or great nicety of execution'.²

Smith was naturally aware that the process differed fundamentally from the usual methods of engraving on wood and copper, but there his understanding of the process virtually ended. He had no conception at all of why it worked, and looked upon it as almost magical:

In this process there could be no deception. At one time four persons, among whom was the author, were present, and saw the whole; two of them, medical men of distinguished abilities, and very skilful chymists, and the other two fully acquainted with every branch of copper-plate printing.³

Smith records that the stone was charged with inking balls after it had been damped with a sponge, but there is no mention of gum arabic, and his only reference to an acid is to claim rather incautiously that it could be used to sluice away any dirt.

From 1807 onwards a number of short notices on lithography were published in the journals. None of them is very explicit, and some are thoroughly misleading, but they are of interest because they show how soon the process so fully described by Senefelder could become veiled in mystery. The first of these accounts appeared in A journal of natural philosophy, chemistry, and the arts for 1807, where under the heading Scientific News there is a short notice entitled Art of printing from designs made upon the surface of stone'. In this the writer (presumably Nicholson, the editor of the magazine) admits that he knows nothing of the history of‘an art which has been practised for some years in this town by several ingenious foreigners . ..' but that an eminent chemist informs him that the method is as follows:

Upon the surface of an hone, or close grained stone, designs are to be made in the stroke manner, with a pen, by means of an ink or pigment, made of a solution of lac in leys of pure soda, with a little soap added, coloured with lamp-black; or the designs may be made with a crayon of the same composition.

But there the writer's knowledge of the process would appear to end. He makes no mention of the basic principles on which lithography is founded, nor of gum arabic; and he inaccurately states that the drawing takes three or four days to dry before it can be soaked in water and inked.

This last point was corrected by H. B. Ker in an article in the Philosophical magazine for May 18o7, ‘Some account of polyautography; a discovery lately made of printing from stone'.² Ker was one of the contributors to the Specimens of polyautography³ and yet his description is no more complete than that in Nicholson's magazine mentioned above:

A drawing is made with a pen and a prepared liquid upon a level stone with a smooth surface, in the manner and with the same facility as a pen and ink drawing: the stone is then, by a very simple process, rendered capable of repelling the printing ink, except in those parts which have been drawn upon by the before-mentioned liquid, to which it adheres: it is then dabbed over with the balls as in printing, and the impression is taken by a cylinder being passed over it; and by this means you have an exact reversed fac-simile of the original sketch.4

It would seem that when Ker produced his own lithographs he knew no more than was required to draw on the stone and that the rest of the process was either neglected by him, or deliberately kept a secret from him by Vollweiler the printer. He would presumably have known from his own experience of drawing on the stone that the ink dries almost immediately, hence his rather confident correction of Nicholson on this point.'

In the same year two accounts of lithography appeared in the pages of the Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände. The first of these, 'Ueber Steindruckerey und ähnliche Erfindungen',² was written by someone who was aware of the two English articles mentioned above, probably through the extracts from them published in L'Esprit des journaux.³ It gives no description of the process as such, but includes an interesting account of transfer lithography and discusses the possible application of this process as an alternative to stereotyping, either by using transfer paper, or by casting special types so that they could be printed down in reverse on to the stone.

The second of these two articles in the Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände, Auch ein Wort über Steindruckerey und besonders über das Steindruck-Institut zu Stuttgart',4 is more important and seems to have had a wide influence. Furthermore, it is the first account of lithography to have been illustrated with specimens of the process used (Plate 1).⁵ The article opens by explaining that the development of stone printing has been hampered by the secrecy surrounding the process, and by appealing to Senefelder or any of his friends to pass on information so that it could be published. It closes with an account of the progress made by Strohofer at the press he opened at Stuttgart earlier that year. But by far the most interesting part from the point of view of this study is the description of the three ways in which the stone could be used for printing, and the particular advantages each one possessed. The methods described were pen and ink, crayon, and engraving on stone. The first, which involved drawing with a steel pen and a specially prepared ink, is described as being the oldest of the three. It was used mainly for music printing and for writing on stone, though it was also considered suitable for sketches and simple outline drawings. The principal advantages of this method were its speed and the long runs that could be taken from the stone. The writer quotes the figure of 10,000-20,000 prints that some had suggested could be taken from a pen and ink drawing, and questions the number only because it had not yet been verified. The second method, which is erroneously described as the invention of Mitterer in Munich, was chalk drawing. This was much more the process for the artist, though not nearly such large editions could be taken from chalk drawings as from pen and ink work. At a later stage in this article the writer points out that Strohofer had only been able to take 4oo decent prints from such a stone, and that by the time 1,5oo had been taken the effect of the original was completely lost. In these first two methods the image was actually applied to the stone, and is described as producing an almost imperceptible raising of the surface. By contrast, the third method involved incising the surface of the stone with an etching needle or burin in much the same way as an engraver would work on copper.' The writer considered that this new method was so different from the others that it constituted a new invention, and he believed that it excelled the others by virtue of the delicacy of the work and the length of run possible. He claimed that several thousand prints had been taken from an engraved stone at Stuttgart without the fine strokes showing any wear. Each of the three methods described in this article is said to have required different handling in the preparation of the stone, in the fixing of the drawing, and in the printing; but unfortunately the actual processes are dismissed as still being secret. Though the writer was only too anxious to persuade Senefelder to publish his secrets, he was not really prepared to pass on valuable technical information himself.

Nevertheless, this German article describing the various branches of lithography as practised in Stuttgart in 1807 is particularly interesting because it established, probably for the first time, a tripartite division of the process. These three manners continued to be used for a number of years to come and, since the article attracted attention in both England and France, its classification soon became fairly generally accepted.

During the course of 1808 short articles appeared in a number of journals, L’Esprit des journaux français et étrangers,² Bulletin de la Société d’Encouragement pour l’Industrie Nationale,3 Archives des découvertes,4 and Annales des arts et manufactures, all based on the account published in the Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände.² They all follow exactly the same pattern, dividing the process into three different manners, and most of the information comes from the same source. The false claims made in the Morgenblatt (that Mitterer invented the chalk manner and Strohofer engraving on stone) are repeated in each of these French articles and were thereby given wide currency; and the conjectural figure of 10,o00-20,o0o prints that could be taken from a pen drawing on stone is also mentioned in all of them. The articles in the Bulletin de la Société d'Encouragement pour l’Industrie Nationale, Archives des découvertes, and Annales des arts et manufactures add short accounts of recent developments in French lithography, and it seems likely that the first of these, rather than the article in the Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände, was the source for the other two.³ Otherwise, all of them are remarkably similar and, directly or indirectly, can be traced back to the account which appeared in the German newspaper.

The Gentleman's magazine for March of the same year contains a similar article by Thomas Fisher on ‘The process of polyautographic printing'.4 Fisher gives an account of the process together with a survey of the progress it had made in England; but, like the writers of the French articles mentioned above, he must have been familiar with the account in the Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände for, amongst other things, he adopts the same tripartite division of lithography. All the same, Fisher's description is not merely a digest of other people's ideas, as the French accounts seem to have been. Outside Germany he was one of the most competent to write about the process,⁵ for he had already started his own collection of polyautographs' and had probably produced as many drawings on stone as any English artist of the time. It is not surprising therefore that his article has a ring of truth about it that most other accounts in the journals lack.

Fisher describes very briefly where the stones come from and how they are prepared, he gives the principal ingredients of the drawing ink, and then lists the three ways of drawing on stone—pen and ink, chalk, and engraving with a point or graver. He writes about the first of these in most detail, explaining that it is best to use an assortment of different size steel pens according to the type of work involved and that, if only a coarse sketch is required, the drawing can be done on paper and transferred to stone. Chalk drawing receives only a brief mention as Fisher probably had no expcrience of this technique,1 but Mitterer is again attributed with its invention. The third method of working on stone by engraving with a point or graver is again not described by Fisher, but he points out that it was practised by André in England well before it was supposed to have been introduced by Strohofer to Stuttgart. Though Fisher adopts the German classification and writes about the three basic methods of working on stone, his own experience was limited to working with pen and ink, and this was clearly the only type of lithograph he was really considering in his description and assessment of the process.

Fisher was not a lithographic printer and, like all the writers of this period, he is not absolutely sure of the chemistry of the process. On the other hand his description of the preparation of the stone suggests a careful observation of either André, Vollweiler, or Redman:

The picture thus finished on the stone has the appearance of a pen drawing; it then undergoes the process of two or three washings, which constitute the principal Polyautographic secret; by the first (evidently an acid) that part of the face of the stone not actually covered with the ink is lowered about the thickness of half a line; when this wash has sufficiently operated, a second is used, to stop its further progress; and then a third, of a glutinous appearance, possessing the singular property of qualifying the interstices of the stone to resist the printing ink, which, except in being thicker, I do not understand differs materially from other printing inks.²

The main advantage of the process for the artist lay in the speed and ease of drawing on stone, and Fisher points out that ‘A small plate, very full of matter, has been finished in a day. . ..'3 The artist could therefore produce his own ideas without the help of professional engravers; no rebitings were necessary, corrections were easily made, and the artist could see the effect of the drawing while he worked. The only real objections to the process lay in the printing and, though Fisher claims that 4,ooo impressions have been taken from stones without any apparent wear, he admits that ‘partial spatterings or double printings’ sometimes occurred.'

A rather different tripartite division of lithography was adopted by Marcel de Serres for his ‘Notice sur l’imprimerie chimique' in Annales de chimie, 18oy.² Marcel de Serres had been sent by the French Government to collect useful information on arts and manufactures, and from his observations of the lithographic establishment at Vienna he found three different methods in use there:

La méthode dont on fait le plus d’usage est la méthode en relief, c’est la méthode la plus usitée pour graver de la musique.

La seconde méthode qu’on emploie, est la méthode en creux, celle-ci est préférée pour les gravures.

La troisième méthode qu’on emploie est la méthode plate, ou celle où il n'y a ni creux ni relief. Celle-ci est utile pour imiter les dessins, sur-tout pour les dessins qu’on desire rendre semblables à ceux faits au crayon.³

In the third method the image is left only very slightly in relief so that it can just be felt, while in the other two manners the nitric-acid etch is used strongly, and in the engraved manner actually used neat so that the different tones are produced, as on copper, by varying the length of etching. Only the third of these three methods really belongs to the lithographic process. The first is the relief etching on stone previously practised by Senefelder and Schmidt, while the second is an intaglio process similar to the engraved method described in the Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände. This tripartite division is therefore quite different from the one previously described, as the stone is merely used as a means of imitating established processes. Marcel de Serres reported that the intaglio method on stone was much more expensive than the others and that it had been abandoned entirely except for work where great precision was required, but that the relief method was mainly used for printing music and was almost the only process employed for this in Vienna.

The various methods of printing from stone as described by Marcel de Serres are essentially imitative, and he claims no particular advantage for the planographic process, except for the production of chalk drawings. He makes no attempt to explain why the process worked, and in all probability did not really understand it himself, for he admits that the composition of the drawing ink was kept a secret from him in Vienna. There is no mention of gum arabic, and the difference between the planographic method and the other two is explained entirely in terms of the different strength of nitric acid used. On the other hand Marcel de Serres was aware that lithographs could be produced without etching, for he explains that the first chemical printer to set up a press in Paris, Chauvron [Choron], made no use of nitric acid but merely damped the stone after it had been drawn, gently wiped the water away from the drawn marks, and applied ink with the inking balls. The ink took only to the drawn parts and was repelled by the parts impregnated with water. De Serres notes, however, that those presses which did not use nitric acid produced poorer prints and not such large editions as those which did.

Marcel de Serres claims that the main advantage printing from stone had over other printing processes was that it could imitate without being imitated, and at a much lower cost. He points out that what would take five or six days to engrave on copper could be engraved on stone in one or two, and that the printing as well was about three times as speedy. Furthermore, the stone would stand considerably longer runs than the copper, and all these factors together would, he estimates, mean a saving of a third in comparison with printing from copper plates.

The comparative cost of lithographic and copper-plate printing will be considered more fully later, but one instance is mentioned here to show that economic factors were important in determining the type of printing done from stone. For as long as the lithographic stone offered a cheap and reasonably effective substitute for the copper plate, and to a lesser extent for the wood block, it would continue to be used as such, and techniques appropriate to mechanical methods of printing would continue to be applied to a process which was essentially chemical.

In 181o Marcel de Serres wrote another article on lithography, Note sur divers procédés peu connus pour l’impression lithographique sur papier, sur toile ou sur étoffes', which was published in Annales des arts et manufactures. This time he addressed his note not from the lithographic backwater of

Vienna, where most of the printing had been commercial, but from Munich which was still the centre for all kinds of lithographic printing. All the important improvements to the process had been made in Munich, and although plenty of commercial printing was undertaken by its numerous presses, artists also drew on stone there with both pen and crayon. Marcel de Serres was consequently in a position to form a much clearer and more accurate impression of the process than he had been able to in Vienna.

Nearly half the article is concerned with a method of printing fabrics by means of stone cylinders; but the remainder is almost entirely devoted to an account of the planographic branch of lithography, and it is worth noting that the new name is adopted for the title. There is a passing reference to engraving on stone, but the emphasis is on drawing with either a pen or brush. Marcel de Serres shows a far greater understanding of the process here than in his previous article. His description of the method of preparing the stone and printing from it is convincing; he is able to give a recipe for the composition of the drawing ink, and for the first time mentions the use of gum arabic. He even explains in some detail a method of transferring drawings done on paper that has been previously coated with a special gummy solution. Above all Marcel de Serres realizes, and states unequivocally, where the real advantage of the process lay:

Ce que la lithographie a vraiment de particulier, c’est qu’on peut, par un procédé fort simple, obtenir un très-grand nombre d'épreuves, non-seulement d’une gravure qui est faite sur la pierre, mais simplement d’un dessin qu’on y a tracé, soit au pinceau, soit à la plume . . . il suffit de savoir dessiner.

This reflects an entirely different attitude to the art of lithography, and anticipates a series of articles that Marcel de Serres contributed to the Annales des arts et manufactures during the first half of 1814, in which the principles of lithography are clcarly and fully stated. These articles will be considered in the section dealing with the early treatises where, in terms of scale, they more properly belong.

This survey of the early literature of lithography has taken us to 181o, the year in which the first independcnt treatise on the process was published in Germany. It may not be a complete account of these notices, but it is comprehensive enough to make it clear that up till 181o the process remained a closely guarded secret. There seems to have been a real interest in the process, and the periodicals at least attempted to give some coherent explanation of how it worked, and yet none of the notices we have considered so far can be regarded as useful guides to those wanting to try lithography for themselves. For the most part they give only vague directions which are often misleading and sometimes inaccurate. Yet by this time (181o) some competent pieces of lithographic printing had been produced in Germany, France, and England. We can only assume that it was not through ignorance of the process alone that it remained a mystery; but that to a large extent this was due to the lithographic printers themselves who, once they had discovered the secret of the process, jealously guarded it. We shall find ample evidence for this assumption in the introductions to the first books devoted to lithography—the early treatises.