# TREATISES PRIOR TO SENEFELDER'S

NLY A FEW TREATISES APPEARED BEFORE SENEFELDER'S MANUAL, and these were primarily concerned with doing some pioneering work and making the process known. In general they are smaller in scope and scale than most of the later treatises, and at least some of them seem to have been unknown by the next generation of printers. During this period lithography continued to be a subject of interest in the periodicals, and the reader is referred to the bibliographies for the more important of these articles.

The very first treatise on lithography was published in Germany with the title Das Geheimniss des Steindrucks. It appeared in two editions, both dated 181o, one published by Cotta in Tübingen and the other by Giegler in Schweinfurt (Plates 2, 3). From the introduction to the Tübingen edition it appears that the author of this first treatise was Heinrich Rapp, but his name was not revealed on the title-page of either version; in the Tübingen edition he is called ‘ein Liebhaber' and in the Schweinfurt edition ‘ein Kunstfreund'. Little is known about Rapp, except that he is supposed to have learned about the process from Charles Strohofer when the latter set up a press in Stuttgart in the spring of 1807 and advertised his services to artists and amateurs. In the same year Rapp supplied a chalk lithograph to accompany the article on stone-printing in the Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände, and according to some early sources he became the first manager of the lithographic establishment which was set up in Stuttgart by the publishing firm of Cotta.

1Most of these treatises run to only twenty or thirty pages and only two of them exceed fifty pages.

Both editions of Rapp's treatise are slim quartos, but the one published at Tübingen is more comprehensive and includes a short history of the lithographic establishment at Stuttgart which, along with other parts, was not printed in the Schweinfurt edition. The Tübingen version also has more plates and illustrates a greater range of methods. The dates 18o7 and 1808 are found on some of the plates of this edition, at least four of which were drawn by Rapp himself; in the Schweinfurt edition all the dated plates were drawn in 181o and five were signed by Seiler. Everything points to the fact that the Tübingen edition was the earlier of the two. It certainly seems to have been far better known, and was the one referred to by Marcel de Serres,² Peignot,3 Senefelder,4 and Engelmann.⁵

The title of Rapp's treatise, Das Geheimniss des Steindrucks, is in itself indicative of the state of lithography at the time, and the author explains in the introduction that while much labour and expense had been bestowed upon the art ‘The greatest disadvantage of all was the thick veil which was spread over the whole thing under the pretext of secrecy and which was guarded most jealously for a long time.'6 Many had tried to better themselves financially by offering the secret for sale and so it was inevitable, he continues, that ‘small disclosures should also occur which conveyed to the public something of the form and nature of these unknown things under their veil of secrecy'.7 Such people had done much to make the basic idea known, but they had not helped to make it understood; and, in the absence of a description by Senefelder, Rapp felt obliged to write one himself:

The author has a special right to share his views and discoveries with the world, and it is only out of modesty that he has withheld them until now, because he would willingly have left the initial step to the first inventor. But since it seems more and more uncertain as time goes on whether the latter will ever express himself publicly, it really becomes a duty to make it known.

He points out in the introduction that stone-printing should not be regarded as a new branch of an already existing art, but as something entirely new; though he admits that the perfection of the established processes had made it almost impossible to believe that any other method of printing could exist. It was the very simplicity of the new process, Rapp claims, that prevented it from being understood, and he states clearly, and apart from Senefelder's specification almost certainly for the first time, that lithography depends on two basic principles. The first of these was that most kinds of stone absorb both water and greasy fluids, and the second that these two fluids oppose one another:In these ordinary phenomena lies the true and most inportant basis for the secret of stone-printing.’

The rest of the treatise is devoted to explaining in a practical way how to produce a lithograph. Rapp tells where the stones can be obtained and how to grain and polish them, gives recipes for the ink and chalk and instructions for drawing with them on both stone and paper. He provides illustrations of two presses and describes carefully how to prepare the stones and print from them. Good specimens of the various methods of drawing on stone are supplied with both editions (Plates 4-1o). This is the model, though small in scale, for most lithographic treatises which appeared later.

Even though the author sees lithography as a completely new process, he panders to tradition by explaining the process of engraving with the burin on stone and methods of imitating aquatints and woodcuts, and he writes at length about the advantages of transferring copper-engravings to stone. All the same, emphasis is put on the planographic aspects of the process, and Rapp's instructions are simple and eminently practical. His description of lithography is the first that could have been understood and followed by the complete beginner, and the hope he expressed right at the end of his treatise, that with its help ‘everyone who wants to can produce prints just as I do', was fully borne out in practice by the experience of Engelmann who, apparently with this book alone, managed to build a press and make some experimental lithographs.²

For a short while, at least, Das Geheimniss des Steindrucks seems to have been well known. Parts of it were reproduced in the Neues Magazin aller neuen Erfindungen,³ and a notice of its publication appeared in Archives des découvertes.4 It is listed in the early bibliographies of Marcel de Serres5 and Peignot,⁶ and it was also mentioned by Senefelder, who refers to it in his own treatise as ‘the first publication that exhibited the new art in the right point of view'.7

The next lithographic treatise to appear was published in England. It was not nearly so well known as Rapp's, and I have been able to trace only one reference to it in the literature of lithography before the last quarter of the nineteenth century. It was written by H. Bankes and published at Bath in 1813 with the title Lithography; or, the art of making drawings on stone, for the purpose of being multiplied by printing (Plate 11). A second edition appeared anonymously in London in 1816 with the title slightly changed, Lithography; or, the art of taking impressions from drawings and writing inade on stone.8 The texts of the two editions differ slightly and the London version has more plates. The author's name does not appear on either title-page, but is given at the end of the text in the case of the 1813 edition.

Like Rapp, Bankes was an amateur artist. Four of his own pen lithographs have been preserved in the polyautographic albums assembled by Fisher, and it may be assumed that he also drew some of the plates for one or both editions of his treatise. Bankes was probably first instructed in the process by Redman when the latter moved to Bath, and his description of preparing the stone and printing from it appears to have been based on his observation of Redman at work rather than on his own experience.

The treatise begins with a short historical introduction in which Bankes explains that he is principally concerned with sponsoring the process as a branch of the arts and that he cannot consider the use of it in the Quarter-Master-General's Office, at the Horse-Guards, for the printing of plans of battles and maps of the seat of war, any application of it favorable to its encouragement as a branch of the fine arts . . .'.² He sees the greatest opportunities for lithography in the multiplication of original drawings ‘and it is principally to excite the attention of the public to this use of the art that the present communication is made ...'.³ With this in mind Bankes adopted the new word lithography, which is used here for the first time and is explained in the text:

Previous to my entering more minutely into the practice of the art, I shall notice its more prominent and obvious capacity, viz. that of multiplying the drawing from the hand of the master. It was with reference to this capacity, that Mr. P. H. André introduced the art, under the title of Polyautography, and intended to apply it to all the purposes of engraving. I have taken the liberty, however, to change this for Lithography, with a view to confine the invention to what is strictly denominated the Fine Arts, or drawing as the first branch of them.4

The term lithographie had been in use some time prior to this on the continent,5 and it may well be that Bankes had some knowledge of either French or German literature on the process.

On the other hand, Bankes makes no mention at all of the complicated variants to the process that were employed in Germany and described in the journals; for him lithography was purely planographic. He gives instructions for the preparation of polished and grained stones, supplies recipes for both ink and chalk, and describes simply and clearly how the stone is prepared and printed:

After the drawing is completed on the stone, it is necessary to place it over a trough of water, and pour over it a very slightly acidulated water, (by means of the nitric

3 Ibid., p. II.

acid) which will, but to an almost imperceptible degree, lower the surface of the stone where free from the tracings of the drawing; a weak solution of gum arabic is then applied, which has the effect of closing the open pores, and keeping the stone in a proper state of moisture for printing from. Thus prepared, the stone is taken to the press, and being washed over with water, the printer's dabber is applied, with the ink made extempore of lampblack, previously well ground, and linseed-oil prepared as for copper-plate ink. This ink being also greasy is resisted by the watered parts of the stone, but received by the tracings, upon which no water can lie; and being thus filled with ink, damp paper is laid over the stone, the pressure of a rolling or screw press is applied, and an impréssion taken. The process of watering, dabbing with ink, &c. is then repeated, another impression is taken, and so on for any number required.¹

The instructions are, however, mainly directed at the artist,² who is told that he must be careful to remove all dust from the stone before starting, must never allow his hand to touch it, and whether working with pen or chalk must make sure that the effect of gradating tints is obtained by the breadth of lines and not by their strength of tone. Greater attention is paid throughout the treatise to drawing with the pen. Bankes recommends a crow-quill for general use, but mentions that a hair pencil-brush or steel pen may be used for fine work. He suggests that the artist should keep pens of three thicknesses, one each for the distance, middle distance, and foreground, and he gives amateur artists who might like to practise the art for their own amusement the following advice:

. . . that they do not on any account give their drawings any thing like the character of engraving; this would cramp the hand, fetter the genius, and considerably diminish the value of the work: let them take the stone, when prepared, and, as if they were to draw on paper, proceed with the same freedom and spirit.³

But despite these recommendations Bankes ends his treatise with some suggestions for drawing landscapes with the pen which seem to be directly inspired by the syntax of copper-engraving and etching. Shadows, he recommends, ‘should be expressed by parallel straight lines which have no local character . . .' except in clouds where the shade tint ‘must be produced by parallel lines gently waving and deviating from the line of the horizon'.⁴

This first English treatise was, as the title suggests, directed principally at the artist. It must have been a useful handbook, describing all that the amateur might need to know in order to draw on stone, but it did not go into the chemical and technical aspects of the process in enough detail for it to have been of much use to the prospective lithographic printer. It may have aroused a certain amount of local interest in the new invention, but it cannot have been of any great value in helping to spread the art in this country, let alone abroad.

Mention must be made here of the series of articles which Marcel de Serres contributed to the Annales des arts et manufactures during the first half of 1814, for while these do not amount to an independent treatise, they are on the scale of one, running to over 15o pages. This is by far the longest account of the new process yet to have appeared, and the first outside Germany to explain its principles clearly. It is divided into two parts; the first deals with the history of the art and the principles on which it is founded, and the second with a description of the materials used and the methods of printing. Marcel de Serres mentions some of the accounts of lithography already published, but notes that:

Quel que soit le mérite de ces différens écrits, il m’a paru qu’il n’y en avait aucun qui rendît compte des procédés avec les détails qu’ils exigent, et qui fît connaître les principes généraux sur lequels ils sont fondés. C’est donc ce qui m’a déterminé à publier ces observations.²

He sees lithography as something quite different from the processes of relief and intaglio engraving, and states clearly the principles on which it is founded. First, that calcareous limestone imbibes water; secondly, that it attracts and absorbs greasy or resinous substances; and thirdly, that grease and resin have an affinity for their like and will repulse water and all damp bodies. These three principles, he continues, are the basis of all lithography, and from them it will follow that: (1) a greasy mark will adhere so strongly to the stone that it can only be removed by mechanical means; (2) all parts of the stone not covered with grease will absorb water; (3) if greasy colour is passed over the prepared stone the colour will attach itself to the grease and will be repelled by the damp stone. The purely planographic nature of the process is affirmed when the author tells us that the acid is only used to make the stone more capable of imbibing water. Despite all this he does not entirely abandon the use of the stone as a substitute for copper, and divides lithographic prints into two principal types: the gravure au tracé', or simple drawing on stone, and the ‘gravure entaillée', which involves working with the burin as for either copper-engraving or wood-engraving. But he leaves us in no doubt as to which is the more important of the two and the one with the greater possibilities:

La première est la seule qui donne ce résultat remarquable de faire obtenir des gravures autographes, à la plume, au crayon et au pinceau, de tout dessin quelconque.²

## and again:

C’est donc, on ne saurait trop le répéter, ce dernier genre de gravure [au tracé] qu'il faudrait chercher à étendre et à perfectionner plutôt que les autres procédés lithographiques, puisque des essais encore imparfaits ont déjà donné des résultats très-remarquables.³

The chapters relating to the techniques of lithography are the most useful and comprehensive yet to have appeared⁴ and, judging by the amount of detailed information given, Marcel de Serres must have been able to study the process very closely while in Munich and Vienna.5 He gives copious directions for the choice of stones, tells where to find them, and describes in detail how to prepare them for both engraving and for simple drawing with the crayon. He supplies recipes for drawing and printing inks, and good working instructions for printing from both engraved stones and simple drawings, explaining what to do, for instance, if the stone gets soiled or starts scumming up. These articles by Marcel de Serres were in fact much more complete in their instructions than any of the independent treatises published prior to Senefelder's own handbook; and through them he must have helped to dispel much of the mystery that still surrounded the process, for none of the early treatises can have reached such a wide public as the numbers of the Annales des arts et manufactures.

Apart from the second edition of Bankes's treatise, which was published in 1816, no other handbook on lithography appeared until 1818. But in the year that Senefelder published his own treatise three others appeared in Dijon, Paris, and Brussels. They were: M[airet], Notice sur la lithographie; D\*\*\*, Procédé actuel de la lithographie; and L. J. D. B., Coup-d'œil sur la lithographie.' The first of them was published in January 1818² and must therefore have been written before the appearance of Senefelder's treatise in Munich.³ The authors of the other two books seem to have had no knowledge of the inventor's treatise either, so it seems reasonable to discuss them here even though their manuals may have been published after Senefelder's.

In this connection it is worth noting that all three authors, like Rapp and Bankes before them, chose not to reveal their names on the title-pages of their treatises. Nothing is known of either L. J. D. B. or D\*\*\*. The first describes himself on the title-page as ‘Sténographe, Artiste-écrivain, et dessinateur', but the latter seems to have been an amateur⁴ for he explains in the preface to his treatise how he read about the process in the reports of various societies, obtained the necessary materials, and began to experiment for himself. The remaining author we know something about. He was F. Mairet, described by Peignot as a‘marchand papetier, relieur distingué’ who was responsible for setting up the second lithographic press at Dijon.⁵ Mairet was therefore the first professional lithographic printer to write a book about the process, as both Rapp and Bankes were primarily amateur artists.

In the preface to his treatise Mairet explains that he has only described the things he has tried out for himself and proved to be satisfactory. He is even rather apologetic about having to do so himself, and suggests that it would have been better if a man of letters like Lasteyrie had written this notice:

. . . mais voyant que jusqu'à ce jour les artistes et les amateurs étaient privés des connaissances nécessaires pour mettre en usage cet art qui peut leur être très-utile, je me suis hasardé à leur donner moi-même une méthode.²

But for all this Mairet must have been familiar with the series of articles on lithography in the Annales des arts et manufactures, for his description of the three basic principles and the three secondary consequences is almost identical to the classification adopted by Marcel de Serres.3

According to Peignot, who includes the work in his bibliography of 1819, Mairet's book was a tremendous success as soon as it was published owing partly to the importance of the subject, which the inventor had kept a mystery, and partly to the exactness and clarity with which it was treated:

On peut d’autant plus compter sur les renseignemens détaillés dans ce volume, que l’auteur n’a rien avancé qu’il n’ait exécuté lui-même, et qu’il n’ait jugé vrai, bon et exact, d'après les résultats satisfaisans qu'il a obtenus. Il peut donc en toute sûreté servir de guide aux artistes et aux amateurs, qui voudront s’occuper de Lithographie.⁴

The treatise is divided into three parts; the first deals with the theory of lithography, the second with the preparation of the materials and with the various ways of drawing on stone, and the third with the methods of printing and the presses used. Mairet describes three ways of making lithographs— using crayon, ink, or a method he calls ‘dessin à la pointe'⁵ (Plates 13, 14)— and he explains in particular some of the precautions to be taken when working. There is no mention anywhere of using the stone as a substitute for copper by engraving into it with the burin and printing it intaglio. By omitting this method, which had been described in nearly all the earlier accounts of lithography, Mairet's treatise is considerably simplified and the basic principles of the process are more clearly seen. Though not nearly so comprehensive nor so thorough in its instructions as the account given by Marcel de Serres, it gains in clarity by being precise. Furthermore, it had the practical advantage of appearing as an independent work complete in one small (12mo) volume.1

Mairet's book seems to have had an immediate success. In the following year it was translated into German, and a second French edition was published in 1824.² By contrast the works of D\*\*\* and L. J. D. B. attracted little attention even amongst contemporary writers. Neither is mentioned by Peignot, though his researches extended topersonnes auxquelles ce nouvel art est familier' and he was writing only a year after their appearance in the very city where one of them was published. D\*\*\*'s treatise was known to Ridolfi and Tartini, who wrote the first Italian handbook on lithography in the following year,3 and also by Engelmann who lists it in his bibliography,⁴ but I can find no reference at all to the book by L. J. D. B.⁵

Yet his Coup-d’œil sur la lithographie, produced within a year of the first press being set up in Brussels, is much the clearer of the two, and it is hard to understand why it should have escaped notice. It was intended mainly for the amateur artist and deals with both drawing on stone and printing from it in a very practical manner, even to the extent of explaining where lithographic stones, presses, chalks, and inks could be bought in Brussels. In addition, the author describes how the drawing materials and printing varnish are made, and carefully lists all the various stages in the preparation and printing of the stones. He writes about three ways of working on stone: drawing with chalk, writing with pen and ink either direct to stone or on to transfer paper, and engraving intaglio with a burin or steel point. Each of these methods is described separately, together with instructions for making corrections and preparing stones for printing.

By comparison D\*\*\*, Procédé actuel de la lithographie, is not nearly so well ordered nor so ample in its instructions, and fully deserved Engelmann's scathing criticism.' The author covers much the same ground as L. J. D. B. and mentions the same methods of working on stone, but in addition to describing how to engrave the stone for intaglio printing he also describes a process similar to Mairet's dessin à la pointe. There are many other similarities between the two treatises, and it seems very likely that the author of Procédé actuel de la lithographie had already studied Mairet's book before he wrote his own account of the process.²

Thus, by the end of 1818, separate treatises on lithography had been published in Germany, England, France, and Belgium, and even the later ones can, for all practical purposes, be said to have preceded Senefelder's Vollständiges Lehrbuch der Steindruckerey which appeared in the same year. The first Italian treatise was published a year later in 1819,³ some five years before the Italian translation of Senefelder's handbook,4 so that in many countries of western Europe the first serious accounts of the process came, not from the inventor, but from others who had mastered its principles only with varying degrees of success.