# SENEFELDER'S TREATISE

DENEFELDER WAS TO WAIT SOME TWENTY YEARS BEFORE PUBLISHING his own description of the process of lithography, despite the very real need for an authoritative manual. Early writers on lithography repeatedly complained that when they set up a press there was no handbook available to guide them.¹ Some, like the writer of the article in the Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände and Rapp in Das Geheimniss des Steindrucks, went so far as to hint that it was the inventor's job to fill this gap, and there can be little doubt that Senefelder was under continual pressure to write an account of his process. In 18o8 he did in fact begin a collection of specimens of the various manners of lithography, but the project was never completed, and though the text lists twenty-four different methods of working on stone, only one number was ever produced.² The specimens were meant to form part of a compendium which Senefelder expected would occupy his attention for many years, but as he explains in his treatise when it was eventually published, the art had made such progress ‘that what I thought a perfect print this year, did not seem so in the next . . .'.3 When in 181I he again took up the idea of publishing a treatise in conjunction with André it was intended that the work should be illustrated with drawings by the best artists of Frankfurt, but these asked treble the price of a similar engraving in copper, as they were not yet masters of the new art . . .’,1 and once again publication was postponed. Senefelder was essentially a practical man, and there can be little doubt that he must have been more concerned with perfecting his invention than describing it. Only when doubts arose in the press as to the true author of the invention was Senefelder finally goaded into writing his treatise.

In 1816 the date for publication was finally fixed and Senefelder began composing a description of all the different manners, and their management . . .'2 while a new sét of specimens was being prepared, this time by Munich artists. Once again progress was delayed because Senefelder was called away to set up a lithographic press in Vienna; and the treatise might perhaps never have been published but for the promptings of Friedrich von Schlichtegroll, director of the Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences at Munich. Allegations had begun to appear in the press that lithography was invented in Paris or London, and rumours which were circulating undermined Senefelder's position as inventor. In an effort to remove these doubts Schlichtegroll contributed a series of letters on lithography to the Anzeiger für Kunst- und Gewerbfleiss im Königreiche Baiern during the latter part of 1816 and the beginning of 1817.3 He had collected information on its invention and progress from local Munich people, including Senefelder's brothers and assistants, and called upon readers to correct any inaccuracies in his account. But above all he called upon Senefelder himself not to delay any longer publishing a history of his invention together with complete instructions for all the various branches of lithography. Schlichtegroll sent copies of these printed letters to Senefelder personally, and they seem to have had the desired effect, for Senefelder acknowledged that it was to Schlichtegroll's continual encouragement, that the present Treatise on Lithography owes its origin and completion'.4

The work was first published in Munich and Vienna in 1818 with the title Vollständiges Lehrbuch der Steindruckerey (Plate 12), and with a preface by Schlichtegroll. The book itself was not illustrated, but appeared with a supplement of twenty plates showing the various manners of lithography. It is some indication of the need for this manual that within a year of publication translations appeared in both England and France. Both were published in 1819, the French edition with the title L'Art de la lithographie and the English translation with the title A complete course of lithography. Later editions of the German work were published in 1821 and 1827, and an Italian translation appeared in 1824.

The book is divided into two main parts; the first deals with the history of the invention and its different processes, and the second gives practical instructions for carrying out the various manners described. Compared with the early treatises it is a lengthy book. The German edition and the English translation of it are both quarto volumes and run into over three hundred pages. Everything is described in the minutest detail,'and it remained the most exhaustive treatise on lithography until Engelmann's Traité théorique et pratique de lithographie, which was published some twenty years later. The range of the treatise is enormous, and Senefelder describes a variety of processes like the ‘engraved' and ‘etched' manners which depend as much on differences of relief as on chemical principles, besides dealing with the purely planographic methods of simple chalk and ink drawing.

Yet Senefelder states quite clearly how his process differs from both intaglio and letterpress printing in the introduction to part two of the treatise:

Lithography is a branch of a new method of printing, differing in its fundamental principles from all other methods now in use, and known by the name of Chemical Printing. All the other methods of printing, hitherto known, might be divided into two branches; the one multiplying the original by elevated forms, the other by engraved forms.²

These, he explains, depend entirely on mechanical principles, whereas his method is quite new:

The chemical process of printing is totally different from both. Here it does not matter whether the lines be engraved or elevated; but the lines and points to be printed ought to be covered with a liquid, to which the ink, consisting of a homogeneous substance, must adherc, according to its chemical affinity and the laws of attraction, while, at the same time, all those places that are to remain blank, must possess the quality of repelling the colour. These two conditions, of a purely chemical nature, are perfectly attained by the chemical process of printing; for common experience shews that all greasy substances, such as oil, butter, &c., or such as are easily soluble in oil, as wax, bitumen, &c., do not unite with any watery liquid, without the intervention of a connecting medium; but that, on the contrary, they are inimical to water, and seem to repel it. The principal dissolving and uniting liquid for the above-mentioned substances is alcali, which, by proper management, forms a sort of soap, soluble in water.

Upon this expcrience rests the whole foundation of the new method of printing, which, in order to distinguish it from the mechanical methods, is justly called the chemical method; because the reason why the ink, prepared of a scbaceous matter, adheres only to the lines drawn on the plate, and is repelled from the rest of the wetted surface, depends entirely on the mutual chemical affinity, and not on mechanical contact alone.1

The novelty of his invention does not prevent Senefelder from seeing it as a rival to the other processes, particularly for commercial purposes. It had in his eyes the value of imitating very easily certain branches of copperplate and letterpress printing, while at the same time being capable of other methods, like the chalk and transfer manners, which were inimitable. It was clearly Senefelder's intention to promote his own invention and show its wide range and versatility. By mentioning all the many possibilities he hoped to show lithography as the most important of the graphic arts, even though he must have realized by this time that some of the manners he described were not very practicable. He gives no emphasis at all to the purely planographic part of lithography which within ten years of 1818 had more or less ousted the others. In this respect he is less prophetic than Marcel de Serres, who had pointed out in 1814 that this was likely to be the most important branch of lithography.²

What Senefelder succeeded in doing with the publication of this book was to establish himself surely as the inventor of the process, and to remove the veil of secrecy, which had shrouded it for twenty years, by supplying an informative book of reference for those who already knew something about the process. What it certainly did not do was supply an ideal introduction to anyone intending to take up lithography. This point was made by Houbloup in his Théorie lithographique of 1825, when he qualified his praise of Senefelder's treatise by pointing out that it was both too expensive and too complicated for an elementary work:

Depuis l’introduction de la lithographie en France, plusieurs ouvrages ont paru sur ce sujet. Le plus estimé est celui de M. SENEFELDER, son inventeur; mais son prix élevé s’oppose à ce qu’il soit à la portée de tout le monde; il est d’ailleurs trop compliqué pour un ouvrage élémentaire; et, en outre, les nombreux changemens qui ont été faits dans la partie matérielle de cet art, et qui tendent tous à le simplifier, ne permettent plus de puiser des règles invariables dans le traité dont il s’agit.i

In this chapter we are concerned with the second part of the treatise only, the part dealing with the practical applications of the process. This is divided into three main sections: 'General rules and explanations', 'Of the different manners of lithography', and a ‘Supplement'. Though rather tedious these must be considered in some detail, as they provide something of a peg on which to hang subsequent developments of lithography.

In the first section Senefelder gives, in separate chapters, comprehensive descriptions of the materials used in lithography. To begin with he describes where the stones can be found, the qualities to look for, and how they should be grained and polished. In the chapter devoted to lithographic inks no fewer than eight differcnt recipes are supplied for both the drawing ink and the chalk, together with instructions for preparing them and additional recipes for etching grounds and inks for transferring.

The third chapter, on acids and other compositions used to prepare the stone, is particularly interesting because Senefelder stresses here the essential planographic quality of lithography by pointing out that the most important part of the preparation of the stone is not the etching but the application of gum arabic:

Most people who have occupied themselves with Lithography still maintain the opinion, which, for a long time, was my own, that the etching with aqua-fortis, or any other acid, prepares the stone, and that the subsequent application of gum only adds to it. But numerous experiments have now convinced mc of the contrary. The gum-arabic, and some other similar substances, are the principal means of preparing the stone; and, by the acid, the stone is only rendered more disposed to admit it.2

This account seems to supersede the one given in the Specification of 18o1 in which Senefelder describes how the action of the acid raises the image on the surface of the stone ‘to the thickness of thin writing paper'. The application of acid is bound to remove a certain amount of the surface of the stone, but by emphasizing this part of the process Senefelder may easily have misled many early printers who saw in it something allied to the processes they already understood.' The establishment here of gum arabic as the ‘principal Ingredient for preparing the Stone'² must be considered important for the subsequent development of lithography.

In this chapter Senefelder also considers some of the difficulties which frequently confront the beginner owing to faulty preparation of the stone, and describes methods of surmounting them. The various instruments and equipment used in lithography, the steel pen, brush, etching needles, rollers, and inking balls are discussed in chapter four, and the papers and the damping of them in chapter five. The following chapter is devoted to lithographic presses, and Senefelder includes descriptions and illustrations of the basic types in use.³

The second practical section is concerned with the different manners of lithography and their application. It is in these chapters that Senefelder displays the wide range of lithography, or rather of the lithographic stone, for many of the methods he describes belong more properly to other branches of printing. All together he describes twenty different ‘manners', some so complicated that they were soon abandoned, others significant in that they anticipated later developments. These various manners can be classified under one or other of the two principal branches of lithography which Senefelder calls the elevated manner'(erhobene Manier) and the ‘engraved manner' (vertiefte Manier), or they can combine features of both.

In the first, all those parts of the stone that are covered by a greasy ink, resist the action of the acid poured over the whole surface of the stone, by means of which the other parts of the surface become corroded; they stand, therefore, higher than the latter, as elevated from the plane surface of the stone. In the second manner, all those lines or parts of the drawing or writing which are to give the impression, are engraved into the surface of the stone by means of a sharp needle, or bitten into it by the action of an acid.1

This is a confusing classification, for what we now call lithography, simple ink and chalk drawing or writing on stone, is included under Senefelder's ‘elevated manner'. It is hard to understand why he should have adopted this classification when he states quite clearly that the essential feature in the preparation of the stone is the application of gum arabic and not the acid. The latter only incidentally puts the image very slightly in relief, and Senefelder knew perfectly well that it was not the difference of levels that caused the stone to print in certain parts but not in others.² In fact, he was accepting a terminology for his new method of printing which stemmed directly from the older processes of wood-engraving and copper-engraving. The classification of lithography adopted by Marcel de Serres using the terms gravure au tracé and gravure entaillée is far more logical and less misleading.

Senefelder subdivides this so-called ‘elevated' branch of lithography into nine separate manners of working on the stone. The first of these to be described is straightforward drawing with prepared ink using either the pen or the hair brush (Plates 15, 16):

This is one of the principal manners of Lithography; and, perhaps, the most popular of all; as it is applicable to many purposes of common life. It not only imitates all sorts of writing and printing, and in many cases even surpasses them in elegance, but it is also applicable to all drawings where the nicety of a well executed copper-plate is not required.³

Senefelder explains that this manner had hitherto been used only for writing and for music, but he foresees its possibilities for the ‘higher productions of art', though he admits that up till now its progress had been hindered by the difficulty of using the pen on stone. The lines of the drawing should be bitten in'⁴ so that they become ‘elevated a little above the rest of the surface',5 but not too much or the spaces in between will begin to take colour. The strength of the etching must depend on the boldness of the design, but in any case the difference in relief that Senefelder recommends is very slight, as he suggests looking at the surface of the stone against the light to see whether it is sufficiently bitten.

5 Ibid.

3 Op. cit., p. 203.

The second manner, of chalk drawing on a grained stone resembling the surface of rough drawing paper, requires a much weaker etch. Senefelder sees this chalk manner as ‘a clear addition, and considerable acquisition to the art . . .',' for the artist can draw directly on to the stone using a familiar instrument, and in far less time than it would take him on copper. The colour of the lithographic stone is a warmish grey and, in order to compensate for this tone when the image is printed on white paper, Senefelder describes a method of combining a drawing in the chalk manner with a tint stone of the same colour ahd, as a development of this, leaving blank spaces in the tint area to give the appearance of a chalk drawing heightened with white (Plate 17). He notes that this method of printing drawings with tint plates had already become greatly admired by amateurs, though he could hardly have anticipated the wide popularity of this type of lithograph some twenty years later. Senefelder also describes a method of inking up a chalk drawing in different colours by masking out certain areas with stencils, and suggests that colour prints could be even more effectively produced by using a separate stone for each colour.

The third of the elevated' manners Senefelder describes is the transfer method, by which a drawing or other image made in ink or chalk on specially prepared paper is transferred to lithographic stone and printed in the same way as a similar drawing made directly on the stone (Plates 19, 20).‘This manner is peculiar to the chemical printing,' writes Senefelder, ‘and I am strongly inclined to believe, that it is the principal and most important part of my discovery.'2 Its real significance was to do away with the need for reversing an image, and this was of great value both to artists, who could by this means obtain fac similes of their drawings',3 as well as to those concerned with writing, music printing, and other branches of commerce.

Manners four and five are essentially imitations of other processes. The first of these to be described is a method of producing the appearance of a woodcut with a facility which must make any wood-engraver envious (Plate 18). The dark parts of the design are completely covered with chemical ink, and when this coating is dry the lights are removed with an etching needle. Where the design is mainly one of black lines on a light ground the marks are put in with the pen. As his fifth manner Senefelder describes ‘Two sorts of India-Ink Drawing'. The initial procedure is very similar to that of the previous manner, but graded tones are obtained either by removing parts of the ground of chemical ink with mezzotint tools or by rubbing it away with a piece of cloth. This last technique required very careful assessment of the consistency of the ink and the strength of the acid. Senefelder was obviously excited by its possibilities, and was anticipating developments in France in the forties when he claimed that it was capable of surpassing even chalk lithography.

The sprinkled manner is another means of obtaining tones on the stone, and involves passing a knife along a tooth-brush charged with chemical ink and allowing the spatter to fall on the stone. Different densities of tone can be obtained by masking out the tints successively with sheets of paper and, later, by working them up by hand (Plates 21, 22). Finally, under this ‘elevated' manner, Senefelder includes various methods of printing in colour from separate plates, and printing in gold and silver.

The ‘engraved' manners are all imitative of the various processes applied to copper, and Senefelder describes seven of them. The most important of these, and Senefelder suggests one of the most important in the whole of lithography, especially for writing and for maps, is the ‘incised' manner (Plates 239). In this process a hard smooth stone is first of all covered with a coating of gum arabic coloured with lampblack or red chalk. When this is dry the drawing is traced on to the stone and the coating is incised with an ordinary etching needle. Where a light mark is required only as much of the coating is removed as is necessary to reveal the stone beneath, but for darker tones the needle is drawn repeatedly along the same line to produce an incision in the stone. As in copper-plate printing the tone of a line is proportionate to its depth, and the stone is charged in the same way as the metal by rubbing ink into the incised lines with a rag. The only real difference between these two kinds of engraving is that the stone is damped before being charged with ink. Ideally this should be sufficient to repel the ink from the surface of the stone, and it should need no wiping. More usually spots appear or a light tint begins to form, and the stone needs some cleaning with a damp rag. This manner, Senefelder explains, ‘is nearly equal to the best copperplate-printing . . . while the stone can be wrought rather more expeditiously and easily than copper . . .'.1

It was clearly Senefelder's intention to show that lithography could surpass all other processes in terms of facility and economy, but it was not so easy to do so as far as quality was concerned, since copper-engraving was held in such high esteem. In addition to this equivalent of stroke-engraving he describes lithographic methods of imitating etchings, soft-ground etchings, and even aquatints. His method of etching on stone is very similar to the same process on copper, the surface being covered with an etching ground which is then scratched away with a needle. But the stone had, according to Senefelder, an added advantage over copper in that the etching needle could be used with greater pressure to cut into the stone itself and so give considerably stronger lines in the subsequent etching. The other manners he mentions are too complicated to bé described in this account; and in general the engraved' branch of the process, with the exception of the incised' and etched' manners, appears to have been little used.

Senefelder ends this account of the various manners of lithography by describing four additional methods of working on stone, which are various combinations of those already mentioned. He calls them mixed manners. Lithography, he boasts, possesses a peculiarity shared by no other medium, for engraved and raised lines can be printed from the same stone.

The Supplement, section three of the second part of the treatise, is strangely prophetic and gives some insight into the character of the ingenious inventor. In this he mentions some of the improvements which had been occupying his attention for some time, and which no doubt had been partly responsible for holding up the appearance of his treatise. He describes a method of printing by the chemical and mechanical manners at the same time and on different levels of the stone, which anticipates the work of printmakers in this century, and a method of imitating oil paintings by transferring separate colour prints successively from paper on to canvas. But most important of all is the account of his search for a substitute for the lithographic stone which was bulky and very costly to transport. In this final section he describes a method of producing artificial stone plates by coating paper and other substances with a preparation of clay, chalk, linseed oil, and other metallic oxides, and mentions some of his researches into the application of different metals to chemical printing. He explains that these had been somewhat delayed by the urgency of publishing his treatise, and that he hopes to deal with them more fully in a supplementary work. A collection of twelve drawings on planches lithographiques' eventually appeared in 1823,' but Senefelder could hardly have anticipated that within a hundred years the lithographic stone would have become more or less obsolete.

Mention must be made here of another prophetic passage, though it does not appear in this section, but in the chapter relating to presses. In this Senefelder admits that he considers it one of the greatest imperfections of lithography that the quality of printing depends to a large extent on the skill of the printer, and that ‘Till the voluntary action of the human hand is no longer necessary, and till the impression can be produced wholly by good machinery' he will not believe that the art of Lithography has approached its highest perfection.'1

To a public that did not even understand the elementary prìnciples of lithography, and asked only for an explanation of these, such peeps into the future must have seemed both incredible and irrelevant. Readers must have been confused by the variety of manners which, as the writer has found to his cost in trying to prepare this synopsis, are exceedingly difficult to understand even with some practical knowledge of working on stone. The accounts themselves are clearly enough written, and every step in the practical application of each manner is described minutely; but the very scope of the work precludes it from being very useful to the prospective lithographic printer. This wide range is seen as a point in its favour by Ackermann, who writes in the advertisement to the English edition:

Nothing seems to have escaped the notice of the ingenious author; his directions extend to every particular which has the least connexion with the subject . . .²

It is much more likely, however, that such thoroughness would have been regarded as a positive disadvantage by most beginners trying to understand the process, and this view is supported by at least two early lithographic printers, Houbloup³ and Engelmann.4

Lithography was at the time in a state of bewildering complexity, and this is reflected in Senefelder's treatise. If there was one person who could have given the process direction, it was the inventor himself; and yet he seemed reluctant even to commit himself to the extent of selecting a limited number of manners and, thereby, presenting lithography in a simpler form. Though he was prophetic in predicting some of the later technical developments, he was not as helpful as either Marcel de Serres or Mairet in pointing out what was likely to be the most important branch of lithography in the immediate future. Throughout the treatise no emphasis is put on the elevated' manner (which we would call planographic), and the ‘engraved' manner is considered to be equally important:

In general, therefore, it is difficult, if not impossible, to say which of these two manners is the most advantageous, as this will depend, in a great degree, on the subject, and the feeling of the artist.

While Senefelder allows that the ‘elevated' manner will give longer runs and speedier printing, he admits that the ‘engraved’ manner will give a greater nicety of expression. Each occupies much the same space in the text. If we are to look for guidance also from the twenty plates chosen as specimens for the original German edition it would seem that Senefelder thought them equally important, for six are in the engraved manner, six are done with the pen, one with chalk, and the rest are either transfers or examples of mixed methods.² Praise is lavished equally on both branches, but if we are to single out one manner which receives an abnormal amount it must be the process of transferring an image from paper to stone. Apart from this, we must conclude that Senefelder found it difficult to choose between one branch of his invention which was quite different from all known processes and would naturally be greeted with a certain amount of suspicion, and the other branch which might be more readily accepted simply because it was an extension of existing methods and yet offered the possibility of improving upon them.

It seems that Senefelder was quite incapable of sensing which way lithography was moving, and that after nearly twenty years he was further from expressing the essence of his invention than he was when writing his patent specification. By concentrating attention almost equally on what he called the ‘engraved' and the ‘elevated' manners Senefelder failed in his treatise to give a clear and lucid description of lithography and, consequently, failed to give any positive direction to its course over the next few years.