10

# IMPROVEMENTS AND THE SEARCH FOR A TONAL TECHNIQUE

ENTION HAS ALREADY BEEN MADE OF ENGELMANN'S EXPERIments which made retouching possible even after the stone had been etched and printing had begun. Hullmandel was more or less forced to make similar experiments when Engelmann set up a branch establishment in London in 1826 which claimed to have exclusively this power of retouching stones. Not to be outdone Hullmandel published a pamphlet in the following year, On some important improvements in lithographic printing, in which he claimed to have discovered a method of retouching drawings made on his specially faced stones.'

For some years Hullmandel had applied a special facing to the stones used in his establishment which made them more susceptible to grease and hence more sensitive to the lighter tints; but it appears that the problem of retouching drawings made on such prepared stones was more difficult than on unfaced ones. The special facing was one of the improvements Hullmandel announced in the above pamphlet. He had probably used it since 1822² and had already alluded to it in his manual of 1824, but since allegations had been made that the idea was taken from an establishment in Paris he took this opportunity to refute them:

Now I here solemnly declare, that so far from my having obtained the knowledge of the use of facing from abroad, the thought is peculiarly and exclusively my own, and that, when I first adopted it, not only no establishment in Paris had any idea of such a process, but to my knowledge no other Lithographic Establishment had ever used it.²

There is no description of the process in either the manual or this pamphlet, as the intention was clearly to keep it a secret. Instead, to justify himself, Hullmandel communicated the process secretly to Faraday the scientist and Harding the artist, and includes letters of testimony from both of them in the pamphlet. That Faraday's testimony should have been considered so valuable emphasizes both a respect for science and the essential chemical nature of the process of lithography.³

## Dear Sir,

Royal Institution, April 12, 1827.

In reply to your request, I have no hesitation in stating, for the information of all whom it may concern, that having been made acquainted with, and having witnessed your method, and other methods of preparing Lithographic Drawings, I know yours to be strikingly peculiar and different from the others, and from a consideration of the chemical principles of the art, should expect your process to possess that superiority which the testimony of Artists, competent to judge, assures me that it has.

I am, dear Sir, truly yours,

M. Faraday.'

Harding, who had been associated with Hullmandel for seven years and had been using such prcpared stones for nearly four years, is less reserved in his testimony. According to him this mcthod of facing, together with the new method of retouching, makes the art of lithography so complete that nothing now seems wanting to make it perfect'.2

No description of this method of facing stones can be found, though an article on lithography in the Foreign review of 1829 mentions a process known in France as ‘préparation qui fait jaune' and in England as yellow facing':

M. Engelmann was the first, we believe, who observed the presence of iron in the lithographic stone; and he also remarked, that the best impressions were obtained from the ycllow stones, that is, from those which contained the most iron. This fact led him to conclude, that the oxide of iron had a strong affinity to grease; and he, therefore, believcd, that by washing the stone with a solution of iron, he should obtain greater certainty in printing.³

The article also records that the process soon fell into disuse because the stone was made too sensitive to grease, with the result that the image became smudged' and the delicacy of the shading was lost. Hullmandel's printing was especially noted for the delicacy of its tints,4 and if the previous observation is correct then the issue is complicated still further. By the time Engelmann came to write his second treatise he seems to have remembered nothing of the process he was supposed to have discovered, and he writes only about a method used by some English lithographers which they called faising' [sic].⁵ Engelmann does not give any real description of this method, but merely states that stones intended for chalk drawings were washed with a solution similar to that used by Michael Hanhart for preparing stones for retouching (1 grammes each of nitrate of iron, nitric acid, and acetic acid in ψ litre of water). When the drawing was completed it was not etched but merely coated with gum arabic. Stones prepared with this facing were supposed to stand up to longer editions and to keep cleaner in the whites than those prepared in the normal way. The facing also had the effect of preventing ink lines from spreading on a grained stone, so that the pen could

5 Traité, pp. 408–9.

3 Op. cit., p. 53.

be used more easily in conjunction with chalk work. From the way Engelmann writes it seems clear that he did not use the process himself, for he questions what would have happened to those parts of a drawing which were worked with the scraper if they were not at least lightly etched.

The second improvement Hullmandel announces in this pamphlet is an extension of the first, and was perhaps the main reason for publication. For a number of years Hullmandel had been making experiments to find a method of retouching drawings which had been made on stones prepared with his special facing. Engelmann had already announced in his treatise that he had discovered a method of making additions to a drawing after it had been etched, but he provided neither a description nor specimens.' Hullmandel suggests that this method of retouching stones prepared in the normal way presented no problems to him either. It would presumably have been made known to him through the arrangement by which Engelmann communicated his improvements. In any case, by this time the normal method of preparing stones for retouching was no longer kept secret, for in 1825 Houbloup published a description of a method in which the stone was simply washed with vinegar, cleaned with water, and left to dry.² But because Hullmandel normally used stones prepared with his special facing he wanted to find a method of retouching which could be applied to these also. What he announces in this pamphlet is that he has discovered such a method, though like Engelmann he gives no description of it. He provides evidence for his success, not in the form of the testimony of distinguished witnesses as he had done for his special facing but, as was not possible before, in the form of a number of specimen plates. He supplies examples of lithographs drawn by himself, Harding, and Lane, each in two states; 5oo prints were taken from these drawings, they were then retouched and a further edition of soo copies was taken from each of the stones.³ In another set of three plates Hullmandel is more ambitious and illustrates how substantial alterations could be made to a lithograph by means of his new process. He prints a landscape lithograph by Harding in which the whole of the left foreground is successively changed from being a bridge with trees to a rocky valley with houses and, finally, to a view of a lake (Plates 58–6o). The second alteration was made after 1,02o impressions had been taken from the stone, and Hullmandel rightly considered that this was something of a tour de force.

The problem of making alterations to the stone after printing had begun, either by simply making additions to it or by removing part of a drawing and replacing it with new work, was one which also occupied many French printers about this time. Houbloup explains that at first it was the practice to make additions without any preparation of the stone, though he admitted that this was not always successful.' The preparation alluded to by Engelmann in his Manuel du dessinateur lithographe appears to have been the same as that described by Houbloup in 1825, for later on in his Traité théorique et pratique de lithographie Engelmann explains that for a time he too tried using acetic acid.² He claims that this worked fairly well and that it was immediately taken up by his colleagues, many of whom were still using it. But he himself continued to search for a better alternative, for he noticed that stones treated with acetic acid tended to become too black in the printing, and also that the tonal balance of the drawing was spoilt since it needed to be etched again after the retouching. To obviate these disadvantages Engelmann tried using citric acid instead:

. . . je fis de nouvelles recherches et trouvai que le jus de citron, à cause de l’acide citrique qu’il contient, enlevait la couche gommeuse sans nuire au dessin; et qu’après les retouches, il suffit de gommer la pierre pour pouvoir en faire le tirage. Je m'arrêtai donc à ce moyen que j’emploie habituellement et presque toujours avec succès.³

Engelmann gives no indication as to when he first used citric acid as a preparation for retouching, but it was presumably some time after 1826, for in that year the Société d'Encouragement offered a prize of 1oo francs pour la meilleure méthode de faire des retouches'. In 1828 the society awarded its gold medal to the chemist Chevallier and the lithographic printer Langlumé, and in the same year they published a description of their process: Mémoire sur la lithographie et sur des procédés de retouche et d’effaçage (Paris, 1828).4 Their method involved the use of a solution of potassium hydroxide (potasse caustique) in varying degrees of strength according to whether the whole drawing was to be removed or the surface only was to be re-sensitized for further drawing. In the first case a solution of one part potassium to three parts water was left on the stone for two to three hours and then, after being washed with water, the stone was ready to be redrawn. Either part of the image or the whole of it could be removed in this way, and the authors saw this as a simpler, quicker, and in the long run more economical method to replace the mechanical grinding of stones. In the second case, when the potassium hydroxide was used in a weak solution of two parts to 125 parts of water and left on the stone for only about five minutes, it merely removed the coating of gum, and so left the stone ready to receive further drawing. When the necessary additions had been made the stone was given a coating of gum-etch. This part of the process was therefore a further alternative to the use of acetic acid for re-sensitizing the stone. Chevallier and Langlumé sent examples of both applications of their discovery to the Société d'Encouragement, and in 1838 the journal Le Lithographe published two plates by Challamel to illustrate the process, the second being a reprint of the first but with half the image completely redrawn (Plates 61, 62).1

In this same period there were many other attempts to find a solution to the problem of making additions on the stone after printing had begun. Some printers tried alum,² while Michael Hanhart successfully used a solution of nitrate of iron, nitric acid, and acetic acid at his press in London.³ But it was generally agreed that this was one of the most difficult operations in the whole of lithography, and even Engelmann admitted that there was no method so successful that it could return the stone to its original condition, and yet do no harm whatsoever to the existing drawing.⁴ On the other hand the problem had been largely solved by Engelmann, Hullmandel, and Chevallier and Langlumé, and one of the greatest limitations of lithography when compared with other graphic processes was at last overcome. From now on positive as well as negative corrections were possible on the stone, and successive states of a drawing could be produced. The advantages of these new possibilities were not immediately seen by a generation of lithographers who were not in the habit of experimenting, or even allowing a drawing to evolve on the stone. The liberating effect was on a more mundane level; it gave the artist more confidence in the medium. A tone that printed lighter than it looked on the stone could be worked darker after a proof had been taken, accidents in the printing could be repaired, extra foliage could be added to the foreground to improve a picturesque landscape; but major changes in conception on the scale of those in Rembrandt's etching and drypoint of ‘The three crosses', though technically possible, would not at that time have been consideręd.

An immediate practical advantage of retouching was seen in the production of drawing-books. Hullmandel, who had already produced many lithographed drawing-books, was aware of these advantages and pointed out in his pamphlet how much simpler it would be for the artist to make only one drawing, which was merely added to for each progressive stage, rather than a series of separate drawings.'

The problem which occupied lithographers most now that the process was well known, was how to establish tints over large areas and to make washes on stone as the water-colour painter could on paper—in other words, to make lithography a thoroughly tonal process. So far, two basic methods for producing tones over large areas had been tried. First, there was the method which was described in nearly all the treatises, of using an additional tint stone from which the lights had been scraped away—though as yet it was not possible to establish a range of half-tones within this tint. Secondly, there was the method of building up tints on the stone that carried the drawing, either by Engelmann's lavis lithographique or by a careful system of cross-hatching with chalk as described by Hullmandel.

Hullmandel's method was a laborious one, taking perhaps weeks to lay in a large area, so that assistants were frequently employed to do nothing but this sort of work for artists. It continued to be used, but was a lengthy process. Engelmann's lavis lithographique was much quicker, but soon fell into disuse. It is described in later treatises, but as early as 1825 Houbloup observed that although it caused a sensation amongst artists when it was first announced, partly because of the mystery which surrounded it, as soon as it became known ‘on l'abandonna à cause des accidens auxquels il est sujet, et aujourd'hui on ne s’en occupe plus du tout'.² Brégeaut makes much the same observation in his treatise:

Mais, depuis long-temps, les artistes refusent d’employer ce moyen, qui joint au désagrément d’une foule de soins minuticux, une séric d’accidens presque inévitables.³

These accidents probably occurred because the round dabbers were not held upright, and this difficulty may have led Hullmandel to use a method rather similar to Engelmann's, but using flat rubbers charged with stumping chalk instead of ink. His process was called the ‘stump style'. It is not described by Hullmandel, but a short note in an article on lithography in the Transactions of the Society of Arts attributes to Hullmandel the invention of a method used to cover large spaces with an even tint:

Now with the use of the flat rubber—a very simple tool made of buff leather glued on to a flat strip of wood, and charged with Lithographic stumping-chalk— an even tint of pure and pearly grey, which may be graduated and deepened to the full intensity of black, is rapidly produced with the utmost facility: the stump in common use by artists is also used to throw in frce and dark touches; producing tints of velvetty softness and richness.'

This method had the great advantage of speed over Hullmandel's chalk tints, while the possibility of producing darker tones gave it an added advantage over Engelmann's lavis lithographique.² Hullmandel must have developed this method some time in or before 1835, as a collection of specimens by him with manuscript notes in the St. Bride Printing Library contains a number of sketches in the stump style, one of them headed ‘Trial of the Stump style made in 1835’ (Plate 63).3 Judging by these specimens it would seem that tints could be stopped out as easily as in Engelmann's lavis lithographique (Plate 64), and that they could be used in conjunction with chalk drawing.

In France similar attempts were made to improve upon Engelmann's lavis lithographique, and both Jobard and Lemercier developed variations on it. In 1828 Jobard of Brussels received a gold medal from the Société d’Encouragement for several improvements to lithography, amongst which was his method of imitating washes on stone. His process was very similar to Engelmann's and is described in some of the later treatises.4 The dabber used by Engelmann was merely replaced by ‘une pincée de laine' which was charged with ink and rubbed over the stone in all directions. A drawing could, of course, be stopped out with gum in exactly the same way as it could in Engelmann's process, but the cloth had an advantage over the dabber in that it could also be used to unify the tints of an existing chalk drawing by dragging some of the grease into the small interstices of the stone which the chalk itself could not reach.

R.-J. Lemercier's process was probably developed a little later. Powdered crayon was spread on to a stone which had been very slightly warmed, and was then worked with either a brush or the dabber to form a tint. His nephew, Alfred Lemercier, who described the process right at the close of the century,² noted that it was particularly useful for skies and water and that it had been employed successfully by Sabatier, Ciceri, and many others.

Another method of building up tones was the one devised by Senefelder and called by him the sprinkled manner.³ In this process a tooth-brush is charged with lithographic ink and made to spatter on to the stone by passing a knife across its bristles; successive tones can be established with the help of stencils cut out of paper. The process is described in some of the later treatises,4 where it was refined to the extent of using gum instead of paper for stopping out; but it does not seem to have been used much, except perhaps for commercial purposes, until Chéret and Lautrec took it up towards the end of the nineteenth century.

Experiments were also made in the reverse direction by covering parts, or all, of the stone with either lithographic ink or chalk, and then reducing the tones in a variety of ways by exposing the grain of the stone. The germ for this approach is found in Senefelder's treatise in connection with the production of tint plates⁵ and his description of a method of producing the effect of wash drawings on stone;ı but the idea was taken up again in France in the 183os by Lemercier, Motte, and Tudot, and for a short while the technique was quite popular there. Similar attempts were also made in England at much the same time,² though these were mainly directed at extending the range of effects obtainable on the tint stone which was used to support a chalk drawing.

No simple description could possibly cover all the methods used by French artists and printers from about 183o onwards in their attempts to find quicker and more spohtaneous tonal techniques for lithography. Chalk hatching was too slow, while the various imitation wash processes, though quicker, all suffered from the disadvantage that the artist could not easily see how his work was progressing. The methods of drawing on stone evolved by the printer Lemercier and the artist Tudot were attempts to find a more convenient tonal technique for the painter, and one more in keeping with his normal method of working. They presented very little that was absolutely new to lithography, and were really extensions of the negative approach which until then had been mainly limited to the removal of highlights and the making of corrections. Both men seem to have been working along similar lines at almost exactly the same time. Lemercier's process was also called lavis lithographique and his nephew records that the first experiments in it were made in 1831.3 The procedure was to build up a tonal structure with chalk, and then to modify the tones

en les frottant avec diverses étoffes, telles que la flaneile, le drap ou la mousseline, ou bien encore avec des estompes en liège, des ébauchoirs en buis ou en ivoire, différentes brosses à peindre sur velours: en un mot, tout ce qui pouvait modifier un ton en frottant par un moyen quelconque.4

A very similar method of removing a dark ground seems to have been adopted by a number of artists working in conjunction with the printer Charles Motte at more or less the same time.' The artist d'Orschwiller in particular developed the idea and extended the process by making use of a technique derived from soft-ground etching.² His special innovation was to lay a piece of tracing paper on to a prepared tint and to remove the parts that were to be made light by pressing with a sharp point made of boxwood. He used this as a drawing process in its own right, but it could also be used for making corrections to a chalk drawing. There was, of course, virtually no limit to the number of ways in which the ground could be removed, and d’Orschwiller made use of many of the techniques described above. Alfred Lemercier quotes a letter from a friend who had seen d'Orschwiller at work:

Je prétends que d’Orchivillers [sic] étendait de l’encre pure ou du crayon sur sa pierre, qu’il modifiait cet à-plat de noir par mille procédés ingénieux: l’eau, l’essence de térébenthine, l’humidité de l’haleine, les pointes en bois, en ivoire, les grattoirs et le papier végétal très transparent posé sur les tons à baisser et frotté soit avec l’ongle, soit avec des ébauchoirs en buis de différentes grosseurs.3

But the man who really developed this negative approach to drawing on stone into an almost independent process was the artist Tudot who, on 29 December 1831, was awarded a gold medal by the Société d’Encouragement for his ‘procédé de manière noire lithographique'. A short article on Tudot's process appeared in L'Artiste in 1832,4 but the description of the actual method involved runs to only a single paragraph. Two years later Tudot himself wrote a treatise on lithography, Description de tous les moyens de dessiner sur pierre (Paris, 1833). It contains no plates, but Tudot includes a lengthy account of his process⁵ as well as extracts from Gaultier de Claubry's report on it to the ‘Société d’Encouragement'.6 In the preface he acknowledges a debt to the printer Lemercier and it is possible, therefore, that the idea for his manière uoire developed directly out of the latter's process. In fact, the two were essentially the same, but Tudot's has assumed more importance, partly because it was fully described in his treatise and elsewhere, and partly because it took this negative approach to its logical conclusion. Tudot's method was to cover the whole of the stone with broad hatchings of lithographic chalk (one with a high soap content so that it would not penetrate too far into the stone) and then to work all over the surface with a sculptor's modelling tool so that the chalk was pushed into all the hollows of the grain. Alternatively, the stone could be coated with a mixture of lithographic chalk dissolved in turpentine and applied with a roller; but in either case the image would, if printed at this stage, appear black. Hence the use of the tern manière noire, the French name for mezzotint. Tudot lists four separate ways of removing this coating either partially or completely: with a piece of flannel, with brushes made of steel wire, with points made of box-wood, ivory, or steel, and with a variety of mezzotint scrapers. The only really new part of the process was the use of specially made wire brushes (égrainoirs) of different shapes which could remove the chalk coating more easily and more completely than could be done by rubbing with a piece of flannel. Tudot claims that these brushes allowed the painter ‘de dessiner par touches, d’une manière analogue à celles où il peint sur la toile, et de conserver toute la finesse et toute l’originalité de cette touche, qui, sous la hachure au crayon se reconnaît difficilement'.' But each of the methods he describes had its particular use and produced its own effect. The flannel produced the most subtle tints, the steel scrapers were reserved for the absolute whites, while the steel brushes were particularly useful for modelling areas like skies. A drawing would normally be made by combining all these methods, and it could be completed by working in a positive direction with either chalk or ink.

For all the apparent advantages of Tudot's manière noire it had little practical success and, apart from the prints of d'Orschwiller and the superb experimental lithographs of Eugène Isabey, the process seems to have been little used. A fine specimen by Tudot was included to illustrate the process in L’Artiste (Plates 5-7),² but even he did not use it consistently, and in the two volumes devoted to his prints in the Bibliothèque Nationale only sixteen lithographs seem to have been produced in the manière noire.i Huet, too, made one text-book example of the process² which could at first sight be taken for a mezzotint by Lucas after Constable, but he mostly used these negative techniques in conjunction with traditional methods of lithographic drawing. Single prints have also been found by Charlet (Plate 71) and Lessore with the imprint Essai à la manière noire . . . Lith de C. Motte'.3 The article in L'Artiste claims that examples of the manière noire had also been produced by Achille Devéria and Grenicr which, along with those of Tudot and Isabey, rivalled the real mezzotints of'Cousins after Reynolds.4 But as early as 1839 the manière noire was included in an article in Le Lithographe along with Engelmann's lavis lithographique as one of the àbandoned processes of lithography.5 In his treatise Engelmann expressed some surprise that artists had not tried it, and assumed that difficulties must have been encountered in the printing,6 but what evidence exists does not support this view, for the commission set up to report on the process to the Société d'Encouragement saw one of Isabey's seascapes7 printed at Motte's in an edition of 6oo by printers without previous experience of the process.8

Tudot's process was yet another attempt to find a quick tonal method which would attract artists to lithography. By this time the technique of drawing for the process had become a very complicated one, and the usual methods of building up tones required considerable patience and skill. Lithography had already established its own set of rules, which in turn stemmed from those of the copper-engravers and aquatinters, and there can be little doubt that artists and printers were searching for a new approach which was more in keeping with the spirit of a new generation of painters. Tudot was well aware of this need and wrote in his treatise:

La manière noire, en général, se prête à rendre les grands effets de lumière et d’ombre; on n’y parvient en lithographie par la manière ordinaire qu’avec beaucoup de temps et de patience; ce moyen entraîne encore à faire un travail régulier. La hachure ici, comme la taille en gravure, sont de convcntion; la nature n’offre rien de semblable: il y a donc probabilité que la manière noire, par cela qu'elle se prête mieux à l’imitation, doit prospérer.

Gaultier de Claubry realized this too, and in his report to the Société d’Encouragement stressed the importance of Tudot's process for the artist:

La lithographie était déjà venue donner aux peintres le moyen de jeter sur la pierre leurs propres idées, et sous ce rapport elle a bien servi l’art et les artistes; mais dans le dessin lithographique il y a quelque chose du matériel de la gravure, qui ne se prête pas facilement à l’abondance de quelques artistes.

Le procédé de M. Tudot les dégage de tous ces soins; leur imagination tout entière peut se peindre en quelques instans sur la pierre, et ce n’est pas le moindre avantage qu’il présente.²

The various tonal methods evolved in the thirties in France by Lemercier, Motte, d'Orschwiller, and Tudot were really only attempts to bring lithography more into line with contemporary painting. In England the artists who turned to lithography were mainly water-colourists, and it was no doubt the strength of this native tradition that led Hullmandel to persevere with the idea of applying washes of varying intensity to the stone just as the artist could on paper. Both Engelmann and Hullmandel had shown in their treatises that this method was completely unpredictable, and gave illustrations of what would happen if washes of over-diluted ink were applied to the stone.3 They insisted that it was not the pigmentation of the ink that determined the marks printed, but its grease content, and that this would either be sufficient to affect the stone or it would not.4 But the fact that both Hullmandel and Engelmann should have enphasized that graded washes were impossible does at least suggest that they were a desideratum, and the choice of the term lavis lithographique by both Engelmann and Lemercier also indicates that their processes were the closest they could get to producing washes on stone.

On 5 November 184o Hullmandel took out a patent for ‘A new effect of light and shadow, imitating a brush or stump drawing, or both combined, produced on paper, being an impression from a plate or stone . . .'5 which he was later to refer to as ‘lithotint'.6 This term is frequently applied to lithographs printed with a second (tint) stone as described by Senefelder, Engelmann, Hullmandel, and others. This is a misuse of the term. Lithotint was Hullmandel's own patented method of printing from washes and other tonal effects drawn on stone, and he adopted the suffix ‘tint' to denote that his process was a tonal one—the lithographic equivalent of mezzotint and aquatint. Lithotint could be used for the drawing of tint stones, but the use of a tint stone itself was not what constituted the new process, and many lithographs printed in black alone are found lettered with Hullmandel's patent.

Considerable confusion surrounds the process of lithotint. Hullmandel left no account of his method of working apart from the short description given in his specification. This is very superficial and seems to have been drawn up in a hurry, for he filed a disclaimer on 25 May 1842 making two minor alterations of terminology and one major correction of fact.

The two changes, involving the qualification of some of the terms he used to describe his process, were made on account of an action brought by Charles Hancock claiming an injunction against him for an infringement of thc patent he himself had taken out on 25 January 1838 for a number of improved methods of printing.' The hearing in the Court of Chancery was completed on 21 April 1842 with judgement given in Hullmandel's favour; but in order to remove possible grounds for further confusion Hullmandel limited his process to the ‘stone' instead of to the ‘plate or stone' and introduced the wordswhat I call' before ‘etch' and etching', thereby differentiating it more clearly from Hancock's process which involved printing by mechanical means (letterpress and intaglio) from metal plates. The hearing was reported in the Art Union² and sparked off a lively correspondence from both parties,³ which must have helped considerably in making Hullmandel's process known. In support of his case Hullmandel produced a lithotint drawing by Harding and subjected it to his process before the court. Affidavits were produced on both sides from lithographic printers and artists,4 some of which were later printed in the Art Union to form part of the communications addressed to it by Hullmandel and Hancock.

Hullmandel gave no description of his process in the pages of the Art Union, and his intention was clearly to keep it secret. His specification, too, provides only a very superficial account of his method of working and, intentionally or otherwise, he managed to mislead many of his contemporaries as to the real nature of his invention. Hancock was probably quite genuinely misled by Hullmandel's specification, and it must be admitted that on the evidence of this alone there was some justification for alleging an infringement of his own patent.

According to the description provided in Hullmandel's specification a drawing is made on either a grained or polished stone ‘with ordinary lithographic ink dissolved in water, and with the use of a brush or hair pencil, or with the stump, or with any of these styles mixed .. .'. It is prepared with acid and allowed to dry completely, after which the stone is placed in an inclined position ‘and a solution of resin in a volatile solvent, such as is generally used in aquatinting, is poured over the whole drawing'.² Hullmandel describes the function of this process in the following terms:

As the solvent evaporates, the resin cracks or extracts in the usual way, just as is the case in laying a ground upon a polished copper or steel plate previous to engraving a subject in aquatint. The drawing which is underneath is therefore protected where the resinous particles adhere to the plate or stone, while the portions of the plate or stone which are in the cracks or between thc portions of resin are exposed and unprotected.

When this ground is dry Hullmandel warms the stone gently before a fire in order to fix the resin on the drawing, and then washes it with a mixture of nitric acid or muriatic acid and gum-water (6 parts gum-water to I part nitric acid), allowing it to act for about a minute. Both the ground and the drawing are then washed off with spirits of turpentine, and the stone is ready for printing.

Hullmandel did not claim to have invented a new method of drawing, for as he pointed out, working with a brush or hair pencil and lithographic ink, or with a stump or any combination of the same' had often been attempted before. His invention rested in the printing of such drawings, and especially in the preparation of them for printing by means of the process described above. Nevertheless, the account in the specification is not convincing. Hullmandel makes no mention whatsoever of the fact that the drawing should be made on stone with graded washes of ink and, as it stands, it is difficult to associate this description with prints produced in the forties lettered either ‘Hullmandel's Patent' or ‘drawn in lithotint', which resemble drawings produced with washes of varying strength (Plate 68). From the evidence of these prints and some experiments in his scrapbook (Plates 69, 70) it would seem that Hullmandel had merely found a method of printing from graded washes of lithographic ink. Experience has shown that such wash lithographs can be made to retain their subtleties; they were particularly popular towards the end of the last century, and many of the best presses today print successfully from drawings made with diluted washes of lithographic ink. Furthermore, there is a very close similarity between these and lithographs which were printed by Hullmandel and lettered with his patent.

It would seem that Hullmandel had merely changed his mind since writing his treatise, and that greater experience had taught him that it was now possible to print from graded washes on stone. It is possible that the solution of resin merely protected the more delicate parts of the drawing from the strong gum-etch, just as an application of powdered resin does, and that the heating of the stone was fulfilling much the same function as the process of ‘burning' described by Brunner as part of the preparation for printing lithographs today.' Hullmandel certainly complicated the issue by comparing his process with that of aquatint and, surprising though it may seem for a man of his abilities and experience, he may even have been misled in his understanding of the function of the resin solution.² In aquatinting the ground creates a more or less even tint which is subsequently controlled by the artist through the processes of stopping and biting; but Hullmandel does not mention any method of determining the nature of the tones obtained, either by varying the resin solution itself or by controlling the strength, extent, or length of the etching. He merely states that the resin solution is poured over' an inclined stone and that the acid is left on the whole of the surface for about a minute'. In the absence of any real description it must be assumed that the variations of tone obtained in lithotints depended on the strength of the original washes of lithographic ink, and not on the preparation itself.

In his letter to the Art Union Hullmandel infers that this was so, though he makes no claim whatsoever for this part of the process:

I must beg leave to observe, that nothing was more simple than the notion of using lithographic ink diluted with water, in order to execute drawings on stone, in the same manner that sepia, or Indian ink, is used on paper; and although there are certain difficulties to overcome in the use of the material, still very fair drawings can be made on stone with lithographic ink, which would be satisfactory enough if they had only to be framed and glazed; but when persons, having executed such drawings, attempted to print them, then commenced the real difficulties, amounting, apparently, to impossibility. I wish it, therefore, clearly to be understood that I lay no claim whatever to the execution of drawings with a brush, but to the possibility of printing drawings so executed.1

Though Hullmandel may not have felt obliged to describe in his specification exactly how the drawing should be made on the stone, his failure even to mention that the ink should be diluted with water to produce washes of varying intensity was thoroughly misleading.

It was left to other writers to mention what Hullmandel had omitted from his specification. The original article on lithotint in the Art Union contains this definition of the process:

Lithotint, indeed, is only a modification of the process of lithography, made for the purpose of obtaining impressions from graduated tints ofliquid ink applied to the stone with a brush, in the same way as Indian ink or sepia drawings are made on paper.²

J. F. Walton, who took over Hullmandel's firm after the latter's death,

2 Vol. iv, p. 106.

showed specimens of the lithotint process at the Great Exhibition. In a small explanatory brochure which was issued at the exhibition as a guide to the examples shown by Hullmandel & Walton he describes lithotint as ‘simply making Drawings on Stone with a liquid ink and brush . . . which gives it [the drawing] all the freedom, feeling, and beauty of an original Drawing made on paper in Sepia or any other colour'.1

Jobard² and Fielding³ both make much the same point, and suggest that a special drawing ink had becn invented, even though Hullmandel states in the specification that ordinary lithographic ink'was used. Whatever the function of the resin solution, therefore, the tonal structure of lithotints clearly lay in the actual drawings and not, as can so easily be concluded from Hullmandel's specification, in the preparation of them.

The need for a satisfactory method of printing from drawings made with brush strokes of varying tones had been felt for some time, but those produced even by Hullmandel's process had a peculiarity which limited their use. They tended to give a greater concentration of ink at the edges, just as water-colour does when applied to dry paper. In the case of water-colour this effect can be avoided by damping the paper, but such a solution is obviously not possible in lithography, and it is a characteristic of most lithotints that they have this rather crisp edge to the brush strokes. In many cases this hardness must have been modified where it became too offensive by rubbing, scraping, and etching. In landscapes, for instance, it was usually necessary to disguise the brush strokes in this way when producing subtle effects in clouds and distant views, while in the foreground, where precision was valued, foliage was usually handled in vigorous brush strokes with their edges unsoftened.

Very few lithotints appear to have been produced entirely with washes because of this characteristic hardening at the extremities of brush strokes. Large flat tints and areas of soft tone were more usually applied with the stump, which was included as part of the lithotint process. Indeed, some prints lettered with this patent appear to have been produced without the use of washes at all, and most contain a great deal of chalk work. The part of the process which appeared most novel at the time was clearly this application of washes to the stone ‘in the same manner that colours are wrought on paper . . .’,1 but it was not the entire process. It was, as Hullmandel points out in his specification, essentially a method of imitating a brush or stump drawing, or both combined' by resorting to any of the now very complex methods of drawing on stone. What is important is that Hullmandel should have perfected this ‘new effect of light and shadow' which enabled water-colour painters to produce the same sorts of effects on stone as they could on paper.

In this connection some mention should be made of the part played by the artist Harding in the development of lithotint. Both the Dictionary of national biography and Thieme and Becker credit him with its invention; and though, as Abbey has pointed out,² this claim cannot be strictly maintained, there may be some justification for it, even though Harding's part in the process could not by its very nature be patented. Harding was certainly closely associated with Hullmandel in his various tonal experiments. A record of this partnership survives in Hullmandel's scrap-book in the St. Bride Library which includes a number of lithotints, one of them with the note Modification of Lithotint—invented by me put in practice by Harding in 1841, as above' (Plate 70).3 Hullmandel himself admitted that Harding was well aware of the value of obtaining prints from wash drawings on stone, and that it was he‘who urged me continually to apply myself to the solution of the problem . . .',4 and he also acknowledged his obligation to Harding for supplying dozens of able sketches which were ‘often only to be spoiled much faster than they were executed . . .'.5 Harding certainly became the most skilful exponent of the technique in the forties, and it was he who made the drawing on stone which was used for the demonstration Hullmandel gave in court in connection with the action brought against him by Charles Hancock in 1842. If, therefore, as we have maintained above, the variations in the tone of the lithographic washes depended primarily on the density of the ink used for the drawing on stone, it seems reasonable to credit Harding with some share in the process, for we know from later lithographers that it was not easy to assess the strength of these tones. Lithotint must in any case be regarded as the logical outcome of the collaboration of Hullmandel and Harding in their search for a method by which the latter, and after him many others, could draw on the stone in much the same way that they could paint with water-colours on paper.

The process of lithotint, Hullmandel's own term for this method of printing wash drawings, was virtually limited to England where there was a strong school of landscape water-colour painting. It was used in a number of topographical publications in the forties, but it does not appear to have been practised for long after Hullmandel's death in 185o. During his lifetime Hullmandel was, of course, protected by his patent and, apart from his successor, Walton, no other English printer is known to have used the process until it was revived towards the end of the century.

In France, where water-colour painting was not so popular as in England, lithotint was less successful. Hullmandel lost no time in protecting his process in France, and on 6 February 1841 he took out a patent for ten years for 'Perfectionnemens apportés à la lithographie'.i He went over to France himself in the spring of 1841 armed with specimens of his new process, and in the course of the next year or so sent selections of lithotints by Harding, Boys, Nash, Walton, and others to many leading figures on the continent.2 Though these prints were greatly admired in France, Hullmandel found difficulty in persuading artists and printers to use lithotint, and Lemercier quotes without reference from a contemporary writer who claimed that Hullmandel was unable to sell his process as nobody liked the effect of the ink washes:

Malheureusement, tous les artistes français qui ont essayé son procédé, sous sa direction, ont généralement très peu réussi, chacun des coups de pinceau marquait sur la pierre; le dessin terminé avec l’encre de M. Hulmandel [sic} ressemblait, à peu de chose près, à une mosaïque, ce qui donnait un ensemble désagréable.³

The preservation of the actual brush marks made on the stone was just what Hullmandel had been aiming at and was well adapted to the type of watercolour painting then popular in England, but this feature found little favour amongst French lithographers.

On the other hand, Hullmandel had at least shown that it was possible to retain the subtleties of graded washes of ink in the preparation and printing of the stone, and the same writer quoted by Lemercier admitted that Hullmandel had made a contribution to lithography car, jusqu'à son arrivée à Paris, on avait cru ce moyen impossible'.' One result of Hullmandel's visit was to inspire the leading French printer, R.-J. Lemercier, to experiment along similar lines² and to develop a method of drawing with washes which his nephew claimed was superior to Hullmandel's in that it left no trace of the original brush marks. Lemercier senior developed his wash process either late in 1841 or, more probably, in 1842,3 and a lithograph by Dauzats bearing the latter date appeared in Baron Taylor's Voyages pittoresques with the imprint ‘Lavis lithographique procédé Lemercier'.4 But the process was still very much in its infancy when the publisher Goupil wrote to Hullmandel in September 1843 giving a short account of Lemercier's early attempts.⁵

The only contemporary description of Lemercier's process that can be traced appears in a short article in L’Artiste for 1843, Lavis sur pierre, procédé de M. Lemercier'.6 Two specimen plates by Mayer and Tirpenne (Plates 74, 75) accompany the article, and it is clear from an examination of these that Lemercier's process was very similar to Hullmandel's as there is the same characteristic hardening at the edges of the washes of ink. The article itself is more concerned with singing the praises of the process than with describing it, though it does state quite clearly that ‘On lave sur la pierre comme sur le papier, on efface, on revient sur ses teintes, on agit enfin comme on le ferait pour une aquarelle poussée à la vigueur, dans le genre des aquarelles modernes . . .'.7 It goes on to explain that a number of different

7 Ibid., p. 7.

washes should be prepared in advance in separate palettes by diluting the ink with distilled water. The usual practice was to work from the lights to the darks, some artists preferring to reserve the highlights first, others to cover the whole image with the lightest wash and to remove this where necessary afterwards with the scraper. The only other important technical point to emerge from the article is that grey stones were to be preferred to yellow ones as they were less porous. The same advice, to work from the light tones to the darks, appears in a set of instructions printed beneath a landscape wash lithograph by Thénot.' In this càse emphasis is put on a method of laying graded washes in skies which stems directly from contemporary practice in water-colour painting:

Dans l’exécution d’un dessin au lavis, on place les teintes claires les premières et les foncées les dernières, les superposant les unes sur les autres par gradation de vigueur; le ciel, est toujours la partie par laquelle on doit commencer, car c’est lui qui détermine le ton général de l’effet. Pour exécuter un ciel formé d’une teinte unie et dé- gradée, il faut apprêter la teinte dans un godet, placer son dessin le ciel en bas, le mouiller entièrement avec de l’eau propre et placer la teinte sur toute la surface, puis relever son dessin verticalement toujours le ciel en bas et frapper plusieurs petits coups sur la table, afin d’unir et fondre imperceptiblement la teinte, &ª.

The article in L’Artiste lists a dozen artists who had tried Lemercier's process,² but for all this it never really became popular in France and had only a very limited application in the early forties. Lemercier was the most successful printer of wash lithographs there, and certainly printed more than anyone else, but isolated examples have been found from the presses of Motte (Plates 72, 73), Lots, Bry, Vayron, and Kaeppelin & Cie.³

Hullmandel's lithotint and Lemercier's variation of it were the natural culmination of the attempts, which had begun with Senefelder in the early years of the century, to capture the appearance of graduated washes on stone. Previous methods had been imitation processes involving in most cases a laborious technique, but these new improvements allowed the artist to work with considerable speed and freedom. In his letter to the Art Union Hullmandel takes up the same point that both Tudot and Gaultier de Claubry had made when referring to the advantages of Tudot's manière noire:

When, in 1816, lithography first appeared in Paris, the public were delighted to be enabled to purchase, at a moerate price, the original sketches of the first artists of their capital . . . but, by degrees, more and more finished drawings were executed, until patient artists, like Aubrys, Le Compte, and others, were six months in finishing a plate. Lithography now assumed the feature of engraving, and the powers of this new art showing itself in highly-finished drawings, artists of reputation gradually abandoned it, and it got entirely into the hands of lithographic draughtsmen.1

Hullmandel hoped that his lithotint would restore to lithography its most important feature by ‘giving the original works of great masters’² in all their richness and variety of tone. The writer of the article in L’Artiste makes the same claim for Lemercier's lavis sur pierre and points out that from now on painters could ‘tracer eux-mêmes sur la pierre toutes les fantaisies de leur imagination . . .'3 without resorting to the tedious business of building up their tones by chalk hatching which required considerable training and experience.

Any of these tonal processes, Lemercier's two versions of lavis lithographique, Hullmandel's stump style and lithotint, d'Orschwiller's process, Tudot's manière noire, or any combination of them, could also be applied to the tint stone which, from the mid thirties onwards, began to be used more and more frequently to support a black drawing.4 The ink used for the printing of these tints had to be mixed by the printers themselves and, because its consistency was not so satisfactory as that of black ink, such tint stones were usually less well printed. In most cases, therefore, it is even more difficult than with black lithographs to decide exactly how their tones were produced.

We have seen that the tint stones provided as examples in the treatises of Engelmann and Hullmandel were only of a very rudimentary nature. Hullmandel's contained some slight effects of half-tone produced by scratching parallel lines with an etching needle, while Engelmann's contained none at all. The process was seen rather as a survival from an earlier period, for by the time they came to write their treatises both printers had virtually abandoned the technique.' Like Ackermann, Engelmann and Hullmandel had been inspired to experiment in this style after having seen the tinted lithographs made in Munich by Strixner and Piloty for the Oeuvres lithographiques, and some of the first lithographs each of these three produced were in the tinted style.² Other printers, too, produced a few early lithographs with tint stones added. The process was never entirely forgotten but, except in Germany where it continued to be'used for the reproduction of paintings, it gradually fell into disuse after about 182o.

It was revived and considerably improved by Hullmandel around the year 1835, and over the next two decades tint plates show an increasing range of tone owing to the use of many of the processes described above.³ Hullmandel's scrap-book contains a number of experiments in producing graded tints in skies which appear to have been drawn by a mixture of these methods, and one of them bears the note ‘Trial for producing variety of tint in a tint stone, which enabled Mr. Harding to produce his sketches at Home & abroad & established and introduced what has since been called, the tinted style in 1835’ (Plates 76, 77).4 In The art of drawing on stone Hullmandel had quite clearly stated that half-tones could not be produced by a partial scraping away of the waxy preparation. Improvements in lithography had now made this possible with the result that the tint stone ceased to be merely a support to an image, but became on occasions so much a part of it that the black stone would have appeared meaningless if printed on its own.

Except for a few passing references the treatises published in the period 1825-35 do not describe the tinted style at all; but it was taken up again in the works of Brégeaut (1839), Chevallier and Langlumé (1838), Engelmann (1835-40), and Fielding (1842) and by 1840 was once again one of the accepted techniques of lithography. In England the process was usually called ‘the tinted style'while in France it was known as printing à deux teintes or the prints as épreuves rehaussées. The method of working remained much the same as that described by Engelmann and Hullmandel some fifteen years earlier, but thé range of tone was extended by the application of any number of the negative processes mentioned above. Engelmann describes the English practice as follows:

Dans la nouvelle application que les anglais ont faite de ces planches teintées, ils ne se sont pas contentés de rehausser leurs dessins par des lumières vives et coupées net; ils les ont en même temps dégradées et amenées par de douces transitions, du ton de la teinte jusqu'au blanc. On fait un grand mystère encore des moyens employés pour obtenir cet effet, et les dessinateurs s’efforcent, en frottant les pierres avec des chiffons, de produire des demi-teintes; ou bien ils essaient de les enlever au grattoir, en employant pour cela des pierres grenées.1

Fielding recommends either stopping out the pure whites with gum or scraping them away with a knife and, for those parts intended as half-tints, merely partial scraping away of the greasy preparation. He also suggests using a piece of woollen cloth for rubbing down the defined edges left by the gum and for producing softer effects like the gradations of evening skies.²

Engelmann, who did not live to see the full flowering of the tinted lithograph, describes two alternative methods in his later treatise.3 One of these was an ingenious method based on d'Orschwiller's idea for removing an image from the stone by drawing on it through a piece of paper. Engelmann suggests taking a counterproof of the black drawing on a piece of tinted paper and placing it face upwards on to a coarsely grained stone which has previously been covered with a ground of varnish. The artist then draws in the lights with a hard white crayon so that the varnish is removed from the stone in proportion to the pressure applied.4 This method had the great advantage that the artist could assess the work accurately as he progressed and, according to Engelmann, the marks produced in the final print looked just like those of a crayon drawing itself. Absolute whites could be obtained by scraping the stone in the usual way when the paper had been removed. Engelmann's other method was a positive one in which the tint was built up with the lithographic chalk as in a normal black drawing, but much more strongly because it was to be printed in a pale tone. When this halftone structure was complete full tones could be put in with ink or, alternatively, the lights and half-tones could be stopped out and a roller charged with printing ink passed over the whole stone.

From these descriptions it is evident that there was nothing particularly new in the process as such; the novelty merely lay in the application of methods which had previously been used for black lithographs to the production of supporting tint stones. The approach was normally a' negative one simply because it originated from the early function of the tint stone, which was to serve as a solid background to counteract the whiteness of the printing paper. All the same, the negative approach had one great advantage over straightforward chalk and ink drawing on stone. If the highlights were scraped so deeply that the stone became substantially hollow, the paper would be pushed into the stone during the printing and so become embossed in the final print (Plates 78, 79). Such an effect may have arisen quite accidentally in the first place,ı but it was certainly produced intentionally later on, and Engelmann describes a similar method in which a very strong etch is used to make the lights appear in relief‘comme si elles avaient été posées avec du blanc au pinceau'.² This embossing of highlights in a tint stone was used to great effect in England by Hullmandel and Harding, and to a lesser extent by Cheffins, Day & Haghe, and Michael Hanhart.

Tint stones were nearly always printed in a rather warm buff colour, and there were probably a number of reasons for this conservatism. In his treatise Senefelder had recommended the use of a printed tint to give the paper something like the tone and colour of the lithographic stone on which the drawing was originally made. When India paper began to be used for the printing of lithographs in 1820³ it soon took the place of the tint stone as its colour was also very similar to that of the lithographic stone. India paper also happened to be an ideal printing surface for delicate chalk drawings, but its supplementary purpose of providing a slight tonal background is borne out by prints on it with highlights touched in by hand with opaque white.' In its turn the tint stone was used to imitate the effect of printing on India paper, and Chevallier and Langlumé describe the appearance of a tint stone as being ‘analogue à celle qu'offrent les dessins tirés sur papier de Chine',2 and devote a section to the imitation of India paper by means of tint stones.3 There were probably antiquarian reasons as well for the popularity of these buff tints which were often very much warmcr than the colour of any lithographic stone or sheet of India paper. The chiaroscuro woodcuts of the sixteenth century almost certainly accounted for the popularity of the tinted style in Germany, and the familiar custom of colouring monochrome aquatints with sepia and similar coloured washes, in the manner of Gilpin's illustrations to his own picturesque tours, may have been partly responsible for the success of the tinted lithograph in England. When particular effects like sunsets or night scenes were required other colours were occasionally used for the tint stones, and when printing with two tints became popular in the forties one of them was usually printed in a grey-blue colour for the sky.

Such tints were normally printed after the black working, and with a transparent ink. Engelmann notes that printers in Munich used to put white chalk in their inks to make them roll up more evenly,4 but he does not recommend this practice because the ink becomes opaque as the oil in it dries, with the result that the black drawing underneath loses its richness. The alternative was to print the tint first, but this had one great disadvantage over the normal practice because the subsequent black impression flattened out any relief obtained in the highlights by scraping and strong etching. The registration of tint stones was normally by means of pin-holes in opposite corners of the print, and special wooden compasses were devised to lay the paper on the stone.⁵

The tinted style of lithography was widely used from the mid thirties onwards for about a quarter of a century. Its revival was largely the result of Hullmandel's example, but it soon spread to most of Europe and became almost the accepted idiom for lithography by the middle of the century.6

The style became particularly popular in England and the finest examples, at least from the technical standpoint, were certainly produced in this country. The tinted lithographs of Harding and other artists which Hullmandel printed were greatly admired in France, and this was one of the few branches of lithography in which even French writers admitted that English artists and printers excelled.

By 184o all the main techniques used by artists for drawing on stone had really been evolved. Improvements now rested largely with the printer and were directed principally at finding a satisfactory method of producing colour prints by lithography. There had been numerous isolated examples of printing by lithography with coloured inks dating right back to the beginning of the century, and some of these involved the use of several stones, but no comprehensive system was developed until the late thirties.² In December 1836, however, Engelmann père et fils perfected a method of colour printing and presented some examples of it to the Société industrielle de Mulhouse. Their process was similar in principle to the one adopted by Le Blon for intaglio printing early in the eighteenth century. Like Le Blon, Engelmann used the three primary colours, red, blue, and yellow, each of which was printed separately. The drawing was done in the normal way with either pen or chalk and the final colour of the print depended on the relative solidity of the tints drawn on the stones. Where necessary Engelmann used a fourth black printing, as Le Blon's successors had done, to give added richness of tone. On 31 July 1837 Engelmann and his son were granted a patent for ten years for their new process,3 which they were later to call chromolithographie. Even before the death of Engelmann senior in 1839 a number of artists had tried the process, and an Albuin chromo-lithographique was published about 1838 consisting of eight coloured lithographs.4

Soon after Engelmann announced his discovery, Hullmandel developed an alternative approach to colour printing which was really an extension of tinted lithography. It was used to great effect in one of the finest of all lithographed publications, Boys's Picturesque architecture in Paris, Ghent, Antwerp, Rouen (London, 1839), where the process is referred to as Chromalithography.1 There are also instances of lithographs produced in the early forties in England where the tinted style has been developed so far that it can really be called colour printing. This underlines the point that has already been made in connection with Engelmann's process, that the actual methods used for drawing on stone remained the same as they had been for monochrome and tinted lithography. The novelty of the processes of both Engelmann and Hullmandel lay in the division of the image into a number of separate printings, in the manufacture of the coloured inks, and especially in the exact registration of the impressions. These were problems which concerned the technician rather than the artist, and it is perhaps because of this that chromolithography was soon taken out of the hands of artists and for nearly fifty years became almost entirely a commercial process.

A new era began for lithography around the year 184o, largely because of the rapid development of chromolithography. From this date printers tended to become more interested in the commercial side of lithography, and this is reflected in the later treatises which are far more concerned with the industrial and economic aspects of the process. The change is really marked by two publications, both of them French. In 1837 the first trade journal of lithography began to appear, and in 184o the publication of Engelmann's second treatise was completed. No works of a similar scale were written on lithography during the same period in England, where letterpress printing was probably more firmly rooted than in France, but there is every reason to believe that the attitudes reflected in these two publications were common to both countries.

Le Lithographe² appeared at irregular, but mainly monthly, intervals from June 1837 to March 1848. It was published under the direction of the lithographic printer Jules Desportes, who had already written a treatise of his own. He seems to have written many of the articles himself and his firm printed most of the plates as well. Le Lithographe began by having something of the character of a magazine of the arts, and included a few articles of general interest, but these were entirely dropped in the second year. It was intended for both artists and printers but, though there were reviews of lithographs exhibited at the Salon and other places, the emphasis was more on the commercial aspects of the process. The kinds of topics that attracted attention were zincography, engraving on stone, transferring from old and new books, writing on stone, typolithography, chromolithography, the apprenticeship system, rates of pay for workmen, the laws relating to the press, and reviews of industrial exhibitions. Some of these subjects had of course been mentioned in earlier treatises, and Le Lithographe does include some articles which would have interested the pictorial artist, but the industrial and commercial aspects of lithography are given much more emphasis here than in any of the treatises. The commercial printing from stone of maps, circulars, and music had been practised alongside pictorial lithography right from the beginning of the century, but by 184o it was seen, at least in France, as a potential rival to letterpress printing. Le Lithographe published lists giving the names of over 1,ooo lithographic printers in France,1 over 3oo of them in Paris, and in a report to the Société d'Encouragement in June 1839 Lasteyrie claimed that there were in France 750 lithographic establishments, 3,000 presses, and 10,000 people engaged in either printing, working on stone, or making lithographic equipment.² Though some of these presses specialized in the printing of artists' drawings, the majority must have been engaged in ordinary jobbing printing—and it was for such printers that the numbers of Le Lithographe were intended.

Engelmann's Traité théorique et pratique de lithographie (Mulhouse, 1835-40) was by far the longest and most comprehensive treatise on lithography yet to have appeared, running into over 45o pages of a quarto volume. It was the first of the exhaustive works on lithography, and in its emphasis on the commercial side of the process anticipates the treatises of Richmond, Doyen, Lorilleux, and Lemercier in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. Engelmann saw his book as a definitive work and, with the exception of his own chromolithography, describes every known aspect of the process in great detail besides giving a thorough survey of the theory on which it rested and of the chemical properties of the materials used. The treatise is very much a record of the progress of lithography over the twenty or so years that Engelmann had been associated with the process. In addition to the practical parts, which have been referred to on occasions elsewhere, it includes a long historical introduction, a good bibliography, and lists of the awards made to lithographers at the Expositions des Produits de l’Industrie française and by the Société d'Encouragement. Engelmann himself rightly felt that this was the end of a chapter in the history of lithography and, in the section of his treatise where he refers to the development of chromolithography, he makes the following claim that time has fully justified:

La Lithographie en noir me semble arrivée aujourd'hui à un tel point de perfection, que je crois peu probable qu’elle puisse jamais livrer des épreuves sensiblement plus belles que celles qui sortent à présent de certains ateliers. Je ne doute pas qu'’on ne trouve par la suite des moyens de production plus réguliers et plus économiques; mais sous le point de vue artistique, la Lithographie en noir me paraît arrivée à peu près à son apogée. C'est donc, si j'’ose m'exprimer ainsi, un art fait, dont les procédés sont devenus susceptibles d’une discussion théorique.1

I Traité, p. 54.