# INTRODUCTION

I HE TECHNIQUES OF DRAWING FOR LITHOGRAPHY DESCRIBED IN the early treatises found their fullest expression in topography and landscape. Indeed, most of the methods of drawing on stone discussed in the previous chapter appear to have been evolved largely with the specific requirements of this branch of work in mind. Chalk drawing remained the basic technique, but the developmcnt of the processes of lavis lithographique, the stump style, tinted lithography, and lithotint towards a tonal system for lithography are all best studied in topography. Moreover, the skills of lithographic draughtsmen and printers in the first half of the nineteenth century were nowhere more obviously displayed.

Most such topographical lithographs were published in sets, either in wrappers, in a portfolio, or bound in volume form. Their first appearance in both England and France can be fairly accurately dated to the end of the second decade of the nineteenth century, with production tailing off some forty years later. Some were published with text, others without any, thus avoiding the statutory presentation to copyright libraries; but in any case the plates usually have a physical independence of the letterpress, and were often the raison d’être for publication. The prints themselves cover a wide field and take the form of picturesque representations of British and European cities, landscape views at home and on the continent, and records of newly explored lands.

Lithography inherited the traditions of eighteenth-century publishing by subscription, in which expensive books with plates usually appeared in parts with paper wrappers and were bound by the owner to his own taste, or could be bought collectively in bound form at the close of publication. Alternative versions were often issued on large and small paper, and were coloured by hand or left plain according to the pocket of the subscriber. But all this was established practice before lithography ever came on the scene, and many such topographical books had been produced with copperengraved or aquatinted plates, particularly in England. Lithography began nothing new in this branch of publishing, but continued a tradition in competition with aquatint, producing at first expensive folio volumes of the editions de luxe class. Only later, when a newly educated poorer clientele emerged, did lithography really enter the field of cheaper publishing and the realm of illustration proper. In the first half of the nineteenth century lithographs were only rarely produced as single prints, and a better market for them certainly existed if some excuse could be found for bringing a number together to be sold in sets by book- and print-seller alike. Topographical publications provided an assured market and an ideal opportunity for lithography to establish itself, and proved to be the means by which it eventually became accepted as a graphic process worthy of the attention of professional draughtsmen.

It was in works of this kind that a method of drawing for lithography was evolved and, at the same time, put to the test; for what might work well experimentally in the lithographic studio, and be described enthusiastically in a treatise, may not necessarily stand up to the hazards of commercial lithography. Thus it was that while many of the seeds sown in the treatises bore fruit and flourished in these topographical works, others proved to be suspect and were either improved upon or rejected. The experience gained from producing lithographs for publication had an important influence on the techniques described in later treatises; for just as the professional copperengravers of the seventeenth century evolved a technique which would stand the wear of a long edition, so the lithographic draughtsman, though not so obviously, moulded his method of drawing to suit the requirements of commercial printing. It was partly for this reason that Hullmandel advocated such a painstaking method of cross-hatching to build up even tones and, conversely, that Engelmann's lavis lithographique and Tudot's manière noire were rejected.

Most of these topographical works were published in England and France. The catalogues of the J. R. Abbey collection of aquatinted and lithographed topography, 1770-186o,' list nearly 60o such publications with lithographed plates, whilc Adhémar's ‘Bibliographie des recueils de paysages lithographiés $\left( \mathrm { I } 8 \mathrm { I } 7 \mathrm { - } \mathrm { I } 8 \varsigma _ { 4 } \right) ^ { \flat _ { 2 } }$ contains 746 entries, of which 143 take the form of drawing lessons. It is hardly true to claim, as Adhémar does,³ that landscape lithography was almost unknown in England and seems to have been peculiar to France. It may well be that French publications outnumbered those produced in England, but even here we cannot be sure since the Abbey collection is not complete. The most ambitious work in scale and scope, Baron Taylor's Voyages pittoresques et romantiques dans l’ancienne France (Paris, 182o-78), was certainly published in France, but the most lavish works were produced in England. And while in France early lithographic draughtsmen spread their activities into other fields, such as caricature, military subjects, and portraiture, English lithographers tended to concentrate on landscape and topography and established such a reputation for it abroad that many of them were even invited to contribute to Taylor's publication. Hullmandel, while admitting the superiority of the French in figures and heads, considered that in landscape ‘every unprejudiced observer will say, that we can produce finer lithographic specimens than they'.4

Yet in neither of these two countries was topography held in very high esteem. Even landscape, which must in every respect be considered a loftier branch of painting than topography, occupied a very lowly position in the eyes of the Royal Academy and the juries of the Salons. It was not easily accommodated by a theory of aesthetics firmly established by the academies of the seventeenth century, and which by and large still prevailed, which required of a painting as a first necessity that the subject matter should be grand. Landscape became acceptable in the hands of Claude or Salvator Rosa only in as much as it embodied those very qualities which were more naturally to be found in history painting. Landscape was legitimate if it could conjure up the glories of a past civilization, as Claude's did, or, like Salvator's, express the heroic passions of man. But for a long time it was not considered a worthy subject in its own right, and until the middle of the nineteenth century occupied a lowly position at the bottom of the pictorial hierarchy

along with still life—the only other inportant branch of painting not concerned with the representation of man.

Eventually it was in the field of landscape that such ideas were challenged, first by Constable in England and later by the painters of the Barbizon in France. But their influence was not to be felt generally until after the middle of the nineteenth century, and in the period under consideration here the predominant feeling was still that expressed by Gainsborough on being invited to paint Lord Hardwicke's park:

Mr Gainsborough presents his humble respccts to Lord Hardwicke, and shall always think it an honor to be employ'd in anything for His Lordship; but with regard to real views from Nature in this country, he has never seen any place that affords a subject equal to the poorest imitations of Gasper or Claude.'

The whole concept of topography was too closely associated with utility to be worthy of the serious attention of painters; and when Fuseli, the Keeper of the Academy, referred to‘the last branch of uninteresting subjects, that kind of landscape which is entirely occupied with the tame delineation of a given spot'² he was merely giving the current definition of topography. But though not in accord with the lofty ideals of painting, topography found no such opposition in the field of print-making, which had for centuries accepted its status as a utilitarian craft with no great pretensions to ‘High Art' and had a long tradition of topography to its credit stemming from Reuwich's illustrations to Breydenbach, Sanctae Peregrinationes of 1486, through Hollar, Loggan, Carlevaris, Canaletto, Sandby, and Girtin to the nineteenth century.

1 Quoted by K. Clark, Landscape into art (Penguin Books, 1956), p. 48. 2 Ibid., p. 49.