# TOPOGRAPHY IN ENGLAND AND THE WATER-COLOUR TRADITION

VV HEN LITHOGRAPHY BEGAN TO EMERGE FROM ITS EXPERIMENTAL state in England towards the end of the second decade of the nineteenth century conditions were ripe for the growth of topographical lithography. Above all, there already existed a flourishing trade in topographical prints, and especially in sets of hand-coloured aquatint views. This process was ideally suited to the interpretation of drawings in the tinted style of watercolour then prevailing in England, and aquatint soon became the most natural way of reproducing them for publication. This relatively new process had been pioneered in England by Paul Sandby, and from its first use by him in a publication, Views in South Wales (1775–7), until the dawn of lithography, scores of such topographical works were published in England by the leading houses of the day.

An increased awareness of the beauty of British landscape was one of the main reasons for this interest in topography. There had been for some time a demand for representations of country seats of the nobility, such as the one Lord Hardwicke had invited Gainsborough to paint, but the writings of Rousseau had inspired a love of nature in the raw untampered by landscape architects. William Gilpin, Gilbert White, Thomas Bewick, Constable, and Wordsworth all reflect somcthing of this return to nature, and were responsible in their different ways for the appreciation of British scenery. It was particularly the more rugged parts that first attracted attention, and the Welsh mountains and the Lake District were favourite subjects for the illustrators of aquatint books. But by 182o these regions had been adequately covered, and lithographed topography in this country seems to show no special regional interest. All parts of the country were becoming increasingly accessible with the growth of an efficient system of transport, and particularly with the opening of the railways, and in this connection it is worth mentioning that the railways themselves provide a small but interesting category of lithographed topography in the thirties and forties.1

Topography was given an additional boost in 1815 by the capitulation of Napoleon's army and by the establishment of peaceful conditions on the continent for the first time in many years. There followed one of the great periods of travel to all parts of Europe, and the English traveller took with hin, as often as not, a pen to jot down his thoughts and a sketch-book to make a record of things seen. It was natural enough that some should make this their professional occupation, sometimes tidying up an amateur's drawing for publication and on other occasions making the original drawing, and numerous illustrated books of travel were produced to cater for those who wanted a reminder of their travels abroad. It is no accident that the sudden revival of lithography in 1818, after it had been dormant since the beginning of the century, should have coincided with this era of travel.

Though personal differences must have existed amongst such travellers, as a whole they showed no marked preference for any one country: France, Switzerland, Italy, Germany, the Netherlands, and later on for the more intrepid travellers, Spain and the Middle East, all attracted attention. The period was one of flux in taste, and we see at one and the same time a revival of medieval and classical studies, as well as a growing interest in what was then termed the Orient. The quest for relics of classical antiquity, such as that which led Lord Elgin to bring the Parthenon sculptures back to England, was inspired by the same romantic ideals that led to the study of medieval architecture in Normandy and the antiquities of ancient Egypt. The same sort of multiplicity of interest appears in the work of many of the most important artists of the time: Blake, Fuseli, Flaxman, and Banks all used elements which derived from classical sources, but they can only be described as romantic in mood. Like many of the topographers of the period they turned to classical as well as medieval sources in the spirit of romanticism. It was this underlying romantic approach to history which reconciles the apparently contradictory and was responsible for this interest in Gothic Europe, classical antiquity, and the exotic East at more or less the same time. And it so happens that the period 1820-4o, which saw perhaps the greatest enthusiasm for Greek, Gothic, and Egyptian architecture, coincided with the rise of the topographical lithograph.

This period was also one of colonization and expansion for Britain. Exploration and travel to distant lands were largely the result of scientific curiosity; and scientific method, though not very advanced at the time, required that some representation be made of things seen, of the physical distribution of land, its vegetation and people, their customs and buildings. Before the days of photography it was virtually essential that an artist should accompany such expeditions to make a pictorial record to reinforce the printed word. Sometimes a professional would be employed especially to do this, as Westall was on Captain Flinders's ill-fated voyage to Australasia, but more often than not some skilful amateur member of the expedition would make a sketch which would then be made presentable for publication by a professional lithographer.i This type of illustrated travel book, carrying on the aquatint tradition, represents another important branch of topographical lithography.

Before considering some of the more important books and their lithographers it may be useful to give a brief account of the wider field of landscape painting in England from which the majority of topographers stemmed. The picture is by no means a clear one, but elements from three main traditions can be singled out for purposes of clarity. Still probably the prevailing influence was that of Claude who had established a type of ideal Italianate landscape which became the norm in eighteenth-century England. In his hands landscape was used to create a suitable setting for religious or mythological subjects, and trees and temples, on one or both sides of the picture, were used over and over again to frame the action and to open up a panoramic view bathed in the golden light of the Italian Campagna. This formula, saved by Claude's vision and handling from becoming stereotyped, was translated into English terms by men like Richard Wilson to lose much of its fascination. It had become the standard by which men judged landscape, whether real or pictorial. Nature herself, though a source book for

Claude, had become of secondary importance to many of his followers, and in time only those parts of nature which might have been found in a Claude landscape were thought fit for painting.

The second influence stemmed from Dutch landscape and particularly from Ruysdael. Unlike the ideal landscapes of Claude such paintings reveal an interest in the observation of the particular and the commonplace, and especially in those aspects of weather typical of north-west Europe— moving clouds and changing effects of light. The influence of this Dutch style of landscape, which spread from East Anglià by way of Crome and Constable, transformed the concept of the picturesque as established in the eighteenth century and created a new kind of picturesque landscàpe by the middle of the nineteenth century.

Thirdly, there existed a type of landscape painting which was more closely related to topography and which found its greatest exponent in Canaletto. Its particular characteristics were crisp, clear, sunlit views with large expanses of inactive sky, and a detailed delineation of the parts as well as the whole. Such paintings frequently seem to have been made from a viewpoint at eye level which gives a low horizon line, increases the speed of spatial movement into the picture, and at once puts the landscape on a thoroughly factual level by relating the spectator to the view represented. This type of landscape gained popularity in England with Canaletto's residence here from 1746 to 1753, and his influence can be traced in the work of Scott, Sandby, Girtin, and others.

Characteristics of each of these three approaches to landscape can be seen in English painting of the beginning of the nineteenth century. Only the last of them, with its interest in the recording of detailed information under ideal lighting conditions, can really be called topography. The probable use of the camera obscura by Canaletto, and certainly by many later topographers, helps to account for the lack of traditional pictorial composition in such work and explains its apparent relationship to photography. By contrast, ideal landscape and the whole concept of the picturesque is at variance with the needs of topography—the delineation of a particular locality whether beautiful or ugly. No ideal theory of art can accept topography unreservedly any more than it can accept accurate portraiture, but since both topographers and portrait painters have always considered themselves to be artists we find traditional ‘picturesque' elements creeping into their work. In topographical drawings this was particularly so in the foregrounds, where artists felt they had more freedom to extemporize, and it is in such parts that we find Claudian elements like the careful placing of a tree to frame a distant view. Such devices have become so much an accepted method of picture-making that we do not notice their repeated appearance even in the work of a painter like Constable, whose whole teaching rejects them. It is no easier to accommodate the Dutch tradition within the strict confines of topography, for it seeks to obscure with changing conditions of light and atmosphere the more permanent elements of form and detail; but concessions were made here as well to incorporate more genuine weather conditions into the essentially Mediterranean idiom of topography.

It is against this background of English landscape painting that we must consider the introduction of lithography to the realm of topographical illustration, which until then had been almost exclusively the province of aquatint and engraving. These two processes were ideally suited to topography proper with its insistence on crisp delineation and accurate detail of drawing; and this was particularly true of aquatint as it usually combined the linear process of etching with the actual tonal process of aquatinting, which tended to simplify tone and clarify form. The preliminary drawings for such prints were produced in water-colour. This medium owed its development to the print trade, and a type of painting was evolved with the prime aim of preparing drawings for reproduction. This resulted in the socalled tinted or stained style of water-colour painting which predominated in the eighteenth century and continued on well into the nineteenth, and might be placed somewhere half-way between drawing and painting. First of all the drawing was usually outlined in pen or pencil. This linear drawing was then given a monochrome foundation in wash and, finally, the local colour was applied on top of the monochrome basis. Such a break-down of procedure was very similar to that used in the production of an actual aquatint print, for the outline was etched first, the aquatint tone applied and usually printed in monochrome, and the whole then coloured in watercolour by a tean of assistants. The water-colours of Towne, Nattes, Sandby, and others would therefore have gone through much the same stages as the plates made from them and, consequently, it was not until almost the end of the eighteenth century that water-colour painting began to be regarded as an independent art form, and even then only grudgingly.

Lithography was invented just as this traditional type of topographical water-colour painting was being challenged by the younger generation of Girtin and Turner who, finding themselves freed from the necessity of working specifically for engraving, evolved a type of water-colour technique which relied less on outline drawing and more on tonal massing and atmospheric and light effects. At the same time the influence of the Romantic movement was beginning to have a liberating effect even in the field of topography. While aquatint was ideally suited to topography, the accurate recording of information about a given place, lithography was found to be better suited to romantic landscape, which required a more personal approach to the subject and a greater interest in those impermanent effects of nature that increase its emotive power. Strictly speaking these are qualities we should not expect to find in true topography which makes the impossible requirement that the artist's job is an impassive one, a mere recorder of things seen. The term is in fact much more easily defined than applied; but if aquatint is thought of as the process of topography then lithography, which allowed for more personal handling, must be considered more naturally the process of landscape.

All the same, after 182o lithography began to compete for the favours of artists in this very field of topography and soon attracted a number of them away from aquatint. The process of change was a gradual one. In the twenties lithographs, engravings, and aquatints are occasionally found together in one volume, and then usually to the detriment of lithography which could not compete in terms of precision with these other processes. In some publications it seems that the original intention was to have used lithography for all the plates, but that it proved unsatisfactory and was finally rejected. Aquatint was still in its heyday in the twenties, but by 183o lithography could hold its own and gradually absorbed the market the other had established during half a century. Lithographed topography reached its peak in terms of numbers in the forties and fifties, and in this period very few aquatint books were published at all. To a large extent the reason for this change to lithography must have been economic, but it does also reflect in the world of print-making and topography the larger movement in art and literature towards romantic ideals.

Despite these differences, English lithography inherited the aquatint tradition both in its style and in its close relationship with topography. With aquatint so well established in the early years of the nineteenth century it is not surprising that the first topographical lithographs should have been so strongly influenced by this process. The static character of Hullmandel's first lithographs, the struggle for a workable tonal process for lithography, as well as the use of terminology borrowed from aquatinting (Plates 8o, 81), all reflect this debt. But the strength of the native aquatint tradition was none the less a severe handicap to the rapid progress of lithography in England, and one of the reasons suggested by an early writer for England's lagging behind France in the first decades of lithography was that there was such a strong school of aquatint and engraving to compete with.

The most important legacy of the aquatint tradition to lithography was undoubtedly the close relationship between water-colour painting and print-making and, as far as the history of lithography is concerned, this was peculiar to England. In France it was primarily the oil painters who turned to the process, but in England nearly all the early lithographers were watercolour painters and, with a few exceptions, it would be difficult to name a lithographer of the first half of the nineteenth century who was not a watercolourist first and foremost. Because of this the whole development of lithography in England was determined by the requirements of watercolour painters, and not least by their concentration on topography.

Water-colours had nearly all been landscapes in the eighteenth century for reasons mentioned above, but the situation did not change very much when water-colour painting became more independent of engraving at the beginning of the nineteenth century. In 1804 and 1807 two societies were founded exclusively for the exhibition of water-colour paintings, which until then had been rather poorly hung at the Royal Academy. These were the Old Water-Colour Society and the New Society of Painters in Miniature and Water-Colours. A reviewer of their exhibitions in June 181o had this to say about their paintings in Ackermann's Repository of arts:

The first thing that strikes an observer, both at Spring-gardens and Bond-street, is, the overwhelming proportion of landscapes; a proportion almost as unreasonable as that of the portraits at Somerset-House. In pacing round the rooms, the spectator experiences sensations somewhat similar to those of an outside passenger on a mailcoach making a picturesque and picturizing journey to the north. Mountains and cataracts, rivers, lakes, and woods, deep romantic glens, and sublime sweeps of country, engage his eye in endless and ever-varying succession.1

Although water-colour painting was becoming freed from the dominance of the print trade the preoccupation with landscape and topography continued. In terms of scale water-colours could not compete with oils in the more important branch of history painting, but they had the advantage of portability which made them especially suited to landscape. But though water-colours were being exhibited and collected as such, many were still being produced specifically for print-making; and it was from the ranks of the water-colour societies that topographical lithographers were drawn. In this respect lithography was merely carrying on from, and continuing alongside, aquatinting. Of the founder members of the Old Water-Colour Society, Hills and Pyne had already contributed to the Specimens of polyautography, and Francis Nicholson and John Varley were to become important early lithographers. As lithography developed, many more of its members either drew on stone themselves or made drawings which were then translated by professional lithographic draughtsmen. Furthermore, Hullmandel, who did more than any other man to foster lithography in England, was a landscape water-colourist. So close was this connection between the two arts that when T. H. Fielding published the third edition of his treatise on painting in $\mathrm { I } 8 4 2 ^ { \mathrm { I } }$ he thought it necessary to add‘an appendix, containing a Manual of Lithography', and he later composed a lithographic treatise himself.² It was almost inevitable therefore that there should have been a close similarity in style between water-colour painting and lithography; but the similarity was with the older tinted style of painting rather than with the more modern approach of Girtin, Constable, De Wint, and Cox. It is true that the older style had become less rigid under these newer influences, but it was not the innovators who turned to lithography. Girtin was, of course, already dead by the time lithography became firmly established in England, but Constable, Turner, and De Wint are not known to have produced any drawings on stone. Lithography was partly a commercial undertaking and unlikely therefore to be in tune with the most recent developments in painting and, in any case, it is very doubtful whether the process of lithography in its early stages could have accommodated itself to this new approach.

The water-colour painters who turned to lithography may be divided into two categories: those who made the original drawing and also put it on to stone, and those who mercly supplied a water-colour drawing to be copied by the lithographic draughtsman. These are by no mcans mutually exclusive categories as many artists worked in both capacities at different times, but we are most concerned here with those of the first group, for they were responsible for bringing to the technique of lithography many features of water-colour painting. They would have been encouraged to do so by their familiarity with the materials used for drawing on stone; crayon and pencil-brush presented no new problems, and the grain of the lithographic stone is very similar to that of a close-textured hand-made paper. The various attempts to imitate washes on stone from the dabbing style to Hullmandel's process oflithotint, in which liquid ink was applied to the stone with a brush, were at least in part the result of this need to imitate watercolour techniques on stone. The deep etching of white highlights on tint stones was likewise an attempt to imitate the appearance of touches of impasto white paint which some of the later water-colour painters liked to introduce when working'on tinted paper. The method of producing halftones from a solid tint stone by rubbing with a piece of cloth wrapped round the finger was a technique which stemmed directly from water-colour painting. Similarly, the use of the pencil-brush to indicate outlines and emphasize details, which became the normal method of bringing out foregrounds in the lithographs of Harding and Prout, was one of the technical peculiarities of the later topographers of the water-colour school. But perhaps the most remarkable similarity lies in the methods employed by both water-colourists and lithographers to obtain sharp and bright lights against darker grounds. Both paper and stone could be scratched away with a knife or scraper for effects such as rain and spray, or for highlights, but where rather larger light areas were needed lithographers adopted a technique very similar in principle to a method first communicated by the watercolourist Francis Nicholson to the Society of Arts in 1799, and later published in his treatise on water-colour painting. Nicholson's technique was to reserve the light areas of a drawing with a mixture of beeswax and turpentine, which was coloured with flake white and applied with a brush. When the water-colour was finished this composition could be dissolved by coaxing it away with a hog brush or rag soaked in turpentine. The process created considerable interest at the time, and since Nicholson was also a prolific lithographer it seems likely that the process of‘gumming out' light areas on the stone, which is described in the early treatises, owed its popularity partly to his influence. Nicholson used lithography to illustrate the second edition of his treatise, and a folding plate contains sketches printed by Hullmandel in the latter's dabbing style with the lights reserved in this way (Plates 82, 83).² Furthermore, Nicholson's process, though used to secure light areas rather than darks, is almost identical in principle to that described in Lithographic pencil drawing (1824), which appeared only a few years after the publication of his treatise.

Finally, English lithographed topography depended, as aquatint had done previously, on the addition of colouring by hand. Though such prints existed perfectly well in monochrome or with a tinted background, they were only consummated when coloured by hand. Usually the colours were transparent and were sparingly touched with varnish but, as in watercolour painting itself, opaque colours were used in later works. Not all topographical publications were hand-coloured, ànd not all copies of any one work, but a comparison of coloured and uncoloured versions clearly reveals the importance of the addition, and fully explains the difference in the original publication prices.' Extensive hand-colouring continued throughout the period of the topographical lithograph, and even where printed tints were used to support the black printing hand-colouring is still found in the more expensive copies. Since personal handling in lithography was generally freer and stronger than in aquatint the colouring was usually applied less in areas of flat tints, more with individual brush strokes. This reflects the changing style of water-colour painting in the nineteenth century from stained drawing, which was ideally suited to aquatint, to a more painterly approach better fitted to lithography. One thing that had not changed was the concept that a topographical print in its most expensive form should be an imitation water-colour, scarcely distinguishable from the original.