# ENGLISH TOPOGRAPHICAL LITHOGRAPHY 1818-1830

HE USE OF LITHOGRAPHY IN ENGLAND FOR THE ILLUSTRATION OF topographical works coincided with the general growth of the process after 1818, and can be more particularly related to improvements in the technical knowledge of English printers which made it possible for them to print satisfactorily from drawings made with chalk on stone. But one early example from the incunabula of lithography in the pen and ink style deserves mention. It is a collection of drawings by Thomas Barker entitled Thirty two lithographic impressions, from pen drawings of landscape scenery (Bath, 1814) (Plate 84).² The work is not strictly one of topography, but it ought to be considered in this context since it was the first important collection of landscape lithography to be published in England. Jagged crags, mountains, withered trees, bridges, and torrents abound in these sketches, which the artist felt would be ‘more valuable to the Lovers of the Picturesque' than his original plan of detached studies of trees and foregrounds. Thomas Barker (1769–1847), more usually known as Barker of Bath, was a successful painter of rustic scenes in the idiom of Gainsborough, and was best known in his lifetime for a popular painting of ‘The Woodman'. After a trip to Rome, 1791-3, he settled in Bath where these lithographs were produced. Barker had already contributed plates to both issues of the Specimens of polyautography and had also made further isolated prints in this period,¹ but he was one of the few artists of any significance who is known to have turned to lithography between this first experimenal period and the later development of the topògraphical school.

The first of Barker's important lithographed publications was a collection of Forty lithographic impressions of rustic figures (Bath, 1813). These are not so freely drawn as the landscape lithographs he produced in the following year and show rather more of the engravers' syntax of hatching.² Barker intimated in the advertisement to the Drawings of landscape scenery that he might produce a similar set of Italian landscapes, but this does not seem to have materialized. It has been suggested³ that Barker may also have been responsible for the landscape plates which served as illustrations to Bankes's treatise on lithography (Plate 11)4 as this was first published at Bath in the same year as the collection of Rustic figures. They certainly show much the same fluency in the handling of the pen as the Drawings of landscape scenery, and both accord with Bankes's advice to amateurs ‘that they do not on any account give their drawings any thing like the character of engraving . . .'.5 But if Barker was responsible for some of the plates it is hard to understand why Bankes made no mention of the fact, as he advertised Barker's forthcoming publications at some length in the text.6

Barker's Thirty two lithographic impressions, froı pen drawings of landscape scenery was printed in the very small edition of fifty copies and was published complete. The size of the edition must have been linited more by an accurate assessment of the market than by technical factors, for Barker had found only 117 subscribers for his previous publication. At the time Bath possessed what was probably the only lithographic press in England which catered for the printing of artists' drawings, and it was there that the plates were Printed under the Direction of Mr. Barker, by D. Redman'.

The next lithographic press to start up in England after Redman's was probably the one opened by Ackermann in January 1817,7 which was mainly used for reproductive work in the Repository of arts and elsewhere. The greatest publisher of topographical books in this period found little use for lithography in a branch of work which was dominated by aquatint, and it must be admitted that the new process could not at that stage have competed with the older one in terms of clarity and precision. Only later, when lithography had proved itself, did Ackermann use it for topographical illustration, but by this time he had ceased to do his own printing and his contribution was that of publisher only. As a patron Ackermann did much to encourage lithography, as he did so many other branches of the polite arts, and it was he who published Senefelder's treatise and brought his invention to the notice of the Society of Arts in 1819.

All this encouragement was indeed necessary for the development of lithography, but what was needed more than anything else was a good lithographic printer. It was little use interesting artists and collectors in the process if drawings continued to be spoilt in the printing as they had been in the past. Redman had proved himself competent to print pen and ink drawings, but this was not the part of lithography which most attracted the artist. There already existed a number of graphic processes which could more or less reproduce a linear drawing. The real fascination of lithography, as far as the artist was concerned, lay in the possibility of multiplying an original chalk drawing made on stone with its infinite variety of tone. And this required a printer of far greater skill and wider interests than Redman— a man with some understanding of chemistry as well as the arts, and with the patience, tenacity, and also the means to apply knowledge gained through experiment.

Just such a man was Charles Joseph Hullmandel (1789–1850). He more than anyone else in England was responsible for the success of lithography, and particularly the topographical lithograph. Though of continental descent, with a French mother and German father, Hullmandel was born in Mayfair and apparently insisted on his English nationality. He was trained as a painter in Paris, and an examination of his sketches and published lithographs shows him to have been at his best a thoroughly competent landscape draughtsman. It was on the way back from a continental sketching tour in 1817 that Hullmandel first became interested in lithography and met Senefelder in Munich.² On his return to England he must have been anxious to try out the art for himself, and his first lithograph is preserved in his scrap-book in the

St. Bride Library (Plate 85).' It is inscribed ‘First drawing by me in 1818' and probably dates from the January of that year.² It is a rather coarse chalk drawing of a mountain scene, printed on buff paper and touched with Chinese white, and is not a particularly distinguished lithograph. Nevertheless, it shows Hullmandel as a draughtsman which, it must be stressed, was his original role in lithography. Only later did he turn to printing his own drawings and eventually those of other artists.

The change of roles came about over his dissatisfaction with the printing of his first published lithographs: Twenty-four views of Italy, drawn from nature, and engraved upon stone, by C. Hullmandel (London, 1818).3 This volume marks a turning point, not only in Hullmandel's career, but also in the history of English lithography; it is the first real topographical work to be produced by lithography in England, and also the first major venture in the use of chalk in this country.4 The book, a landscape medium folio, consists of twenty-four lithographs without text, and from a comparison of various states half the plates can be dated June 1818 and the other half 1o July of the same year. The single print mentioned above must in any case have been produced prior to the first of these two dates, and it is reasonable to assume therefore that, like the plates for the Twenty-four views of Italy, it was printed by Moser and Harris.

Very little is known about this firm of lithographic printers, the third of the three private presses known to have been working in England at that time.⁵ This is their first recorded printing, and from a circular preserved in the Victoria and Albert Museum6 it is known that the partnership was dissolved on I July 1818—that is, as Abbey has pointed out, half way through the production of Hullmandel's plates. Francis Moser is recorded printing again (on his own) drawings by Hullmandel and others in March 1819,1 and he also printed four lithographs for Harley's English scenery which were published in May 182o.² These, together with Hullmandel's drawings and the circular which was printed lithographically, are the only recorded examples of printing by Moser either with or without Harris.³

It was Hullmandel's dissatisfaction with the production of his Twentyfour views of Italy that persuaded him to turn to printing himself. He submitted these prints, together with others since lost, to the Society of Arts, and was awarded a silver fedal for them in 1819. The communication he submitted with the drawings was published in the Transactions of the society, and is dated 28 February 1819.

The drawings I have the honour to present to the Society for promoting the Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce, are the fruits of an art invented some years ago in Germany, and but lately introduced in this country, at least, in its present state of perfection. Its great advantage is that of enabling the artist to offer to the public the original productions of his pencil, without having recourse to engravers. The repeated failures I met with when I first began the work, intituled 'Twenty-four Views of Italy' determined me to have a press and materials of my own, and after several failures and renewed attempts during the space of fourteen months, I am at last enabled to offer some drawings which show, I hope, a decided progress in the art. I must beg leave to observe, that the twelve last of the 24 Views of Italy, and the 5 drawings marked 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, are printed entirely under my direction, and that the preparation of the stones, the chalk, the ink, &c. are entirely done by myself. With regard to the drawings marked 6, 7, 8, 9, the whole process, from the first preparation of the stones, as well as the printing, are done also by myself.4

Unfortunately, the numbered drawings are no longer traceable, but the last four of these were probably Hullmandel's first attempt at printing his own lithographs; and a most ambitious one it must have been, for in the same communication he explains that he produced these ‘imitations of aquatinta'from several stones:⁵

The tints of the prints marked 6, 7, 8, 9, are produced by a second stone covered over with grease; the lights are scraped out in the places where they are intended to be; and the print being brought on the stone in its exact place, produces the effect of a drawing on coloured paper touched in with white. The drawings marked 7, 8, 9, are printed with a third stone, to give more effect to the fore ground.1

All the other prints mentioned must have been printed either by Moser and Harris or by Moser alone with Hullmandel directing operations on the spot (if this is what was meant by ‘entirely under my direction’) after Harris had left the firm.² But an examination of the prints shows no appreciable improvement in the printing done after Hullmandel's intervention, and we must assume that it was for this reason that he determined to experiment on his own account. He would have seen examples of German chalk work while in Munich, and perhaps it was the Oeuvres lithographiques, which contained tinted lithographs by Strixner, Piloty, and other artists, that prompted him to try this type of chalk lithography with tinted backgrounds, for nothing quite so ambitious had been produced in this manner in England before. Hullmandel would certainly have set much higher standards for the printing of chalk drawings than he could have expected from any English printer at the time, and must have realized that the only way to do justice to his own drawings was to print them himself.

But we must return to Hullmandel the lithographic draughtsman, for this he remained during his first few ycars of work as a printer, producing drawings for a number of publications. In this field too he was a pioneer in England, for up till this time all that was required of the artist was that he should draw on stone as he would on paper. It was Hullmandel who showed that lithography was something more than this, and he began to evolve a method of drawing with chalk on the stone which was to culminate in the complicated system of cross-hatching described in his treatise. His aim was undoubtedly to create a tonal system for lithography which could compete with aquatint in rendering an artist's watcr-colour. In his Twenty-four views of Italy the system was still very much in its infancy with rather coarse parallel hatchings borrowed from engraving (Plates 86–8). This style of working had been pioneered in Munich some ten years earlier by artists such as Joseph Hauber and Max Wagenbauer, whose lithographs in Lithographische Kunstprodukte (Munich, 1805-7) are quite as advanced in their use of systematic methods of chalk hatching as those of Hullmandel in Twenty-four views of Italy. Some of Hullmandel's early chalk lithographs are very similar both in technique and mood to the landscape lithographs of Wagenbauer, and it is quite possible that he had seen some of them while he was in Munich. In the plates of Twenty-four views of Italy the direction of shading usually follows the form; there is virtually no cross-hatching, and the lines appear aggressive in their regularity when compared with the carefully concealed techniques of later draughtsmen. But, for all the stiff monotony of his hatching, Hullmandel showed for the first time in this country that it was possible to draw in terms of tone with the lithographic crayon.

It would be difficult to over-emphasize Hullmandel's contribution to the development of lithography in England. As a draughtsman he was by no means outstanding, and yet his work at this crucial stage was probably vital to the subsequent growth of drawing on stone; as a theorist he was responsible for the translation of Raucourt's French treatise, besides writing one of his own which ran into several editions and other shorter notices as well; but it was as a printer of artists' lithographs, and particularly topographical drawings, that he had most influence on his contemporaries both in England and in France. From his introduction to topographical lithography until his death in 185o he was responsible for nearly all the major technical developments which affected this and many other branches of lithography. In terms of quantity he was responsible for printing plates for over I 5o topographical publications alone. Amongst these may be counted many of the finest of the time, for he brought to the printing of artists' drawings the knowledge of an amateur scientist and the understanding and sympathetic handling of an artist, which inspired confidence in many of the leading water-colour painters of the day.

Hullmandel must have set up his lithographic press some time between 10 July 1818, when the latest plates of Twenty-four views of Italy were printed, and 28 February 1819 when he submitted his communication to the Society of Arts.¹ We must assume that he was not allowed to do his own printing at Francis Moser's and that his first real experience of this side of lithography was when he brought a press and materials from Germany and began experimenting with the help of his servant in his own home at 51 Great Marlborough Street. It was probably at this stage that he studied chemistry under Faraday in order to understand something of the chemical foundations of the process. In a very short time Hullmandel attracted a variety of amateurs and artists to his press and founded what amounted to almost a school of lithography at 51 Great Marlborough Street and, later on, at number 49 as well.

The first work drawn, printed, and published entirely by Hullmandel from this address was a set of three rather weak chalk drawings and a lithographed plan of the Château des Rochers (1819),' one of the few châteaux to escape the French Revolution unscathed. The drawings are all dated I May 1819 and are backed up with a yellowish tint stone with the lights reduced by scraping away in parallel hatchings in the way Hullmandel was later to recommend in his treatise. The technique is presumably much the same as the one he used for the drawings (nos. 6–9) which he sent to the Society of Arts and described in his communication. But this work is of little significance apart from its priority.

In the following year Hullmandel began publication of his Roman costumes; drawn from nature by Pinelli and C. Hullmandel (182o-1), a further set of lithographs similar in style, format, and subject to his Twenty-four views of Italy. Only three of the twenty-four plates are original compositions, the rest being very free adaptations of Pinelli's plates for Nuova raccolta di cinquanta costumi pittoreschi (Rome, 1816), but Hullmandel made all the drawings on the stone himself and was responsible for the printing of them as well. All the plates are in the style of chalk drawing he had evolved for his earlier Italian set, but they are drawn rather more freely and with a more complex, and at the same time less rigid, system of hatching. Hullmandel appears to have made no attempt to capture the spirit of the original etchings, and he converts Pinelli's austere and economical linear images into much more friendly naturalistic terms.

The publication that assured the success of lithography in England and, it was claimed, first drew the attention of artists to the process was G. B. Belzoni, Plates illustrative of the researches and operations in Egypt and Nubia (182o-2) (Plate 89).² The volume was one of a number which appeared in the 182os with plates produced by a variety of different processes, and along with the lithographs are found a number of etchings and one aquatint. Forty-four hand-coloured plates were published in 182o and the supplement of six plates (all lithographs) followed in 1822.¹ The twenty-six lithographed plates of the original volume were printed by ‘C. Hullmandel's lithography' from drawings by Belzoni himself and J. Ricci.² Belzoni had been attracted by the idea of having his drawings reproduced by lithography after seeing some sketches which Hullmandel had drawn and printed. No work of any importance had been printed in England by lithography at this stage and its use here, as one early writer pointed out,³ had the effect of recommending the new process to artists.4 With the establishment of Hullmandel's press a good printer of ckalk drawings was available in England for the first time, and from 182o onwards artists began to turn to the new process as well as to aquatint to have their drawings published. Nevertheless, aquatint was still flourishing in the 182os, and England had such a reputation abroad for this medium that her artists and engravers were even employed on a number of foreign publications.5 Against this cstablished tradition lithography could only hope to play second fiddle for some time to come.

One artist who was attracted to lithography at this early stage was the well-known water-colour painter Francis Nicholson (1753-1844).6He began working as a painter in oils, but became a frequent exhibitor with the Society of Painters in Water-Colour and was elected its president in 1813. Coming from Yorkshire, he specialized in a type of picturesque landscape readily found around him, and was particularly known for this kind of work. Though not amongst the greatest of the English water-colour school he was very successful in a commercial sense and also made important contributions to the technique of water-colour painting, broadening its scope and range of effects. In this respect, and particularly in his invention of a stopping-out varnish, he showed himself to have been something of an innovator; and it is in this light that we must view his introduction to lithography as he approached his seventieth year.

No established artist had yet turned to lithography in England, and certainly no one had let it interfere with the more important occupation of painting; but, according to the Redgraves, Nicholson virtually gave up the practice of his own art' and devoted ‘much time to the advancement of lithography'.i The earliest prints of his that can be traced were published in 182o and were printed either by Hullmandel or by Rowney and Forster, a firm whose first productions also date from that year.² These two firms were responsible for printing most of Nicholson's early drawings which were published, either plain or coloured, in paper wrappers. They are views of English scenery, particularly of his native Yorkshire, and at least four sets of Six views of Scarborough were published between 1822 and 1824.3 Nicholson made lithographs for no major publication but he must have been about the most prolific lithographer of the period; one contemporary writer estimates his output of drawings on stone as not much under 8oo,4 while Roget reports that he is credited with several hundred lithographs which, serving as “copies" for students, have been thumbed and torn and worn away like old school books, and consequently become rare'.s5 Like most successful water-colour painters Nicholson was also an instructor, and though this may not have been the prime reason for the production of these lithographs, it might well have accounted for their sale. He had long realized the value of producing more than one version of a drawing, especially for the Scarborough market where he found a ready sale for his work, and with an eye to business he had developed his own way of multiplying drawings:

For Scarborough, [he writes] I manufactured an incredible number of drawings. My process was by etching on a soft ground the different views of the place, from which werc taken impressions with black lead. This produced outlines so perfectly like those done by the pencil, that it was impossible to discover any difference.

This was nearly half of the work, and in the long days of summer I finished them at the rate of six daily.

This passage relates to a period before Nicholson was forty years old, but it may help to explain why he was later attracted by lithography to the extent of giving up painting, and particularly why he produced so many views of Scarborough in this medium.

As far as is known Nicholson never left the British Isles and, apart from a few drawings after sketches done abroad by amateurs, his work is limited to views at home. This is true of his lithographs as well, which are mainly of scenery in Yorkshire, Wales, Scotland, and Devon. He was not an architectural draughtsman and preferred the wilder aspects of nature which he found in these parts; waterfalls and rocky scenes particularly interested him. In all this he was conforming to current ideas of the picturesque, and in lithography he frequently adopted the most picturesque of formats, the vignette.

Nicholson's technique of drawing on the stone (Plates 90, 91) was quite different from Hullmandel's. Whereas the latter usually built up his tones with chalk hatchings Nicholson often made use of Engelmann's lavis lithographique, the process that Hullmandel adopted and called the dabbing style. This method was ideally suited to a water-colour painter who was used to building up his tones stage by stage, and it was especially suited to Nicholson because the method of reserving lights which Engelmann advocated was very similar to the process he had been using in his water-colours to preserve the light areas from dark washes.² The dabbing style was a much surer way of obtaining tonal unity than Hullmandel's chalk shading as seen in its early stages in Twenty-four views of Italy. It was also a more successful method for producing softer greys in skies and distances, but it lacked the crispness of good chalk work. Nicholson often employed the two together, combining the advantages of both methods, but he rarely employed a rigid shading technique, preferring the chalk to caress the stone as if it were paper. Whereas Hullmandel's method of drawing tended towards severity Nicholson's appeared at its best, soft and delicate, at its worst, woolly and indecisive. A generation older than other early lithographers, Nicholson stands somewhat apart from them; he does not appear to have had any great influence on his contemporaries and continued to produce his own sets of lithographed views without ever contributing to any of the major publications in this medium.

One such work, the most important containing topographical lithographs published in England in the 182os, was Britannia delineata: comprising views of the antiquities, remarkable buildings, and picturesque scenery of Great Britain. Kent (London, 1822–-3) (Plates 92, 93). It is an imperial folio volume with a dedication to George IV and notes to the plates in English and French. The original plan, in obvious emulation of the Voyages pittoresques et romantiques dans l'ancienne France, which began publication'two years earlier, was to cover the whole of Great Britain county by county; but only twenty-five plates for this first volume on Kent were ever published.' These appeared in five parts of five plates each with dates ranging from February 1822 to September 1823. Even this first volume does not seem to have been completed, for Rodwell and Martin announced in one of their publication lists (undated) that the volume on Kent was to be completed in eight numbers, each containing five plates. This figure is confirmed by a publisher's note found with part four of Britannia delineata² and dated January 1823, which claimed that the first volume will be completed in four additional Numbers, forming eight in all, and will certainly appear in the course of the present Year'. No explanation can be found for this halt in the progress of a venture which had all the ingredients of success, but there must have been some delay in the appearance of the parts even before publication ceased. It is not even clear who in fact published the work, for the plates of the first four parts carry the imprint of Rodwell and Martin (who certainly announced the first three parts in their lists), while those of part five bear that of Ackermann. The subject is even more confused as a set of five parts in their original wrappers in the John Johnson Collection is described by pasted correction slips on the wrappers themselves as having been published by J. Dickinson, 114 New Bond Street, while the original imprint found beneath them is Printed for R. Ackermann, Strand'.3

The significance of Britannia delineata for the historian of lithography is that it brought together for the first time three of the leading lithographic draughtsmen of the period. Hullmandel, who printed all the plates, was responsible for eleven drawings in an improved but still rather laboured style of hatching (Plates 94–6), Harding for eight (Plates 107–12), and Prout and Westall three each (Plates 98-101, 105). For none of them was it the first excursion into lithography, but the publication provides a good opportunity to compare styles and to discuss their lithographic work.

Samuel Prout (1783-1852) was the first of these to experiment with lithography. In fact, he was working on stone before either Hullmandel or Nicholson, for he contributed a chalk seascape to Ackermann's Repository of arts as early as April 1817.' Like most lithographers of the topographical school Prout was primarily a water-colour painter. He was born in Plymouth and specialized in views of the west country and particularly coast scenes until, after a visit to the continent in 1818, he turned increasingly to the drawing of foreign cities. For the rest of his life Prout devoted himself to making architectural drawings of French, Belgian, Swiss, and Italian towns, many of which became popular by being published in the form of lithographs. He found a worthy champion in Ruskin, who, having been brought up on Prout's drawings as a boy, lavished rather more praise on him than was his custom and probably rather more than Prout deserved. Ruskin admired him particularly for the way he expressed age in architecture, and for finding sources of the picturesque ‘in the busy shadows and sculptured gables of the Continental street',² and claimed rather excessively that he was ‘the only one of our artists who entirely shared Turner's sense of magnitude'.³

As a water-colourist Prout belonged rather to the older school of stained drawing, using his firm but crumbling line as a basis for colouring, and he was, as Ruskin realized, ‘essentially a draughtsman with the lead pencil'₄ rather than a painter. He had tried soft-ground etching as a method of reproducing his drawings ‘in imitation of chalk' as early as 1813,⁵ but eventually found lithography to be the ideal medium for this sort of work. It was no doubt Ruskin's admiration of Prout's drawing which prompted the few generous remarks he ever made about lithography, and allowed him to recommend Prout's lithographed sketches for study in his Elements of drawing.

In many ways Prout retained something of the amateur's approach to lithography, even though he became one of its chief exponents. He seemed to regard drawing on stone as a tonal extension of drawing on paper; and in this he is nearer in approach to many of the French lithographers of the period. Unlike Harding and many other English draughtsmen Prout was never carried away by the technical possibilities of lithography, preferring his tones to evolve in a seemingly careless way rather than to build them up systematically with laborious chalk-hatching. Ruskin, ever the opponent of graphic techniques, notes in particular the refreshing execution of one of Prout's lithographs of Ratisbonne (Plate 97), and compares his ‘scrawled middle tint of the wall' with the wretched smoothness of recent lithography'.² On the other hand Prout did on occasions follow Hullmandel's advice by building up a preparatory all-over tint with the dabbers, as he did in his lithograph of‘Sandgate’ (Plate 98) for Britannia delineata in order to give it unity and a richness of tone. The same technique was employed for the Interior of Dover Harbour' (Plate 99) where some of the delicate lights in the sky (Plate 1oo) were reserved with gum before the application of the dabbers. But for the most part Prout's technique of working on stone was merely an extension of his natural method of drawing and involved a vigorous handling of the crayon with occasional use of the pencil-brush and scraper (Plate 1o1). There is very little of the conventional syntax recommended by Hullmandel and, for all the redeeming freshness of Prout's approach, his lithographs are made to look somewhat coarse when compared with those of the other artists of Britannia delineata.

Prout's best early work, and certainly the most admired at the time, was his Illustrations of the Rhine (1822–6) (Plate 102).3 The twenty-five lithographs, which were all printed by Hullmandel, are essentially tonal drawings built up with irregular and free hatchings; but again there is considerable use of the dabbers, particularly in the skies.4 In some plates an all-over tone has been established by this means,5 with perhaps a figure or highlight reserved with gum, which gives a tonality to the whole and a luminosity to the lights rarely matched by other lithographers. In these plates and in many of Prout's other lithographs the sensuous quality of the crayon and his tendency to generalization seem ideally suited to the picturesque, eroded architecture he loved to portray.

William Westall (1781-1850) made less of a reputation as a lithographer than either Prout or Harding, since he divided his talents between this process and engraving and aquatinting. He was the younger brother of Richard Westall, and had a successfúl start to his career in 18o1 by being accepted as a probationer under West at the Royal Academy. When only nineteen he was selected to accompany Captain Matthew Flinders's expedition to Australia as a landscape draughtsman—a voyage which ended in shipwreck and near disaster for both Flinders and Westall. After eight weeks on a coral island, followed by a long stay in the East, Westall eventually returned to England some four years after his departure. On his return the sketches he had made were elaborated into water-colour paintings, exhibited in 18o8, and finally engraved and published in Flinders's account of the expedition.' For a short while Westall exhibited with one or other of the water-colour societies, but he began to turn more to painting in oils. He exhibited frequently at the Academy and was elected an A.R.A. in 1812. Throughout his life he was closely connected with the graphic arts, first of all with engraving and aquatinting, and later with lithography as well. He contributed many drawings for Ackermann's most famous publications,² as well as for several other books with aquatint plates. Sometimes he acted as draughtsman only, but he engraved five of his own collections of aquatint views himself³ and also worked as a line-engraver.

Westall continued to work for the engravers and to produce his own aquatints even after he had turned to lithography, and he brought to this newer process a delicacy of handling which is in marked contrast to the vigorous drawing of Prout. He was one of the few lithographers to employ the dabbing style with any real success, managing to avoid the specks and black circles which Hullmandel warned against in his treatise, and was regarded as something of an expert in this style.4 It was a process ideally suited to someone used to working in aquatint and had been evolved by

Engelmann in conscious imitation of this process.' In Westall's lithographs there remains something of the approach of the aquatinter, and this can be seen in prints like ‘The Valley of Maidstone' (Plate 105). His palest silvery greys were usually built up gradually by means of the dabbers and, like aquatint tones, they show no direction of shading. Soft crayon was used for the middle tones and then, where emphasis was needed in foregrounds and elsewhere, Westall used a sharp crayon, or occasionally a pencil-brush, which worked its way nervously across the surface of the stone with much of the quality of a line etched into copper.

Unlike Prout, Westall was not a traveller in Europe. He did not share Prout's passion for foreign cities and is known to have visited the continent only once, three years before his death. The lithographs he produced from his own drawings were all therefore of English scenery, the most important being his Thirty-five views on the Thames at Richmond, Eton, Windsor, and Oxford, 1824,² which contains perhaps his first published lithographs as the imprint date on the plates of the first of the seven parts is I December 1821. These prints reveal the same delicacy of treatment as those in the Britannia delineata. The subjects themselves encouraged the use of wide expanses of sky and these were particularly well handled, as in ‘Eton from the Play Fields' (Plates 103, 104), by most skilful use of the dabbing style. Occasionally lights on clouds were brought out by means of a gum reserve or by scraping away the all-over tint. An early thirst for travel in Westall may have been partly quenched by lithographing for a number of publications the drawings and sketches of those who had undertaken expeditions abroad and had not the necessary skill to put them on to stone themselves.³ This was a type of work which Prout never undertook, but which is in character with a draughtsman widely experienced in the graphic arts.

The remaining artist who contributed to Britannia delineata, James Duffield Harding (1797–1863), was certainly the one best known as a lithographer in the nineteenth century, and he occupied a similar position with respect to drawing on stone as Hullmandel did to printing from it. He became the undoubted technical master of the processes Hullmandel perfected, and dominated the field of topographical lithography in England for twenty years. His output of lithographs was enormous and he exerted an influence through his prints and lithographed drawing-books out of all proportion to his stature as an artist.

Harding was primarily a water-colour painter, becoming an Associate of the Society of Painters in Water-Colour in 182o and a member in the following year. He exhibited with this society regularly until his death, apart from a period of ten years following 1846 when he tried sending oils to the Academy in the hope of election. His early training was received partly from Prout, whose love of European travel he shared to the full; but where his master had excelled in architectural studies, Harding's leanings were towards landscape, and particularly the drawing of trees. In his turn Harding became a teacher, like so many water-colourists in the nineteenth century, and gained a reputation as one of the most successful of the time, counting Ruskin among his pupils. Many of Harding's ideas were said to have been incorporated in Modern painters. Ruskin certainly admired his drawing of foliage for in this same work he asserted that, after Turner, Harding was ‘unquestionably the greatest master of foliage in Europe'.' Despite the support of Ruskin, Harding was never very highly regarded as a painter, and was far better known for his lithographs and for his mastery of drawing for the engravers. Part of his early training, after Prout's tuition, was as a line-engraver under one of the brothers Pye, and it was in this medium that he had many of his drawings reproduced in the Landscape annual between 1832 and 1834, and in numerous books, particularly in the thirties.

Harding's connection with lithography began when he was introduced to Hullmandel by Valentine Bartholomew, the flower painter.² His first lithograph was printed by Hullmandel and is preserved in the latter's scrapbook in the St. Bride Library with the written note First drawing on Stone by J. D. Harding in 182o' (Plate 106).3 The print, a view of the Chateau of the Counts of St. Martin: Valley of Aost', was lithographed from a drawing by Major Cockburn and bears the date I April 182o.4 From this time onwards Hullmandel and Harding formed a friendship and unofficial partnership which lasted for twenty-five years. Between them they directed the course of topographical lithography in England, and were not without influence on its development in France as well. We must assume that it was Hullmandel who supplied the initiative, but it was Harding who put his ideas into practice, and in doing so naturally prompted more experiments. The genesis of some of the later methods of drawing for lithography can be studied in the above scrap-book, but the topographical books they produced together remain by far the best testimony to their partnership. Hullmandel, of course, ranged much wider than Harding and printed the work of other draughtsmen, besides working in many fields other than topography; but as far as can be discovered Harding remained faithful to Hullmandel's press until the latter died in 185o.

From the beginning Harding showed himself to be in complete control of the techniques of drawing for lithography, and he mastered each of the new methods evolved by Hullmandel. In Britannia delineata he far outstripped the other contributors as a lithographic draughtsman, even though he was relatively new to the process. Most of the tonal areas in his eight plates for this work were produced by a system of chalk-hatching similar to that later recomnended by Hullmandel, but there was also considerable use of the dabber to unify tonal areas and for cloud effects and other soft tints. Particularly good use was made of these techniques in the lithograph ofFolkestone' (Plate 107) with its stormy, threatening sky. The whole image was treated in terms of simplified masses of tone which suggest a conscious attempt to rival the process of aquatint. In the sky the complex methods used for building up the tones were completely disguised (Plate 1o8) while in the middle distance and foreground the hatching was kept open to leave the firm strokes of the crayon visible (Plate 1o9). The same range of treatment is seen in the lithograph of ‘Maidstone' (Plate 11o). In this print the delicate tones of the sky were built up by a much purer use of the dabbers (Plate 111), the foliage of the middle distance was drawn vigorously with the crayon (Plate I12), while in the foreground the pencil-brush was used to give precision and to add richness to the darks. Harding managed to coax from the stone a far wider range of effects than any of his contemporaries in England, allowing distances to dissolve and yet keeping the crisp, precise foregrounds that were his speciality as a water-colourist. In Britannia delineata he established himself as the supreme stylist of lithography and, judged purely from the technical standpoint, it must be admitted that by comparison Hullmandel's handling appears laboured, Prout's coarse, and Westall's rather naïve.

Harding's plates for Britannia delineata were the most important original lithographs he produced for an English publication in the 182os, and all his major productions fall into our next period. Yet he produced some of his finest lithographs in these first ten years before he became carried away by his technical skills, and the plates he contributed to the Voyages pittoresquesí are amongst the best in that enormous work. In these, and in his lithographs for Britannia delineata, Harding succeeded in putting into practice a satisfactory method of tonal drawing on the stone which could compete with aquatint. An early writer, álluding to Harding's skills, pointed out that ‘not content with sketching on stone, he produced finished pictures in black and white'.² This is what Hullmandel had been trying to do in his own prints but had failed to achieve because of his limitations as a draughtsman. The arrival of Harding at this stage provided him with a skilful enough executant to put his ideas into practice, and it is more than likely that the methods of drawing on stone described by Hullmandel in The art of drawing on stone were in part based on those evolved by Harding during his first few years as a lithographic draughtsman.

Apart from the two publications mentioned above, Harding worked principally as a reproductive lithographer in this first period, either translating the sketches of amateur draughtsmen or reproducing the works of popular artists.³ In this context his A series of subjects from the works of the late R. P. Bonington (1829-3o) deserves mention since the majority of the twenty subjects are topographical. The collection appeared in four parts and was published as a memorial volume to the young painter who had died only the previous year. It provided an ideal subject to which Harding could devote his skills as a lithographer and prompted a contemporary writer in the Library of the fine arts to record that it ‘affords the most effective examples both of Mr. Harding's powers in lithography, and the capabilities of the art itself'.1

Although all the artists of Britannia delineata contributed to other publications, and Prout and Harding to the Voyages pittoresques, it remained the only major English topographical work with lithographed plates to be published during this first period. Not only the finest but also the majority of topographical volumes continued to be produced with aquatint plates. Lithography was encroaching upon this stronghold and is found in combination with aquatints in a number of publications, but it had not yet become firmly established. Lithographic printers were certainly increasing in number in England since Hullmandel had shown that chalk drawings could be printed successfully. In addition to Rowney and Forster, who continued printing until about 1824, others who were responsible for printing topographical lithographs and seem to have made their first appearance in the 182os were: John Boosey & Co., W. Day, C. Ingrey (later Ingrey & Madeley), N. Chater & Co., R. Martin & Co., P. Simonau, Graf & Soret, and Engelmann, who set up a branch company in London in 1826.² This last firm, with the style Engelmann, Graf, Coindet & Co., and with considerable experience behind it, was the first serious rival to Hullmandel's press.

There were also many skilled and prolific lithographic draughtsmen who specialized in this type of topographical work and, like Harding in this period, concentrated most of their labours on reproducing the work of other artists. Many of them seem to have been connected in some way with Hullmandel's press and are found doing much the same sort of work as Harding, but usually with less skill. Amongst the most important in this period were A. Aglio, T. M. Baynes, D. Dighton, M. Gauci, G. Harley, and G. Scharf.

One of the leading lithographers of the next generation, Louis Haghe, had already published plates in Belgium and England,3 and had contributed to the Voyages pittoresques. Like Harding, Haghe produced his best work in this period (Plates 1 13, 1 14) and showed himself to be a master of the particular sort of chalk hatching which Hullmandel discussed in his treatise. But Haghe does not appear to have produced very much work in lithography before 183o, and he more properly belongs to a later period.