## 14

# ENGLISH TOPOGRAPHICAL LITHOGRAPHY 1835-1855

IN THE PERIOD DISCUSSED IN THE LAST CHAPTER TOPOGRAPHICAL lithographs were usually produced in the chalk manner, with or without the use of the dabber, and were either coloured by hand or left monochrome. In the period following 1835 it became increasingly common to combine the original black drawing with another printing, usually straw or buff in colour, as a background tint. This change in style was gradual, resting rather on a series of improvements than on any one discovery. The basic idea of using a second stone to support a chalk drawing was almost as old as lithography itself and the reason for it, as explained by Senefelder, was quite simple: he used it in the first place merely to compensate for the warm grey tint of the stone on which the original drawing was made and then, later, when it occurred to him to scrape away parts of the tint, to imitate drawings on toned paper touched with white chalk. It may be partly for the first reason that from about 182o onwards lithographs were printed on India paper, which is much the same colour as a pale lithographic stone.² Monochrome lithographs printed on this paper are sometimes even found touched with opaque white paint for the highlights; but black and tint lithographs were frequently printed on India paper too, and this method clearly had advantages because the lights could be removed as part of the graphic process and the tone and colour of the background tint could be controlled. The most famous early application of the tinted lithograph was for the plates of the

Oeuvres lithographiques (Munich, 1811–16), which was widely acclaimed in England and France as well as in Germany. Though the process undoubtedly owed something to the chiaroscuro woodcuts of the early sixteenth century, it became something typically lithographic during the period under consideration here and, in its turn, exerted a considerable influence on nineteenth-century wood-engraving.

The tinted lithograph was already an established ‘manner' by the time Engelmann and Hullmandel came to write their treatises. Even some of the lithographs Hullmandel presented to the Society of Arts in 1819 were printed with tinted backgrounds with the lights scraped away to produce the effect of a drawing on coloured paper touched in with white’² and a number of examples could be cited from the 182os in both France and England where this process had been used in a similar way.3 Nevertheless, there were still technical difficulties which made it impossible to do much more than reserve the highlights with gum or scrape them away with some sharp instrument. These methods were quite sufficient for imitating a drawing touched with white; but in ten years the whole concept of a lithograph had changed from that of an imitation chalk sketch to a tonal painting on stone. Sharp contrasts in the tint stone were out of keeping with the subtle gradations of tone produced with the chalk and dabber in the black printing. What was needed was some corresponding method of producing half-tones on the tint stone to keep pace with the improved techniques of chalk drawing. In 1824 Hullmandel had found such half-tones impossible; but during the 183os he made experiments along these very lines and was responsible for all the most important developments in tinted lithography in England, as he had been for those in chalk drawing on stone ten years earlier. Some of Hullmandel's experimental plates are preserved in his St. Bride scrap-book and they provide a rough chronology of his investigations, but his contributions are best studied in the major topographical books of the period. Of all branches of lithography this was the one most associated with England, for although the tinted style bccame almost the international idiom for lithographed topography in the middle of the nineteenth century, no other country produced such ambitious volumes as those published in England between 1835 and 1855.

It would seem from a study of the St. Bride scrap-book that Hullmandel was engaged in the tonal experiments which made these works possible from about 1831, when he produced eight small sketches inscribed ‘Trials of the Brush Style made in 1831'.1 This would have been about the time that French printers were working along similar lines, and there can be little doubt that Hullmandel knew of their activities. His own experiments were directed at finding a new tonal system for lithography to replace the more or less obsolete dabbing style and the tedious method of chalk-hatching, and at extending the range of the second printing by producing half-tones on the tint stone itself. Such tints could be produced in two directions: either by building up a positive tone, or by making an all-over tone and reducing it. Almost certainly many of Hullmandel's experiments combined both approaches, which could in principle be used either for the black drawing or for the background tint. In practice, however, the positive approach was normally reserved for the black printing and the negative one for the background tints, largely because of historical precedent; but they were by no means mutually exclusive, and the most effective tint stones combined such an assortment of the techniques described in the previous chapter that it is virtually impossible to describe their genesis.

It is not surprising, therefore, that some confusion has arisen over the tonal systems employed in the work which marks the full flowering of the tinted lithograph: Harding's Sketches at home and abroad (1836).² It is an imperial folio volume containing fifty plates of single-tint lithographs in direct imitation of drawings on tinted paper touched with white.3 The lithographs remain essentially drawings, sometimes more than one to a plate, and no copies are known to have been coloured. The original drawings were made over a period from September 1824 to October 1835, but mainly date from 1834 when Harding made an extensive continental tour. It is not known when the drawings were put on stone, but presumably some time after October 1835. They were printed by Hullmandel and published by Charles Tilt in an edition of 1,ooo copies, after which the drawings were to be effaced from the stones.⁴

It is perhaps Harding's best-known publication, and caused somcthing of a sensation when it appeared. The artist was presented with a diamond ring by Louis-Philippe, who doubtless found this a much less harmful outlet for lithography than the political caricatures of Daumier. Stylistically, Harding's prints in Sketches at home and abroad must be put somewhere half-way between his carefully observed and laboriously executed tonal lithographs of the twenties and the rather facile lithotints of his later period. The use of a second printing allowed Harding to adapt for lithography some of the technical tricks he had developed in his water-colours and drawings. One of these was his use of opaque whites, which was frowned on by the watercolour purists, and the other, on which the first sometimes depended, was his use of tinted paper for sketching. According to Roget, his use of coloured paper dates from 183o when he made sketches on it in Italy which were much admired in England and ‘brought that material into vogue as the more efficient means of producing an effect'.' It seems significant that Hullmandel's experiments began at about this time and, more particularly, that four Italian views dated 183o appear in Harding's Sketches at home and abroad.

The work is interesting technically as it made use, probably for the first time in a published work, of both Hullmandel's stump style in the black printings and graded tones on the tint stones (Plates 115, 116). These were quite separate processes which Hullmandel had been working on in the mid 183os, and for which evidence can be found in his scrap-book. Both were extensions of existing methods and no specific date can be assigned to them. The stump style, which was really only an improvement of the dabbing style, was perfected by Hullmandel some time prior to 1835. It was used sparingly by Harding for some of the delicate tones of skies and distances in his Sketches at home and abroad and, in particular, for the waves and clouds in ‘Shipwreck'. Harding must have been connected with Hullmandel's experiments, for two sketches in the St. Bride scrap-book have the written note ‘One of these was sent to Mr. Harding when in Devonshire in the Summer of 1835',² and another, undated, ‘Trial of Stump style by Harding with Stopping' (Plate 64).3 The first of these is particularly interesting as the urgency implied by sending this proof to Harding while sketching in Devon would suggest some connection with the forthcoming publication, especially as plate 3 in Sketches at home and abroad is a view ofChudleigh Rocks, Devon', and is dated September 1835.

2 Op. cit., f. 19.

In many ways the discovery of a satisfactory method of making a variety of tone within the tint stone itself was more important for the development of lithography; for once it became accepted that this was a possibility, there was no reason why the second printing should not contain as much of the drawing as the black stone itself. The approach was basically the negative one of reducing an all-over tone by a variety of means such as those used by Motte, Lemercier, and Tudot in France for black lithographs. Hullmandel was certainly working along very similar lines, for two plates are included in his scrap-book'with the note ‘Trial for producing variety of tint in a tint stone, which enabled Mr. Harding to produce his sketches at Home & abroad & established and introduced what has since been called, the tinted style in 1835' (Plates 76, 77). One was printed in black and the other in a colour approaching that normally used for tint stones, and both were produced mainly by scraping and rubbing away from a prepared tint. In the black print there must have been some reserving of the lights with gum applied sparingly with a hog brush, and probably in both of them some of the middle tints were in the first place established positively, either with chalk or by means of the new stump style.'

The tones established in the plates for Sketches at home and abroad are not nearly so adventurous as these experiments would lead us to expect. Many of the highlights on foregrounds, trunks of trees, and buildings are no more complex than some found in tinted lithographs of the twenties, except that the very strongest lights have been scraped away deeply to give a slight relief to the prints in imitation of the effect of chalk or Chinese white applied to a drawing.² In many places the second printing was used, as it had been by the chiaroscuro woodcutters of the sixteenth century, to give an increased sense of form. This technique may have been largely responsible for the changing style of Harding's lithographs, from the tonal painting of the earlier prints to a type of lithograph more concerned with modelling and the representation of form. It was mainly in the skies of the plates in Sketches at home and abroad that Harding made use of Hullmandel's new techniques and produced a variety of tones by scraping and rubbing away the greasy preparation and by a subsequent painterly application of brush strokes. No doubt he was less familiar with the process than Hullmandel, and was not prepared to be too experimental in an important publication. All the same, it is tempting to suppose that Hullmandel's improvements which led to the stump and tint styles were largely directed at supplying his friend and associate of fifteen years' standing with a method more suited to his latest style of drawing than the traditional chalk-hatching of the twenties.

Sketches at home and abroad marks a turning point, not only inHarding's lithography, but also in the development of topographical lithography in general. With this publication the possibilities of Hullmandel's experiments had been proved, and the success of this type of lithograph assured. From this time on the tinted lithograph became the norm and gradually developed in complexity. In December 1836 Harding's Portfolio was published in the same style but on a smaller scale (imperial quarto) with twenty-four plates tinted in exact imitation of the original drawings'. Unlike the earlier publication some copies of the Portfolio were coloured by hand, apparently with a mixture of washes and coloured crayon. Of the older school of lithographers, Prout produced a number of prints in this idiom, including his Sketches in France Switzerland and Italy (1839),² but his Fac similes of sketches made in Flanders and Germany (n.d., c. 1833)³ and Sketches at home and abroad (1844) were drawn in monochrome lithography.

Apart from Harding, who played a leading role in both periods, the most important lithographers of the tinted style belong to a younger generation. The most prolific of these was Louis Haghe (18o6–85). During the thirties and forties he shared the leading reproductive work with Harding, besides producing a number of series of prints after his own drawings, and he must be considered one of the most skilful exponents of the tinted lithograph. He was born at Tournai in Belgium where he received his first instruction in drawing at the local academy and, later, water-colour lessons from the Chevalier de la Barrière. While still in his teens Haghe received his first instruction in lithography when the Chevalier set up a lithographic press and employed him as one of his assistants. It must have been soon after this, when he was still only seventeen, that Haghe assisted in the production of Collection des principales vues des Pays-Bas (Tournai, c. 1823). The volume was published in twelve parts, each consisting of eight plates printed by Dewasme, with descriptive text in French and Flemish. Some of the earlier parts contain plates bearing the dates 1822 and 1823. A number of artists were responsible for the lithographs including the Chevalier de la Barrière himself and J. B. de Jonghe. Haghe lithographed twenty plates, either from his own drawings or after those of his employer and others. According to anonymous articles in the Art journal and the Printing times and lithographer² the Chevalier de la Barrière returned to France while the work was still in progress, leaving Haghe with the responsibility of instructing an English visitor named Maxwell in the art of lithography. It seems that Haghe was persuaded to return with Maxwell to England to continue the tuition, and was lured with the prospect of finding commissions in this country. Both articles suggest that this would have been in 1823, when Haghe was still only seventeen; but if this was in fact the date when Haghe came to England we lose track of him until 1825 when he lithographed fourteen of the plates in Robert Simpson, The anatomy of the bones and muscles (1825).3 At the close of that year he made three drawings on stone (imprint date December 1825) for a collection of Three views of Hereford (Hereford, 1826).4 The printing for both of thcse publications was done by W. Day of Gt. Queen Street. This appears to have been the beginning of a connection between printing firm and artist which lasted until Haghe gave up lithography to concentrate on water-colour painting in 1852. To this early period also belongs a set of twenty-four lithographs by Haghe illustrating J. R. Planché, Lays and legends of the Rhine (London, 1827–9).⁵ The plates of this book, all vignetted and printed on India paper by W. Day, are amongst the most delicate and meticulous of carly English lithographs (Plates 113, 114). But whatever Haghe's reasons for coming to this country may have been he seems to have produced few lithographs in the twenties, and a writer in the Library of the fine arts for 18316 records that he was not extensively represented in England.

Apart from the above works, and two plates for the Voyages pittoresques, only Haghe's twelve illustrations to Captain Edward Bold's Travels through Sicily and the Lipari Islands (London, 1827)² and the fifteen lithographs he made from drawings by T. Compton, G. S. Shepherd, and J. Young for a collection of Guernsey views (1829-30)3 can be traced from this early period.4 He may have preferred to concentrate on painting in water-colours at this stage, and must certainly have done some work of this kind, for in 1835 he was elected an associate of the Institute of Painters in Water-Colour.

Haghe's reputation in England was mainly as a reproductive lithographer, and his most important work of this kind, the translation of Roberts's sketches of the Holy Land, represents the culmination of this art. In France he was better known as an original lithographer through the numerous drawings he contributed to the Voyages pittoresques over a period of twenty years. The only major English publications in which he appears as both artist and lithographer were his three series of Sketches in Belgium and Germany (London, 1840, 1845, 1850).5 Each of these contains twenty-six plates of exclusively architectural subjects, both interiors and exteriors. Haghe was not primarily a landscapist, and he preferred subjects like these with an historical flavour in which he could concentrate on the intricacies of ornamental detail. All these lithographs were produced with tinted backgrounds, the prints of the last two series each having an additional tint stone, and were printed by Day & Haghe (in the last series using the style Day & Son).

The combination of Day and Haghe appears to have been a somewhat more binding one than that of Hullmandel and Harding, and occupied much the same position relative to the thirties and forties as the latter had done in the twenties and continued to do in this later period. William Day had begun by printing lithographs on his own, and it was in this capacity that he must have met Haghe by the close of 1825. It is not clear when the style ‘Day & Haghe' was first used, or even what the exact relationship was between the two men, but it makes its first appearance around 183o and by 1834 is found in the directories. According to William Simpson, who joined the firm of Day shortly before Haghe left it, the latter had no financial interest in the firm but merely lent his name and artistic skills; and in support of this it is worth noting that the imprints ‘W. Day' and ‘Day & Son'were occasionally used even during the period when Haghe was associated with the firm. All the same his acceptance, at least as a nominal partner in the firm, coincided with its growth, and in the 183os the firm of Day & Haghe presented the first real competition to Hullmandel, being appointed lithographers successively to the King and to the Queen. In 1845 William Day senior died, but his son William took over the company and it continued to prosper so that William Simpson, who joined the firm as a lithographic draughtsman in 1851, could refer to it in his autobiography as ‘the first house in London for pictorial lithography'.1 Haghe left the firm in the following year and from then until it was converted into a limited company in 1867 it continued as Day & Son. In the same year the company went into liquidation and its goodwill passed to Vincent Brooks. It is difficult to assess the relative importance of the presses of Hullmandel and Day & Haghe in the period when both were active in the thirties and forties. The former was still experimenting with the process, but in terms of output probably has to take second place to Day & Haghe, the first firm really to exploit the tinted lithograph. Other leading printers of tinted lithographs in England were A. Ducôte, Graf & Soret, C. F. Cheffins, M. & N. Hanhart, and Standidge & Company. But despite these rival concerns Hullmandel continued to attract the more important artists of the water-colour school, and three of these, J. F. Lewis, Thomas Shotter Boys, and J. Nash, all very different in their choice of subject matter, may be considered in this context.

John Frederick Lewis (1805-76) was one of the most skilful technicians of the water-colourists. He joined the Society of Painters in Water-Colour as a young man in 1827 and eventually became its president in 1855. During this period he established something of a reputation as a painter of exotic Mediterranean scenes. He shared, and was partly responsible for, the romantic enthusiasm for what was then thought of as the Orient, and spent eight years in Egypt making meticulous renderings of its costume and architecture. Though the son of F. C. Lewis, the aquatint engraver, and in his early years trained as an engraver himself, he was not primarily a graphic artist. He was responsible for only three series of lithographsone in which he made the original drawings and also put them on to stone, another in which he enlisted the help of professional lithographers, and a third in which he made lithographs from another artist's drawings. But these three collections, and particularly the two of Spanish life and scenery, were responsible for making his name as a lithographer. Lewis was one of the first English artists to record the beauties of Spanish life, making his first journey to Spain in 1832 and returning to do some further drawing there in 1833-4. During the thirties he sent almost exclusively Spanish subjects both to the Water-Colour Society exhibitions and to the Royal Academy, and it was from the studies made on these trips that he produced his first series of lithographs.

The first collection, Sketches and drawings of the Alhambra, was published in June 1835, the second, Sketches of Spain & Spanish character, in the July of the following year.² Both volumes are of a uniform folio format and contain twenty-five tinted lithographs together with a lithographed titlepage. In the earlier set Lewis had the assistance of Harding, Lane, and W. Gauci in putting seventeen of the drawings on to stone, but the second series was Drawn on Stone from his original Sketches entirely by himnself'. With these two publications he must have added to his reputation as an artist of Mediterranean scenes that of lithographic draughtsman, for his last work, Illustrations of Constantinople (1838),3 was Arranged and Drawn on Stone from the original Sketches of Coke Smyth by John. F. Lewis’ (Plates 117, 118). This is uniform with the other two sets in both size and number of plates, and like them was published either plain or with the prints handcoloured and mounted in portfolio. Though inexperienced in lithography, Lewis brought to the medium the decisive handling of a skilled and sure draughtsman. There was nothing new in the particular techniques he employed, but he provides one of the best cxamples of an artist working successfully in the idiom of the tinted lithograph. Nearly all the drawing in Lewis's prints is found in the black printing, and the tint stone is mainly used to give variety in the skies by means of a range of half-tones and to provide emphasis in the foregrounds by bringing out the strongest highlights. But it was Lewis's choice of subjects, rather than his technique, that accounted for his popularity as a lithographer, and that prompted Ruskin's rather excessive praise of his Spanish sketches.1

Thomas Shotter Boys (1803-74) was far more of a professtional lithographer than Lewis both in the range and quantity of his work, and was one of the few English lithographers to have strong contacts with France. Little is known about his early life, except that he was at first apprenticed to George Cooke the engraver. He later turned to water-colour painting and exhibited with the New Water-Colour Society from 1824. In the following year he went to Paris where he came under the influence of Bonington² and remained till about 1834, making perhaps occasional visits later but settling in London for the rest of his life.

Shotter Boys's stay in Paris resulted in his first major lithographed publication, Picturesque architecture in Paris, Ghent, Antwerp, Rouen (London, 1839).3 The plates for this work were printed by Hullmandel in chromolithography and, though containing some of the finest of topographical prints, the publication is even more important as a landmark in the development of colour printing and falls outside the scope of this book. Boys also made many lithographs for the Languedoc and Picardie volumes of the Voyages pittoresques4 between 1835-40, and perhaps even later. The majority of these were printed by Hullmandel, though some of the earlier plates (dated 1835) were printed in France by Thierry. It may even have been in Paris that Boys received his introduction to lithography for his earliest recorded lithograph, which he drew in 1832, was printed by Delpech.⁵ He also made three drawings on stone which were printed by Motte for Paris ancien et moderne (Paris, 1836)6 and contributed to Le Moyen âge pittoresque (Paris, 1836).7 Most of his first work in England was done after other artists' drawings and in the tinted style. He worked as the principal reproductive lithographer for David Roberts, Picturesque sketches in Spain (1837),1 and for Clarkson Stanfield, Sketches on the Moselle, the Rhine & the Meuse (1838),² and in this capacity he also made tinted lithographs for a number of other publications in the period 1838-40.3 Apart from the plates printed in France, wherever there is evidence of a printer it is Hullmandel. There must certainly have been a close connection between the two men as the Picturesque architecture in Paris is dedicated to Hullmandel in acknowledgement of his improvements and discoveries ‘by his sincere friend T. S. Boys'. It is even possible that Boys was employed by Hullmandel as a reproductive lithographer, for he made no great reputation as an artist during hislifetime.

Apart from the Picturesque architecture in Paris, Boys published only two sets of lithographs in England after his own drawings. The first, which is very rare, is a set of ten tinted lithographs, A series of views in York (York, 1841).4 The second, and more important in every respect, is his Original views of London as it is (London, 1842),5 which consists of twenty-six tinted plates drawn and lithographed by Boys and printed by Hullmandel (Plate 119). Like most of the important topographical productions this was published in both plain and coloured versions, and it has since become, at least in the latter state, one of the most prized collectors' pieces of lithography. Much of this interest can, of course, be explained by the beauty of the plates, but some also by their subject matter. London had for a long while been a favourite city for topographers, but never had the recording of information been of more value than in this early Victorian period when life was changing so rapidly, and before the camera was really competent to replace the artist's drawing. In his insistence on the importance of local detail, Boys stands at the end of a long tradition of topographical draughtsmen, and these plates provide us with one of the most complete pictures of the architecture, costume, and transport of London around 1840.

With his preference for low viewpoints and sharp diagonals of buildings receding into space Shotter Boys stems indirectly from Canaletto. Like Canaletto, too, his skies are rarely clouded, and he allows nothing to obscure the clarity and precision of his immaculate draughtsmanship. Born a generation earlier he would surely have turned to aquatint rather than to lithography in order to reproduce these views. Of all lithographers Boys was the one most clearly devoted to the traditions of topography, and was prepared to record many un-picturesque features like the scaffolding to the left of ‘The Club-House, Pall Mall' or the pavement layers' tools in the foreground of‘St. Dunstan's, Fleet Street'.

Though Boys's handling of figures may owe something to French artists, his treatment of buildings belongs to the English school of architectural drawing with its close relationship to aquatint engraving. It is in this respect that Boys differs most from other lithographers. His chalk drawing is crisp, with sudden contrasts of light and dark to emphasize details rather than to produce an effect, and he used the tint to pull the whole drawing together in much the same way as an etcher would use his aquatint ground. This was a rather new use of the tint stone, which may have been suggested to Boys by his earlier experience in colour printing and by the necessity of dividing up his image on to a number of different stones. In the work of most other lithographers of this period the tint stone was merely scraped away in places to render highlights or surface detail, while in many of Boys's lithographs the tints must have been conceived as an integral part of the drawing. They are used particularly to mass buildings and to express simple contrasts of light and shade in much the same way that architectural draughtsmen had previously used aquatint. It is this simple use of tone, quite as much as his style of topographical drawing, that links Shotter Boys's lithographs of London with an earlier tradition.

The third of these artists whose drawings were printed by Hullmandel was Joseph Nash (18o8-78). Like Boys he was primarily an architectural draughtsman, having begun his training under Pugin in 1829. Nash's love of medieval and Tudor architecture may well have been fostered while working under Pugin, for in 183o he is found producing his first lithographs from sketches taken under Pugin's direction in the latter's Views illustrative of the examples of Gothic architecture (1830).

In 1834 Nash began an association with the Society of Painters in Water-Colour which was to last until his death, and at much the same time started contributing illustrations to the annuals. For the first few years most of his exhibited paintings were of this illustrative class, but he also exhibited some architectural drawings, many of which were later lithographed by him to form a set of twenty-five prints published as Architecture of the middle ages in 1838.' In these lithographs Nash made use of the new stump style which Hullmandel had only recently perfected, and the following note about it appeared in the preface:

By the introduction of the stump in place of the point [crayon] for making large tints, the Artist has an instrument placed in his hands, which for freedom and rapidity of execution, admitting at the same time both of the greatest delicacy as well as force of tint, ncarly equals the pencil [water-colour brush] in colour—indeed it may almost be called painting on stone.²

Nash was one of the leading exponents of the stump style which, as the above paragraph emphasizes, allowed the water-colourist to produce on stone the appearance of effects that he could produce on paper, but with considerably less effort than would have been needed by the older method of chalk hatching.

The stump style was used again by Nash in his best-known publication, The mansions of England in the olden time,3 which appeared in a series of four volumes, each with a lithographed title and twenty-five plates, between 1839 and 1849. The plates were published plain, or coloured and mounted in portfolio, and a volume of descriptive text was published to complete the set in 1849. Apart from the number of plates, it is not an exceptional work, and most of the lithographs were produced by an extension of the processes employed by Harding in his Sketches at home and abroad. The first germs of the stump style had been seen in Harding's work, but here it plays a more important part and in ‘Grand Entrance, Hardwicke Hall, Derbyshire' (Plates 120, 121) was used for building up nearly all the large masses of tone and, apart from the underlying tint stone, was used on its own for the sky. Nash also made more use of the tint stone; in Harding's work the lights had been removed only sparingly, but in these lithographs of Nash the range of tone is much greater, and particularly so in the plates of the fourth series.4

More interesting in many ways are the four plates in the third series produced by Hullmandel's new lithotint process, which allowed a much closer approximation to the approach of the water-colour painter than even the stump style. This third volume is not dated, but three of the lithotint plates are signed and dated 1841, and one 1840. All are lettered with the words C. Hullmandel's Patent'. It is therefore not strictly true to claim, as Abbey does, that Nash ‘seems to have remained faithful to the stump',' though this does seem to have been his only excursion in the use of the newer process and he certainly reverted to the stump in later publications. The use of lithotint in ‘Athelhampton, Dorsetshire' may even have been the first application of the process in a published work since the plate itself is dated 184o and Hullmandel did not take out his patent until November of the same year. Only the black printing seems to have been produced with washes of ink, the tint stone having been drawn, like all the others in the series, by scraping and rubbing away from an over-all tone. It seems likely that some of the larger tonal areas of the black printing were produced by the stumping process which, it must be remembered, was also covered by the lithotint patent; but some of the darker parts of the building were certainly applied with brush strokes of varying intensity. This is particularly evident in the treatment of the coat of arms on the buildings to the left. A more finely-grained stone must have been used for this lithograph, but as there is some scumming up of the surface it is difficult to determine with any degree of certainty exactly how the drawing was originally made. This is probably lithotint in its transitional stage, being prior to Harding's sketch in the St. Bride scrap-book and also earlier than his plates in The park and the forest. Unlike these later lithotints it was not printed on India (or similar) paper. ‘Charlcote, Warwickshire' (Plate 122) and ‘Bay Window in Hall, Bramhall, Cheshire' provide much purer examples of the application of ink washes, and many brush strokes show the hardening at the edges which is so characteristic of lithotint (Plate 123). There seems to have been little use of the stump in these two prints, but some of the hard edges of brush strokes may have been softened by scraping and rubbing where they appeared too aggressive. These four plates in The mansions of England in the olden time seem to have been Nash's only excursion into lithotint, and in his other lithographed publications he reverted to the stump.

Most of Nash's other lithographs were made while he was working on the Mansions of England. As a reproductive lithographer he drew on stone in this period two sets of prints in the tinted style after sketches by Wilkie, and one after drawings by Lake Price,² all of which were printed by Hullmandel. His only other important original publication was a set of twenty-five plates, Views of the interior and exterior of Windsor Castle (1848),3 after drawings which he had exhibited the previous year at Maclean's the publisher. Some of these plates abandon the traditional buff tint and are printed in blues and even strong reds instead, and all appear to be printed in three colours. Only copies coloured by hand with transparent and opaque colours can be traced, and the work may be said to stand somewhere half-way between the hand-coloured print and the chromolithograph.

While these new artists continued for the most part in the tradition of the tinted lithograph established by Harding in Sketches at home and abroad, with the black drawing produced with the crayon or stump, Hullmandel and Harding continued to experiment. The result was the former's lithotint which was patented on 5 November 184o. However prints by this process may have been produced,4 they give the appearance of wash drawings made with a brush, and this represents the final stage in the evolution of lithography towards the goal at that time of the imitation water-colour. The dabbing and stump styles enabled the lithographer to build up tones as a water-colour painter would in the earlier stained type of drawing, but these processes could not reproduce the more painterly application of individual brush strokes which was by this time almost general amongst water-colourists.

Harding was the undoubted master of the process of lithotint and was responsible for the first publication with all the plates produced by it: The park and the forest (1841).⁵ It is a work of landscape rather than topography and consists of twenty-six plates (including title) of trees in their appropriate landscape settings to illustrate the picturesque beauty of trees themselves, alone and in combination'.6 Harding was particularly admired for his drawing of trees and foliage, and in Modern painters Ruskin singles out one of a group of‘Stone Pines' in The park and the forest as an example of the successful diminution of the trunks of trees. In fact the publication might almost be considered a drawing-book, for the types Harding established so skilfully here were used again and again in his own drawing-books, and have served as models for such books on trees ever since. The park and the forest is a folio volume without text, and was published by Thomas Maclean in an edition of 1,ooo copies. All the plates are printed in black with a tint stone of the usual buff colour and are lettered ‘Printed with [or from] C. Hullmandel's Patent'. Instéad of India paper the lithographs are printed on what is described on the title-page as ‘Smith and Chapman's adhesed paper', which appears to have been mounted during printing in the normal manner. The lithotint process was used for both the black and buff printings, but no print was produced entirely by means of washes of ink. There was still considerable use of chalk on the black stones, especially for the drawing of foliage, and in some of the plates it is hard to detect any wash work at all in the black printing. This technique appears to have been used more freely on the buff stones which assume far more importance than hitherto in tinted lithographs. In most of the plates the buff tint is not only used to throw up highlights, but appears as an essential part of the drawing, and in ‘Beech and Ash' (Plates 124, 125) and ‘Old Oaks' (Plates 126, 127) it is quite as important as the black printing itself. In the last of these the whole of a distant view to the left is drawn on the tint stone without any addition of black (Plate 127), while in ‘Larch’ and many others the variation of tone is so great as to give the impression of a third printing. This effect has been achieved by making the general tint a half-tone, presumably by rubbing away the surface of a full tint with a coarse flannel, and then working in two directions, either reserving or scraping away for the lights or adding with a brush for the darks. The lithotint process is most clearly seen in the view beyond the lake in ‘Common Willow'(Plates 128, 129) where both black and tint stones show the characteristic hard edges of the washes of ink. But of all the plates ‘Beech and Ash' makes the fullest use of Hullmandel's process. In this plate both printings exhibit a full range of tone; the foreground in particular is composed of a medley of individual brush strokes of varying intensity which make this the closest imitation of a sepia wash drawing yet achieved in the graphic arts (Plate 125).

Harding used the lithotint process again to illustrate S. C. Hall, The baronial halls, and picturesque edifices of England (1848).1 The work consists of 1Abbey, Scenery, no. 405, Hardie, p. 237, Lewis, p. 133, Roget, vol. ii, p. 182.

seventy-two tinted lithographs and was originally published in thirty-six parts, the earliest imprint date being 1 October 1843. The plates were made after drawings by a variety of artists including Harding, Cattermole, and Prout, and were Executed in Lithotint, under the Superintendence of Mr. Harding'. What exactly was meant by this is not clear, but Harding himself made twenty lithotints, some from his own drawings, and the remainder were drawn in lithotint by Hulme (twenty-eight), Walton (nineteen), and Allom (five). It is possible that none of these other artists had yet tried the new process, in which case Harding may have been responsible for instructing them in minor technicalities like assessing the density of the washes on the stone.' Undoubtedly Chapman and Hall, who published the work, saw it as something of an experimental venture, though it was hardly true to claim as they did in their advertisement that it was ‘the only series of Prints in Lithotint'.² In any case the process was restricted to the black printings, the buff tints being produced by what had now become the more orthodox method of rubbing down a prepared surface. The tint stone plays a subsidiary role in these prints and nowhere assumes the importance it does in some of the plates for The park and the forest. Nevertheless, in the black drawing there is a much purer use of the lithotint process than in the earlier work. Harding, in particular, scarcely uses the chalk at all and relies almost entirely on washes of ink and an occasional use of the stump. He is seen at his best when working after Cattermole, and the latter's ‘Naworth Castle, Cumberland' and ‘The Beauchamp Chapel, Warwick' (Plates 13o, 131) show the most advanced use of lithotint in the publication.

Harding continued to use the new process, but in a rather facile manner. Many of his drawing-books contain plates produced by it, and some of his later lithographs for the Voyages pittoresques are lithotints.3 The process was in keeping with, and was no doubt brought about by, the changing style of water-colour painting, and water-colourists not otherwise known as lithographers used it as a means of publishing their work. Frederick Tayler and George Cattermole,4 both noted for their free and painterly handling of water-colours, produced lithographed portfolios of their sketches drawn in lithotint by themselves. Amongst the recognized lithographers Nash's early use of the process has already been noted, but Haghe and Boys both experimented with lithotint in the Voyages pittoresques, and W. L. Walton made frequent use of it. All these plates were printed by Hullmandel who was, of course, protected by his patent from any competition in England. But although lithotint represented the logical culmination of Hullmandel's search for a tonal method which would suit the water-colour painter, it never really became firmly established. Had Hullmandel perfected this wash method a little earlier he might have found it used much more generally by the water-colour painters who frequented his press. For although Hullmandel's was a business cońcern and undertook a great deal of commercial work, it had been established in the first place to print artists' drawings. This continued to be its principal occupation even in the forties, but by this time lithography was a commercially successful process and had almost completely ousted aquatint from its own stronghold, so that it ceased to exercise the kind of fascination which must have attracted many of the watercolourists who had previously turned to lithography to have their drawings multiplied. By 184o there was no shortage of lithographic printers and the production of lithographs after an artist's drawings had become more of a commercial venture. In this respect Hullmandel could not compete with the rising establishment of Day & Haghe, which had trained a whole school of reproductive lithographers, and by the time of Hullmandel's death in 1850² this younger firm had already assumed his role as the leading lithographic press in England for the printing of drawings.³

In terms of numbers the products of the firm of Day & Haghe in the forties, and afterwards Day & Son in the fifties, must far outweigh those of Hullmandel in earlier decades. Haghe was associated with the firm until 1852, when he decided to devote himself entirely to painting in oils and water-colours. Until this time he must have been in charge of the draughtsmen at the press and gathered around him a whole team of assistants who seem to have worked almost exclusively for the firm, and continued to do so even after he had left it. Amongst the more important of these were his younger brother Charles Haghe, George Hawkins, Edmund Walker, Robert Carrick, the brothers Andrew and Thomas Picken, the Frenchman

Edmond Morin, and William Simpson. There were others who were recognized as specialists in particular subjects: T. G. Dutton for ships, Vinter and Lynch for portraits, and J. Needham, who had been a pupil of Harding, for tree drawing and landscapes. William Simpson, who joined the firm in 1851 just before Haghe withdrew from it, gives some idea in his autobiography of the division of labour that was practised.' A number of men, presumably the most junior, were employed merely to put the outlines of a drawing on the stone; then, in the case of Simpson's own drawings his assistant, Joseph Bielski, put in the tints according to instructions; and finally, Simpson himself applied what he calls ‘artistic finish'. This was a practice inherited from professional copper-engraving, and its acceptance in lithography meant that the newer process had now become firmly established on a commercial footing and had lost much ofits early attraction as a means of multiplying an original drawing. No doubt the bulk of the work undertaken, particularly about the time of the Great Exhibition,² necessitated this economical employment of skilled labour, but it is significant that the firm did not attract the better-known artists to draw on stone as Hullmandel's did even in this later period.

On the other hand, the efficiency of the system operating at Day & Haghe's allowed them to undertake some commissions far larger in scale than anything produced by Hullmandel. One such project was the drawing on stone and printing of the plates for the most ambitious work ever published in England with lithographed plates: David Roberts, The Holy Land, Syria, Idumea, Arabia, Egypt & Nubia (1842–9).3 The work went through a somewhat complicated history and really comprises two publications. The first, The Holy Land, Syria, Idumea, Arabia, appeared in twenty parts (1842-5) with text by George Croly; the second, Egypt & Nubia, in a further twenty parts (1846-9) with text by William Brockedon. Copies of the first half were sold bound in 1846, but all forty parts, mainly of six plates each, were still available for sale in this state in 1849.4 The entire I Op. cit., p. I5.

publication, though somewhat different from the original plan, is now often found complete in a sct of six folio volumes consisting of 248 lithographs with descriptive text.

Roberts had conceived the idea of the publication by August 1838 when, inspired by the interest of the period in this type of subject, he set off for the East to ‘visit the Holy Land, and make drawings of the scenes of sacred history and the antiquities of Egypt'.' David Roberts was a highly successful topographical painter (one of the few to gain entry to the Royal Academy) who had already had a set of his Spanish sketches reproduced by tinted lithography.² In Egypt he was supplied with a guard to protect him from ‘interruption or insult whilst sketching'3 and was given every encouragement by the British Consul-General, who even arranged for him to be allowed to sketch in the mosques—but with the proviso that he should use no brushes made with hog's bristles. On his return to England Roberts approached the publisher Murray with his project, but having estimated the outlay at £1o,ooo Murray was not prepared to take the risk. Roberts then tried Moon who agreed to undertake the publication and offered him £3,ooo for the drawings. Some seventy-two of these were exhibited in various parts of the country to arouse public interest and to obtain subscribers, and by May 1841 over £2o,00o had been guaranteed. The original plan, as outlined in Roberts's journal,4 was to issue 3oo plates in five volumes selling at 1oo guineas coloured and 5o guineas plain, and to engage Harding and Haghe to put his drawings on to stone. Though remaining on a grand scale the plan was somewhat modified, and for unknown reasons the lithographic work was entrusted to Haghe alone.

Roberts's style of water-colour painting was ideally translated into tinted lithography. He belonged to the older tradition of water-colour painting that continued into the middle of the nineteenth century. First of all he would establish his outlines with a pencil, often using a straight edge, and would then lay on a series of washes which allowed the original drawing to show through. Frequently the foundation washes were almost monochrome, forming much the same basis for the drawing as the tint stone did in lithography. Stronger colours were reserved for figures and accessories, and

Roberts added these last of all in much the same way as a print would be coloured by hand. This sort of drawing was much more in keeping with Haghe's lithography than Harding's, for the latter had developed a rather marked personal handling at this stage of his career. Furthermore, many of the drawings for The Holy Land were interiors and exteriors of inhabited buildings, and while Haghe was a figure and architectural draughtsman, Harding was primarily a landscapist. But these points aside, the work was probably too vast in scale for Harding (and we assume Hullmandel) to undertake. Apart from anything else it would have involved the use of over 6oo stones. It has always been assumed that Haghe alone was responsible for making the drawings on stone although Williams, writing while the work was still in progress, states that the lithographs were made with qualified assistants.' Bearing in mind the practice of the firm of Day & Son as described by Simpson only a few years later it seems much more likely that this was so. But even if all the tint stones were drawn by assistants, Haghe would still have been required to produce the chalk stones at the rate of over thirty a year, and this at a time when he was travelling abroad and producing his series of lithographed Sketches in Belgium and Germany.

The plates of Roberts's The Holy Land are not particularly advanced examples of the technique of tinted lithography. They appear alternately throughout the volumes as large full-page prints (Plate 132) and smaller half-page vignettes on squared-up tints (Plate 134)—representing the difference between what would have been called drawings in the first place and sketches in the second. Most of the black drawing for both sorts of lithographs was produced with the chalk. In the first place a very hard chalk seems to have been used for the delineation of buildings and architectural details and, in keeping with Roberts's original drawings, many of the straight lines were drawn with a rule (Plates 132, 133). This part of the operation may well have been carried out by assistants, and so may the massing of large areas of tone. These were mainly built up by the traditional method of chalk hatching as described by Hullmandel, and only occasionally is there evidence of the use of the stump or dabber. In many ways the smaller vignettes are more successful than the more ambitious, rather overworked, large plates. They are more sensitively handled, and this encourages the belief that Haghe may have been responsible for their entire production. All the lithographs are tinted and the background stones display a variety of tones, particularly in the skies (Plate 135). These must have been produced by combining a variety of techniques. The full lights were often gummed out first before the application of the tint, and the half-tones were usually produced by a combination of rubbing, scraping, and etching away the over-all tone. Additional work was often done on top of this basis either with the crayon or, if crisp positive marks were needed, with brush and ink. Some of the highlights were gummed out with dry brush-work to give texture and, particularly in the foregrounds of the vignettes, some of the full lights have been etched deeply to give a slight embossing in imitation of Chinese white or chalk. The Egypt and Nubiá volumes show a real advance in the use of these tints, and many of the plates in these volumes make use of a third printing, usually grey-blue in colour. This normally replaces the buff tint in the skies, but sometimes, when the sky is a warm colour, both tints are used together to give greater richness. Two plates make use of three tints along with the black drawing and one of them, Approach of the Simoon', uses overprinting to such an extent that it can be considered a chromolithograph.

Roberts was appreciative of the way his drawings had been lithographed and wrote of Haghe that he had ‘not only surpassed himself, but all that has hitherto been done of a similar nature. He has rendered the views in a style clear, simple, and unlaboured, with a masterly vigour and boldness which none but a painter like him could have transferred to stone.'i Ruskin, who was a subscriber to the publication, was not at all in agreement. He thought little of Haghe's conventional, forced, and lifeless'² lithographs in general, and in a passage in Modern painters had the following to say about those in Roberts's The Holy Land:

So magnificent a work should have been put only into first-rate hands, and there is much about it unsatisfactory in every way; partly from attempting too much, but chiefly from the incapability of the hands employed on the landscape. No one but Harding should have executed the foliage; and, at any rate, a good draughtsman should have becn secured for the foregrounds. I know not whose work they are; but they are a libel on Mr. Roberts, whose foliage is always beautiful and artistical, if not very carefully studied.³

Ruskin's objections to the publication went further than this. He was strongly critical of the original drawings which he had seen when they were first exhibited to advertise the proposed publication. He found fault with Roberts for some of his mannerisms, such as the repeated use of something light in the foreground set off against a darker object behind it, and for the sameness of his grey and yellow tints touched with lights.

But Roberts's drawings had made a deep impression on Ruskin when he was young, as he records many years later in Praeterita:

They were faithful and laborious beyond any outlines from nature I had ever seen, and I felt also that their severely restricted method was within reach of my own skill, and applicable to all my own purposes.

.. . He taught me, of absolute good, the use of the fine point instead of the blunt one; attention and indefatigable correctness in detail; and the'simplest means of expressing ordinary light and shade on grey ground, flat wash for the full shadows, and heightening of the gradated lights by warm white.'

Ruskin rightly saw in Roberts's method of drawing an ideal technique for the recording of information. But the passing of time and the development of photography were sufficient to temper this youthful enthusiasm, and in Modern painters Ruskin wrote of the drawings for The Holy Land:

But if these sketches were all that the artist brought home, whatever value is to be attached to them as statements of facts, they are altogether insufficient for the producing of pictures. I saw among them no single instance of a downright study; of a study in which the real hues and shades of sky and earth had been honestly realized or attempted; nor were there, on the other hand, any of those invaluable blotted fiveminutes works which record the unity of some single and magnificent impressions.²

It is clear from Ruskin's other writings that as statements of fact he did not consider that the architectural drawings of even Canaletto could compete with the camera, and at the close of the century he referred to these very drawings which Roberts brought home from the East as records of which the value is now forgotten in the perfect detail of photography . . .'.3 We would probably agree with Ruskin that the lithographs based on these sketches are not pictures of the highest order to compare with Turner's, but this should not obscure the fact that it was Roberts's prime aim in going to the East to make accurate drawings of places, some of which had never been recorded before, and many of which were not at the time within the scope of the camera.

Though The Holy Land was by no means the last of the topographical publications with lithographed plates, it remained the most ambitious. With the exception of Edward Lear, who continued to illustrate his travel books with his own lithographs, and J. P. Lawson's Scotland delineated (1847–52),1 with lithographs mainly by Harding after Cattermole, Roberts, and many other artists, it marks the last link between the established artist and topographical lithography. When Haghe left the firm of Day after lithographing the plates for one other important publication, Fossati, Aya Sofia Constantinople (1852),² only Harding was left of the water-colourist lithographers, and at this stage he was mainly concerned with producing drawing-books.

For all this, there was little falling off in the quantity of topographical lithographs published in the fifties. The firm of Day & Son continued to be the leading printers, and their production in this period was probably greater than it had been in the earlier decade. But by this time scores of lithographic printers were producing topographical plates, and scarcely a provincial town was without a lithographic press of some sort. Hullmandel & Walton were still active during this period, but Day's leading contender was the rising firm of M. & N. Hanhart. Michael Hanhart had been the manager of Engelmann's London press, and when this branch closed down in 183o he started up on his own. It was not until the forties and fifties that the firm of Hanhart came to the fore, and in this period it specialized first in the printing of tinted lithographs and, later, in chromolithography.

In the first few years after 185o interest centred at home on the Great Exhibition, but soon afterwards it shifted abroad to the Crimea and the Middle East generally and then, after the Mutiny, to India. Although the tinted (often double-tinted) lithograph continued to be the predominant style of lithography, the Great Exhibition may be said to mark the beginning of the era of the chromolithograph; and with the rise of chromolithography there came about an even more complete separation of the parts played by the original artist and the lithographic draughtsman.

It was photography, of course, that eventually killed topographical drawing. The camera obscura, which so many topographers had used as an aid to drawing, eventually led to the invention of photography by which these very images were chemically fixed and multiplied indefinitely. The topographical artist found himself ousted by the camera, and even in this period a number of books were produced with plates lithographed after photographs.3 The invention of the camera stifled topographical drawing, the only flourishing branch of pictorial lithography in England, and with it nearly all original drawing on stone until its revival by Whistler and Way in the 187os.