# THE VOYAGES PITTORESQUES ET ROMANTIQUES DANS L’ANCIENNE FRANCE

L HOUGH TOPOGRAPHY AND LANDSCAPE WERE THE MOST IMPORTANT branches of lithography in England during the first half of the nineteenth century, there was no publication to compare in scale with the Voyages pittoresques et romantiques dans l’ancienne France (Paris, 1820–78); nor can any lithographs in an English publication compare in quality with the very best prints from this enormous French work. Many other collections of topographical lithographs were produced in France, but these are all overshadowed, in a way that no English work overshadows its contemporaries, by the Voyages pittoresques. It occupied artists and many of the leading lithographers for a period of over half a century and must rank as one of the most ambitious publication ventures of all time. For this reason, and since in all but scale it remains typical of French topographical lithography, it seems justifiable to concentrate on this one publication to the exclusion of many others which have already been discussed in general terms by Adhémar in his Les Lithographies de paysage en France à l’époque ronantique (Paris, 1938).

The growth and decline of these other publications coincided almost exactly with that of the Voyages pittoresques. Much the same gencral development can be traced in topographical lithography in France as we have seen in England, and the first collections of this sort date, in France as well, from the last years of the second decade of the nineteenth century. Though these French publications were undoubtedly inspired by English artists sketching in France and by an English literature of travel illustrated with aquatint and copper-engraved plates,1 it is more difficult to determine priority with respect to lithographed views. Barker's Thirty two lithographic impressions, from pen drawings of landscape scenery (Bath, 1814) was certainly the first such collection, but the plates themselves were not produced by what was later to become the accepted idiom for topography—chalk drawing on stone. In this respect perhaps six French collections, all dating from 1817, preceded Hullmandel's Twenty-four views of Italy; and for the next few years the initiative passed to France.

As in England, lithcgraphed views were usually sold by subscription and published in parts of four or five plates with a few pages of text. To help publicize such ventures collections were often dedicated to some distinguished person, and sometimes the lithographs themselves were exhibited singly or in sets at the Salon. At first the artist or printer was his own publisher, but later many houses specialized in this sort of work, amongst them Gihaut, Chaillou-Potrelle, Bry, and Lemaître in Paris, Brunet (Lyons), Charpentier (Nantes), and Périaux (Rouen) in the provinces. Paris was the centre of publishing and all the most important works were produced there; many provincial publications seem to have had no more than a very local sale and scarcely reached the metropolis. It was even quite usual for sets of views published in Paris to be sold at somewhat reduced prices in the provinces.

One of the most significant differences between the collections published in England and France lies in the choice of subjects. In England, scenery at home and abroad attracted about equal attention in the period 1820-40, with foreign views becoming increasingly the more popular from 184o-60; in France interest centred chiefly at home, and about three-quarters of the collections listed by Adhémar are concerned with the scenery of France (though it must be remembered that in many cases it was these very same views that attracted English lithographers to travel abroad). Throughout the period covered by Adhémar's bibliography sets of foreign views were published in France, but there seems to have been no general shift of interest in the later period as there was in England. The subjects of Adhémar's first period (1818-30) were chiefly the most accessible parts of France, such as Normandy and the Paris Basin, which had already been made popular by English artists. After 183o Adhémar detects a movement away from the picturesque recording of Gothic ruins to an interest in natural landscape and a widening of scope to include other regions of France, amongst them Brittany, Provence, and the Pyrenees. Health resorts, particularly in the Pyrenees, attracted attention in this later period, seascapes became increasingly popular in the forties, while another favourite theme was to follow the course of a river. As far as foreign views were concerned lithographers began by following the eighteenth-century taste for Italy and Switzerland, but interest later shifted to Spain, North Africa, and the Middle East, with Russia becoming increasingly popular as the unhappy memories of 1812 began to fade. But this illustrated literature of travel never assumed the proportions it did in England, and this concentration in France on the recording of her own picturesque scenery must at least partly account for the sudden decline of topographical lithography there after 1845. As the cult of the picturesque began to fade with the new taste for the natural landscapes of Rousseau and Corot, the lithographed view became less popular; and this again provides a sharp contrast to the pattern in England where interest in foreign scenery made the years 184o-6o the most productive period of the topographical lithograph.

One of the most important early collections published in France, and one which brought together for the first time many of the early lithographic draughtsmen, was le comte de Forbin, Voyage dans le Levant (Paris, 1819). It is a large folio volume with the letterpress printed by the Imprimerie Royale and with lithographed plates by (amongst others) Baltard, Bourgeois, Bouton, Daguerre, Fragonard, Hersent, Lecomte, Thiénon, Vauzelle, and Carle and Horace Vernet. All the lithographs were printed by Engelmann and many, particularly those by the most prolific artist, Bourgeois (Plate 136), are dated 1818. They have not yet developed much beyond the stage of simple chalk drawings on stone; some contain little hatching with no tone at all in the skies, while in most a loose, open style predominates. In some plates the chalk work tends to become muddy and imprecise, but in others there is an advance in terms of technique over Hullmandel's lithographs of the same period, with far less reliance on rigid hatchings adapted from engraving.

In influence as well as in subject matter Forbin's volume stands in much the same relationship to French drawing on stone as Belzoni's Plates illustrative of the researches and operations in Egypt and Nubia does to English lithography, and it seems most probable that Forbin's use of lithography inspired Belzoni to turn to the same process for his publication. Neither work relies entirely on lithography, and of the seventy-eight plates in Forbin's publication eight were engraved in aquatint by Debucourt after Forbin's drawings. Of the fourteen publications listed by Adhémar in the period 1817–19, Forbin's Voyage dans le Levant is the only one to include the work of a substantial number of different lithographers and, since nine of these artists were later to work for Baron Taylor, it seems to be a convenient stepping-stone from which to view the publication which, beginning only one year afterwards, was to dominate French topographical lithography for a period of over fifty years: C. Nodier, J. Taylor, and A. de Cailleux, Voyages pittoresques et romantiques dans l’ancienne France (Paris, 182o-78).

The work was the conception of Baron Isidore Taylor (1789-1879) who continued to direct the publication throughout its course. Taylor was a man of wide interests, and his work as an artist and as a patron of the arts represents only one side of his many activities.' Though born in Brussels of English parents he was a naturalized Frenchman, and it was in Paris that he received his training as an artist, first at the École Polytechnique and, later, assisting the scene painter Degotti at the Opéra. It is chiefly as a sponsor of artists of the romantic movement that Taylor is remembered. He shared the enthusiasm of the romantics for the middle ages and for foreign travel, and was responsible for a number of publications based on his trips abroad. As an administrator Taylor held posts of increasing responsibility, eventually becoming Inspector-General of the Fine Arts and the Museums of France. The idea of making a record of the monuments of France came to him when he was a very young man in 181o, as he described many years later in the introduction to the volume on Dauphiné:

Au mois de juin 181o, je conçus le plan de cet ouvrage, et je proposai au Ministère de l’intérieur d’en encourager la publication. Il falloit alors, pour traduire les nombreux dessins qui devoient indispensablement accompagner le texte, les reproduire par la gravure. Ce travail, long et extrêmement dispendieux, élevoit les frais des premiers volumes à une somme tellement considérable, qu'il étoit impossible d’espérer que les produits de la vente du livre, encouragé même par une subvention du gouvernement, pussent établir une balance entre les recetttes et les dépenses.

Une découverte importante pour la reproduction des dessins venoit d’être faite à Munich par Senefelder, qui fit, quelque temps après, un voyage à Paris, et pria notre excellent peintre de paysage et de monuments, Charles Bourgeois, d’essayer de dessiner sur pierre. Bourgeois me montra ses premières lithographies. Je vis dans ce nouvel art un moyen de réaliser une pensée qui devoit occuper la plus grande partie de ma vie; je crus entrevoir que la lithographie devoit être presque pour les arts du dessin ce que la typographie avoit été pour la littérature. J’attendis que les progrès de la découverte de Senefelder permissent aux artistes de préscnter au public des œuvres plus terminées que les croquis des premiers essais, et, en effet, ces progrès, réalisés à Paris, en 1818, par Engelmann, favorisèrent l’exécution de cet ouvrage. Mais la difficulté pour un jeune homme de réunir alors tous les matériaux d’un travail qui devoit contenir la description et la représentation de tous les monuments de l’antiquité, du moyen âge et de la renaissance qui ont contribué si puissamment à la gloire et à la richesse intellectuelle de la France, retarda encore la publication de ce livre, dont le premier volume ne parut qu'en 182o.

Despite financial backing from the state, Taylor had to wait for a cheaper method of reproducing drawings than engraving on copper before he could embark upon the publication; but it is particularly surprising that he should have put such faith in the new process of lithography, which by 1818 had scarcely proved itself for single prints, let alone for a work of the scale that must even then have been envisaged for the Voyages pittoresques. Nodier's introduction to the first volume reflects something of the experimental nature of the choice:

Le nouveau procédé connu sous le nom de Lithographie n’a pas obtenu l’approbation unanime des gens de goût; et le tort en est peut-être au mauvais usage qui a été fait de cette invention, comme de toutes les inventions nouvelles que l’ignorance dénature, et que le cynisme déshonore. Il ne nous appartient pas de décider ce que cet art peut produire, et de fixer le terme de ses perfectionnements: mais il nous est permis de penser qu’il présente pour un ouvrage du genre de celui-ci d’incontestables avantages. Plus libre, plus original, plus rapide que le burin, le crayon hardi du lithographe semble avoir été inventé pour fixer les inspirations libres, originales et rapides du voyageur qui se rend compte de ses sensations.²

As it happened Taylor's choice of lithography probably did as much to ensure the success of lithography in France as any other single factor, for as Nodier himself observed, the draughtsmen of the Voyages pittoresques . . . ont fourni aux partisans de la lithographie le plus puissant, le plus irrécusable de leurs arguments.'3

The text, though now perhaps rather neglected, originally formed an important part of the publication and was entrusted to Charles Nodier, one of the most prolific writers of the romantic period. He was helped by the architect Alphonse de Cailleux, who continued alone after Nodier's death in 1844. The idea was, as Nodier describes in his introduction, to appeal not so much to the scholar as to the traveller interested in the ruins of old France with all their noble associations. The whole publication is tinged with romantic nostalgia for the past and with a particular enthusiasm for the middle ages. There can be little doubt that there was a genuine desire to make some permanent record of monuments, many of which were in a sad state of disrepair and only a generation earlier had been badly damaged during the revolution, but it was also the enthusiasm of a period brought up on Walter Scott and Byron. Although Taylor aimed at representing the monuments of antiquity and the Renaissance as well as those of the middle ages it is quite clear where his real sympathies lay, and in one of the later volumes he records that he had spent fifty years defending his belief that ‘dans l’histoire des beaux-arts du monde, les arts du Bas-Empire et du moyen âge n’étoient pas une décadence, mais un progrès’.1

In scale as well as in subject matter the Voyages pittoresques was a product of romanticism, and even the fact that the publication was never completed has for us certain romantic associations. The original idea was to cover the whole of France by provinces, but only nine were ever undertaken, which represents only about a third of the area of the country. Some provinces required three or four volumes each, and the whole work as it exists today consists of around twenty folio volumes.² Only the lithographs of the first half of the publication (up to and including the Languedoc volumes) actually bear plate numbers, but the total number of lithographed plates has been variously estimated at between 2,700 and 3,000.

The work was published in parts of apparently unequal bulk, each consisting of text and the appropriate plates, and these were sold at 15 francs 50 centimes for the earlier parts and 18 francs for those of the last volume.³ Amongst the subscribers was a strong representation of European royalty besides many French libraries and artists. Nearly 6oo names appear on the original subscription list, but the number gradually dwindled so that there were less than half this number of subscribers for the volume on Franche-Comté and fewer still for subsequent volumes.' The number of copies printed diminished in much the same proportion from 6oo for the first volume to soo for Franche-Comté and Auvergne, 35o for Languedoc and Picardie, and only 3oo for Bretagne and Dauphiné. The dating of the volumes themselves seems to bear only a general relationship to the dates of the lithographs they contain, but it may still be useful to indicate their sequence in one of the sets seen:²

<table><tr><td>i.</td><td>Normandie 1820</td><td>xi.</td><td>Picardie 1840</td></tr><tr><td>ii.</td><td>Ancienne Normandie 1825</td><td>xii.</td><td>Picardie 1845 7</td></tr><tr><td>iii.</td><td>Franche-Comté 1825</td><td>xiii.</td><td>Bretagne 1845</td></tr><tr><td>iv.</td><td>Auvergne 1829</td><td>xiv.</td><td>Bretagne 1846</td></tr><tr><td>V.</td><td>Auvergne 1833</td><td>xV.</td><td>Bretagne 1846</td></tr><tr><td>vi.</td><td>Languedoc 1834</td><td>xvi.</td><td>Dauphiné 1854</td></tr><tr><td>vii.</td><td>Languedoc 1834</td><td>xvii.</td><td>Champagne 1857</td></tr><tr><td>viii.</td><td>Languedoc 1835</td><td>xviii.</td><td>Champagne 1857</td></tr><tr><td>ix.</td><td>Languedoc 1837</td><td>xix.</td><td>Bourgogne 1863</td></tr><tr><td>x.</td><td>Picardie 1835</td><td>XX.</td><td>Ancienne Normandie 1878</td></tr></table>

The publication was delayed by Taylor's frequent trips abroad in his official capacity collecting works of art for the museums of France. Pennell records that by 1847 it was causing something of a public scandal, since it was still being subsidized by the government, and thać Le National and Le Courrier français were pointing out that if the work were continued it would take 103 years to complete and would cost each subscriber 33,o0o francs.³ As it was, the publication continued for nearly sixty years and could never have been completed within the original structure,4 for by 1878 the taste for things medieval was already waning and the art of the topographical lithograph virtually dead.

For all this, those volumes of the Voyages pittoresques that were completed remain a fine monument to French lithography and book production. The letterpress was entrusted to the firm of Didot, which was responsible for printing all the volumes (Plates 137, 138), and it is possible to trace the growth of this important family of French printers as the work progressed. Pierre Didot set the style for the rest of the work in the first volume, using the same austere modern-face typography that he had used so successfully in his famous edition of Racine's works of 18o1-5, and this tradition was continued by his successors right through to the last volume, with a gradual decline in standards and particularly in the quality of the paper. The mechanical precision and clarity of the type and the generous use of space in the typography were both features of Didot printing which had been evolved under the austere influence of neo-classicism at the close of the previous century, and their use in a work so consciously medieval in intention only emphasizes the inherent conservatism of the printing trade. The contrast between letterpress and lithography becomes particularly marked when in the Languedoc and Picardie volumes the text is embellished with lithographic border decorations in the style of medieval manuscripts.

In this one publication it is possible to trace the discoveries and progress of lithography, as Nodier predicted in his introduction, and also possible, though Nodier could hardly have foreseen this, to trace its subsequent decline in the later volumes. The lithographs themselves fall into two main categories. By far the most important are the plates of landscape views and architectural exteriors, interiors, and details. These vary considerably in image size and appear separate from the text. Most of them are printed on India paper, which would have been mounted during the actual printing process itself.² The other lithographs take the form of vignettes with the text and on the title-pages, and border decorations. All these are printed on the text paper itself.

The ornamental borders make their first appearance in the first of the Languedoc volumes, where they begin to incorporate some of the lithographed vignettes (Plate 138). This is an early example of the revival of medievalism in book production which until then had been limited, with rather more historical and technical justification, to wood-engraving.³ In the Voyages pittoresques the borders are used throughout the seven Languedoc and Picardie volumes to surround every page of text; they consist of architectural details, figures, animals, and plants, besides whole views set in cartouches, and become increasingly complex and assertive. On some pages the text occupies scarcely a quarter of the surface of the page and appears as a small rectangle obscuring the middle of a picture. Only the conception of these borders is strictly medieval and, although some of the decorative motifs derive from medieval and Renaissance manuscripts, the style of their imagery belongs to the nineteenth century. Though Pennell describes them as ‘amazingly bad' they must at least be respected as superb examples of craftsmanship, for many of them (again following the fashion of woodengraved books of this period) are repeated many times, thereby adding considerably to the difficulty of printing.

All the printing of the plates was originally undertaken by Engelmann, whose improvements in printing had been responsible for Taylor's decision to use lithography for the illustrations. The first volume, consisting of only eighty-five plates, was comparatively small; it seems to have been something of an experimental one and there is considerable variety in both the style and size of the images. Some of the lithographs are printed direct, others on mounted India paper, while a few are printed with a harsh and crudely drawn tint stone. From the beginning Engelmann seems to have persuaded artists to use his newly invented process of lavis lithographique, and a number of plates appear to have been produced in conscious imitation of aquatint. Engelmann was again responsible for printing all the plates of the second volume on Ancienne Normandie which, with only two tinted plates, appears much less experimental. Thereafter, he continued with the help of other firms and did most of the printing until 1834, but no plates printed by Engelmann appear after volume ix. Though not even responsible for the majority of the plates in the Voyages pittoresques he must still be considered its leading printer, for in these early years he set a standard of fine printing which served as an example to his followers and must have created the same sort of confidence amongst artists of the period in France as Hullmandel had in England; and by the time Engelmann died in 1839 all the finest lithographs of the Voyages pittoresques had been published.

English printers contributed for the first time to the volume on Franche-Comté; all together Hullmandel printed 127 plates and the firm of Day, either with the style W. Day or Day & Haghe, forty-nine.² Numerically

1 Vols.iii-xii, xvi.

2 Vols.iii, v, vii-xii,xvi.

this was not perhaps a very significant contribution, but it happened to coincide with the best period of the Voyages pittoresques. The quality of Hullmandel's printing in particular was much admired in France, and in one of his pamphlets Hullmandel reprints two letters from Baron Taylor to this effect.' The lithographs printed by Hullmandel and Day were nearly all those of English artists and were, of course, printed in England and sent to Paris for publication.²

Apart from an occasional plate printed by Bichebois, Hullmandel and Day were the only printers to share with Engelmann the production of plates in volumes iii-v, but the next volume saw the introduction of Thierry frères who were to take over Engelmann's role as leading printer until volume xviii. Pierre Thierry was Engelmann's brother-in-law and, after going into partnership with him, he succeeded Engelmann at the Paris works and took over all the materials as well as the good will of the firm. The guard books of the press up to 186ı are preserved in the Bibliothèque Nationale,3 but little else is known about this printer, the most prolific of the Voyages pittoresques.

Lemercier, Bénard et Cie (later simply Lemercier), the other important French printer of the second half of the Voyages pittoresques, also made its début in the first Languedoc volume (vi). Lemercier's was the leading lithographic house in France in the middle of the nineteenth century both in size and reputation.4 In the mid 185os it possessed seventy hand presses and was the leading training ground for young lithographers; and in this and many other respects may be compared with the firm of Day & Son in England during the same period. Lemercier, Bénard et Cie printed plates for every subsequent volume until the first of the Bretagne volumes (xiii), when the firm continued as Lemercier until publication ceased. In the last few volumes

Lemercier played an increasingly important part, and all the plates for Bourgogne (xix) and Ancienne Normandie (xx) were printed at his press.1

All together more than I 5o artists contributed to the Voyages pittoresques, which must surely be the largest number ever brought together for one publication. Some of them can scarcely be identified, while the majority have not managed to find their way into the annals of art history.² But they can be divided into two broad categories: those artists, often the best known, who produced only occasional drawings or lithographs, and a number of rather mediocre topographers who produced the bulk of the plates and occasionally some surprisingly attractive ones. Running across this division we can distinguish (at least on occasions) between those who produced the original drawings and those who translated them into lithographs.3 Often the same artist would be responsible for both the original drawing and the lithography; but a division of labour in this way was quite usual and sometimes, when the draughtsman was a specialist topographer, even a third hand would be utilized for the drawing of figures.4

Into the first category must be put the isolated lithographs by Ingres and Géricault. These were the most important artists associated with the Voyages pittoresques, but their names lend rather more distinction to it than their prints.5 There were also a few plates by some of the earliest lithographers better known for their work in other fields: Bergeret, reputed to be the first Frenchman to draw on stone, is represented in the first few volumes, so are Carle and Horace Vernet, Jean-Baptiste Isabey, Charlet, Devéria, and Bourgeois, whose first lithographs had prompted Baron Taylor to use this process for the publication. Taylor himself made drawings for a number of volumes,i and we are reminded that Daguerre was also a draughtsman by ten drawings made before he turned his attention to the process which was eventually to replace the topographical artist.² But the majority of the contributors were primarily landscape and topographical draughtsmen and, as in England, they were not the artists who have since been recognized as the most important. There are no plates by Michel, Troyon, Rousseau, Corot, Decamps, Diaz, Daubigny, or Jacque, though all were working during the most productive period of the Voyages pittoresques. Even Jules Dupré, who published landscape lithographs in L'Artiste, is not represented. The leading artists of this kind who did contribute more than the occasional lithograph were Bonington and Eugène Isabey and, though their plates are generally recognized to be the finest, they represent only a very small proportion of the total number. Of the better-known minor masters of the romantic movement, there are a few plates by Paul Huet (vol. v), L.-E. Watelet (vols. i, iv), J.-R. Brascassat (vol. iv), Charles de la Berge (vol. v), and F.-M. Granet (vol. iv).

The majority of the lithographs were produced by artists now scarcely remembered; but since nearly all of them exhibited at the Salons they must at least have been considered amongst the more successful artists of their day.³ Most of them were painters in oil rather than water-colour, for there was no tradition of landscape water-colour painting in France to compare with that established in England. Some produced only the drawings which were then translated by professional lithographers, but others, such as Benoist, Bichebois, Challamel, Chapuy, Deroy, Durand, Jacottet, Joly, Monthelier, Petit, Sabatier, and Tirpenne, were established lithographers themselves and exhibited lithographs at the Salons.

The bulk of the work for the Voyages pittoresques was undertaken by about a dozen artists some of whom remained faithful to Baron Taylor almost throughout the whole publication. The most productive in the earlier volunes was Alexandre Fragonard (1780-1850), and either he or his son, Théophile Fragonard (1806–76), continued to contribute over a period of twenty-five years. Louis Villeneuve (1796-1842),1 an important early lithographer, made his first appearance with a few plates in the first volume and continued to appear in every subsequent volume until his death. Lithographs by him are most frequently found in the Franche-Comté (Plate 139), Auvergne, and Languedoc volumes. Louis Bichebois (18o1-50),2 Nicolas Chapuy (1790–1858),3 and Léon Sabatier (d. 1887),4 who contributed regularly during the middle period of the Voyages pittoresques, were all professional lithographers who illustrated other publicàtions and exhibited their lithographs at the Salons. Chapuy is found particularly in the Languedoc volumes and Bichebois in that on Franche-Comté, while Sabatier (Plate 14o), beginning with a few lithographs only for Franche-Comté, continued much longer than the others to become the leading artist of the Dauphiné volume. From 184o the name Émile Sagot appears,5 sometimes as draughtsman and lithographer, and on other occasions as draughtsman only; in the later volumes, particularly those on Champagne, Bourgogne, and Ancienne Normandie, Sagot takes over the role of leading illustrator. But by far the most consistent and regular contributors were Eugène Ciceri (1813-90) and Adrien Dauzats (1804-68). Lithographs by Ciceri are found in every volume from x onwards, while Dauzats, who made his first appearance in volume iii, continued as one of the most prolific lithographers in every volume until death prevented him from contributing to the very last one on Ancienne Normandie.

Eugène Ciceri was the son of P.-L.-C. Ciceri, who succeeded Degotti as director of scenery at the Opéra. The elder Ciceri, whom Taylor must have met while working at the Opéra as a young man, was also a water-colourist and lithographer, and was responsible for a few plates in the first four volumes of the Voyages pittoresques. There are no lithographs by either father or son in the Languedoc volumes, but the Ciceri who appears with increasing regularity from volume x onwards must be Eugène. He was the only really important lithographer to cmerge during the second half of the publication, and was one of the most productive French topographical lithographers in this later period, producing plates for many other travel books as well. Some of Ciceri's lithographs were made from his own drawings but many, particularly in the later volumes, were after originals by Mayer, Gaucherel, Sabatier, Sagot, Séchan, and others. In fact, while his own lithographs often appear rather large and empty, those he made after other artists' drawings are amongst his best. Ciceri was first and foremost a craftsman and technically there was no one working in these later volumes to match the soft and silvery tones of his lithographs, many of which were built up by Lemercier's powdered-crayon method. In some of the plates, such as‘Côtes du Finistère, Cap St. Mathieu' (Plates 141, 142), Ciceri seems to have established a light tint over the whole stone, and then to have scraped it away or worked on it with chalk where necessary. By these means he managed to give the effect of a tint stone, but without the use of a second printing, and ensured a unity of tone which at times appears almost photographic. Ciceri is seen at his best in the Bretagne volumes where, particularly in two coast scenes,1 he seems to have been influenced by the lithographs of Isabey.

Though numerically the most important contributor to the Voyages pittoresques, Adrien Dauzats was less of a technician in lithography than Ciceri. He was a minor painter of the romantic movement, specializing in architectural subjects and exhibiting paintings regularly at the Salons for over thirty years. He was also an architect and designed the settings for some of Delacroix's pictures. He travelled widely abroad and also in France in connection with the Voyages pittoresques, which he was associated with from 1828 until his death forty years later.² His early lithographs for this work show an excessive interest in architectural detail and are by no means distinguished, but his later prints are much more impressive. One of his finest lithographs is the ‘Façade de Notre-Dame Cathédrale de Rheims’ (Plates 143, 144) which reveals a precision and severity very different from the softer handling of Ciceri. Most of Dauzat's prints were made from his own drawings, but like Ciceri he also worked as a reproductive lithographer and in the Bretagne volumes he produced many plates after drawings by Cambon, Gaucherel, and Mayer.

For all the differences in personal style and handling, however, the plates for the Voyages pittoresques are perhaps rather more remarkable (considering the number of artists contributing) for their uniformity than for their variety. The common subject matter of rugged landscape, overhanging eaves, crumbling masonry, and Gothic decoration, together with the conventions of the lithographic medium itself, have tended to reduce individual style. But of the French artists represented, two seem to emerge with rather more distinction than the others. They are Paul Huet, who is represented by two lithographs only (both dated 183 1),' and Eugène Isabey, whose seventeen plates produced between 183o and 1832 are found in the two Auvergne volumes.² Both minor masters of the romantic school of painting, they turned to lithography in much the same spirit and succeeded in mitigating the topographical anonymity of the majority of the plates in the Voyages pittoresques. Both were skilled at creating an over-all unity of mood with dramatic contrasts of light and dark, and to this end abandoned the mechanically laid shading of the routine lithographers,'preferring a much more spontaneous method of building up tones by vigorous, irregular hatchings (Plate 146) and by frequent use of the scraper almost in imitation of the transitory lights reflected from impasto paint (Plate 148). They make no attempt to disguise this handling but, like many of the painters of the period, allow it to express much of the movement and excitement of the scene. Isabey, in particular, must be regarded as one of the great experimental draughtsmen of lithography, for he tried out many of the new tonal techniques which had been evolved in France during the thirties and forties in an attempt to find a method of drawing more suited to the requirements of romantic landscape.³

Huet and Isabey shared the romantic enthusiasm for depicting dramatic conflicts of nature. They were marine painters as well as landscapists, delighting in the powerful movement of stormy seas and racing clouds, and Isabey's finest lithographs are undoubtedly his marine and coastal scenes. In the Voyages pittoresques, limited to one of the most central provinces in France, it was the sky, that ‘chief organ of sentiment', that sets the mood for their lithographs. In plates like Isabey's ‘Église Saint Jean, Thiers' for instance (Plate 149),4 which was exhibited at the Salon of 1831, land and sky are inextricably united and the prevailing mood makes itself felt before any topographical accuracy can be considered. Such lithographs, freely drawn and showing a liberal use of the scraper, act as a powerful corrective to those of the architectural draughtsmen whose works predominate in the Voyages pittoresques.

Though Huet produced many other lithographs outside the Voyages pittoresques,¹ Isabey is much more important and must rank as one of the few really significant lithographers. During the early thirties he produced prints for a number of other publications, and this was his most active period as a lithographer. In 183o he drew thirteen lithographs, mainly of marine subjects, for a collection of Croquis par divers artistes,² and in the same year, after accompanying an expedition to Algeria as official painter, he illustrated Denniée, Précis historique et administratif de la campagne d’Afrique (Paris, 183o).³ There then followed his plates for the Auvergne volumes and, in 1832, his Souvenirs d'Eugène Isabey.4 The work which by general consent contains Isabey's finest lithographs, Six marines (1833),5 was again a collection of views of shipping and coastal towns. To this same period also belong a few plates for other publications and a number of single lithographs, often seascapes, which do not appear to have been intended for publication at all. He produced no other collections of prints after this, but concentrated on lithographs of his favourite subjects, many of which seem to have been produced purely for his own satisfaction and in very small editions. Only very few proofs exist today of these lithographs and some are extant in unique prints. Though many of them are unsigned and bear no imprint they would seem to date from the early forties when Isabey was experimenting with new techniques at Lemercier's in order to realize the full painterly potentialities of the medium. In the best of these and in the Six marines Isabey achieves an emotional intensity in his treatment of the elements that has something of the quality of Turner's work and is quite unsurpassed in lithography.

By comparison, Isabey's plates for the Voyages pittoresques are less exciting. Three of these lithographs were made after drawings by Jorand, one after Régnier, and one other probably in conjunction with Ciceri. The original drawings for these, as well as some of Isabey's own sketches for the Voyages pittoresques, are preserved in the Destailleur collection of the Bibliothèque Nationale.' Isabey departed considerably from the originals in his treatment of the details, but in all cases the drawings were made in reverse on the stone so that they retained their topographical accuracy when printed. His own drawings are slight, linear sketches which give only the main distribution of a composition. Such sketches allowed for considerable development in a tonal medium like lithography and, while he seems to have kept closely to the disposition of the topography (which would presumably have been traced),² he frequently made alterations by adding figures and bric-à-brac to the foregrounds. There is also an increased sense of drama and movement in the lithographs owing to the greater contrasts of tone and to the treatment of the skies, which are scarcely indicated in the original drawings. Though not perhaps Isabey's finest or even his most typical lithographs they are still the outstanding plates of the Auvergne volumes and, many would contend, of the whole of the Voyages pittoresques. His meandering, sinuous line is in places surprisingly reminiscent of Daumier's and provides a refreshing break from the stylized drawing of most of the plates, while his sense of light and atmosphere and convincing drawing of crowd scenes³ make his lithographs views of living towns rather than of architectural monuments.

Mention must also be made of the French artists who drew and lithographed the ornamental borders for the seven volumes devoted to Languedoc and Picardie. Some of the same names appear again: Dauzats, Villeneuve, Monthelier, Ciceri, Courtin, and others, but many of the borders required a rather different type of artist who specialized in figure drawing rather than topography. Chenavard lithographed a frontispiece and supplied drawings for some of the Languedoc volumes, and popular illustrators of the romantic era including Jean Gigoux, Tony Johannot, Challamel, and Célestin Nanteuil are also represented. But the majority of the borders were designed by Eugène Viollet-le-Duc who, perhaps more than anyone else, was responsible for the revival of interest in the architecture of the middle ages, and as a practising architect himself was one of its chief restorers. Most of Violletle-Duc's drawings were lithographed by Léon Asselineau, who also worked for Le Moyen âge pittoresque (Paris, 1836 and 1839-44). Célestin Nanteuil, Théophile Fragonard, and Pharamond Blanchard are, next to Viollet-le-Duc, the most prolific of the many artists who designed or lithographed these decorative borders.

At a time when English landscape painting was beginning to be appreciated in France, and when many English painters exhibited at the Salons or, like Bonington, Boys, Callow, Wyld, and the Fielding brothers, even worked in France, it is not surprising that artists from across the channel should have contributed to the Voyages pittoresques. Fifteen lithographers who were either English by birth, or who worked principally in England, are represented, and we are reminded that in the graphic arts generally there were strong links between the two countries. In 1817 Charles Thompson brought Bewick's technical skills to Paris and virtually founded the school of wood-engraving which flourished in France in the thirties and forties;² and in copper-engraving and aquatint English artists were also in demand and played an important part in two of Ostervald's publications of the twenties.³ But the relationship appears to have been one-sided and there was no reciprocal movement in any of the graphic arts in this period to compare with these English contributions to French publications. In lithography, while Géricault made prints at Hullmandel's during his stay in England, and Monnier and Lami produced lithographs of their trips to London which were printed and published in France, only Sabatier, Ciceri, Mouilleron, and Edmond Morin (who worked for the firm of Day & Son), are known to have made lithographs for English topographical publications.4

It was a sad reflection on topographical lithography in France that it should have been necessary to call upon foreign artists to help with a statesponsored publication with intentions which were politely nationalistic. Yet

English lithographers were ideally suited to the task. Some of them, like Bonington and Boys, were already living in France, while many of the others, particularly Haghe, Harding, and Prout, had spent much of their time travelling abroad and specialized in just the sort of picturesque views that were required. All together English lithographers were responsible for over 2oo plates in the Voyages pittoresques, well over half of which were the work of two men—Haghe and Harding.

Louis Haghe had the greater output and lithographed nearly eighty plates; the majority were from his own drawings, but some were after originals by French artists, particularly Laurens, Taylor, Duthoit, and Truchot. Haghe's contributions to the Voyages pittoresques spanned the whole of his career as a lithographer. His earliest lithograph for it, which was printed byW. Day,² may even have preceded the first prints he published in England, and he continued to contribute regularly up to and including the Dauphiné volume. By the time this was published in 1854 Haghe had retired from lithography to concentrate on water-colour painting. Some of Haghe's best lithographs are to be found in the Voyages pittoresques, and particularly in the earlier volumes when he was producing very craftsmanlike chalk drawings along the lines of the techniques described by Hullmandel. A fine example of this sort of chalk lithograph is provided by ‘Ruines de l'Abbaye de Saint Martin du Canigou' (Plate I5o), in which a fully tonal picture has been built up with carefully disguised hatchings for the sky and middle distance and more open hatchings for the foreground. Most of Haghe's lithographs were printed in England by the firm of Day (under its various styles) and by Hullmandel; but he must also have made some of his lithographs in Paris during the thirties, for many of his plates in the Languedoc volumes were printed by Engelmann, Thierry, and Bénard et Bichebois.³

Harding on the other hand, with but one exception,4 remained faithful to his associate Hullmandel, and is represented only by lithographs from his own drawings.⁵ His plates cover the same period as Haghe's and, like him, he produced a number of prints for the later volumes in Hullmandel's patent lithotint. But the finest of Harding's lithographs in the Voyages pittoresques, and amongst the best he ever produced, belong to the early volume on Franche-Comté. Along with the plates for Britannia delineata, these are certainly his most important original lithographs of the early period before he became carried away by his own technical skills. They are small prints, often drawn on rather coarse stones. The best of them, such as Chateau d'Oliferne' (Plate I 51), are in fact some of the smallest of the whole publication, yet they achieve the effect of much larger works through very carefully built-up tones. These are treated in large simple masses which derive from the aquatint tradition, and they reveal a truth to visual impressions rarely seen in his later work. In the Languedoc volumes Harding's style becomes more facile and is reminiscent of the sort of drawing he popularized in his own didactic books. His lithographs of this period are more concerned with form than tone and appear rather empty when compared with his prints of the twenties (Plate I 52). Though complete in themselves, they look almost as though they should have been used in conjunction with a tint stone. In fact Harding made no tinted lithographs for the publication, but in this later period, starting with the Picardie volumes, he worked mainly in lithotint.'

Of the other English artists, George Barnard (a pupil of Harding), Thomas Shotter Boys, and R. L. Gale, all of whom are represented only in the Languedoc and Picardie volumes, are numerically the next in importance.² Boys must have begun his connection with the Voyages pittoresques while staying in Paris, for his first plates in the Languedoc volumes were printed there by Thierry, 1834-5 (Plate 153),3 presumably just before Boys returned to England. The remainder of his lithographs were printed by Hullmandel, some of them being drawn in the stump style4 and others in lithotint.⁵ Many of the lithographs by Gale and Barnard were made after drawings by Prout, who lithographed only three drawings himself for the early volume on Franche-Comté.6 Both worked rather in the early manner of Harding, but while Gale's plates were all printed by Hullmandel, some of Barnard's were produced in France by Thierry.7

Occasional plates are also found by W. L. Walton, W. Gauci, and Joseph Nash,' all of whom were prolific lithographers for English publications, and by Freeman, D. Fowler, and H. Harris.² Newton Fielding, who with his brothers exhibited regularly at the Salons in the twenties, contributed two charming plates (Plate 1 54),3 and Frederick Mackenzie, one of the artists who worked for Ackermann, produced two lithographs for the Languedoc volumes.4

But the outstanding English artist whose lithographs are to be found in the Voyages pittoresques is Richard Parkes Bonington (18o1-28). Born near Nottingham, he emigrated with his parents to Calais in 1817 and later settled in Paris, where he studied under Gros at the École des Beaux Arts and met Isabey and Delacroix. As a painter he owed much to the English water-colour school and was partly responsible for the growing popularity of their manner in France; but in return he was greatly influenced by French painting, and particularly so in his romantic costume pieces. Apart from travelling abroad, including visits to England in 1825 and 1827, Bonington remained in France until his early death in 1828, exhibiting both in London and at the Salons in Paris. As a lithographer he inherited the traditions of English topography, but little else, for when he left for France in 1817 Hullmandel had not yet set up his press nor even produced his own prints for Twenty-four views of Italy. All Bonington's lithographs were originally published in France; even those he made after drawings by Pernot for the Vues pittoresques de l'Écosse (Paris, 1826), which were selected for an English edition with the title Scotch sketches (London, 1829), were not published in this country until after his death, and only one of his lithographs was printed in England.s Not only this, but Bonington's method of drawing for lithography with its airy tonality and lightness of touch belongs, if the distinction needs to be made, to France rather than to England

Bonington produced fewer lithographs than Isabey, and nearly all of them were drawn in a period of only five years, from 1824 to 1828.6 His first published lithographs were a set of eight topographical plates with a lithographed title, Restes et fragmens d'architecture du moyen âge (Paris, 1824),1 and on the strength of these, and in the same year, he began working for the Voyages pittoresques. In these volumes are found his finest lithographs, and his reputation as a lithographer must stand or fall by them. His other prints for Vues pittoresques de l'Écosse (Paris, 1826)² and his own Cahier de six sujets (Paris, 1826)3 do not bear comparison, while his illustrations in pen and ink for Les Contes du Gay Sçavoir (1828)4 fall into quite a different category.

Bonington made only fifteen lithographs for the Voyages pittoresques: four plates and a vignette for Ancienne Normandie and ten plates for Franche-Comté.5 Yet two of the plates from the first of these volumes, Rue du Gros-Horloge, Rouen' (Plate 156) and ‘Tour du Gros-Horloge, Évreux' (Plate I55),6 have since become canons by which we consciously or otherwise assess the contributions of the other lithographers. These are outstanding prints even in Bonington's own œuvre; but they make their impact more through the significance of their compositions, the inevitability of placing, and the sense of scale imparted to the buildings by the figures, than through any specifically lithographic quality. When Bonington dealt with less impressive compositions, particularly in the Franche-Comté volume, he was less successful—though some of these lithographs were made after drawings by other artists.7

As a lithographer Bonington showed neither the excessive technical skills displayed by Ciceri in some of his later work, nor the disregard for the conventions of lithographic drawing shown by Isabey and Huet. He worked strictly within the established idiom of chalk lithography, building up his tones with careful parallel hatchings. Technique was never allowed to obtrude; it never assumed more importance than the image, as was the case with so many lesser lithographers. It grew to suit the occasion and was only fully exploited in his most impressive compositions for the Normandie volume, where ranges of tone from strong blacks to silvery greys were handled with great subtlety. In the ‘Rue du Gros-Horloge, Rouen' (Plate 1 56) Bonington played on the recession of the buildings by picking out the foreground figures with rich black ink and flicks of the scraper (Plate 157); while in the ‘Tour du Gros-Horloge, Évreux' (Plate 155), where the crowd tends to merge with the buildings, it is the clock tower itself which first attracts attention, its base illuminated against a background of threatening clouds and its pinnacles standing dark in splendid counterchange against the lightest part of the sky.

These prints remain a canon for the Voyages pittoresques and for topographical lithography generally, not necessarily because they are the finest, but simply because, unlike Isabey, Bonington was working within the accepted conventions of both topographical drawing and lithography. An Englishman working in France, he managed to combine his native tradition of topographical drawing, which had no equal in France, with a technical sensitivity and freedom from stylization found only in the best French lithography.

The combination of English and French artists working for the same publication provides an opportunity for comparison. The plates of the Voyages pittoresques are uncoloured; this is the most obvious difference between the topographical publications of the two countries, and it reveals a more important underlying difference of intention. While nearly all the most important English lithographed books with topographical plates were produced with some copies coloured and others left plain, it was the former, more expensive, versions that determined the style of drawing for lithography. In England topography was closely associated with water-colour painting. Lithographed topography merely continued this tradition, so that the work on the stone was in some cases no more than a rather elaborate preliminary drawing which, though it existed satisfactorily on its own, really needed the addition of water-colour washes. Even in some early English lithographs which are not coloured, such as those of Harding for the Voyages pittoresques and Britannia delineata, the intention must still have been to imitate in monochrome the tonal distribution of a water-colour painting— as had previously been the case with aquatint. In France, where there was neither such a strong school of water-colour painting nor the same tradition of aquatint engraving, it was the oil painter with his ancillary skills of drawing with pencil and crayon who turned to lithography. This was the reason advanced by a number of early writers for the superiority of the French in lithography; and the facility of English artists with the water-colour brush was seen originally as a handicap. These contrasting backgrounds were responsible for a difference in approach to lithographic drawing in the two countries. Artists in France were not tempted to imitate oil paintings on stone, with the result that there was usually more insistence on the actual handling of the lithographic medium, whether it was the delicacy of Ciceri or the vigour of Isabey. English lithographs appear much more mechanical and laboured in treatment, so that the addition of hand-colouring is often welcome. There are, of course, exceptions, and the similarity of Prout's lithographs to the French in this respect has already been noted, but by and large this distinction can be fairly made. It is a distinction that has its roots in the early treatises of Engelmann and Hullmandel; for while the former gave only technical instructions on the use of the crayon and recommended his lavis lithographique for larger areas of tone, Hullmandel went into an elaborate description of methods of hatching and cross-hatching which would, if followed literally, have had the effect of destroying all personal handling. In his later treatise Engelmann was very critical of this method of building up tones by superimposing one fine tint on top of another. He claimed that such tints tended to produce dull and lifeless tones when printed, whereas the French approach preserved all the brilliance of the original drawing:

L'artiste français est naturellement adroit et hardi; il attaque avec fermeté les parties vigoureuses, et dépose ainsi sur la pierre des masses de crayon bien nourries qui y adhèrent fortement; et ce n’est qu’après avoir ainsi couvert ses parties les plus vigoureuses, qu’il fond et harmonise les demi-teintes par un travail plus léger.²

The introduction of a tint stone to support a black lithograph found rather less favour in France than it did in England, and this might also be attributed to the basic difference in approach between the lithographers of the two countries.3 English draughtsmen found themselves in the difficult position of producing prints which could be coloured, but would at the same time exist perfectly well without any addition by hand. Not too much tonal work could be included, especially in the skies, for this would tend to upset the tonal unity of the hand-colouring and destroy its transparency.ª Yet some information was needed in these parts. The most obvious solution was the introduction of an additional stone which could serve both to support a somewhat empty drawing and also to give some information in light parts such as skies, but would not deaden any subsequent hand-colouring. In France no such limitations were imposed on lithographic draughtsmen, and it is possible that this is why they found rather less use for the tinted background printing which became such a feaure of English lithography from 1835. Apart from a few isolated examples,1 tinted lithographs began to make their appearance in France from 1837 onwards,² but not until 1844-5 could they compete with monochrome prints in terms of quantity, and after that their output gradually decreased with the general decline of topographical lithography.

In the Voyages pittoresques, apart from the occasional plates already noted in the first two volumes, a few tinted lithographs are to be found from volume x onwards, but only in the Dauphiné volume (vol. xvi, 1854) does this become the predominant style. Even at their best these tinted lithographs cannot compare with those printed in England, and it was generally agreed that this was a branch of lithography in which the English excelled.³ In some of the later volumes of the Voyages pittoresques the tints extend beyond the limits of the drawings to include the letters, thereby serving as a substitute for the tone of India paper.

Although the predominant style throughout the Voyages pittoresques is monochrome lithography produced primarily with the crayon, at the outset French artists made particularly good use of Engelmann's lavis lithographique to produce the lighter tones in chalk drawings. Baltard, who was the first to use this new process, is represented by a plate in the first volume.4 Thereafter, this method was frequently employed by French draughtsmen to produce skies and distant views so long as Engelmann was printing their lithographs. When Lemercier became associated with the publication in the thirties a number of artists used his powdered-crayon method to produce similar effects, and in the same period Hullmandel printed lithographs by Boys and others in his newly perfected stump style.²

There are also plates printed in lithotint by Hullmandel from drawings by Haghe, Harding, and Boys in the Picardie and Dauphiné volumes. It must have been very soon after taking out the patent in 184o that Hullmandel made his unfruitful visit to France in the hope of selling his process which prompted Lemercier to experiment along similar lines. Wash drawing on stone, allied as it was to water-colour painting, was never the success in France that it had been in England, but a few plates in the Voyages pittoresques bear witness to Lemercier's experiments.³

Zinc plates were used by Haghe for a few plates in the Voyages pittoresques.4 Before 184o their use was virtually limited to England, where the zinc was much purer and, at least for the purposes of lithography, better manufactured than it was in France.5 Even in England, however, zinc was rarely used for work of the highest quality.⁶

The techniques discussed in the last three paragraphs account for very few plates in the Voyages pittoresques, and most of them are simple monochrome chalk drawings on stone. The finest volumes are the early ones on Normandie, Franche-Comté, and Auvergne, where plates by the undoubted masters of lithography, Bonington, Isabey, and Harding, are found alongside occasional prints by Atthalin, Charlet, Brascassat, Fielding, Huet, Sabatier, and Watelet which single themselves out from the more strictly topographical plates which form the bulk of the publication. After Nodier's death in 1844 the plates showed less interest in landscape and became more architectural in character,7 and there followed a gradual decline in the standard of the lithographs which was checked only by Ciceri. But this change alone cannot account for the decline in quality, for Bonington had already shown that fine lithography was quite compatible with architectural accuracy.

In the years immediately following Bonington's finest lithographs Niepce in France discovered the process of photography. In 1837 Daguerre, who had already made drawings for the Voyages pittoresques, produced a reliable method of fixing the images of nature which was eventually to undermine the original purpose of the publication. Daguerre made his invention public by announcing it to the Académie des Sciences in 1839, and in the same year it was bought by the French Government. Almost immediately it achieved such widespread popularity that any unskilled amateur could, with the aid of a camera, make his own illustrated voyages pittoresques. Very soon the daguerreotype began to replace the artist's drawing for topographical illustration. At the outset such images appeared in reverse, which had the incidental advantage that they could be copied directly on to an engraving plate or lithographic stone, allowing the printing process itself to do the job of reversal. For technical reasons many early daguerreotypes were of topographical subjects. It was therefore of twofold importance that they should go through some process of print-making; in the first place, because a daguerreotype was unique and, secondly, because it needed a graphic process to make subjects topographically accurate until such a time as prisms began to be used to reverse images. A lithograph ofNotre-Dame de Paris', claiming to have been the first made after a daguerreotype, was published in the journal Le Lithographe in the year that Daguerre announced his process (Plate 158).1 Thereafter daguerreotypes were used for a number of topographical publications, being engraved, lithographed, or actually printed from etched daguerreotype plates.²

Though Taylor and Nodier contributed some of the text to one of these daguerreotype collections as early as 1841,3 Taylor seems to have resisted the temptation of using the benefits of photography until the very late volumes of the Voyages pittoresques.4 The invention of photography must have taken some of the incentive from a publication which had started out only twenty years earlier by being experimental. Nevertheless, the influence of this newer ‘art' on the drawings of the second half of the work was considerable, and the use of photographs (more often than is acknowledged)í cannot be ruled out.

The real threat to the lithographer, as opposed to the topographical draughtsman, came only when the photographic image could be produced on paper and, like lithographs, in virtually unlimited numbers. Real photographs were frequently used as illustrations, and one even finds its way into the Voyages pittoresques.² But more important from the point of view of economy was the application of photography to the graphic processes themselves. The idea of fixing a photographic image on to the lithographic stone and taking prints from it was taken up in 1849 by Lemercier, who sent some of his experiments to London for the Great Exhibition and was awarded a medal of honour. A few years later the positions of both topographical draughtsman and lithographer were usurped when Lemercier, Lerebours, Barreswil, and Davanne produced a set of six prints of Gothic architecture, Lithographie ou impressions obtenus sur pierre à l’aide de la photographie (Paris, 1853). Le Secq took the photographs and Lemercier was responsible for the printing. Subsequently Lemercier became associated with Poitevin, whose improvements were protected by a patent of 27 August 1855, and two years later he bought from him the right to exploit the procédé Poitevin'. It was this process that Lemercicr used in the last two volumes of the Voyages pittoresques, and particularly in the one on Bourgogne (vol. xix, 1863) in which twelve plates were printed by photolithography.³

The rise and fall of the topographical lithograph in France can therefore be studied in the pages of this one publication.Within fifty years of its inception the topographical artist had been more or less replaced by the camera and, furthermore, the appearance of photolithographic plates in its later volumes foreshadowed the eventual disappcarance of the professional lithographic draughtsman.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY

(a) Literature on the history and techniques of lithography 1801–20 (in chronological order).

(b) Sources for the early history and techniques of lithography (in alphabetical order and including items listed in (a)).

(c) General.