# Foreword

## T

his volume marks an important departure in the Industry and Society series of the Johns Hopkins University Press and the Eleutherian Mills-Hagley Foundation. It has been our intent from the first that most of the studies in this series focus on the economic and social history of the Mid-Atlantic states yet be pertinent to wider issues and topics. Burton Folsom's Urban Capitalists, John Bodnar's Worker's World, and Paul Paskoff's Industrial Evolution led the way in fulfilling that goal; all three deal closely with aspects of industrial history in a single state, but all approach their subjects in a way that makes them of interest to the broad community of historians. The publication of David Hounshell's From the American System to Mass Production represents another kind of work that we also hoped to include in the series—studies that make significant contributions to important historical questions about the relationship between industry and society but do not necessarily deal exclusively with the Mid-Atlantic region.

Hounshell's work is pathbreaking in many respects. He gives us, for the first time, a comprehensive analysis of the evolution of the most significant and best-known set of mass production technologies in American history. Beginning with their origins in the federal armories of the early nineteenth century, Hounshell traces those interrelated technologies through a number of industries—the sewing machine, the woodworking industries, the reaper, the bicycle, and the automobile. The techniques were spread and improved by a close-knit network of key mechanics, who moved out in concentric circles from the armories to the machine tool companies, the sewing machine manufacturers, and the rest, all the way to the automobile makers. Mechanics who had learned parts of the growing body of ideas about how to create highly productive factories passed those ideas on to others, who, in turn, expanded and spread them. The extent of the linkages between the critical firms and individuals was astonishing. Over time, these men steadily widened the range of methods for manufacturing items of wood and metal. Factory organization, specialized machines, precision manufacture, interchangeable parts, carefully coordinated work sequences and materials flows, and new methods for stamping and welding metal eventually become standard items in the repertoire of America's production engineers.

By the early twentieth century some industries had become so adept at turning out masses of parts that they encountered a bottleneck at the point of assembly. The mechanics and engineers responsible for the revolution in production proved equal to this new challenge as well. On the eve of World War I the Ford Motor Company came up with the answer—the assembly line. The last obstacle had been removed. Seemingly limitless numbers of virtually identical goods could now be produced. A perpetual cornucopia machine had emerged, fully realizing the promise of true mass production that began in the armories at Springfield and Harpers Ferry.

Almost as quickly as the new order had dawned, however, it ran into another bottleneck. For the first time in the story of the industries Hounshell examines, the major problem ceased to be the challenge of how to produce enough goods to meet an evergrowing demand and became, instead, how to dispose of these goods. Although creative marketing and heavy advertising had been central elements in the success of firms such as Singer and McCormick, their factory superintendents had usually been called on again and again to expand output. In the auto industry, however, after Ford's assembly innovations at Highland Park things began to change. For the first time in the firms studied here, serious difficulties arose as the volume of manufactured goods exceeded the demand. The solution to these problems came not from Henry Ford, perhaps the greatest figure in the history of mass production, but from Alfred Sloan, Charles Kettering, and others at General Motors. They pioneered a revolutionary approach to marketing in which they continued to introduce real mechanical improvements in their products but, in addition, they now emphasized style and superficial annual model changes. Furthermore, GM began to create individual products consciously aimed at different income groups.

The General Motors strategy succeeded so well that the Ford Motor Company plunged into decline and losses. Ford and his production engineers eventually were forced to follow the lead of GM. Hounshell traces in detail the story of the painful transition at Ford to the new technology of ‘flexible mass production." Ford had, with the Model T, taken American mass production to its most extreme form. He had also led his company into an economic and technical dead end. The dream born in the federal armories a century earlier became the nightmare of crushing inventories of unsold cars and a rigid production system with enormously costly and inflexible plants.

The tragedy of Henry Ford pointed to a cruel dilemma that had long troubled other manufacturers. In a sense it is a fundamental problem of technically advanced capitalism itself—-manufacturers could produce ever greater quantities of any given item, but eventually they reached the point at which they could no longer sell them at a price that would yield what they considered an acceptable profit. The system is built on endless growth, however, and for any given firm, continuing growth can be achieved only through change. No solution is ever final, no product ever so successful that its growth phase continues endlessly. Even the Model T—the perfect car for the masses—fell victim to this hard fact. Ever since American consumers have been free to choose new goods in the marketplace, they have done so sooner or later, no matter how useful, durable, or inexpensive the existing product might have been. Firms committed to growth exist in a treadmill universe; the machine of growth must never stop.

In many industries, though generally not in the ones detailed in this study, the problem of overcapacity had existed long before Ford pioneered the assembly line. Manufacturers tried various ways of dealing with the problem, from trade associations and pools to the mergers that created so many big businesses before World War I. Oligopolistic competition and heavy reliance on modern marketing techniques provided a way out for some industries. When the problem of overcapacity struck the auto industry, however, it hit the Ford Company especially hard because of the company's wider-ranging commitment to the mass production of a single product.

David Hounshell skillfully traces the evolution of the most important set of production technologies in American industrial history. In the process, he inters a number of myths that have grown up over the years, such as the ideas that the use of interchangeable parts was widespread in the nineteenth century, that interchangeability always meant lower costs, and that technical barriers prèvented mass production in the woodworking industries. Perhaps most important, Hounshell shows that the most successful American firms relied on the most careful attention to both marketing and production. The story he tells is one in which a complex and difficult set of new technologies cane to fruition with the benefit of initial government subsidy and only when business leaders made long-term commitments to innovation and excellence. At a time when Americans are worrying about a decline in the performance of their industrial corporations, it is both timely and instructive to have this history of the era in which U.S. firms rose to a dominant position in world markets.

This is not, however, entirely a paean to progress. Although most of the book is written from the perspective of the factory superintendents and engineers who perfected mass production, the gradual spread of mechanized production technology meant more routinized work for the people who tended the machines and whose workday came to be controlled and defined by the production engineers. ln its final chapter, the study assesses the ambiguous meaning for American society of the coming of mass production.

Few topics are as central to the interests of the Regional Economic History Research Center at Hagley as David Hounshell's subject. Since he has served for some years as a member of the Center's Academic Advisory Board and as curator of technology at the Hagley Museum, I am particularly pleased to have his work appear in this series.

GLENN PoRTER, Director Regional Economic History Research Center Eleutherian Mills-Hagley Foundation