# Wicked Problems in Design Thinking Richard Buchanan / Introduction / Design and Intentional Operations

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Wicked Problems：《in Design Thinking Buchanan，1992》\Wicked Problems：《in Design Thinking Buchanan，1992》\Wicked Problems：《in Design Thinking Buchanan，1992》\auto\Wicked Problems：《in Design Thinking Buchanan，1992》.md

# Wicked Problems in Design Thinking Richard Buchanan

## Introduction

This essay is based on a paper presented at "Colloque Recherches sur le Design: Incitations, Implications, Interactions," the first French university symposium on design research held October 1990 at l'’Université de Technologie de Compiègne, Compiègne, France.

Despite efforts to discover the foundations of design thinķing in the fine arts, the natural sciences, or most recently, the social sciences, design eludes reduction and remains a surprisingly flexible activity No single definition of design, or branches of professionalized practice such as industrial or graphic design, adequately covers the diversity of ideas and methods gathered together under the label. Indeed, the variety of research reported in conference papers, journal articles, and books suggests that design continues to expand in its meanings and connections, revealing uņexpected dimensions in practice as well as understanding. This follows the trend of design thinking in the twentieth century, for we have seen design grow from a trade activity to a segmented profession to a field for technical research and to what now should be recognized as a new liberal art of technological culture.

It may seem unusual to talk about design as a liberal art, particularly when many people are accustomed to identifying the liberal arts with the traditional "arts and sciences"that are institutionalized in colleges and universities. But the liberal arts are undergoing a revolutionary transformation in twentieth-century culture, and design is one of the areas in which this transformation is strikingly evident.

To understand the change that is now underway, it is important to recognize that what are commonly regarded as the liberal arts today are not outside of history. They originated in the Renaissance and underwent prolonged development that culminated in the nineteenth century as a visionof an encyclopedic education of beaux arts, belles lettres, history, various natural sciences and mathematics, philosophy, and the fledgling social sciences. This circle of learning was divided into particular subject matters, each with a proper method or set of methods suitable to its exploration. At their peak as liberal arts, these subject matters provided an integrated understanding of human experience and the array of available knowledge. By the end of the nineteenth century, however, existing subjects were explored with progressively more refined methods, and new subjects were added to accord with advances in knowledge. As a result, the circle of learning was further divided and subdivided, until all that remained was a patchwork quilt of specializations.

2 Neo-positivism, pragmatism, and various forms of phenomenology have strongly influenced design education and practice in the twentieth century. If design theory has often tended toward neo-positivism, design practice has tended toward pragmatism and pluralism, with phenomenologists in both areas. Such philosophical differences are illustrated in the split that developed between the theoretical and studio courses at the Hochschule für Gestaltung (HfG) Ulm before its closing. The split between theory and practice in design is an echo of the difference between the predominantly neopositivist philosophy of science and the exceptionally diverse philosophies of practicing scientists. Design history, theory, and criticism could benefit from closer attention to the pluralism of views that guide actual design practice.

Walter Groupius was one of the first to recognize the beginnings of a new liberal art in design. In an essay written in 1937, he reflected on the founding of the Bauhaus as an institution grounded on the idea of an architectonic art: "Thus the Bauhaus was inaugurated in 1919 with the specific object of realizing a modern architectonic art, which like human nature was meant to be all-embracing in its scope. . . . Our guiding principlewas that design is neither an intellectual nor a material affair, but simply an integral part of the stuff of life, necessary for everyone in a civilized society." Scope of Total Architecture (New York: Collier Books, 1970), 19–20. The term "architectonic," in this case, transcends the derivative term “architecture” as it is commonly used in the modern world. Throughout Western culture, the liberal arts have similarly been described as "architectonic" because of their integrative capacity. Groupius appeared to understand that architecture, regarded as a liberal art in its own right in the ancient world, was only one manifestation of the architectonic art of design in the twentieth century.

4 John Dewey, The Quest for Certainty: A Study of the Relation of Knowledge and Act ion (1929; rpt. New York: Capricorn Books, 1960), 290–91.

Today, these subject matters retain an echo of their old status as liberal arts, but they flourish as specialized studies, leading to the perception of an ever more rich and detailed array of facts and values. Although these subjects contribute to the advance of knowledge, they also contribute to its fragmentation, as they have become progressively narrow in scope, more numerous, and have lost "connection with each other and with the common problems and matters of daily life from which they select aspects for precise methodological analysis."1 The search for new integrative disciplines to complement the arts and sciences has become one of the central themes of intellectual and practical life in the twentieth century. Without integrative disciplines of understanding, communication, and action, there is little hope of sensibly extending knowledge beyond the library or laboratory in order to serve the purpose of enriching human life.

The emergence of design thinking in the twentieth century is important in this context. The significance of seeking a scientific basis for design does not lie in the likelihood of reducing design to one or another of the sciences—an extension of the neo-positivist project and still presented in these terms by some design theorists.2 Rather, it lies in a concern to connect and integrate useful knowledge from the arts and sciences alike, but in ways that are suited to the problems and purposes of the present. Designers, are exploring concrete integrations of knowledge that will combine theory with practice for new productive purposes, and this is the reason why we turn to design thinking for insight into the new liberal arts of technological culture.³ 1

## Design and Intentional Operations

The beginning of the study of design as a liberal art can be traced to the cultural upheaval that occurred in the early part of the twentieth century. The key feature of this upheaval was described by John Dewey in The Quest for Certainty as the perception of a new center of the universe.

The old center of the universe was the mind knowing by means of an equipment of powers complete within itself, and merely exercised upon an antecedent external material equally complete within itself. The new center is indefinite interactions taking place within a course of nature which is not fixed and complete, but which is capable of direction to new and different results through the mediation of intentional operations.⁴

What Dewey describes here is the root of the difference between the old and new liberal arts, between specialization in the facts of a subject matter and the use of new disciplines of integrative thinking.

Dewey observes, however, that the meaning and implications of the new direction are still not fully understood.

Nowadays we have a messy conjunction of notions that are

9 Dewey, "By Nature and By Art," 291–92.

consistent neither with one another nor with the tenor of our actual life. Knowledge is still regarded by most thinkers as direct grasp of ultimate reality, although the practice of knowing has been assimilated to the procedure of the useful arts;—involving, that is to say, doing that manipulates and arranges natural energies. Again while science is said to lay hold of reality, yet “art" instead of being assigned a lower rank is equally esteemed and honored.⁵ assigned a lower rank is equally esteemed and honored.⁵

Carrying these observations further, Dewey explores the new relationship between science, art, and practice. He suggests in Experience and Nature that knowledge is no longer achieved by direct conformity of ideas with the fixed orders of nature; knowledge is achieved by a new kind of art directed toward orders of change.

But if modern tendencies are justified in putting art and creation first, then the implications of this position should be avowed and carried through. It would then be seen that science is an art, that art is practice, and that the only distinction worth drawing is not between practice and theory, but between those modes of practice that are not intelligent, not inherently and immediately enjoyable, and those which are full of enjoyed meanings.⁶

Although the neo-positivists courted Dewey for a time, it was apparent that his understanding of the development of science in the twentieth century was quite different from their understanding.? Instead of treating science as primary and art as secondary, Dewey pointed toward science as art.

The consideration that completes the ground for assimilating science to art is the fact that assignment of scientific status in any given case rests upon facts which are experimentally produced. Science is now the product of operations deliberately undertaken in conformity with a plan or project that has the properties of a working hypothesis.8

What Dewey means by “art' in this context is crucial to understanding the new role of design and technology in contempory culture.

After a period in which natural knowledge progressed by borrowing from the industrial crafts, science entered upon a period of steady and ever-accelerated growth by means of deliberate invention of such appliances on its own account. In order to mark this differential feature of the art which is science, I shall now use the word "technology." . . . Because of technologies, a circular relationship between the arts of production and science has been established.9

What Dewey defines as technology is not what is commonly understood in today's philosophy of technology. Instead of meaning knowledge of how to make and use artifacts or the artifacts themselves, technology for Dewey is an art of experimental thinking. It is, in fact, intentional operations themselves carried out in the sciences, the arts of production,1º or social and political action. We mistakenly identify technology with one particular type of product—hardware—that may result from experimental thinking, but overlook the art that lies behind and provides the basis for creating other types of products.

From this perspective, it is easy to understand why design and design thinking continue to expand their meanings and connections in contemporary culture. There is no area of contemporary life where design—the plan, project, or workinghypothesis which constitutes the “intention" in intentional operations—is not a significant factor in shaping human experience. Design even extends into the core of traditional scientific activities, where it is employed to cultivate the subject matters that are the focus of scientific curiosity. But perceiving the existence of such an art only opens the door to further inquiry, to explain what that art is, how it operates, and why it succeeds or fails in particular situations. The challenge is to gain a deeper understanding of design thinking so that more cooperation and mutual benefit is possible between those who apply design thinking to remarkably different problems and subject matters. This will help to make the practical exploration of design, particularly in the arts of production, more intelligent and meaningful.

However, a persistent problem in this regard is that discussions between designers and members of the scientific community tend to leave little room for reflection on the broader nature of design and its relation to the arts and sciences, industry and manufacturing, marketing and distribution, and the general public that ultimately uses the results of design thinking. Instead of yielding productive integrations, the result is often confusion and a breakdown of communication, with a lack of intelligent practice to carry innovative ideas into objective, concrete embodiment. In turn, this undermines efforts to reach a clearer understanding of design itself, sometimes driving designers back into a defense of their work in the context of traditional arts and crafts. Without appropriate reflection to help clarify the basis of communication among all the participants, there is little hope of understanding the foundations and value of design thinking in an increasingly complex technological culture.

