# Bridging Disciplines and Sectors: An Industry-Academic Partnership in Design Anthropology # Christina Wasson and Crysta Metcalf As discussed in the introduction to this volume, design anthropology straddles two fi elds or research traditions with markedly different objectives, orientations, epistemic assumptions, and methods (see Otto and Smith, this volume). Combining the practices of anthropology and design across a university-industry partnership adds another layer of complexity to the equation for success. While other authors in this book speak to the challenges of combining anthropology and design, in this chapter we speak to the challenges of combining anthropology and design across organizations. Like designers and anthropologists, universities and for-profi t industries often have different, sometimes competing, goals and purposes. For instance, collaboration between industry and universities can face obstacles because these organizations are driven by different incentive systems and different goals (Bruneel, D’Este, and Salter 2010). In some ways, these organizational differences overlap with the disciplinary differences between designers and anthropologists. While anthropology is present and past focused to develop a body of knowledge, design is future focused and the goal is to develop new products, services, and policies. Universities are usually producing knowledge for educational purposes, while industry is usually harnessing knowledge for profi t. While universities emphasize the creation of public knowledge, corporations often want to keep the knowledge they produce private. The goal of a for-profi t organization is, like design, to create products, while the product of academic research is knowledge. The fact that the two partners in any joint work have differing goals and objectives can, sometimes signifi cantly, reduce the likelihood of either side viewing the relationship as a success. Furthermore, research has shown that effective collaboration is even more challenging across organizations than across disciplines. For instance, a study by Cummings and Kiesler found that “projects with PIs [Principal Investigators] from more universities were signifi cantly less well coordinated and reported fewer positive outcomes” than projects with PIs from one university but multiple disciplines (2005: 703). There is signifi cant evidence that university-industry partnerships have historically faced fairly high rates of failure, at least in the United States (see Baba 1988). This has prompted a change in how universities and industry are coordinating for collaboration. Since the 1980s, there has been more focus on creating institutional structures to help mitigate the challenges. According to Freitas, Geuna, and Rossi, “This qualitative change in the nature of the relationships between industry and academia has been accompanied by the emergence of visible new organizational forms such as university-industry liaison offi ces, technology licensing offi ces, technology transfer offi ces, industryuniversity research centres, research joint ventures, university spin-offs and technology consultancies” (2010: 3–4). And, despite the effort to formalize the collaborations, consulting work, and paid access to university research, success is still varied and occurs less often than all involved would hope (Freitas et al. 2010). Two major types of barriers that hinder success have been identifi ed by Bruneel and colleagues (2010) as orientation-related barriers and transaction-related barriers. Orientation-related barriers are due to the different goals and objectives of universities and industry. Transaction-related barriers come into play with the advent of new institutional structures for university-industry collaboration, such as the technology transfer offi ces and others listed earlier. The barriers come from administrative and legal issues, such as who will retain intellectual property rights under what conditions. The development of technology licensing offi ces, technology transfer offi ces, technology consultancies, and so forth has corresponded to an increase in transaction-related barriers. Universities use these new organizational forms to capitalize on the commercialization of knowledge and produce fi nancial gain for the universities. In doing so, there is increased confl ict over intellectual property rights and the terms of the research partnership (Bruneel et al. 2010). For example, joint ventures and research centers can encounter competing interests when attempting to structure their agreements so that both the university and the organizational partner profi t from royalties. Pavese has suggested that successful industry-university partnerships require fi guring out “the right value proposition” (2009). Before the development of these new industry-academic partnership models, the prior model of university-industry collaboration had been based on “ personal contractual collaborations between university researchers and fi rm engineers and researchers” (Freitas et al. 2010: 16; italics in original). In these cases, the relationships were not institutional as such; they were based on researchers’ social networks and the development of trust between the parties involved. The term contractual is used metaphorically rather than literally. It is our assertion that this earlier model actually works better than the newer model, at least in design anthropology partnerships. Ours is a case study of successful personal contractual joint research between a professor and her class at the University of North Texas and a research scientist and her team at Motorola Mobility, Inc. We conclude that fi ve major factors contribute to successful university-industry design anthropology partnerships: 1) the multidisciplinary membership of the teams; 2) the close alignment between the interests and backgrounds of the lead researchers; 3) the high value students placed on these projects; 4) a strong commitment on the part of the lead researchers; and 5) their reliance on a personal contract model. ## THE HISTORY OF OUR COLLABORATION AND ITS INTERDISCIPLINARY CONTEXT In the period from 2005 to 2011, we conducted fi ve collaborative class projects. In this section, we outline the history and practices of our collaboration and situate it in the context of multiple, intersecting forms of interdisciplinary practice(s). The two of us initially met at the spring 2004 annual meeting of the Society for Applied Anthropology. Immediately in our fi rst conversation, we started to explore the possibility of developing a collaboration in which Crysta, and through her Motorola, would be the client for a class project in Christina’s design anthropology course at the University of North Texas. <sup>1</sup> We remained in communication over the summer, and planned our fi rst collaboration for fall 2005. Thereafter, we usually collaborated on a class project every fall semester, with some variation due to adjustments to course schedules. Here is a list of project topics and when projects were conducted: • Eco-Moto (Fall 2005). An investigation of how the physical design of a mobile phone could communicate to consumers that this line of phones was ecologically friendly. Social Television Peripherals (Spring 2008). Motorola had developed design guidelines for a product that enabled friends and family who were geographically distant from each other to watch television together virtually. The class examined the design of remote controls, input devices, and presence indicators. Supplemental Experiences (Fall 2008). A study of how people move back and forth between live experiences and on-screen experiences that supplement the live event by providing more information about it. Nonintrusive Notifi cations (Fall 2009). Another study related to social television, this time focusing on the design of notifi cations about people’s buddies that would appear on the television screen. Research was conducted to understand people’s perceptions of interruptions during leisure activities. • Exploratory Kitchen Media Research (Fall 2011). An investigation of how people use media before, during, and after the cooking process. During the fi rst class project in fall 2005, we experimented with our collaborative process, exploring ways to work together effectively. We both ended up feeling that the process as well as the results satisfi ed our respective needs, and were motivated to continue. The leader of the business group inside Motorola who was our ultimate client was very pleased with our work, generating recognition for us both inside and outside of Motorola. Subsequently our collaboration process remained fairly consistent in its general outlines, although we continued to refi ne our approach and each project had unique aspects. It was undergirded by our mutual commitment to a partnership in which we played equal but different roles, our willingness to be fl exible, and our readiness to invest a fair amount of time and energy into the project. When we started to plan a class project, Crysta usually suggested a few potential research topics that would contribute to ongoing activities within her organization, and together we selected the one that seemed like the best fi t for the class. We both contributed to the study design, methods, and protocols, with Crysta taking a lead role in the overall study design, and Christina understanding better how to adapt a study design to the context and constraints of a semester-long course. Our compatibility as collaborators was facilitated by the specifi c characteristics of the organizations in which we worked and our roles within those organizations. Crysta worked in a research lab setting within Motorola. While Motorola went through various restructurings during the time period described, as of spring 2012, Crysta’s organization was called the Applied Research Center at Motorola Mobility, Inc. As a manager in a corporate research lab, Crysta’s role was to lead research projects that would generate ideas for new products and services. So the research projects Crysta suggested for the class fi t within a larger constellation of similar, ongoing research projects. Christina was a professor in the department of anthropology at the University of North Texas (UNT). This department offered a master’s degree in applied anthropology, with the goal of training students who would become practitioners rather than academics. Client projects were regarded as a valuable aspect of students’ preparation for such careers. Furthermore, one of the specializations of the department was business anthropology, which included design and organizational anthropology. In fact, at the time of the writing of this chapter, UNT was the only university in the United States that offered a course on design anthropology within an anthropology department. So the master’s program attracted students who were interested in design anthropology. In addition, UNT’s design department had a signifi cant focus on design research. Faculty encouraged students to take the design anthropology course. Our collaboration is situated within multiple, intersecting types of partnerships, including partnerships across institutional sectors, disciplines, and people. It is productive to examine interactions between the fi elds of anthropology and design in more detail, as they played out in the context of the class projects. The two fi elds were brought into dialogue in at least four ways: through the topics of the research projects; the composition of the class; Crysta’s team composition; and the partnership between the two of us. First, while the research topics for each class project were unique, they all shared the overall goal of combining anthropological theories and methods with design theories and methods to create tangible product ideas. The research process was enriched by the multiple disciplinary backgrounds that students brought to it. The case study presented later in this chapter illustrates the process. Second, Christina strove to have each class consist of about half anthropology students and half design students. One of the pedagogical goals was to have design and anthropology students learn from each other and learn how to collaborate with each other. The class was primarily open to advanced undergraduates and master’s students in anthropology and design (UNT did not offer a PhD in anthropology). Christina also accepted a few doctoral students from fi elds such as marketing and information science. Total class size ranged from thirteen to eighteen students. Third, the team Crysta managed, and to whose ongoing research activities the class projects contributed, was highly interdisciplinary. In addition to an anthropologist and several designers, the team included engineers, computer scientists, and human-computer interaction specialists. The team had developed a highly collaborative research process in which all members of the team, regardless of training, participated. Computer scientists, designers, and other team members went into the fi eld and gathered and analyzed the data together with a trained fi eldworker; anthropologists, engineers, and others participated in the design process with the designers; and while prototyping was usually the purview of the computer scientists and engineers, they regularly consulted with the entire team to ensure the research prototypes were designed as planned and would answer the next set of research questions. The team had developed an interdisciplinary dialectical process that acted as a catalyst to inspire a collaborative culture of working relationships and an understanding of how to utilize the strengths of diverse disciplines (Metcalf 2008). Fourth, while both of us were trained in anthropology, we each had extensive histories of working with designers and contributing to the interdisciplinary area that has been labeled design anthropology. Christina worked for E-Lab, a design fi rm that was a pioneer in incorporating ethnography into design research practice, from 1996 to 1997 (Wasson 2000, 2002; Wasson and Squires 2012). She subsequently taught design anthropology in collaboration with clients ranging from the Field Museum to Microsoft to the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport, as well as maintaining a modest consulting practice. Christina was also a founding member of the Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference (EPIC) Steering Committee, one of the original six people who together developed the fi rst EPIC event (Anderson and Lovejoy 2005; Wasson 2005). She remained on the steering committee until 2010; her roles included chair of academic relations. Crysta has worked for Motorola since 2000, where she pioneered an approach to the integration of ethnography, design, and engineering targeted to the specifi c context of Motorola products and services (Metcalf 2011). She both worked on and led crossdisciplinary teams for the entirety of her career at Motorola, mentoring and teaching others how to conduct successful interdisciplinary research and develop transdisciplinary teams. These four areas of interdisciplinary interactions illustrate complex connections between people, disciplines, and institutions that overlap and intersect in multiple ways. Crysta and Christina were able to model their experience in crossdisciplinary partnerships to students; the students themselves learned about other disciplines from their classmates in the context of collaborating on a project that would be used by an interdisciplinary team. Furthermore, the fi elds of anthropology and design were not linked in a simple one-on-one dialogue surrounded by a vacuum; rather, they were connected to additional disciplines through the composition of the class as well as the membership of Crysta’s team. ## OBJECTIVES AND INCENTIVES In this section, we describe ways in which our collaboration addressed the goals of Christina’s class and Crysta’s team, our own agendas, and the objectives of our organizations. With respect to class goals, it was an invaluable experience for students in an applied master’s program to work on a real client project; they were highly motivated by the awareness that their fi ndings would be used. Furthermore, they learned important skills in conducting client-centered research projects. While some of them had already conducted academic ethnographic research projects, they were new to the cultural logic of developing a research design targeted to the needs of a client organization, maintaining a focus on client priorities during the course of the fi eldwork, and engaging in an ongoing communication process with the client during analysis to ensure fi ndings were directed to the client’s needs. The class project helped us to bring students into the design anthropology/design research community of practice. In terms of relationality, it provided a vehicle for us to form a mentoring relationship with the students. The goals of the interactive media user research (IMUR) team, Crysta’s team within the Applied Research Center at Motorola Mobility, Inc., are to develop a body of knowledge about how people interact with media, how they interact with each other around media, and how they communicate with each other through media. Most of the team’s research concentrates on innovations in video consumption and curation experiences, but includes research on photos, music, blogs, and books as well. The team seeks to understand people’s behavior with respect to professionally created content and usergenerated content in order to invent and design compelling consumer experiences. For the IMUR team, the value of collaborating with universities is threefold. First, there are a certain number of people on the team, and thus the number of projects that can be completed in any given year is limited. But the list of projects that the team is interested in conducting is fairly close to unlimited. University partnerships can enhance the team’s ability to acquire additional information about media behaviors through research partnerships. The second form of value obtained when partnering with a university is diversity of perspective. In spite of the fact that Crysta’s team is highly crossfunctional, university professors and students bring a fresh perspective to project defi nitions, research questions, and analysis that contributes greatly to innovative thinking. Third, the collaboration also establishes university ties that are respected in the larger research organization. Our collaboration also contributed to Christina’s educational, research, and practice goals. Conducting applied research projects was central to her vision of how to train applied anthropology master’s students. At the same time, she enjoyed the opportunity to conduct research on particular aspects of sociality and technology use that she might not have previously encountered, but which fi t within the framework of her theoretical interests. As a professor, Christina did not have as much time to engage in applied projects as she would have liked, so the class projects were a valued way to maintain a foot in the world of practice. In addition, our collaboration contributed to the goals of Christina’s department, college, and university. As mentioned previously, the UNT Department of Anthropology had an applied focus and a business anthropology specialization; our class projects contributed to both of these areas (Jordan, Wasson, and Squires 2013; Wasson 2008). Furthermore, the department was housed in a unique college, the College of Public Affairs and Community Service. Essentially this was a school of applied social sciences; it included other departments such as criminal justice, public administration, and social work. Therefore the emphasis on providing students with applied experience was seen as a feather in the cap of the college, and the fact that the client was such a well-known company was regarded as an additional plus. Finally, the university administration placed a strong emphasis on partnerships between the university and outside organizations. One of the four goals of UNT’s 2012 Strategic Plan was to “partner with businesses and community groups to build and deepen meaningful relationships” that would strengthen the institution. <sup>2</sup> While universities most often regard university-industry partnerships as a benefi t for fi nancial reasons, our collaboration was somewhat different since it took place in the context of a class rather than a research grant or consultancy. The advantage for students and for the university was the experience that students obtained. We are often asked whether Motorola pays students for these class projects. The answer is no. Students should be motivated to take the class for the learning experience, not because they want to earn money. It would be unfair to compete with other classes where the client is a nonprofi t organization that cannot afford to pay, or where there is no class project. At the same time, Motorola did spend some money on these class projects. It paid for Crysta’s trips to Texas and the pizza party for students at the end of the semester, as described in the following section. In addition, Motorola paid the costs of data collection. For instance, study participants were always given an incentive to compensate them for their time, and on some projects we used a recruiting fi rm to fi nd study participants. Another question that often comes up is whether students are required to maintain secrecy about the research fi ndings. Again, the answer is no, because the research was designed as a class project rather than a consultancy with a professor. On some projects, there was a legal agreement between Motorola and UNT, but it protected Motorola’s right to profi t from design ideas that emerged from the project. All legal agreements explicitly preserved the right to publish for Christina and the students. From Motorola’s perspective, a number of benefi ts for the corporation stemmed from establishing a university-industry partnership of the type that we engaged in. As part of the Applied Research Center, Crysta’s team has a number of mandates that result from its position within the larger corporation. Alongside developing design ideas that Motorola can profi tably use, one of the main goals is to produce patents, or intellectual property, that can be leveraged by the corporation. The team has regularly used the class’s research as the foundation for new product innovation. This is done without including the class in brainstorming activities and Motorola thus retains the value of any intellectual property that the IMUR team generates. The IMUR team is also expected to create thought leadership within its respective communities of practice. This increases the visibility of Motorola and highlights the rigor and cutting edge nature of technology research in the company, and this in turn attracts talent to the organization. Dissemination of the team’s research, specifi cally publishing and speaking at conferences, is encouraged. This is why there is no obligation for Christina or the students to keep the research fi ndings secret; publication of research is seen as having value for the company. In addition, research teams are expected to collaborate with other groups within the company, so the corporation can leverage their knowledge throughout the product development cycle. University-industry projects are always conducted with an eye to providing benefi t for other groups in the organization. ## CASE STUDY: KITCHEN MEDIA With our respective goals in mind, and our history of successful collaborations, we decided to team up once again for a joint research project in the fall of 2011. This was a project examining how people use media in the kitchen, and serves as our case study of a successful university-industry partnership. From Crysta’s perspective, the IMUR team had been studying how people engage in television viewing experiences for a number of years (see, for example, Basapur et al. 2011; Harboe et al. 2007). These studies mainly focused on research in the living room or family room and how people engaged with the media and with each other when the primary task was watching television. However, the team knew it was missing a signifi cant amount of information on how people engage in media experiences when watching the screen is not the primary focus of attention. The team also wanted more information about media behaviors when the media experience was taking place in other contexts in the home and when more than one type of media was being used as part of an activity. Investigating how people use media in the cooking process, the IMUR team believed, would serve as a good fi rst step in looking at different media consumption contexts within the home. Crysta’s team proposed that media use in the cooking process would be interesting because in the United States many people have televisions in their kitchens, and people utilize their smartphones and tablets in the kitchen and during the cooking process as well. The kitchen is also a social location, and the process of cooking is a social process, which means that if people were engaging in media experiences, they would be likely to be engaging in social activities as well (Grimes and Harper 2008; Svensson, Hook, and Coster 2005). Finally, the cooking experience was selected because the IMUR team expected the primary focus of activity to change during the process. They expected more shifting back and forth between tasks and between different types of media than when someone sits down in the living room to watch a program. Crysta and Christina discussed the possibility of ethnographic-style research exploring kitchen media use and agreed this project would be good for university collaboration because it was a new domain area of research for both Crysta’s team and Christina’s class. From Crysta’s point of view, it was a good topic because the students would not need a deep and nuanced understanding of the space and history of IMUR research to come up with fi ndings that would be new and interesting to Motorola. What were the patterns in how people used media in the cooking process? Did people use more than one device to create, curate, and/or consume media while in the kitchen? What types of media were consumed in the kitchen—were they food or kitchen specifi c? Answers to any of these questions would help Crysta’s team understand this space better and help it devise follow-on research. From Christina’s point of view, exploratory kitchen media research seemed like a great topic because she was confi dent that students would be able to connect with it easily and become enthusiastic conducting fi eldwork. After all, food preparation and eating are fundamental human experiences. In most cultures, certainly in ours, they evoke powerful emotions and feelings of connection with family and community (Mintz and Du Bois 2002). We developed plans for the kitchen media project during the summer of 2011. Crysta wrote drafts of the research design and interview guide; Christina suggested minor edits. Christina developed the course syllabus, which operationalized the research design into a series of specifi c assignments for students. Crysta hired the recruiting fi rm to fi nd the participants and acquired the participant incentives. Once class had started, Christina worked with students to create a password-protected website for fi eldwork data on WordPress. Crysta visited the class in person three times over the course of the semester. First was an introductory visit in the second week. Second was a midpoint check-in during week nine. The last visit was during fi nals week; students delivered an oral presentation of their fi ndings and submitted a written report. Crysta expressed her appreciation to the class by throwing a pizza party at Christina’s house afterward. The students in this class included: • Five undergraduate anthropology majors • Two undergraduate communication design majors • One undergraduate interdisciplinary arts and design/anthropology double major • Three MA students in anthropology • Two MFA students and one MA student in communication design • One PhD student in marketing • One PhD student in education. The class was therefore mainly a mix of anthropology and design students, with a few students from other fi elds included for additional diversity and insights. This mix produced a productive interdisciplinary collaboration. The project benefi ted from the expertise of each discipline. The class met one night a week for three hours. The fi rst half of each class meeting was dedicated to discussion of readings on the history, theory, and practice of design anthropology to ensure that students received an introduction to relevant literature. The second half of each class meeting was focused on project activities. Crysta participated in almost every class meeting. Since she was based in the Chicago area while students were meeting in the vicinity of Dallas, we used virtual communication technologies on the days when she was not physically present at UNT. A speakerphone sat in the middle of the circle of students, and we used desktop sharing to allow Crysta to see what was being shown on the computer in the classroom (visible to students through an LCD projector). Christina taught students to follow E-Lab’s model of collaboration between anthropologists and designers. E-Lab was a pioneering design fi rm that played a leading role in bringing together ethnographic research and design in the 1990s. Christina assigned two articles that described E-Lab’s work practices and had the class discuss them at length (Wasson 2000, 2002). One useful tool for these class discussions was an image termed the “bow tie model” that illustrated a collaborative, interdisciplinary work process (Wasson 2002). According to this model, the fi rst half of the work process focused more on ethnographic research. It moved from the collection of instances—bits of data—through patterns across the data, to the development of explanatory frameworks. The frameworks were the center point or pivot of the work process. They were followed by more designfocused activities, fi rst the development of high-level design concepts and then actual prototypes. Christina explained that the class would not go as far along the design path as it could, because of time constraints; its work process would end with visualizations of design ideas. Christina also emphasized that a central principle of E-Lab’s work practices was that both researchers and designers should be members of a project team from beginning to end. Although researchers might play a lead role in the fi rst half, it was important for designers to participate in fi eldwork fi rst hand. And although designers might play a lead role in the second half, it was important for researchers to continue to assess emerging design ideas in light of the research fi ndings. The course lasted for sixteen weeks—fi fteen weeks of class meetings followed by fi nals week (this is the standard semester length at American universities). The fi rst four weeks were spent in orienting students and training them in ethnographic fi eld methods. Then the students spent fi ve weeks conducting fi eldwork. Eight research participants who regularly used media to enhance their cooking experience were recruited. They were asked to take pictures documenting their media use and to draw a map of their kitchen showing the location of all media devices used during a particular cooking event. Then student researchers conducted open-ended, in-depth interviews with the research participants to learn more about their cooking-related media use. The students worked in pairs and video recorded the interviews. Interviews lasted one-and-a-half to two hours. The student researchers placed photos, maps, detailed fi eld notes about each interview, and extensive video clips from the interviews on a WordPress site that they created for the class. This made fi eld data available to the whole group for comparison and analysis. All students working together as a group, with Christina as guide and facilitator, conducted much of the analysis during class time. The students presented fi ndings from their research over the course of four weeks. Each team of students verbally narrated its fi eldwork experience and illustrated key moments and insights with photos and video clips. Other students asked questions and discussed the fi eldwork. During this process, Christina noted examples and emergent insights in a Word document visible to the whole class via an LCD projector. Initially, the Word document functioned somewhat like a more sophisticated and deep version of a fl ipchart. As the Word document became longer, students started to group the ideas by having Christina cut and paste bits of text. Information was organized into the categories of instances, patterns, and design ideas. This process was somewhat similar to creating an affi nity diagram, moving to an increasingly sophisticated and abstract level of analysis. The class needed a portable analysis space because its meeting room was used by many other classes over the course of each week, so it could not store any data or analysis materials in the room. Over time topics emerged that became the chapters of a written report. Toward the end of the semester, students were asked to choose a chapter topic; chapter authors generally included a mix of anthropology and design students. They conducted further analysis of the data on their topic and developed design ideas based on the research fi ndings. In addition, one student took on the task of preparing a PowerPoint presentation. While there is not space in this chapter to describe all of the fi ndings from the project, a few examples may be illuminating (Aiken et al. 2011). First, we found a strong connection between sociality, media use, and cooking. For instance, people built community by sharing recipes and pictures of dishes they prepared. Second, we developed an overall framework about the temporal cycle of cooking. The cooking experience could be understood as being composed of three stages: before, during, and after cooking; or, planning, execution, and celebration. Contrary to expectations, the use of media was most prevalent before cooking and after cooking. The before stage was characterized by the richest media use, as it included exploration activities that led to browsing and information searches. Furthermore, the after stage of one cooking experience was often the before stage of the next cooking experience, either for the same person or another person. Plate 30 shows one of the trajectories we mapped for the study participant, Michael. Third, we identifi ed three common orientations toward cooking among people who use media: the foodie orientation, the effi ciency orientation (often seen in parents of large families), and the health orientation. We termed these orientations rather than segments or personas because the same person might display different orientations or a mix of orientations depending on the circumstances (Aiken et al. 2011). Based on these research fi ndings, students developed a number of interesting design ideas. For instance, to support sociality they designed a media device that would encourage and facilitate both physical and virtual social interactions before, during, and after the cooking experience. Specifi cally, they developed a stationary kitchen computer with the following capabilities, as illustrated in Plate 31 : • The ability to mount the screen onto any fl at surface (kitchen cabinet doors, refrigerators, walls, etc.) and to pivot it in different directions • A touch screen interface system • A wireless and waterproof keyboard for optional use • A built-in camera on the computer screen • A voice command option • Ahe capability to sync the stationary or “main” computer with other media (phones, tablets, laptops, desktops) (Aiken et al. 2011). ## CONCLUSIONS This project was extremely successful from both Crysta’s and Christina’s perspectives. Crysta’s team utilized the fi ndings of the study to greatly enhance its understanding of media use in context and also disseminated the research to other groups within the company who were producing products geared toward the kitchen context. Immediately after the research project was over, others in Motorola Mobility’s Applied Research Center were requesting the results, and one member of another team sat in on the fi nal presentation. From the UNT perspective, indications of the project’s success included the positive evaluations given to the course by students; the opportunity for several students to present a paper on the project at the next meeting of the American Anthropological Association; and encouragement from the leadership of the National Association for the Practice of Anthropology (NAPA) to apply for the NAPA Student Achievement Award. We think a number of factors played into the success of this and previous design anthropology projects conducted jointly by UNT and Motorola. We also believe that taking into consideration these fi ve factors, collaborative success can be replicated. First, both teams on the project were multidisciplinary. Both the class and the IMUR team had designers, social scientists, and others whose perspectives and goals needed to be understood and accommodated as part of the teaming process. This difference in perspectives and goals is similar to the differences in perspectives and goals of UNT and Motorola, as described in the introduction. Thus the students and researchers were already familiar with negotiating differences in product orientation versus knowledge production orientation, because they had to accommodate that in their team building. When it came to accommodating the differences in perspectives and goals among institutions, it was already familiar territory. Second, the two of us as project leaders have aligned interests and backgrounds. As described previously, our partnership meshes well with our professional priorities and our other work activities, as well as those of the organizations in which we work. We both have many years of working at the intersection of anthropology, business, design, and technology. In addition, our professional circles overlap quite a bit. For instance, Marietta Baba, who was Crysta’s dissertation advisor, has also informally mentored Christina for many years. A third factor that contributes to our successful partnership is that students greatly value the experience of participating in client-oriented class projects. They see the benefi ts of gaining marketable skills in design research, being able to list the project on their resume, and, for the design students, adding the designs they create to their portfolios. They also appreciate the skills they learn with regard to teamwork, collaboration across disciplines, connecting research insights with design ideas, and organizing a research process around client needs. Thus the students are motivated to do well on the project. In addition, the interactions between the two of us model an effective and constructive client-consultant relationship. Many students have had little exposure to such relationships beforehand, or have primarily encountered negative interactions between clients and consultants. A fourth element in the success of our partnership is our willingness to dedicate quite a bit of time and energy to the collaboration. We both demonstrated a high level of commitment to the project, which was visible to each other. For instance, Crysta displayed dedication through her willingness to give up one evening a week of her personal time, for sixteen weeks running, to participate in class meetings. Christina put quite a bit of effort into project management, ensuring that students carried out their research responsibilities in a timely manner, guiding the analysis process, and encouraging constructive teamwork among students. Finally, it is our assertion that the collaborative research effort was successful because we based it on the personal contract model. The problem with the transaction-based approach that uses institutional structures for knowledge transfer, according to Freitas et al., “is that it ignores the specifi cities of the socio-economic-institutional context and the fi elds of research” (2010: 13). Instead of relying on institutionalized structures and marketbased contracts for knowledge transfer, we relied on our own long-standing personal relationship based upon feelings of trust and obligation, feelings that stemmed, in part, from belonging to the same social and professional networks. Our partnership was, and is, a personal, socially situated contract, not a market contract with its associated administrative and legal challenges. It is well known in psychology and economics that when people view an interaction in market terms, they are willing to pay a (literal) price for not meeting their obligations, and are more willing to end tasks (see, for example, Frey and Jegen 2001; Gneezy and Rustichini 2000). On the other hand, when people view their interaction as part of a personal contract, part of having a relationship with the other person, then their actions are regulated by social norms— in which not meeting obligations or ending a research collaboration has social consequences. In this case, we did not want to violate our personal contract by letting each other down. Thus we were motivated to put more effort into making the joint interorganizational research project successful as part of our personal obligations to one another. It is our hope that this short description of our partnership can be useful to others seeking to initiate academic-industry collaborations in design anthropology. We recognize that each partnership has unique dimensions and that different models of industry collaboration have evolved across the various programs that offer a specialization in design anthropology, such as SPIRE at the University of Southern Denmark, Design at the Swinburne Institute of Technology, and Design Ethnography at the University of Dundee. These programs vary, among other things, in the degree to which they emphasize preparation for a career in application, their housing in different disciplinary contexts, and the national educational traditions within which they are situated. Nonetheless, we expect the industry collaborations that they consider most successful share considerable similarities with our own experiences. ## NOTES 1. The most recent syllabus for the design anthropology course, as well as other course materials, can be viewed at http://courses.unt.edu/cwasson/ courses/design-anthropology. 2. See http://www.unt.edu/features/four-bold-goals/. ## REFERENCES Aiken, J., Burns, M., Brazell, B., Carranza, R., Dennis, R., Dubois, J., Hicks, J., Lomelin, M., Maxwell, M. L., Orange, E., Paquette, A., Reed, S., Roswinanto, W., Schlieder, V., Wilson, S. K., and Yang, X. H. (2011), “Exploratory Kitchen Media Research,” Report for Crysta Metcalf, Applied Research Center, Motorola Mobility Inc., by Design Anthropology Class, University of North Texas. Anderson, K., and Lovejoy, T. (eds.) (2005), Proceedings of the Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference , Redmond, WA, November 14–16 . Baba, M. L. (1988), “Innovation in University-industry Linkages: University Organizations and Environmental Change,” Human Organization, 47(3): 260–269. Basapur, S., Harboe, G., Mandalia, H., Novak, A., Vuong, V., and Metcalf, C. (2011), “Field Trial of a Dual Device User Experience for iTV,” in Proceedings of EuroITV , Lisbon, Portugal, June 29–July 1, 127–136. Bruneel, J., D’Este, P., and Salter, A. (2010), “Investigating the Factors that Diminish the Barriers to University-industry Collaboration,” Research Policy, 39(7): 858–868. Cummings, J. N., and Kiesler, S. (2005), “Collaborative Research across Disciplinary and Organizational Boundaries,” Social Studies of Science, 35(5): 703–722. Freitas, I.M.B., Geuna, A., and Rossi, F. (2010), “University-industry Interactions: The Unresolved Puzzle,” Working Paper Series , Department of Economics, University of Torino. Frey, B. S., and Jegen, R. (2001), “Motivation Crowding Theory,” Journal of Economic Surveys , 15(5): 589–612. Gneezy, U., and Rustichini, A. (2000), “A Fine Is a Price,” Journal of Legal Studies , 29(1): 1–17. Grimes, A., and Harper, R. (2008), “Celebratory Technology: New Directions for Food Research in HCI,” in CHI 2008 , Florence, Italy, April 5–10, 467–476. Harboe, G., Massey, N., Metcalf, C., Wheatley, D., and Romano, G. (2007), “Perceptions of Value: The Uses of Social Television,” in The 5th European Interactive TV Conference, 2007 , Amsterdam, May 24–25, 116–125. Jordan, A., Wasson, C., and Squires, S. (2013), “Business Anthropology at the University of North Texas,” in P. Sunderland and R. Denny (eds.), Handbook of Anthropology in Business , Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press. Metcalf, C. (2008), “Interdisciplinary Research, Anthropological Theory and Software Innovation: Bringing It All Together,” paper presented at the Society for Applied Anthropology Meeting, Memphis, TN , March 28. Metcalf, C. (2011), “Circulation of Transdisciplinary Knowledge and Culture in a High Tech Organization,” Anthropology News , 52(2): 28. Mintz, S. W., and Du Bois, C. M. (2002), “Anthropology of Food and Eating,” Annual Review of Anthropology , 31: 99–119. Pavese, K. E. (2009), Introduction to The New York Academy of Sciences Webseminar Academic-industry Collaboration: Best Practices. Available at: www. nyas.org/Events/WebinarDetail.aspx?cid=d774f799-36cf-4982-87faed2d9f6c9896. Accessed October 26, 2012. Svensson, M., Hook, K., and Coster, R. (2005), “Designing and Evaluating Kalas: A Social Navigation System for Food Recipes,” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction , 12(3): 374–400. Wasson, C. (2000), “Ethnography in the Field of Design,” Human Organization, 59(4): 377–388. Wasson, C. (2002), “Collaborative Work: Integrating the Roles of Ethnographers and Designers,” in S. Squires and B. Byrne (eds.), Creating Breakthrough Ideas: The Collaboration of Anthropologists and Designers in the Product Development Industry , Westport, CT: Bergin and Garvey, 71–90. Wasson, C. (2005), “Celebrating the Cutting Edge,” in Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference , Redmond, WA, November 14–16, 140–145. Wasson, C. (2008), “A ‘Dreamcatcher’ Design for Partnerships,” in E. K. Briody and R. T. Trotter (eds.), Partnering for Organizational Performance: Collaboration and Culture in the Global Workplace, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefi eld, 57–73. Wasson, C., and Squires, S. (2012), “Localizing the Global in Technology Design,” in C. Wasson, M. O. Butler, and J. Copeland-Carson (eds.), Applying Anthropology in the Global Village, Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 251–284.