## 部分参考文献 Abdy , Jane. The French Poster. New York: Graphiques, 1977. Ackland-Snow, Nicola; Brett, Nathan; and Williams, Steven. Fly: The Art of the Club Flyer. New York: Watson-Guptil Publications, 1996. Ades, Dawn. Photomontage. NewYork: Pantheon, 1976. ——. Posters: The 20th-Century Poster Design of the Avant-Garde. New York: Abbeville, 1986. Anikst, Mikhail, ed. Soviet Commercial Design of theTwenties. New York: Abbeville, 1987. Anscombe, Isabelle, and Gere, Charlotte. The Arts and Crafts Movement in England and America. New York: Rizzoli, 1978. Arnheim, Rudolf. Art and Visual Perception: A Psychology of the Creative Eye. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1974. Art Deco Trends in Design. Chicago: The Bergman Gallery and University of Chicago, 1973. Arwas, Victor. Art Deco. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1980. Ashwin, Clive. A History of Graphic Design and Communication. A Source Book. London: Penbridge, 1983. Aslin, Elizabeth. The Aesthetic Movement . Prelude to Art Nouveau. NewYork: Praeger, 1969. Baljev, Joost. Theo van Doesburg. New York: Macmillan, 1975. Banham, Reyner. Theory and Design in the First Machine Age. New York: Praeger, 1967. Barnicoat,John. A Concise History of Posters: 1870-1970. New York: Oxford University Press, 1980. Battersby, Martin. The Decorative Thirties. New York: Walker, 1971. . The Decorative Twenties. New York: Walker, 1969. Bayer, Herbert. Bauhaus 1919-1928. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1972. ——. Herhert Bayer. Painter, Designer, Architect. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1967. Billcliffe, Roger. Mackintosh Textile Designs. New York: Taplinger, 1982. Bing, Samuel. Artistic America, Tiffany Glass, and Art Nouveau.Reprint. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T Press, 1970. Black, Mary, American Advertising Posters of the Nineteenth Century. New York: Dover, 1976. Boe, Alf. From Gothic Revival to Functional Form: A Study in Victorian Theories of Design. Oslo: Oslo University Press; Oxford: Blackwell's, 1957. Bojko, Szymon. New Graphic Design in Revolutionary Russia. New York: Praeger, 1972. Bolin, Brent C. Flight of Fancy. New York: St.Martin's Press, 1985. Branzi, Andrea. The Hot House: Italian New Wave Design. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T Press, 1986. Briggs, Asa, ed. Wlliam Morris: Selected Writings and Designs. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1962. Broos, Kees. Pet Zwart 1885-1977. The Hague: Gemeentemuseum, 1973. Brown, Robert K., and Reinhold, Susan. The Poster Art of A. M. Cassandre. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1979. Brunhammer, Yvonne. The Nineteen Twenties Style. London: Paul Hamlyn, 1969. Burckhardt, Lucius. The Werkbund History and Ideology, 1907-1933. New York: Barron's, 1977. Busch, Donald. The Streamlined Decade. New York: George Braziller, 1968. Cabarga, Leslie. A Treasury of German Trademarks. New York: Art Direction Book Co., 1985. Callen, Anthea. Women Artists of the Arts and Crafts Movement, 1870-1914. New York: Pantheon, 1980. Campbell, Joan. The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978. Carter, Rob; Day, Ben; and Meggs, Philip. Typographic Design: Form and Communication. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1985. Carter, Sebastian. Twentieth Century Type Designer. New York: Taplinger, 1987. Clark, Robert J. Arts and Crafts Movement in America. Princeton: Princeton UniversityPress,1972. Constantine, Mildred, and Fern, Alan. Revolutionary Soviet Film Posters. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974. ——. Word and Image. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1968. Cooper, Austin. Making a Poster. London: The Studio, 1949. Cooper, Douglas. The Cubist Epoch. London: Phaidon, 1970. Crane, Walter. Of the Decorative Illustration of Books Old and New. London:George Bell, 1896. ——. William Morris to Whistler. London: George Bell, 1911. Delhaye, Jean. Art Deco Posters and Graphics. New York: Rizzoli, 1978. Delpire, Robert. Paris 1925. Paris: Gallimard, 1957. Design in America: The Cranbrook Vision 1925-1950. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1983. Deslandres, Yvonne, with Lalanne, Dorothea. Poiret. New York: Rizzoli, 1987. Dewey, John. Art as Experience. Reprint. New York: Wideview/Perigee 1980. Dorfles, Gillo. Kitsch: The World of Bad Taste.New York: Universe, 1969. Downey, Fairfax. Portrait of an Era as Drawn by Charles Dana Gibson: A Biography. New York: Charles Scribner & Sons, 1936. Elliott, David, ed. Alexander Rodchenko and the Arts of Revolutionary Russia. New York: Pantheon, 1979. Ferebee, Ann. A History of Design from the Victorian Era to the Present. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970. Fortz, Adrian. Obects of Desire. Design and Society fiom Wedgwood to IBM. New York: Pantheon, 1986. Fraser, James, and Heller, Steven. The Malik Verlag 1916-1947, Berlin, Prague, New York. New York: Goethe House; Madison, N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson University, 1985. Friedman, Mildred, ed. De Stijl 1917-1931, Visions of Utopia. New York: Abbeville, 1982. Frutiger, Adrian. Type, Sign, Symhol. Zurich: ABC Verlag, 1980. Fuld, James J. A Pictorial Bibliography of the First Editions of Stephen C. Foster. Philadelphia: Musical Americana, 1957. Gallo, Max. The Poster in History. New York: American Heritage, 1974. Garner, Philip. Contemporary Decorative Arts fiom 1940 to the Present. New York: Facts on File, 1980. Gerstner, Karl, and Kutler, Marcus. Die Neue Graphik/The New Graphic Art. New York: Hastings House, 1959. Glaser, Milton. Milton Glaser Graphic Design. Woodstock, N.Y.: Overlook Press, 1974. Gluck, Felix, ed. World Graphic Design:Fifty Years of Advertising Art. New York: Watson-Guptil, 1969. Gombrich, E. H. Art and Illusion. 2nd edition.Princeton: Princeton University Press, Bollingen Series, 1961. Grannis, Chandler B., ed. Heritage of the Graphic Arts: A Selection of Lectures Delivered at Gallery 303, New York City. New York and London: R. R. Bowker, 1972. Gray, Camilla. The Russian Experiment in Art 1863-1922. New York: Charles Scribner & Sons, 1973. Gray, Nicolette. A History of Lettering: Creative Experiment and Letter Identity. Oxford, 1986. ——. Nineteenth Century Ornamented Typefaces. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977. Greif, Martin. Depression Modern: The Thirties Style in America. New York: Universe, 1977. Hageney, Wolfgang. Paris, 1928-1929. Rome and Milan: Editions Belvedere, 1985. Hammond, Wayne G., and Volz, Robert L. Book Decoration in America, 1890- 1910. Revision. Williamstown, Mass.: Chapin Library, Williams College, 1979. Havinden, Ashley. Advertising and the Artist. London: The Studio, 1956. Heartfield, John. Photomontages of the Nazi Period. New York: Universe, 1977. Heller, Steven, and Pomeroy, Karen. Design Literacy: Understanding Graphic Design. New York: Allworth Press, 1997. Heller, Steven. Design Literacy (Continued): Understanding Graphic Design. New York: Allworth Press, 1999. Heller, Steven, and Fink, Anne. Faces on the Edge: Type in the Digital Age. New York: Van Rostrand Reinhold, 1997. Henderson, Sally, and Landau, Robert. Billboard Art. San Francisco: Chronicle, 1979. Hillier, Bevis. Art Deco of the Twenties and Thirties. London: Studio Vista; New York: E.P. Dutton, 1968. ——. Tbe Decorative Arts of the Forties and Fifiies: Austerity Binge. London: Studio Vista, 1970. ——. The Style of the Century 1900-1980. New York: E.P. Dutton, 1983. ——. The World of Art Deco. New York: E.P. Dutton, 1971. Hine, Thomas. Populuxe. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1986. Hipgnossis and Hardie, George. The Work of Hipgnossis. New York: A & W Visual Library, 1978. Hlavsa, Oldruich. A Book of Type and Design. New York: Tudor, 1960. Hofmann, Armin. Graphic Design Manual: Principles and Practice. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1965. Horn, Richard. Memphis: Obects, Furniture, and Patterns. Philadelphia: Running Press, 1986. Hornung, Clarence P., and Johnson, Fridolf. 200 Years of American Graphic Art: A Retromective Survey of the Printing Arts and Advertising Since the Colonial Period.New York: George Braziller, 1976. Howarth, Thomas. Charles Rennie Mackintosh and the Modern Movement. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1952. Hulten, Pontus, organizer. Futurismo, Futurism and Futurisms. New York: Abbeville, 1986. Hurlburt, Allen.The Design Concept. New York: Watson-Guptil, 1981.——. The Grid. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1978. Huszar, Vilmos. Schilder en Ontwerper 1884-1960, De Grote Onbekende Van de Siil. Utrecht: Sjarel Ex, Els Hoek, 1985. Igarashi, Takenobu, ed. World Trade marks and Logotypes Ⅱ.Tokyo: Graphic-sha, 1987. Jan Tschichold: Leben und Werk des Typographen. With an introduction by Werner Klemke. Dresden: VEB Verlag der Kunst, 1977. Japan Package Design Association, ed. Package Design in Japan. Its History, Its Faces. Tokyo: Rikuyo-sha, 1976. Johnson, Diana Chalmers. American Art Nouveau. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1980. Johnson, Douglas and Madeleine. The Age of Illusion: Art and Politics in France, 1918-1940. New York: Rizzoli, 1987. Jones , Owen. The Grammar of Ornament. Reprint. New York: Portland House, 1986. Jordan, Joel T.; Hoeckle, Summer Forest; Jordan, Jason A. Searching for the Perfect Beat: Flyer Designs of the American Rave Scene. New York: Watson-Guptil Publication, 2000. Jubb, Michael. Cocoa and Corsets. London: Public Record Office, Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1984. Kahn, Douglas. John Heartfield: Art and Mass Media. New York: Tanam, 1985. Kallir, Jane. Viennese Design and the Wiener Werkstätte. New York: Galerie St. Etienne/George Braziller, 1986. Karginov, German. Rodchenko. New York: Pantheon, 1980. Kelly, Rob Roy. American Wood Type, 1828-1900. Notes on the Evolution of Decorated and Large Types. New York: Da Capo, 1969. Kepes, Gyorgy. Language of Vision. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1945. ——. The New Landscape. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1956. Khan-Magomedov, Selim O. Alexander Rodchenko: The Complete Work. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1987. ——. Alexander Vesnin and Russian Constructivism. New York: Rizzoli, 1987. Kimura, Katsu. Art Deco Package Collection. Tokyo: Rikuyo-sha, 1985. Koretski, Victor Borisovich. Comrade Poster. Moscow, 1978. Kostelanetz, Richard, ed. Moholy-Nagy. New York and Washington: Praeger, 1970. Koumenhoven, John A. Made in America: The Arts in Modern Civilization. New York: Doubleday, 1948. Kunzle, David. The Early Comic Strip. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973. Lang, Lothar. Expressionist Book Illustration in Germany, 1907-1927. Boston: New York Graphic Society, 1976. Larner, Gerald and Celia. The Glasgow Style. London: Astragal, 1980. Lewis, John. Anatomy of Printing: The Influences of Art and History on Design. New York: Watson-Guptil, 1970. . The Twentieth Century Book. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1967. Lewis, John, and Brinkley, John. Graphic Design. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1954. Lindsay, Jack. William Morris: His Life and Work. New York: Taplinger, 1980. Lippard, Lucy R. Dadas on Art. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1971. Lissitzky-Kuppers, Sophie. El Lissitzky: Life, Letters, Text. London and New York: Thames & Hudson, 1980. Lista, Giovanni. Le Livre Futuriste. Modena, Italy: Editions Panini, 1986. Lodder, Christina. Russian Constructivism. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1987. Lois, George, and Pitts, Bill. The Art of Advertising: George Lois on Mass Communication. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1977. Lucie-Smith, Edward. Cultural Calendar of the Twentieth Century. London: Phaidon, 1981. Lupton, Ellen and Miller, Abbot. Design, Writing Research: Writing on Graphic Design. London: Phaidon, 1999. McCarthy, Fiona. A History of British Design, 1830-1970. London and Boston: George Allen & Unwin, 1979. McClelland, Gordon. Rick Grin. New York: Putnam and Perigee Paper Tiger, 1980. McDermott, Catherine. Street Style: British Design in the Eighties. New York: Rizzoli, 1987. Macfall, Haldane. Auhrey Beardsley: The Man and His Work. London: John Lane, 1928. McLean, Ruari. Jan Tschichold: Typographer. Boston: David R. Godine, 1975. ——. Modern Book Design. New York: Faber & Faber, 1958. ——. Victorian Book Design. New York: Faber & Faber, 1963. McLuhan, Marshall, and Fiore, Quentin. War and Peace in the Global Village. New York: Bantam, 1968. Madsen, Stephen Tschudi. Sources of Art Nouveau. New York: Da Capo, 1976. Marchand, Roland. Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity, 1920-1940. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985. Margolin, Victor. American Poster Renaissance: The Great Age of Poster Design, 1890-1900. New York: Wats0n-Guptil, 1975. Marzio, Peter. The Democratic Art: Pictures for a Nineteenth-Century America. Boston: David Godine, 1979. Mayor, A. Hyatt. Popular Prints of the Americas. New York: Crown, 1973. Meggs, Philip B. A History of Graphic Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983. Meikle, Jeffrey L. Twentieth Century Limited Industrial Design in America, 1925-1939. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1979. Metzl, Ervine.The Poster: Its History and Its Art. New York: WatsonGuptill, 1963. Miller, J. Abbot. Dimensional Typography: Case Studies on the Shape of Letters, A Kiosk Report. Princeton: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996. Moholy-Nagy, Laszlo.Vision in Motion. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1947. Morison, Stanley. First Principles of Typography. Cambridge, England:Cambridge University Press, 1957. Mouton, Henri. A. M. Cassandre. New York: Rizzoli, 1985. Muller-Brockmann, Josef. The Graphic Artist and His Design Problems. NewYork: Hastings House, 1961. ——. A History of Visual Communication. New York: Hastings House, 1967. Muller-Brockmann, Josef and Shizuka. A History of the Poster. New York: Hastings House, 1961. Murgatroyd, Keith. Modern Graphics. London: Studio Vista, 1969. Naylor, Gillian. The Arts and Crafts Movement: A Study of Its Sources, Ideals, and Influence on Design. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T Press, 1975. Neuwmann, Eckhard. Bauhaus and Bauhaus People. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970. —. Functional Graphic Design in the Twenties. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold,1967. Ozenfant, Amedee. Foundations of Modern Art. New York: Dover, 1953. Packer, William. The Art of Vogue Covers, 1919-1940. New York: Bonanza, 1980. Passuth, Kristina. Moholy-Nagy. London and New York: Thames & Hudson, 1984. Pentagram. Ideas on Design. New York: Faber & Faber, 1986. ——. Living by Design. New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1978. Peterson, Theodore. Magazines in the Twentieth Cenury. ChampaignUrbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1964. Pevsner, Nikolaus. Pioneers of Modern Design: From William Morris to Walter Gropius. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1960. Pitz, Henry C. The Practice of Illustration. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1947. Prokopoff, Stephen. The Modern Dutch Poster. Champaign-Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois, Krannert Art Museum, 1987. Pulous, Arthur J. The American Design Ethic: A Hisory of Industrial Design to 1940. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T Press, 1986. Quilici, Vieri, ed. Rodchenko, the Complete Work. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T Press, 1987. Radice, Barbara. Memphis: Research, Experiences, Results, Failures, and Successes of New Design. New York: Rizzoli, 1984. Rand, Paul. A Designer's Art. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985. ——. Thoughts on Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1971. Read, Herbert. Art and Industry. New York: Horizon, 1961. Reed, Orrel P., Jr. German Expressionist Art: The Robert Gore Rifkind Collection. Los Angeles: University of California, Frederick S. Wright Art Gallery, 1977. Rennert, Jack. Timeless Images. Tokyo: Isetan Museum of Art, 1984. Rhodes, Anthony. Propaganda: The Art of Persuasion, World WarⅡ. Victor Margolin, ed. New York: Chelsea House, 1976. Rowland, Kurt. History of the Modern Movement. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1974. Rubin, William S. Dada, Surrealism, and Their Heritage. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1968. Rublowsky, John, and Heyman, Ken. Pop Art. New York: Basic Books, 1965. Sanders, Barry. The Craftsman: An Anthology. Santa Barbara: Peregrine Smith, 1978. Sartogo, Piero. Italian Re-Evolution: Design in Italian Society in the Eighties. La Jolla, Calif: La Jolla Museum of Contemporary Art, 1986. Schau, Michael. All American Girl: The Art of Coles Phillips. New York: Watson-Guptil, 1975. Schmidt, Joost. Lehre und Arbeit am Bauhaus 1919-32. Dusseldorf: Editions Marzona, 1984. Schweiger, Werner J. Wiener Werkstätte: Design in Vienna, 1903-1932. New York: Abbeville, 1984. Selz, Peter, and Constantine, Mildred. Art Nouveau. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1976. ——. Art Nouveau: Art and Design at the Turn of the Century. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1959. Sembach, Klaus-Jurgen. Exactitude: Style 1930. New York: Univerg, 1986. Shahn, Ben. The Shape of Content. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1957. Snyder, Gertrude, and Peckolick, Alan. Herb Lubalin: Art Director, Graphic Designer, and Typographer. New York: American Showcase, 1985. Sparke, Penny. An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century. London: Allen & Unwin, 1986. Sparke, Penny; Hodges, Felice; Coad, Emma Dent; and Stone, Anne. Design Source Book. Secaucus, N.J.: Chartwell, 1986. Sparling, H. Halliday. The Kelmscott Press and William Morris, Master-Craftsman. New York: Macmillan, 1924. Spencer, Herbert. Pioneers of Modern Typography. New York: Hastings House,1970. ——.The Liberated Page: A Typographical Anthology. San Francisco: Bedford, 1987. Spencer, Isobel. Walter Crane. New York: Macmillan, 1975. Spiegelman, Art, and Mauly, Françoise, eds. Read Yourself Raw. New York: Pantheon, 1987. Sutnar, Ladislav. Package Design: The Force of Visual Selling. New York: Arts,1953. Taylor, Joshua C. Futurism. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1961. Thor gerson, Storm, and Dean, Roger, eds. Album Cover Album: A Book of Record Jackets. New York: Dragon's World Book, 1977. Thorgerson, Storm, and Powell, Aubrey. 100 Best Alhum Covers. London, New York, Sydney: DK Publishing, Inc., 1999. Tichi, Cecelia. Shifting Gears: Technology, Literature, Culture in Modernist America. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press, 1987. Tolmer, A. Mise en Page: The Theory and Practice of Layout. London: The Studio, 1930. Tracy, Walter. Letters of Credit: A View of Type Design. Boston: David Godine, 1987. Twyman, Michael. Printing, 1770—1970: An Illustrated History of Its Development and Uses in England. London: Eyer & Spottiswoode, 1970. Updike, Daniel Berkeley. Printing Types, Their History, Forms, and Use: A Study in Survivals. New York: Dover, 1980. Vallance, Aymer. William Morris: His Art, His Writings, and His Public Life. London: Studio Editions, 1986. Van Doesburg, Theodore. Principles of Neo-Plastic Art. London: Lund Humphries, 1969. Varnedoe, Kirk. Vienna 1900: Art, Architecture and Design. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1986. Veronesi, Guilia. Style and Design 1909-1929. New York: George Braziller, 1968. Watkinson, Raymond. Pre-Raphaelite Art and Design. New York, 1970. Weber, Eva. Art Deco in America. New York: Bison, 1985. Weill, Alain. The Poster: A Worldwide Survey and History. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1985. Weisberg, Gabriel P. Art Nouveau Bing, Paris Style 1900. New York: Harry N. Abrams, in association with the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Service, 1986. Welo, Samuel. Trademark and Monogram Suggestions. New York: Pitman, 1937. Wember, Paul. Johan Thorn Prikker. Krefeld, Germany: Scherpe Verlag, 1966. Wingler, Hans M. The Bauhaus: Weimar, Dessau, Berlin, Chicago. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T Press, 1969. Wornum, Ralph N. Analysis of Ornament. London: Chapman & Hall, 1879. Yasinskaya, I. Revolutionary Textile Design. Russia in the 1920s and 1930s. New York: Viking, 1983. Young, Frank H. Advertising Layout. New York: Pascal Covici, 1928. ## ANNUALS American Institute of Graphic Arts. AIGA Graphic Design, USA. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1980. Art Directors Club. Annual of Advertising and Editorial Art. New York: 1921-present. Coyne, Richard. CA Annual of Design and Advertisings. Palo Alto: Communications Arts Books, 1958. Herdeg, Walter. Graphis Annual Zurich: Graphis Press. New York: Hastings House, 1952. Print Casebooks. Three six-volume editions of the best in graphic design from 1975 to 1980. Bethesda, Md.: R. C. Publications. "The Society of Illustrators." The Illustrators' Annual. New York: Hastings House, 1959. Typography: The Annual of the Type Directors' Club. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1985.