sought to provide photography with just such a "structural and historical" analysis. In the process, they have produced a revisionism and a way of thinking that are the principal subjects of this book.

## PHOTOGRAPHIES

Although I use the term postmodernism here as a convenient rhetorical trope, postmodern criticism is by no means homogenous in outlook, having been informed by a variety of sometimes competing theoretical models (Marxism, feminism, psychoanalysis, semiotics). Nevertheless, a remarkably consistent view of the photograph has come to occupy the center stage of critical debate. Indeed, within a certain intellectual milieu, this view has become the dominant way of thinking about the medium. It is now ubiquitous in undergraduate and graduate classes on photographic history and criticism and is frequently reproduced in articles and books on the medium. A paragraph from the writing of English critic John Tagg neatly summarizes this viewpoint:

Photography as such has no identity. Its status as a technology varies with the power relations which invest it. Its nature as a practice depends on the institutions and agents which defne it and set it to work. Its function as a mode of cultural production is tied to denite conditions of existence, and its products are meaningful and legible only within the particular currencies they have. Its bistory has no unity. It is a flickering across a field of institutional spaces. It is this field we must study, not photography as such.

What exactly is being said here? To begin with, Tagg suggests that photography cannot be understood as having a static identity or singular cultural status. Photography is, he says, better regarded as a dispersed and dynamic field of technologies, practices, and images. The compliant ubiquity of this photographic field is such that it is indistinguishable from those institutions or discourses that choose to make use of it. Photography's history is, therefore, the collective and multifarious history of those same institutions and discourses. A history of police photography could not, for example, be separated from a history of the practices and institutions of criminology and the justice system. Hence it follows that photography has no coherent or unified history of its own other than as a selective documentation of its various uses and effects.

The meanings of any individual photograph are similarly contingent, being entirely dependent on the context in which that photograph finds itself at any given moment. A photograph can mean one thing in one context and something else entirely in another. The identity of a photograph is thereby equated not with some kind of inherent photographic qualities but with what that photograph actually does in the world. The crucial point is that photographs can never exist outside discourses or functions of one kind or another. There is never a neutral ground where the photograph is able to speak “of and for itself," where it can emit some essential, underlying "true" meaning. Tagg's whole argument is based on the presumption that photographs have no single true meanings.

Particularly influential for Tagg's conception of the photograph is the structuralist Marxism of French philosopher Louis Althusser, with its emphasis on the role of ideological apparatuses in the maintenance and reproduction of the capitalist system. This is clear in one of Tagg's early explanations of his approach to the study of photography.

What I am trying to stress here is the absolute continuity of the photograph's ideological existence with their existence as material objects whose "currency" and "value" arise in certain distinct and historically specific social practices and are ultimately a function of the state....

While it is also used as a tool in the major educational, cultural and communications apparatuses, photography is itself an apparatus of ideological control under the central "harmonising" authority of the ideology of the class which, openly or through alliance, holds state power and wields the state apparatus.?

Although Tagg goes on in later articles to criticize the totalizing rigidity of this Althusserean model of political control, his concept of photography retains much of its basic outline. For Tagg, the meanings and values of any individual photograph continue to be entirely determined by its relationship to other, more powerful, social practices. And, as an apparatus of visual representation, photography remains before all else a tool for transporting ideology from one site to another. As he explains this process in his best known essay, "Power and Photography" (1980): "Like the state, the camera is never neutral. The representations it produces are highly coded, and the power it wields is never its own. As a means of record, it arrives on the scene vested with a particular authority to arrest, picture and transform daily life; a power to see and record; a power of surveillance. .. . This is not the power of the camera but the power of the apparatuses of the local state which deploy it and guarantee the authority of the images it constructs."8

Despite a residual Althuserrean framework, Tagg's essay does provide a more complicated description of how this deployment occurs. The result is a pioneering effort to relate the work of French philosopher Michel Foucault to the history of photography. As Tagg explains, Foucault provided cultural critics with a concept of a dynamic "micro-physics" of power, of a "disciplinary power" that circulates within and through the very grain of the social body such that we find "a multiplication of the effects of power through the formation and accumulation of new forms of knowledge." Following Foucault's lead, Tagg concentrates in this and later essays on the photographs used by that "disciplinary archipelago" of agencies and local apparatuses of the state involved in the circulation of power and knowledge. As an instrument of these agencies, photography exercises no power of its own. Consequently, Tagg's account of the political effects of photography focuses not on the medium itself but on the determining mechanisms of its historical frames, on"the ways in which photography has been historically implicated in the technology of power-knowledge."10

Building on Foucault's idea that "discourse constitutes its object," Tagg's essays consistently regard photography as an instrument that facilitates the imposition of power by those who have some (usually the agents of the state) on those who have none (usually already marginalized groups such as the working class, criminals, the insane, native peoples, ethnic subcultures, and so on). In Tagg's schema, photography is but a convenient conduit that enables these more or less powerless subjects to be represented by the forces of modern oppression as objects of knowledge, analysis, and control. Photography itself receives little attention in his analysis, precisely because he pointedly rejects the category of the "in-itself." Indeed, the assumption here is that, as a thing with no fixed identity or historical unity, photography potentially belongs to every institution and discipline but its own.

The basic tenets of Tagg's view of photography are repeated in the work of other contemporary writers on photography. We can also find it figured, for example, in the essays of American photographer and critic Allan Sekula. But whereas Tagg's photocriticism derives from a combination of Althusser and Foucault, Sekula reproduces a dialectical theory of the photograph informed primarily by the Marxism of Georg Lukács. As Sekula has described his own work:

I see my own critical project now as an attempt to understand the social character of "the traffic in photographs." Taken literally, this traffic involves the social production, circulation and reception of photographs in a society based on commodity production and exchange. Taken metaphorically, the notion of traffic suggests the peculiar way in which photographic meaning—and the very discourse of photography——is characterized by an incessant oscillation between what Lukács termed the "antinomies of bourgeois thought." This is always a movement between objectivism and subjectivism.11

Sekula regards the photograph as a mobile, contingent, and inherently social entity, an entity always caught between the twin ideological demands of aestheticism (or subjectivism) and scientism (objectivism). These contradictory demands are induced, he argues, by the "sustained crisis at the very center of bourgeois culture." This crisis is produced by the "threat and promise of the machine," a dialectic that bourgeois culture “continues to both resist and embrace." As Sekula would have it, "the fragmentary and mechanically derived photographic image is central to this attitude of crisis and ambivalence; the embracing issue is the nature of work and creativity under capitalism."12

For Sekula, the photograph appears to confirm the individual subjectivity of those pictured even as it reduces those subjects and their social relations to a visual thing, to a commodified object-image equivalent to all others. As a mechanical, seemingly neutral machinery of representation, informed by the empirical truth-values of positivism, the photograph makes this objectification appear natural and beyond question. However, the photograph's very objectivity can reveal class differences as different, as historical and unnatural, and therefore as potentially open to change. This capacity to both threaten and confirm the established order of capitalism is for Sekula the source of photography's fascination and social power.

For this reason, Sekula identifies photography as a practice uniquely placed to focus “the confidence and fears of an ascendant industrial bourgeoisie."13 Note, for example, Sekula's description of the 1955 “Family of Man" exhibition: "Here, yet again, are the twin ghosts that haunt the practice of photography; the voice of a reifying technocratic objectivism and the redemptive voice of a liberal subjectivism." 14 And his account of photography's mixed reception in 1839: "Photography promises an enhanced mastery of nature, but photography also threatens conflagration and anarchy, an incendiary leveling of the existing cultural order."15 Sekula discovers a similar duality in the photographs produced by Canadian Leslie Shedden between 1948 and 1968, referring to their linkage of "the instrumental realism of the industrial photograph and the sentimental realism of the family photograph."16 Most prominently, Sekula investigates various nineteenth-century photographs of the body and identifies “a fundamental tension develop[ing] between uses of photography that fulfill a bourgeois conception of the self and uses that seek to establish and delimit the terrain of the other."17 In short, Sekula continually stresses that, when looking at photography, "we are confronting, then, a double system: a system of representation capable of functioning both honorifically and repressively."18

What enables this system to function duplicitously is the fact that the meaning of any particular photograph is ultimately a manifestation of the tensions within capitalism itself. Like Tagg, Sekula thinks of photography as the vehicle of larger outside forces and of photographic identity as something fundamentally contingent on these forces. Never neutral, the photograph always finds itself attached to a discourse (or, more accurately, a cacophony of competing discourses) that gives any individual photograph its meanings and social values.

Sekula rests this aspects of his theory of photography on the semiotics of the American nineteenth-century pragmatist philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce. Arguing that photographs are before all else indexical signs, Sekula projects the photograph as a type of representation linked by a relation of physical causality or connection to its objects. According to Sekula, "because of this indexical property, photographs are fundamentally grounded in contingency."1" In other words, as an index the photograph is never itself but always, by its very nature, a tracing of something else.

Like Tagg and Sekula, British photographer and critic Victor Burgin has no time for those who seek a photographic "essence" or who concentrate on a narrow, arthistorical account of photography and its development. Burgin is more interested in approaching photography through its relation to "the general sphere of cultural production."20 In that context, he argues that photography's primary characteristic is its capacity to produce and disseminate meaning. But the meanings of photographs are not determined by, or confined to, the pictures themselves, for meaning is continually being reproduced within the contexts in which these pictures appear. Already we note a familiar conception of the photograph, namely that "meaning is perpetually displaced from the image to the discursive formations which cross and contain it."21 For Burgin, the object of photographic theory is not the photograph as such but rather the practices of signification that precede, surround, inform, and produce any photograph as meaningful. Photographic theory is but an "emphasis within a general history and theory of representations,"just as any individual photograph is but an intersection within a complex and often invisible process of meaning production.²2

The "photographic text," like any other, is the site of a complex "intertextuality," an overlapping series of previous texts "taken forgranted" at a particular cultural and historical conjuncture. These prior texts, those presupposed by the photograph, are autonomous; they serve a role in the actual text but do not appear in it, they are latent to the manifest text and may only be read across it "symptomatically."... The question of meaning therefore is constantly to be referred to the social and psychic formations of the author/reader.23

Semiotics and psychoanalysis are two of the ways by which such formations might be articulated, and Burgin's work has been of central importance in bringing these modes of social analysis to bear on photography. He has been particularly concerned with photography's contribution to Western culture's nexus of power, desire, and representation, especially as it involves itself in the “unending process of becoming" enacted by the viewing subject.24 Photographs are always catalysts for, and foci of, that desire invested in looking. As such, the experience of the photograph can be readily incorporated into a Lacanian theory of the subject. Referring to the emphasis placed on the look in Jacques Lacan's discussion of the imaginary, Burgin similarly defines the subjective effect of the camera as a (deceptive) "coherence founded in the unifying gaze of a unified, punctual, subject."25 It follows that the camera's "laws of projection . . . place the subject as geometric point of origin of the scene in an imaginary relationship with real space."26 The implication is that all photographs obey these "laws" and have this "effect.""It is therefore important that photography theory take account of the production of this subject as the complex totality of its determinations are nuanced and constrained in their passage through and across photographs."27

Notice however that this version of photographic theory again displaces attention from the photograph itself (a category that Burgin has in any case already abandoned as antithetical to the semiotics of meaning production). Like the desiring subject he describes, Burgin looks through the photograph in search of something that necessarily has its origins elsewhere. For Burgin, photography is yet one more of desire's tantalizing "red herrings": "Fundamentally, it is the unconscious subject that desires.... But the conscious object of desire is always a red herring. The object is only the representative, in the real, of a psychical representative in the unconscious (Freud's ideational representative' of the instinct). In fact, desire is the instinct, as the Lacanians put it, 'alienated in a signifier'——the trace of a primal, lost, satisfaction. The real object ... is irretrievably absent."28

I have only briefly sketched the theories of photography presented by these three writers. My account is necessarily reductive, leaving out many of the nuanced arguments, revisions, and extensive visual analyses that so animate their individual essays and (in the case of Sekula and Burgin) their photographic works. However, it does outline the development of a particular conception of photography that is now central to Anglo-American postmodern thinking in general.²9 To repeat Tagg's opening formulation, "Photography as such has no identity," and "Its history has no unity."

This view is hardly peculiar to Tagg, Sekula, and Burgin. One finds it reiterated in the work of any number of other contemporary photo-critics. Feminist scholar Abigail Solomon-Godeau, to take one example, also cogently argues against a notion of“photographic autonomy"in her 1991 collection of essays, Photography at the Dock. She marks her disquiet by the addition of inverted commas around the"disciplinary object photography'" whenever she has cause to refer to it. Stressing the "mutability of photographic meaning,"she asserts that "the photograph is, before all and after all, a building block in a larger structure." Once again, she rejects the category of “the thingitself" in relation to photography, except as it is “something dynamically produced in the act of representation and reception and already subject to the grids of meaning