entirely absent from his exhibition. Similarly, he ignores the dominant and very conventional landscape school of painting of the early nineteenth century and the many monumental and similarly conventional landscape photographs produced by early practitioners. As Solomon-Godeau asserts:

Galassi can be justifiably accused of committing a tautology and of selecting only the evidence which matihes his hypoth sis . . . to proride an academic and scholarly justification for the curatorial preferences and critical apparatus of MoMA's Photography Department.55

"Bejore Photography" n as thus constructed to proride precisely the thesis that the museum required: to u it, that the history of photography, essentially and ontologically, is not only engendered by art, but is in fact inseparable from it.56

All of this is undoubtedly true. Indeed, the postmodern critique of formalism is convincing on virtually all levels (and this book therefore takes it as a given). But this still leaves an important question unanswered. By what exactly is photography “engendered,"if not by art (or, at least, by the Western picture-making tradition)? What is this thing we call photography?

It should be clear from my discussion thus far that recent approaches to photographv all hinge on photography's historical and ontological identity, a matter that both postmodernists and formalists think they have somehow resolved. In a sense, the entire laborious argument between them reduces down to a single, deceptively simple question: Is photography to be identified with (its own) nature or with the culture that surrounds it? Both postmodernists and formalists presume to know what photography is (and what it isn't). Their argument is about the location of photography's identity, about its boundaries and limits, rather than about identity per se.

## ORIGIN STORIES

In this context, it is interesting that Galassi has seen fit to provide his "photography" with something necessary to all identity claims—a location in time and space, a point of origin prior to which it had no identity, a before photography. This historical move, this gesture to an originary moment of birth, is, as Jacques Derrida tells us, "not just one metaphysical gesture among others, it is the metaphysical exigency, that which has been the most constant, most profound and most potent."57

This is certainly the case with scholars concerned with the history and meanings of photography. Whatever the theoretical approach, photography's commentators inevitably find themselves having to say something about the medium's invention and its cause or causes. Indeed, the nature of photography's political and cultural identity is often explicitly equated with the nature of its origins. This, after all, is the use value of origin stories as a genre. They allow one the opportunity of, as Derrida puts it, "returning strategically,' ideally, to an origin or to a priority' held to be simple, intact, normal, pure, standard, self-identical, in order to then think in terms of derivation, complication, deterioration, accident, etc."58In other words, as a manifestation of“the metaphysical exigency," any given origin story distills its teller's approach to the practice of storytelling (the practice of thought, of history, of representation) in general.

As we've seen, Galassi locates the origins of photography in a specific shift in artistic aspiration that takes place within European culture in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. In Photography Until Now, Szarkowski is a little more circumspect, initially claiming no more than that "new possibilities" like photography arise from "a complex ecology of ideas and circumstance that includes the condition of the intellectual soil, the political climate, the state of technical competence, and the sophistication of the seed." He then goes on to suggest more concretely that "the invention of photography depended on the confluence of three streams of thought." The first two he identifies as optics and chemistry; “the third was the poetic idea that it might be possible to snatch from the very air a picture formed by the forces of nature."

With this conceptual architecture as his background, Szarkowski then goes on to sketch the same prehistory for photography that has been repeated in virtually every book published on the medium. He quickly traces the development of the camera obscura from the fifth century B.C. onward (“T'he camera is essential to the idea of photography"), mentions some eighteenth-century experiments on light-sensitive substances, and then draws attention to fifteenth-century Italy and the idea, made possible by perspective, that pictures might be“formed by the edges." In this way, Szarkowski is able to bring a broad sweep of history to focus on “the Western pictorial tradition" and what both he and Galassi see as photography's most essential feature— the camera's ability to picture the world as a series of framed views (which Szarkowski calls "the idea of contingency"). However neither of these scholars addresses why this particular ability suddenly came to be privileged or why the “poetic" idea of photography emerged in the early nineteenth century and not before. Indeed, Szarkowski provocatively asserts that, on the evidence available, "photography was not invented to serve a clearly perceived need." It was instead, so it seems, the inevitable product of an artistic sensibility whose own origins lie in the fifteenth century. In other words, photography's identity is founded in history (or, at least, in art history).59

This equation of identity with history brings Szarkowski and Galassi a little closer to the views of those very postmodernists who so vehemently oppose them. For postmodernism would also locate photography's origins within history; it is just not always the same history as that favored by formalism. Victor Burgin, for example, provides photography with one origin story that closely resembles that of Szarkowski, arguing that "in its essential details the representational system of photography is identical with that of classical painting: both depend (the former directly, the latter indirectly) upon the camera obscura."60

Many other historians, John Tagg among them, have sought to equate photography's emergence with the concurrent development of particular social and political formations: "The incentive to develop the existing scientific and technical knowledge as a means of fixing the image of the camera obscura came . . . from the unprecedented demand for images among the newly dominant middle classes, at a stage of economic growth in Britain and France when organized industry was displacing traditional patterns of manufacture and laying the basis for a new social order."61 The assumption that the invention of photography answered the demands of a newly dominant bourgeois ideology enables Tagg neatly to incorporate the medium's history into a classbased analysis of contemporary European society. Most importantly, it makes even photography's invention an unavoidably social and political phenomenon. This also suits the theoretical approach of Allan Sekula. Although avoiding the demand to define a specific point of origin (this would come dangerously close to the essentialism that his work claims to dispute), Sekula consistently equates photography's historical appearance with the modern development of the logic of capital: "Photography is fundamentally related in its normative way of depicting the world to an epistemology and an esthetics that are intrinsic to a system of commodity exchange."62

Already it is possible to note a strange congruence taking place within and among these various accounts of photography's origins. The formalists, supposedly concerned primarily with the essence of the photographic, find themselves building the foundation of this essence on history (on that which lies outside the photographic frame). Meanwhile, the postmodernists, supposedly opposed to any search for essence, find themselves seeking to identify photographic epistemologies and aesthetics that are “fundamental,"“essential,"and “intrinsic"(and so are presumably internal to each and every photograph).

Until this point my account has seemed quite straightforward. Schematic though it undoubtedly is, it nevertheless reveals the operation of what appear at first glance to be two diametrically opposed points of view. On one side are those who believe that photography has no singular identity because all identity is dependent on context. On the other are those who identify photography by defining and isolating its most essential attributes, whatever they may be. One group sees photography as an entirely cultural phenomenon. The other speaks in terms of photography's inherent nature as a medium. One approach regards photography as having no history of its own; the other happily provides an historical outline within which all photographs are thought to have a place determined in advance. One stresses mutability and contingency; the other points to eternal values. One is primarily interested in social practice and politics, the other in art and aesthetics. We could go on. The differences seem clear enough.

But are they? Is the difference between essentialist and antiessentialist theories of photography quite as marked as it appears? The postmodern critique of essence, for example, is the critique of identity “as such"; in this case, a critique of the formalist notion of photography as something unified and undifferentiated. Postmodernism wants to say that photography is nothing but difference and replace its singular identity with multiple photographies. But there is an irony in the orchestration of this oppositional logic. In postmodern criticism, the photograph still has an essence, but now it is found in the mutability of culture rather than in its presumed other—an immutable nature. In other words, the postmodern identification of photographies with a sphere of operations that is entirely cultural—the assumption that mutability "as such" can be delimited even if identity "as such" cannot—is itself an essentializing gesture. Why, amid the general postmodern critique of binary structures, does this division between sameness and difference, nature and culture, substance and appearance, continue to be essentialized? Why, in short, assume that nature is frozen in place as the undifferentiated origin against which culture can secure its identity?

Already we begin to see the limitations of these prevailing ways of talking about photography. Despite appearances to the contrary, both share a presumption that, in the final analysis, photography's identity can be determined as a consequence of either nature orculture. The distinction between these two entities, more particularly the politics of the maintenance of all such distinctions, is left unquestioned. Thus the opposition between postmodernism and formalism is binary (each depends on defining itself as not-the-other, allowing neither to actually engage the logic of otherness itself). This oppositional structure is then repeated within the methodology each brings to photography, a problem to which I shall return. The point is that postmodernism and formalism, at least in their dominant photographic manifestations, both avoid coming to grips with the historical and ontological complexity of the very thing they claim to analyze.

This book aims to rearticulate something of that complexity. Following in the footsteps of the scholars discussed above, I will look for the identity of photography in the history of its origins. If nothing else, a repetition of this traditional gesture allows me to make a close, even rigorous examination of this most foundational of photographic stories. More than that, such an examination may help to determine photography's own determinations. Should the identity of photography be confined to the realm of nature or to that of culture? Or will we find that, wherever we look—at photographic theory or at the medium's history—any given foundation is continually being displaced by a dynamic and troubling play of differences? In this sense, the chapters that follow are not just about the arcane matter of photography's historical identity. They are also about questions of history and identity in general and perhaps even about the question of matter itself.