## 2 CONCEPTION

y account of recent debates about photography has directed attention to the M identity of the object under investigation. Traditionally, photography's commentators have been quick to rephrase this ontological question in terms of a historical one, that is, as a search for origins. "What is photography?" is all too readily transformed into "Where and when did photography begin?"Responses to this second question have been easier to formulate, relying as they do on concepts of history seldom closely examined and on evidence regarded as self-evident. Consequently, photography's historiography is generally comprised of a rapid movement from the difficulties of philosophical investigation to a simple and selective exposition of facts. By this means, a theoretically fragile edifice, that identity signaled by the word photography, has been erected on a rarely questioned foundation of endlessly repeated historical information.1

Before returning to the debate, we must address this rhetorical structure. The aim is not to reject it as incorrect but rather faithfully to follow the path of its own logic, to pursue photography to its moment of origin.

## THE GREATEST MYSTERY

But when (or what) exactly was that moment? As soon as we ask such a question we can feel photography's historical foundations stir a little under our feet. For example, in the introduction to his authoritative tome The Origins of Photography, Helmut Gernsheim describes photography's origins in terms of a temporal conundrum which he regarded as “the greatest mystery in its history.

Considering that knowledge of the chemical as well as the optical principles of photography u'as fairly widespread following Schulze's experiment (in 1725) . . . the circumstance that photography uas not invented earlier remains the greatest mystery in its history. . . . It had apparently never occurred to any of the multitude of artists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries who were in the habit of using the camera obscura to try to fix its image permanently.2

This question, a question of timing—and, as we shall eventually see, of truth, of appellation, of propriety, and of power—is one that has concerned almost all who have written about the origins of photography. At its most vulgar, the question has taken the form of a sometimes acrimonious debate about the identity of photography's true' inventor. Frenchman Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre was of course the one who enjoyed the honor and pecuniary benefits of being the first to have his process announced to the general public, initially in the Academie des Sciences on January 7, 1839 and then in the Chambre des Députés on June 15: "You all know, and some of you, Gentlemen, may have already had an opportunity of convincing yourselves of the fact, that, after fifteen years of expensive and persevering labor, Mr. Daguerre has at length succeeded in discovering a process to fix the different objects reflected in a camera obscura.... The method of Mr. Daguerre is of his own invention, and is distinct from that of his predecessor, in its course as well as in its effects."3

This last strategic aside suggests that the speaker already glimpsed something of the argument that would soon ensue as to the status of Daguerre's original partner in this project, Nicéphore Niépce. The tone of this argument is suggested in a small extract from Victor Fouque's 1867 tract, The Truth concerning the Invention of Photography: Nicéphore Niépce, his Life, his Endeavours, his Works:"open the biographies, the dictionaries, open most of the works treating on Photography, and you will read there that this wonderful art was invented by Daguerre!... In spite of all that has been said to the contrary, against the usurption, in spite of all that has been written for more than a quarter of a century on photography and its real inventor, Joseph-Nicéphore Niépce, the error persists today."4 No less insistent is Gernsheim's view: "In our opinion, Niépce alone deserves to be considered the true inventor of photography—a fact confirmed by our rediscovery of the world's first photograph which led us to a reassessment of his pioneer work."⁵

Niépce's ownership of the title of "true inventor"and Gernsheim's ownership of the “first photograph" would seem to put the issue beyond doubt, at least as far as Marcel Bovis, writing in 1986 in .4 History of Photography, is concerned: "The credit for the initial idea of photography must without question go to Nicéphore Niépce (and his brother Claude)."' Bovis, however, subtly shifts the emphasis away from the hunt for the first successful maker of a photograph to a more nebulous quarry—the first thinker of photography! For this there are also plenty of claimants and just as many determined advocates seeking kudos for being the discoverer of the first photothinker, The Austrian historian Josef Maria Eder is among the best known of these advocates:

I pointed out as early as 1881 that we must consider as the first discoverer of the sensitiveness to light of the silver salts Johann Heinrich Schulze. . . . It follows that Schulze, a German, is to be credited with the invention of photography, which was pointed out for the first time by this author. . . . None of the modern authors seems to have known the work of Schulze, and the present writer was the first, basing his statement upon the study of the original sources, to point out the German scientist Schulze as the inventor of photography in its first inception."

Eder equates the process of "discovery"with that of "invention," perhaps thereby confusing the accidental with the conscious and the chemistry necessary to the making of photographs with the actual idea of photography itself. As Lynn White Jr. has pointed out: "Here we are faced with a problem of critical method. Apples had been dropping from trees for a considerable period before Newton discovered gravity: we must distinguish cause from occasion."8

Nevertheless Eder's argument does at least add weight to Gernsheim's claim that the basic components of photography—the images formed by the camera obscura and the chemistry necessary to reproduce them—were both available in the 1720s, quite some time before the photograph was officially "invented" in 1839. Indeed, Eder's History of Photography takes considerable trouble to trace the development of photochemistry through the eighteenth century, detailing the various discoveries and experiments with light and silver compounds undertaken by, among others, Schulze (1727), Jean Hellot (1737), Beccarius (1757), William Lewis (1763), Joseph Priestley (1772), Torbern Olof Bergman (1776), Carl Wilhelm Scheele (1777), and Jean Senebier (1782). As Eder points out, there is a direct link between these discoveries and some of the earliest experiments toward a specifically photographic process.

The earliest publication of such experiments appeared in the first issue of the Journals of the Royal Institution of Great Britain in June 1802 under the title “An Account of a method of copying Paintings upon Glass, and of making Profiles, by the Agency of Light upon Nitrate of Silver. Invented by T. WeDGwood, Esq. With Observations by H. Davy." This essay, one of forty-eight authored by Humphry Davy appearing in this issue of the Journals, records various experiments undertaken by himself and Tom Wedgwood, son of the famous potter and industrialist. A few pertinent extracts follow:

White paper, or nhite leather, moistened with solution of nitrate of silver, undergoes no change when kept in a dark place: but on being exposed to the day light, it speedily changes colour, and, after passing through different shades of grey and brown, becomes at length nearly black. ...

The condensation of these facts enables us readily to understand the method by which the outlines and shades of painting on glass may be copied, or profiles of figures procured, by the agency of iight. . .. W hen the shadou of any figure is throun upon the prepared surface, the part concealed by it remains white, and the other parts speedily become dark. ...

The images formed by means of a camera obscura have been found too faint to produce, in any moderate time, an effect upon the nitrate of silver. To copy these images was the first object of Mr. Wedguood in his researches on the subject, and for this purpose he first used the nitrate of silver, which u as mentioned to him by a friend, as a substance very sensible to the influence of light; but all his numerous experiments as to their primary end proved unsuccessful.

The exact date of these experiments remains uncertain. In a letter to a friend dated January 14, 1797, W'edgwood remarks that "this talent [for philosophical investigation], if I have it in any degree, I attribute to a spirit of accurate analysis acquired from the writings of Scheele and Bergmann [sic], and practiced in the operations of the laboratory.""Wedgwood's “talent" also undoubtedly benefited from the influence of his father. Not only was Josiah Wedgwood an enthusiastic experimental chemist himself, he also surrounded his family with the best scientific thinkers and most upto-date library in Britain. In 1779 he had employed Joseph Priestley's assistant John Warltire to instruct his children in chemistry. Two years later he purchased the notebooks of Dr. William Lewis, who had earlier repeated and confirmed Schulze's experiments with the light sensitivity of silver compounds. The following year he even emploved Lewis's assistant Alexander Chisholm as his secretary, and it seems likely that Chisholm also instructed Tom Wedgwood in chemistry. It is no surprise then to find references to both Scheele and Senebier in Wedgwood and Davy's Account, nor to find Wedgwood familiar with the properties of silver compounds."

Dayy was also expert in the experimental chemistry of his day. On March 11, 1801 he had been appointed assistant lecturer in chemistry at the Royal Institution in London as well as director of the laboratory. He had been working there only a few months before his employers asked him to prepare courses on "The Art of Dyeing" and "The Chemical Principles of the Art of Tanning." It is tempting to think that during the preparation for these courses, undertaken between July and September 1801, Davy took a (renewed?) interest in Wedgwood's experiments on printing images on "white leather, moistened with solution of nitrate of silver."

During his research, Davy may also have come across the earlier work of Elizabeth Fulhame in this same field. Having been encouraged by a meeting with Joseph Priestley in October 1793, Fulhame had published her book With a View to a New Art of Dying and Painting in the following year. Among other things, she suggested that maps could be made using silver inscribed by the action of light. Larry Schaaf has described her notion as "an essentially photographic process"and argued tnat this 1794 book be included among those important to the early history of photography.12 T'he book was republished in Germany in 1798 and in the United States in 1810. More importantly, Fulhame's experiments were reviewed in three British magazines in 1795 and 1796 and mentioned in an article published in 1798 in Philosophical Transactions on "the chemical Properties that have been attributed to Light." This last article was written by one of Davy's patrons at the Royal Institution, Sir Benjamin Thompson, Count of Rumford. Fulhame was also one of only two researchers cited by John Herschel in his first paper on photography, published in March 1839. In his second footnote he refers readers to Count Rumford's 1798 report on her work.13 Whether or not Fulhame had any direct influence on the idea of photography, her book is yet further evidence that the chemistry necessary to a photographic process was available and widely known for some time before 1839.

Unfortunately the only direct records we have of Davy's own photographic experiments are the references in his “Account." After detailing various experiments that Wedgwood (and he?) had carried out, Davy also mentions certain efforts of his own: "In following these processes, I have found, that the images of small objects, produced by means of the solar microscope, may be copied without difficulty on prepared paper. T'his will probably be a useful application of the method; that it may be employed successfully however, it is necessary that the paper be placed at but a small distance from the lens." He then goes on to discuss the preparation of various possible solutions and their different responses to light, before concluding as follows: "Some experiments on this subject have been imagined, and an account of the results of them may possibly appear in a future number of the Journals. Nothing but a method of preventing the unshaded parts of the delineation from being coloured by exposure to the day is wanting, to render the process as useful as it is elegant."14

Unfortunately no accounts of further experiments were published, and Davyalways in a hurry—seems to have been distracted by other pressing concerns away from his pursuit of photography.

Important though this 1802 document undoubtedly is, it still does not explain either why it took so long to invent a workable photographic process or why such a process was conceived in the first place. And so we come back to the quest for the first idea of photography. As Henry Talbot argued in 1844, "The numerous researches which were afterwards made—whatever success may be thought to have attended them—cannot, I think, admit of a comparison with the value of the first and original idea."⁵ Five years before, in his first publication on photography, Talbot had conceded that "it appears that the idea was originally started by Mr. Wedgwood."16

Many more recent historians have agreed. But when and under what circumstances did this idea arise? Some histories date Wedgwood's first experiments as early as 1790. In this year, having completed an excellent education, the nineteen-year-old Wedgwood began a series of experiments at his father's ceramics factory in Etruria, England. In November 1790, for example, he was reportedly experimenting with quicksilver and nitrate of silver, leading to his invention of “silvered ware"in about February 1791. His new process resulted in ceramic vessels that exhibited a pattern of silver on black earthenware bodies.17 Wedgwood subsequently had two papers read before the Royal Society. The first of these, titled“Experiments and Observations on the production of Light from different bodies by heat and attrition," was communicated to the Society by Sir Joseph Banks on December 22, 1791. However neither this paper nor its later companion make any mention of photographic experiments or discoveries. Although obviously occupied at this time with experiments and speculations about the relations of silver compounds, light, heat, and the fixing of images,

Wedgwood apparently undertook no work toward a specifically photographic process in 1790.

Apart from the "Account" of 1802, we have only one other relatively detailed report of Wedgwood's photographic experiments. In December 1799 the already distinguished English surgeon Anthony Carlisle, who was to become famous six months later for his own experiments with electricity, was introduced to Wedgwood's close friend Samuel Taylor Coleridge by Davy. The three men apparently enjoyed a vigorous discussion about Locke, Newton, and pain, among other diverse topics. Perhaps Davy was also instrumental in bringing together Carlisle and Wedgwood at around this time. In any case, in a letter to the editor of The Mechanics' Magazine dated January 30, 1839, just five days after Talbot's photogenic drawings had been exhibited for the first time, Carlisle wrote about participating in similar experiments with Wedgwood "about forty years ago":

At the evening meeting holden at the Royal Institution on Friday last, several specimens of shaded impressions were exhibited, produced by the new French Camera. The outlines, as well as the interior forms of the objects, were faintly pictured, and hence the application of this method of impressing accurate design may become disregarded after public curiosity subsides.

Having, about forty years ago, made several experiments with my lamented friend, Mr. Thomas Wedgwood, to obtain and fix the shadows of objects by exposing the figures painted on glass, to fall upon a flat surface of shamoy leather wetted with nitrate of silver, and fixed in a case made for a stuffed bird, we obtained a temporary image or copy of the figure on the surface of the leather, u'hich, however, was soon obscured by the effects of light. It would be serviceable to men of research if failing experiments were more often published, because the repetition of them would be thus prevented. The new method of depicting by a camera, promises to be valuable for obtaining exact representations of fixed and still objects, although at present they seem only to possess the correct elements for a nished drawing.

Few artists of competent skill addict themselves to drawing natural objects, although the value of such designs should be faithfully correct, and the new instrument and new method are well suited to those purposes.18

Carlisle's reminiscence lends weight to the notion that Wedgwood undertook at least some of his photographic experiments in the latter part of 1800. We know, for example, that Wedgwood himself was almost constantly traveling between January and June 1800) and then between November 1800 and August 1802, with only occasional periods of rest in London. However one of those rest periods fell between November 17, 1800 and the first week of December. He could well have used this time to undertake experiments at the facilities of the Royal Institution. Moreover, a letter written to Tom Wedgwood by his fellow intellectual and former housemate John Leslie on November 18 of that year contains a sentence that neatly corresponds to Carlisle's description of Wedgwood's experimental apparatus. "A few days ago I left at York Street an object-glass and some thin cylinders for the solar microscope, and half a dozen bits of painted glass which will, I think, suit you. I have more pieces, which you may have at any time."19

Leslie's reference in the same line to both the pieces of painted glass and a solar microscope suggests that, like Davy, Wedgwood may have used such an instrument to project his “shadows" on the moistened leather in the bird case. Such images could of course have been made as contact prints, but Carlisle specifically mentions that the leather is “fixed" in place, a precaution that implies the use of some sort of projection process. Of course, Davy had already written that Wedgwood's first attempts were made using a camera obscura, an instrument that Carlisle does not mention in his letter. So Wedgwood's earliest attempts may well have preceded both their friendship and the 1800 date. Whatever the exact timing, Wedgwood's experiments obviously took place between about 1790 and 1802 and are usually regarded as the first to have photography as their principal object.

The claims made for Wedgwood as first photographer, like those for Schulze, assume that the inaugural idea of photography must be marked by some definite evidence of a technological struggle in its direction. But what of those ideas that are no more than ideas? Could not photography have been imagined in some earlier, idle moment of speculation by a creative but not necessarily technological mind? Georges Potonniée's The History of the Discovery of Photography speculates that "the first idea of photography seems to have been discerned by some in a work written by the Norman, Tiphaigne de La Roche, about the middle of the eighteenth century."20

This work, an allegorical novel called Giphantie written in 1760 and rediscovered for photo-history by Mayer and Peirson in 1862, has often had its “photographic" portion reproduced.21 Tiphaigne likens a large hall to a camera obscura, the walls of which carry a "painting" that faithfully replicates, in all of its color and movement, an agitated seascape. Certain “elementary spirits" were able to “fix these passing images" on a piece of material soaked in a “very subtle substance,"resulting in a permanent image “much more precious than anyone can produce, and so perfect that time cannot destroy it."22

Potonniée, who identified Niépce as first inventor, was not particularly impressed with this passage, despite its remarkable rhetorical proximity to the photographic process. Pointing to the problem of retrospective interpretation, he rather disdainfully regarded Tiphaigne's descriptions as no more than"a naive and popular dream": "Some historians look upon this mass of fantasies as a divination of genius, and the description as anticipating photography. I must refuse to see in it as much as this. . . . It was only chance which made his dreams so curious. . . . No, Giphantie did not forecast photography! Moreover, instead of having aided whatever led to its discovery, it is photography which discovered the simple novel and rescued it from oblivion."23

Dream it may have been, but was it a popular dream as Potonniée suggests? For what is striking about both Tiphaigne's novel and Schulze's earlier experiments is that they represent two of the very few recorded instances of pre-nineteenth-century imaginings that even approximate the idea of photography. Much more impressive in this regard is the vast absence of similar talk during the centuries prior to 1800. Indeed the historical record reveals that only at the end of the eighteenth century did speculations of this kind become frequent and widespread.

Compare, for example, the paucity of pre-nineteenth-century evidence with that multitude of would-be photographers industriously speculating, experimenting, and claiming successful results throughout the early part of the nineteenth century. I have already mentioned the experiments of Wedgwood, Carlisle, and Davy. Davy's coeditor of the Journals of the Royal Institution, Thomas Young, is one contemporary scholar who obviously took note of the “Account." In 1803 he tested his theories of light using the same setup described by Davy: "I threw this image on paper dipped in a solution of nitrate of silver, placed at a distance of nine inches from the microscope."24 However, Young makes no mention of wanting to make the resulting “dark rings" permanent, an aspiration that many have seen as an essential component of any photographic process.

The aspiration for permanence looms large, for example, in the writings and experiments of Joseph-Nicéphore Niépce and his brother Claude. Pierre Harmant has claimed that they first had the idea of photography in 1797 or 1798, although the evidence for this date is unconvincing." More persuasive is the statement that appeared in Daguerre's 1839 publication .An Historical and Descriptive Account of the Daguerréotype and the Diorama: "M. Niépce was engaged, since 1814, in endeavouring to fix the images of the camera obscura."26 The Niépce brothers' earliest experiments concentrated on the automatic copying of engravings, having been inspired by the introduction of lithography into France in 1802 (and more especially by the establishment of the first successful lithographic premises in Paris in 1813). However, by 1824 Claude (who had left their home in Chalon-sur-Saòne in 1816, eventually moving to England) signaled a definite shift in his brother's ambition: "I see that you ... are determined, my dear friend, to occupy yourself principally with views of landscape in preference to copying paintings."27 Having in 1816 made some early attempts with paper soaked in silver chloride, Nicéphore concentrated his later efforts on making heliographs, as he called them, using pewter plates coated with a light-sensitive bitumen solution. The earliest extant example, a barely legible image showing a view from the window of this studio, dates from about June 1827.

The year before Louis Daguerre had contacted Niépce with an offer to collaborate on any future photographic experiments. Daguerre, already famous as a designer for the Paris Opera and a coinventor of the Diorama, had apparently been making his own fledgling attempts at a photographic process since 1824. The strength of his motivation is conveyed in a story repeated by Helmut Gernsheim:

Obsessed b, this idea, Daguerre equipped a laboratory at the Diorama near the Place de la Republique in Paris, and there for several years he carried out mysterious experiments, shutting himself in bis workroom for days on end. The famous chemist J. B. Dumas relates (in The Illustrated London News of July 26, 1851) that Madame Daguerre consulted him one day in 1827 as to uhether or not he thought it possible that her husband would be able to fx the images of the camera. "He is always at the thought; he cannot sleep at night for it. I am afraid he is out of his mind; do you, as a man of science, think it can ever be done, or is he mad?"28

By 1838, five years after Nicéphore's death and following a premature announcement of success in 1835, Daguerre was able to announce the invention of a workable process that he modestly called daguerreotype: "It consists in the spontaneous reproduction of the images of nature received in the camera obscura, not with their colors, but with very fine gradation of tones."29 This announcement, officially endorsed by various French notables in January 1839, immediately induced a number of other people to come forward and claim that they too had been thinking of or experimenting toward a photographic process.

The most famous of these is William Henry Fox Talbot, an English scholar, experimental scientist, and natural philosopher. Talbot quickly arranged for a few samples of his “photogenic drawings" to be shown at a meeting of the Royal Institution on January 25, 1839 and followed this a week later with a reading of his paper on the process involved. Some historians have favored Talbot's claims over all others because he eventually introduced the paper-based negative-positive system still in use today. Also, unlike Daguerre, Talbot left numerous notes and essays about his photographic experiments and a quite specific account of the onset of the idea of photography. The latter forms part of his "Brief Historical Sketch of the Invention of the Art," published with his photographically illustrated book The Pencil of Nature in 1844. Some pertinent extracts follow:

It may be proper to preface these specimens of a new Art by a brief account of the circumstances which preceded and led to the discovery of it. And these were nearly as follows.

One of the first days of the month of October 1833, I was amusing myself on the lovely shores of the Lake of Como, in Italy, taking sketches with Wollaston's Camera Lucida, or rather I should say, attempting to take them: but with the smallest possible amount of success. ...

I then thought of trying again a method which I had tried many years before. This method was, to take a Camera Obscura, and to throw the image of the objects on a piece of transparent tracing paper laid on a pane of glass in the focus of the instrument. . . .

Such, then, was the method which I proposed to try again, and to endeavour, as before, to trace with my pencil the outlines of the scenery depicted on the paper. And this led me to reflect on the inimitable beauty of the pictures of nature's painting which the glass lens of the Camera throu's upon the paper in its focus—fairy pictures, creations of a moment, and destined as rapidly to fade away.

It was during these thoughts that the idea occurred to me . . . how charming it would be if it were possible to cause these natural images to imprint themselves durably, and remain fixed upon the paper!30