Taken as a whole, this description neatly embodies the conceptual paradox that pervades the discourse of all proto-photographers.

Each case examined here attempted to maintain a dynamic reflexive movement at the level of language that comes to rest at neither of the two defining poles. Consider the concept-metaphor each conjured up in these ambiguous words and phrases: a mode of representation that is simultaneously active and passive, that draws nature while allowing her to draw herself, that both reflects and constitutes its object, that undoes the distinction between copy and original, that partakes equally of the realms of nature and culture. Photography, whatever it was, obviously posed a dilemma for its inventors that was as much philosophical and conceptual as scientific. Everyone was sure that nature was central to his idea of photography, but no one was quite sure what nature was or how to describe her "mode of existence." In short, at the very moment photography was conceived, nature, its central element, was a decidedly unresolved concept.

## VIEWS OF LANDSCAPE

Frequently, although not always, references to nature in the discourse of the protophotographers were articulated in terms of landscape; that is, as one quite particular mode of picturing nature. For many of these pioneers, landscape not only represented the principal pictorial aspiration for their latent process but provided much of the conceptual and technical language used to describe its expected products. Whether landscape figured in their discourse as picture, concept, or vocabulary, it invariably fit within the framework provided by the aesthetic theory known as the picturesque.

The picturesque, Europe's primary theorization of landscape during the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, provided its adherents with a widely recognized set of conventions and aesthetic standards by which to make and judge landscape images. It also provided a popular philosophical context within which larger questions of representation could be conceived and disputed. It is hardly surprising to find the picturesque inhabiting the discourse of the proto-photographers. Any educated person would have been familiar with its basic precepts and most of photography's inventors were very well educated indeed. In addition, most of photography's pioneers were either amateur or professional artists; thus the picturesque was one of their regular tools of trade.

Against this background, it is no accident that we find picturesque terms like view, effect, or prospect appearing in their writings or that we see landscape posited as a central aspiration for their photographic experiments. But even when landscape is not specifically mentioned, the almost invariable use of a camera obscura by the protophotographers suggest an interest in its representation. The facilitation of landscape drawing was, after all, this instrument's principal artistic function. The use of a camera obscura to aid one's drawing also tended to presume a picturesque rendering of the scene in question, for the camera provided the tight framing and fixed viewing position required by this particular arrangement of aesthetic conventions.

But how central was the picturesque to the experimental thinking of the protophotographers and to the reordering of European knowledge that made it possible even to conceive of a "photography?" A brief examination of its place in the photographic activities of Niépce, Daguerre, and Talbot may provide the beginnings of an answer. It is notable that Nicéphore Niépce, for example, chose a consistent designation to distinguish his "photographic" experiments from those concerned only with the photomechanical copying of engravings. Georges Potonniée traced the use of this particular designation:

Niépce always called these images by a peculiar name, he named them "points de vue." We find this term "points de vue" used for our present word "photographs" in his letters to his son Isidore, to his brother Claude, to the engraver Lemaître, to his partner Daguerre, etc. His correspondents, in turn, use the same term when replying: the letters of July 19, 1822, February 24, and September 3, 1824, May 26, 1826 and February 2, June 4, July 24, and September 4, 1827, August 20, 1828, Octo ber 4, and 12, 1829. The same term, with its precise significance, is found again in the "Notice" written by the inventor on December 8, 1827 for the Royal Society of London and in the letter written on December 5, 1829 to his associate Daguerre. Everywhere the difference between "points de vue" and "copies de gravures" is emphasized.41

Niépce apparently always used the picturesque phrase points de vue to designate the images he hoped to produce in his camera. Indeed, when speaking of his brother's "desired end" in 1824, Claude Niépce noted that "you are determined, my dear friend, to occupy yourself principally with views of landscape in preference to copying paintings."42 In September of that year Nicéphore was able to report back that "I have succeeded in getting a picture from nature [point de vue] as good as I could desire."43 By about June 1827 Niépce had produced his earliest extant heliograph, a courtyard scene taken from his studio window. In an earlier letter to Daguerre, dated June 4, 1827, Niépce apologized for his lack of recent results: "I shall take them up again today because the countryside is in the full splendor of its attire and I shall devote myself exclusively to the copying of views from nature [points de vue]."44 With this constant emphasis in mind the second paragraph of Niépce and Daguerre's “Provisional Agreement" of December 1829 asserts that "Monsieur Niépce has made certain researches with the purpose of fixing by a new method, without the aid of a draughtsman, the views of nature."45

This was an aim with which Daguerre would have had considerable sympathy. In 1801, at the age of fourteen, he had been apprenticed to an architect in Orléans and spent much of his teenage years sketching landscapes. Between 1807 and 1816 he worked as an assistant to Pierre Prévost, helping to paint the large historical vistas for which the latter became famous. Even Jacques-Louis David admired them, supposedly remarking to some students, "Really, one has to come here to study Nature!"4 Daguerre went on occasionally to exhibit paintings in the annual Salon, usually of architectural ruins set amid gloomy landscapes. He also contributed ten drawings to the monumental Voyages pittoresques et romantiques en l’ancienne France, a twenty-six-volume work that appeared in numerous parts between 1820 and 1878. Having made his reputation as a master of trompe l’oeil scenery designs for the theater, Daguerre then went on to employ this skill to good effect in his diorama paintings. These paintings, consisting primarily of landscape scenes, used every available convention of the sublime and the picturesque to achieve the dramatic visual effects that Daguerre and his patrons desired. They were, as one spectator remarked, "an extraordinary mixture of art and nature, producing the most astonishing effect."47 In 1839 Daguerre would claim that the daguerreotype could deliver these same“effects"to its practitioners.

Although by no means as expert in the ways of the picturesque as Daguerre, Henry Talbot was equally steeped in its methods and iconography. He was, for example, first taken to see a panorama at the impressionable age of eight and exclaimed to his mother that it was “exactly like nature."48 After an extensive education, including some instruction in the fine arts, Talbot moved into Lacock Abbey in 1826. Two years before he had praised the“view from the top of Bowden hill," although he also complained that the“fine old pile"of the abbey had been “defaced with modern windows irregularly placed."49 This appreciation of views, of buildings as signifiers of history, and of the aesthetics of regularity are all drawn from picturesque theory.

Talbot could hardly escape this theory. His strong-willed mother was a notorious practitioner of the picturesque, reportedly "constantly adjusting the landscape to her taste."so This was a taste that Talbot obviously shared. In 1826 he visited Corfu and on April 16 wrote back to his mother and described what he had seen: "I wish Claude were here to take a view for me, from the lighthouse of Zante at sunset. I never saw so perfect a view, for generally in real views, something is too much or too little, but with this view the most critical judgement must be contented. The same view looks nothing in the morning when the light falls the wrong way."51

After 1839 Talbot frequently went in search of such picturesque views for his photographs, referred readers to the picturesque features of particular images, gave instructions on how to take pictures of landscape and “external nature," and promoted the use of his photographic process by tourists and travelers. This promotion was inspired no doubt by his own experience in 1833 while on a honeymoon trip to Lake Geneva. There, in the midst of an unsuccessful attempt to draw a picturesque view using a camera lucida, Talbot later claimed to feel his first pangs of the desire to photograph. Thus, in his own narrative of invention, the picturesque figures as a powerful point of origin, supposedly inspiring his thoughts of photography by the frustrating absence of a properly drawn composition on the page before him.

What did it mean to aspire to the production of picturesque effects in the decades around 1800? The Reverend William Gilpin was the picturesque's most persistent and influential exponent, publishing numerous illustrated travel books on the subject, many of which were reissued and translated into French and German. In his first writings on the subject in 1768, Gilpin had described the picturesque as “expressive of that peculiar kind of beauty which is agreeable in a picture."52 By 1792 Gilpin had slightly redefined his concept of the picturesque, bringing it more in tune with a romantic sensibility. He now described it in terms of a judicious conjunction of opposites: "By enriching the parts of a united whole with roughness, you obtain the combined idea of simplicity and variety, from whence results the picturesque."53 It is worth noting that Gilpin's concept of the picturesque in this, his last book on the subject, does not involve a harmonious resolution of constituent parts but rather a strategic maintenance of visual disjunctions. It is also important to note that the picturesque is here projected in terms of an effect on the mind produced by his “combined idea" and not as a particular style of picture making or genre of subject matter.

However, in practice this didn't preclude Gilpin from projecting landscape as the central concern of the picturesque. Indeed, Gilpin's formulations were so popular that those who could afford to do so would troop around Britain and the continent looking for views of nature that looked like landscape pictures, for scenes that confirmed a picturesque aesthetic. Beauty spots these were called, the precursors to the postcard views we seek out today. Sketches were often made at these spots as memories of the experience. Indeed, one irony of Gilpin's promotion of the picturesque was that while promoting an ideal style of landscape he encouraged many more people to get out into the European countryside and to observe and draw it for themselves. When nature proved a little recalcitrant, machines were sometimes employed to bring a more picturesque order to what was seen by the naked eye. The camera obscura was one popular device used for this purpose. However in many cases this instrument was replaced by more portable machines for seeing, such as the camera lucida (invented in 1801) or the Claude glass.

This last instrument, a tinted convex mirror, was commonly used to produce a stable, reflected image of landscape reminiscent of the paintings of Claude Lorrain: "The blackened mirror gave a rather weak reflection, so that the prominent features of the scene were stressed at the expense of the detail, while the colours were also toned down nearer to those found in actual varnished paintings."54 Travelers would hold the glass in their hand so as to see a reversed image of the landscape positioned behind their back. As one tourist recalled,"my Convex Mirror brought every scene within the compass of a picture."ss This made the device particularly useful for composing picturesque versions of the landscape. The curved surface of the mirror allowed one, for example, to bend framing trees so that they more obviously cupped a particular view. It also provided an enhanced pictorial integrity. such that one could hold a simultaneous focus on both foreground and distance. As Gilpin described this preferred state, "In the minute exhibitions of the convex-mirror, composition, forms, and colours are brought closer together; and the eye examines the general effect, the forms of the objects, and the beauty of the tints, in one complex view. ”56

The pictorial properties that Gilpin admired in his Claude glass—the ability to reduce all things to a visual equivalence—are strikingly similar to those that would later be found in the photograph. No wonder that Sir John Robison, secretary and a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, referred to the glass while trying in August 1839 to describe his first sight of a daguerreotype: "The best idea I can give of the effect produced is, by saying that it is nearly the same as that of views taken by reflection in a black mirror."57

In Gilpin's terms, tourist sketches, whether made with the glass or without, were but pictures of a nature, which was already a series of pictures. He made this clear in his Observations .. . on ... the Mountains, and Lakes of Cumberland, and Westmoreland:

As we stood under the beetling cliffs on each side, they were too near for inspection: their harsh features wanted softening; but we had noble views of them all in order, both in prospect and retrospect. Not only the design, and composition, but the very strokes of nature's pencil might be traced through the whole scene; every fractured rock, and every hanging shrub which adorned it, was brought within the compass of the eye: each touch so careless, and yet so determined: so wildly irregular; yet all conducting to one whole.58

In the context of such thinking aesthetes like Arthur Young (1741–1820) surveyed the Swiss Alps in his Travels in France and Italy and declared with satisfaction that “in several places the view is picturesque and pleasing: enclosures seem hung against the mountain sides as a picture is suspended to the wall of a room."59 In 1788 Gilpin's son wrote to his father in similar terms following a visit to Borrowdale in the Lake District. Like Young, Gilpin junior wrote without apparent irony as if his view of the countryside and its representation as pictures were two indivisible and equivalent activities. “It gave me . .. a very singular pleasure to see your system of effects so compleatly [sic] confirmed as it was by the observations of that day—wherever I turned my eyes, I beheld a drawing of yours."60

On the basis of this apparent conjunction of nature, picture, and eye—later to be emulated in the invention of the camera lucida—Rosalind Krauss has defined the picturesque as a "beautifully circular" relationship between nature and art, original and copy.61 She posits this definition in the context of a larger argument concerning an avant-garde modernism invested in the “myth" of originality. Looking back to the origins of modernism, she points out that "the ever-present reality of the copy as the underlying condition of the original was much closer to the surface of consciousness in the early years of the nineteenth century than it would later be permitted to be."62

For it is perfectly obvious that through the action of the picturesque the very notion of landscape is constructed as a second term of which the first is a representation. Landscape becomes a reduplication of a picture which preceded it. . ..

The singular and the formulaic or repetitive may be semantically opposed, but they are nonetheless conditions of each other: the two logical halves of the concept landscape. The priorness and repetition of pictures is necessary to the singularity of the picturesque, because for the bebolder singularity depends on being recognized as such, a recognition made possible only by a prior example.63

It is no surprise then to find that, for the eighteenth-century viewer, nature was always already a picture in waiting, with God as its divine artist. As Carl Barbier argues, Gilpin believed that "nature as a divine work of art is placed above human works of art," a comparison only possible because he assumes that both obey common“artistic" principles.64 The picturesque system of judicious selection and combination amounting to a systematic process of aesthetic ordering—merely emulated those principles of order that nature herself was thought to practice (but that her vast scale had sometimes made ambiguous and difficult to discern). Indeed, wealthy proponents of the picturesque, like Talbot's mother, employed landscape designers to transform their grounds into a series of "views," thus forcing nature to look more like a picture, to look more ideal.65 As Gilpin explained: "Nature is always great in design; but unequal in composition.... Nature gives us the material of landscape; woods, rivers, lakes, trees, ground, and mountains: but leaves us to work them up into pictures, as our fancy leads.... I am so attached to my picturesque rules, that if nature gets it wrong, I cannot help putting her right. .. . The picture is not so much the ultimate end, as it is the medium, through which the ravishing scenes of nature are excited in the imagination."66

Although nature remains the archetype for Gilpin, it is as an ideal model of the creative process rather than as a specific object or a given arrangement of forms that an artist should mechanically copy. The artist's canvas, page, or mind's eye is therefore the aesthetic equivalent of the Linnaean table while the artist is but a natural philosopher seeking to make visible a system of divine order that is always already there. In that sense, the artist or viewer merely plays the role of a conduit between nature (God) and image. In terms of epistemology, picturesque landscape and nature are of one and the same order of knowledge——in the words of Foucault, they are taken to be signs "perfectly transparent to one another."

This, at any rate, was Gilpin's rhetorical ideal for the picturesque. However, his own preference for the conventions of the sublime, together with the way in which the picturesque was actually formulated—as an ennobling and pleasurable effect on the mind—tended to undercut its rationalist imperative. This is particularly so late in the century when, as we saw in Coleridge's formulations, mind came to be regarded as something constitutive of the self rather than simply reflective of the outside world. Even Gilpin conceded that in the picturesque the imagination must be allowed to rule the eye: "The learned eye, versed equally in nature, and art, easily compares the picture with it's [sic] archetype: and when it finds the characteristic touches of nature, the imagination immediately takes fire; and glows with a thousand beautiful ideas, suggested only on the canvas."67

In the light of such sentiments some critics have argued that the picturesque served as a transition between a rationalist comprehension of nature and a romanticism based more on subjective and emotional responses.68 Examples of this shift in conception include the notable dispute in the 1790s between Uvedale Price and Richard Payne Knight “on whether the picturesque defines real properties of natural objects or whether it is a mode of vision abstracted from the senses and pertaining exclusively to painting."69 In a similar vein, Coleridge asked himself, while looking at a view, "how much of this sense of endless variety in Identity was Nature's—how much the living organ's."70 As a consequence of this kind of questioning the picturesque itself—that discourse so important to the vocabulary of a desire to photograph—had become, by the end of the eighteenth century, a somewhat “unstable term."71

The writings of Richard Payne Knight, in particular his Analytical Inquiry into the Principles of Taste of 1805, are commonly cited as exemplary of this instability. Some short extracts follow:

This very relation to painting, expressed in the word picturesque, is that which affords the whole pleasure derived from association; which can, therefore, only be felt by persons, who have conversant ideas to associate; that is, by persons in a certain degree conversant with that art. Such persons, being in the hail: of riening, and reciring pleasure from fine pictures, will naturally feel pleasure in viewing those objects in nature, which have called forth those powers of imitation. ... The objects recall to the mind the imitations ... and these again recall to the mind the objects themselves, and show them through an improved medium—that of the feeling and discernment of a great artist.72

The spectator, haring his mind enriched with the embellishments of the painter and the poet, applies them, in the spontaneous association of ideas, to the natural objects presented to his eye, which thus acquire ideal and imaginary beauties; that is, beauties, which are not felt by the organic sense of vision; but by the intellect and imagination through that sense.73

Knight understood the picturesque to be a circular economy of pleasurable memories with their source in the minds of persons already "in a certain degree conversant with ... fine pictures."He confirmed the picturesque's pictorial qualities with reference to the inescapable history of its name, the sign it had taken up within language. This attention to the opacity of language is one clue to the modern tenor of his outlook. Another is the fact that the economy he described depends on a knowing subject who acts within the system as an agent, rather than as a transparent conduit.

This picturesque, the one that coincided with the advent of the desire to photograph, is therefore caught up in a discourse of critical self-reflexivity. Moreover, and most importantly, it is a model of representation depending on having a certain selfconscious being as its trope. A new kind of personage is being described, a figure who looks with discernment while simultaneously being constituted as discerning by "the habit of viewing."Knight articulated, in other words, a different kind of viewer of landscape—a being who is for the first time both the subject and the object of representation.