instrument of Newton and Locke. Indeed, Wedgwood's photographic experiments, in which the mirrored image visibly projects itself onto a surface, must have confirmed the validity of Coleridge's newly fashioned mind metaphor. Wedgwood himself could hardly have been unfamiliar with Coleridge's rhetorical transformation of the camera obscura into an active projection of the world it receives. To repeat my point, the camera whose images were the "first object" of Wedgwood's desire was not the same instrument that had so preoccupied artists in previous centuries. Wedgwood's camera was instead a figure undergoing a profound transformation, a mutation that was to see it reemerge as a peculiarly modern rhetorical trope. This new trope appears in the discourse of the desire to photograph, with all of its troubling intonations of a change in subjectivity and its apparent questioning of the dualist certainties of its Cartesian predecessor.

## SPONTANEOUS REPRODUCTION

The dynamic economy of expression that I have identified with the discourse produced by the proto-photographers could also be said to represent, even to reproduce, a new understanding of space and time. This manifests itself in a number of ways. Daguerre, for example, claimed with considerable flourish that his process was capable of“spontaneous reproduction," a phrase that in the early nineteenth century often indicated chemical or physical changes that appeared to have no external cause. Niépce had also used the words spontaneous reproduction in his earlier accounts of héliographie, suggesting the importance of this property to both men's perception of photography's identity. To describe photography as spontaneous was to claim that it proceeded entirely from natural impulse, which seems at variance with the preponderance of chemical manipulation and equipment necessary to processes like the daguerreotype. What is interesting then is not so much the aċhievement of spontaneity as the desire for the natural that Niépce and Daguerre's phrase suggests. This also focuses attention on how time is figured within the conception of photography.

We have already seen that time is important in a number of the discourses from which emerged the desire to photograph. Talbot, having explored some aspects of the temporal in his 1830 poem The Magic Mirror, directly addressed this same theme in his earliest publication on photography, "Some Account of the Art of Photogenic Drawing" (January 1839). Referring to Wedgwood and Davy's failure to find a way to stop the images they produced from fading away or "becoming entirely dark," Talbot announced to his listeners that he had discovered "a method of overcoming this difficulty," of "fixing the image." He went on to explain that two different objects, one intricate in its details and one not, take the same amount of time to be rendered photographically. "The one of these takes no more time to execute than the other; for the object which would take the most skillful artist days or weeks of labour to trace or to copy, is effected by the boundless powers of natural chemistry in the space of a few seconds."

Never quite able to decide whether the origins of photography lay in nature or in culture (notice how his own photograms include both botanical specimens and samples of lace and handwriting), Talbot later conjured yet another descriptive phrase that contains elements of each: "the art of fixing a shadow."He further elaborated: "The most transitory of things, a shadow, the proverbial emblem of all that is fleeting and momentary, may be fettered by the spells of ournatural magic,' and may be fixed for ever in the position which it seemed only destined for a single instant to occupy. ... Such is the fact, that we may receive on paper the fleeting shadow, arrest it there and in the space of a single minute fix it there so firmly as to be no more capable of change."109

Many themes mentioned in this quotation have been rehearsed earlier in my argument. It is worth noting in particular that Talbot spoke of photography here not in terms of the image that it might produce but as a possible resolution of his frustration with space-time itself. In this one passage where he decisively abandoned empirical science in favor of poetic metaphor, Talbot spoke of the new medium as a peculiar articulation of temporal and spatial coordinates. Photography is apparently a process in which "position" is "occupied"for a "single instant," where "fleeting" time is "arrested" in the "space of a single minute." It seems that he was able to describe the identity of photography only by harnessing together a whole series of binaries: art and shadows, the natural and magic, the momentary and the forever, the fleeting and the fettered, the fixed and that which is capable of change. Photography was, for Talbot, the desire for an impossible conjunction of transience and fixity. More than that, it was an emblematic something/sometime, a "space of a single minute" in which space becomes time, and time space.

Talbot further elaborated the relationship between photography and time in his 1844 publication The Pencil of Nature. His very first image, a view titled Part of Queen's College, Oxford, is accompanied by a commentary in which Talbot pointed out that "this building presents on its surface the most evident marks of the injuries of time and weather."iio As Hubertus von Amelunxen has remarked, Talbot continued to stress time in many more of these commentaries; indeed Talbot's "use of temporal adverbs" is so extensive that "chronology becomes chronoscopy."111

The Pencil of Nature derives the uniqueness of its form and content from the traces of a perception that announces itself as new and that is predominantly based in its being vis a vis the fourth dimension, time. Immediacy and simultaneity are temporal characteristics, as perception and aesthetic experience are an expression of an awareness of time and space. The experience of time in the animated traversal of space, in a movement that distances even as we approach, means that the viewing subject experiences itself in history.112

Photography's peculiar temporal characteristics, in particular its ability to bring past and present together in one visual experience, were also noticed by contemporary journalists. A number used the term necromancy (communication with the dead) to describe the actions of both Daguerre's and Talbot's processes. In March 1839, for example, the English periodical The Spectator said the daguerreotype was apparently "like some marvel of a fairy tale or delusion of necromancy."113 Referring to Talbot's publication of The Pencil of Nature, The Athenaeum called it "a wonderful illustration of modern necromancy."114 An earlier review in this same journal, published on February 22, 1845, also noted photography's engagement with time, commenting that "photography has already enabled us to hand down to future ages a picture of the sunshine of yesterday."115 Photography provided a visual memory of the past, a history of what has come before and with it a prophecy of future changes.

In this sense, photography seems to offer a temporal experience significantly different from that provided by previous media. Speaking strictly in terms of chronometry, a painting or drawing is marked first and foremost by the painstaking time invested in its production by the artist concerned. We read that expenditure of time in the picture's elaborately inscribed surface, thus leaving the object or scene represented within the picture frame to inhabit its own internal time zone. As Talbot pointed out in his lccount, a photograph explicitly directs attention to the temporal implications ofits own process of representation. It depicts a set of objects in fixed spatial relations at a given moment in real time. It fixes in place that moment lived before the camera, a moment external to the picture's own compositional organization of temporal coordinates. Talbot concluded that the primary subject of every photograph was therefore time itself.

But what kind of time is it? The photograph presumes to capture, as if in a vertical archaeological slice, a single, transient moment from a linear progressive movement made up of a numberless sequence of just such moments. Photography apparently figures time itself as a progressive linear movement from past to future. The present during which we look at the photographic image is but a staging point, a hallucinatory hovering that imbricates both past and future. In this paradoxical play between a synchronic and diachronic notation of time, photography reiterates what Hayden White has called a peculiarly modern time anxiety.116 As Linda Nochlin describes the situation, "Time is seen as the arrester of significance not—as in traditional art—the medium in which it unfolds."117

The expression of this time anxiety was by no means confined to the discourse of the proto-photographers. As early as 1782 William Gilpin expressed vexation at not having the means to capture adequately the fleeting visual sensations of a river journey. In his Observations on the River Wye, he made the following comment: "Many of the objects, which had floated so rapidly past us, if we had had time to examine them, would have given us sublime, and beautiful hints in landscape: some of them seemed even well combined, and ready prepared for the pencil: but in so quick a succession, one blotted out another."118

Gilpin sometimes made use of his Claude Glass momentarily to alleviate this problem. In this passage from 1791, for example, he yearned for the ability to make his glass "fix" its transient reflected image: "In a chaise particularly the exhibitions of the convex-mirror are amusing. We are rapidly carried from one object to another. A succession of high-coloured pictures is continually gliding before the eye. They are like the visions of the imagination; or the brilliant landscapes of a dream. Forms, and colours in brightest array, fleet before us; and if the transient glance of a good composition happen to unite with them, we should give any price to fix and appropriate the scene."119

In normal circumstances, the Claude glass necessitated a certain stop-start progress on the part of the aesthete seeking picturesque views. Once again visible space is space is measured through a temporal spacing. Each change in the view offered by the glass is a visual marker of the time taken to move a few paces from the previous view. Rosalind Krauss remarks on a similar staccato quality in Gilpin's writings. He consistently presents, she says, "the notion of singularity as the perceptual-empirical unity of a moment of time coalesced in the experience of a subject."

Gilpin's Observations on Cumberland and Westmorland addresses this question of singularity by making it a function of the beholder and the array of singular moments of his perception. The landscape's singularity is thus not something which a bit of topography does or does not possess; it is rather a function of the images it figures forth at any moment in time and the way these pictures register in the imagination. ... The landscape is not static but constantly recomposing itself into different, separate, or singular pictures.120

However, from the 1790s on neither the Claude glass, nor the older camera obscura, nor the new camera lucida satisfied the frustrations and yearnings engendered by by the temporal demands of picturesque representation. Gilpin's use of the word fix is striking in this context. In picturesque parlance it normally referred to the delineation by sketch or watercolor of the image reflected on retina, mirror, screen, or paper. At a certain point we encounter the idea, so preposterous that it can barely be spoken, of the image retaining or fixing itself. According to historian Malcolm Andrews, the widespread use at this time of such a word as “fix” indicates a “predatory, acquisitive instinct," a “figurative sense of appropriation" that “leads in one direction to landscape as a commodity." At the same time, he suggests, such terms represent a prevailing need to give “stability"to new experiences, and this at a time when traditional notions of space and time, as well as landscape, were being called into question.121

This questioning was very much informed by what Kant called the "Copernican revolution" offered by German idealist philosophy. Embodied in a series of debates between Kant and successors like Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, this philosophy emphasized the role of the human subject as both knower and active constituent of knowledge. Space and time were particularly important to this type of thinking. Kant, for example, posited space and time as a priori or transcendental structures "spontaneously"triggered in the mind of the individual subject by stimuli from the external world. Space and time are therefore neither things nor relations of things but the two forms of human sensibility and thereby the dual condition of all cognitive experience.122

Here then is another source of Coleridge's rejection of the camera obscura model of the human mind. It has already been noted that in 1798 Coleridge was able to study German philosophy firsthand as a consequence of the financial security promised by the Wedgwood brothers'generous annuity. Indeed, it is often said that Coleridge introduced such philosophy, more particularly a selective conglomeration of the work of Kant, Fichte, and Schelling, into English aesthetic discourse. However Coleridge was not alone in finding such thinking attractive. Before working at the Royal Institution, Humphry Davy had, between October 1799 and February 1801, been an assistant at the Pneumatic Institute in Bristol (where he gained some notoriety for his experiments with the effects of nitrous oxide).123 His employer, Dr. Thomas Beddoes, possessed a fluent reading knowledge of German and was at this time apparently looking into the possibilities offered by Kant's philosophy. This, when taken in conjunction with Davy's close friendship with Coleridge, has led historians like Trevor Levere to equate Davy's thinking at this time with a "post-Kantian idealistic dynamism."124 Davy's brother claims that Humphry was reading about Kant as early as 1796, the same vear that the first English account of the German philosopher's work appeared in London—F. A. Nitsch's .1 General and Introductory V'iew of Professor Kant's Principles concerning Man, the World and the Deity.125 Nitsch's book was soon followed by other publications, and German idealism of one form or another became part of the currency of early nineteenth-century English philosophical debate.

We find evidence of this debate in how Coleridge in 1803 attempted to address the discrepancy between the passing of time and the demands of representation:

Thursday Morning, 40) minutes past ()ne o'clock—a perfect calm—now & then a breeze shakes the heads of the two Poplars, | disturbs the murmur of the moonlight Greta, then in almost a direct Line from the moon to me is all silver—Motion and Wrinkle  light—& under the arch of the Bridge a wave ever & anon leaps up in Light . . . silver mirror/gleaming of moonlight Reeds beyond—as the moon sets the water from Silver becomes a rich yellow.—Sadly do I need to have my Imagination enriched with appropriate Images for Shapes—/Read Architecture, & Icthyology126

Coleridge tried to solve his dilemma with a stream of fragmented metaphoric phrases, unimpeded by the restraints of grammar or coherent narrative. It was a quest, as Ross Gibson puts it, "to capture the instant of perception." According to Gibson, “the problem is that the moment passes faster than words can cohere."27 This problem continued to occupy Coleridge's thoughts. The poet told friends, for example, that he was particularly interested in how certain psychic processes such as dreams and opium reveries allow the observer to experience “a transmutation of the succession of Time into juxtaposition of Space."i28 A few years later, in 1816, Coleridge coined a word that aptly describes the property he sought—"tautegorical."The term described "the translucence of the Eternal through and in the Temporal" or, as the Oxford English Dictionary puts it, "expressing the same subject but with a difference,"the difference that comes with time.129

One person who shared Coleridge's concern with such issues was Tom Wedgwood. Wedgwood had himself visited Germany in 1796, accompanied by his friend John Leslie; in fact, Coleridge's later trip followed the same route. No doubt Coleridge and Wedgwood spent some time comparing their experiences. They also often discussed related philosophical issues. I have already suggested that they discussed Wedgwood's photographic experiments during a trip taken together in 1802. It appears that they also touched on the question of time itself. Indeed, in one letter written during this trip, Coleridge described the whole experience in temporal terms remarkably reminiscent of those associated with the photographic: "For the last five months of my Life I seem to have annihilated the present Tense with regard to place—you can never say, where is he?—but only—where was he? where will he be?"130

Ample evidence shows that Coleridge and Wedgwood also often discussed the work of Kant and other German idealist philosophers. In a notebook entry dated December 1803, Coleridge paraphrased and discussed Kant's Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten (1797 edition). In the midst of this discussion, Coleridge interpolated "Remember T. Wedgwood, as we were sitting together in the Coach/& forever are loving to look at Children/Vide Schiller." Coleridge referred here to the two men's mutual interest in the psychology and perceptual skills of children, by way of a rhetorical gesture toward Schiller's Über naive und sentimentalische Dichtung (1795).131

This interest had taken on a particular focus two years before. In early 1801 Tom's brother Josiah referred to Tom's ardent theorizing, saying that "the subjects cleared are no less than Time, Space, and Motion; and Mackintosh and Sharp think a metaphysical revolution likely to follow."132 Coleridge was also familiar with Tom's philosophical speculations along these lines. On February 13, 1801 he described them: "I take T. Wedgwood's own opinion, his own convictions, as sTroNG presumptions that he has fallen on some very valuable Truths—some he stated but only in short hints to me/ & I guess from these, that they have been noticed before, & set forth by Kant in part & in part by Lambert.... I have been myself thinking with the most intense energy on similar subjects/ I shall shortly communicate the result of my Thoughts to the Wedgwoods."33 Despite the enthusiasm of various friends, one of whom had promised to publish Wedgwood's theories under the title Time and Space, only one fragment ever appeared. Titled "An Enquiry into the Origin of our Notion of Distance"(and compiled posthumously by friends from Wedgwood's notes), the article, which Eliza Meteyard describes as “a somewhat feeble attempt to replace the Berkeleian theory of optical distance by the more objective ideas of Reid, of whom Wedgwood was an ardent admirer," was published in 1817 in the Journal of Science and 1rts edited by the Roval Institution of Great Britain.14 The article primarily compares sight and touch in relation to the perception of distance. As Wedgwood argued, "When we have learned by touch the real magnitude of an object, the visual or apparent mag nitude becomes only a sign which instantly suggests the tactual magnitude." This idea places Wedgwood's thinking within an ongoing philosophical argument about the relations of the senses whose participants also included Descartes, Locke, Berkeley, Diderot, Buffon, Condillac, Reid, Kant, and Brown.'3 Not surprisingly, Coleridge was also interested in this issue. As Coburn remarks, from November 1800 on, in Coleridge's notebooks "observations and experiments in touch and vision are often associated with Tom Wedgwood."136

Among the other concerns of Wedgwood's article are the "inadequacy of language ... to description," the "correction of visual appearances by notions derived from appearance," and the distinction between “two acts or states of mind, called perception and idea." The essay also indicates Wedgwood's interest in experiments based on bodily experience and in children's responses to stimuli: "Perception becomes a language of which the chief use is to excite the correspondent series of thought, and the senses are seldom intensely and long employed but in the examination of new objects. The far greater part of what is supposed to be perception is only the body of ideas which a perception has awakened."137 Wedgwood's arguments seem to draw on both Reid and the associationism of Archibald Alison's Essays on the Nature and Principles of Taste (1790); however they also còrrespond to certain Kantian concepts. Whatever their exact derivation, at the very moment Wedgwood's speculations encompassed the idea of photography, he was also intimately caught up in an idealist-inspired reconsideration of space, time, perception, and subjectivity. No wonder Coleridge felt able to describe Wedgwood in 1809 not just as a departed friend but as one who“added a fine and ever-wakeful sense of beauty to the most patient accuracy in experimental philosophy and the profounder researches of metaphysical science."138

Time and representation were also comprehensively explored by certain painters during this period. In 1833, for example, English painter John Constable published a book on landscape painting in which he claimed that his own pictures were "taken from real places ... the effects of light and shadow being transcripts only of such as occurred at the time of being taken." He continued: "In some of these subjects of Landscape an attempt has been made to arrest the more abrupt and transient appearance of the CHIAR'osCURO IN NATURE; to shew its effect in the most striking manner, to give to one brief moment caught from fleeting time’ a lasting and sober existence, and to render permanent many of those splendid but evanescent Exhibitions, which are ever occurring in the changes of external Nature."139 It is interesting to compare Constable's aspirations with those of the French landscape painter Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot (1796–1875). Corot reportedly advised painters to “surrender to the initial impression and if you have really been touched, the sincerity of your emotion will move others ... (choose your motifs) not for their sentimental implications or their symbolic content, but only for what they are, as seen from a distance, caught in an instant, bearing the stamp of time."14o As Peter Galassi has pointed out, a number of painters in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, including Corot, Con stable, and Pierre-Henri de Valenciennes, began to produce self-consciously quick sketches designed to capture nothing more than transient effects of light and atmosphere.'4 Some of Constable's earliest plein-air sketches of weather were produced during a tour of the Lake District in 1806, following virtually the same route suggested by his family's copy of William Gilpin's guide to the region's landscape. Indeed it has been suggested that the growing popularity of the quick sketch owed much to picturesque theory, acting as the visual equivalents of Gilpin's diaristic word-pictures. Such sketches were also a provocative instance of non finito, of an image simultaneously fixed in place while still overtly in the midst of a process of completion.142

Anxious to put into practice the conviction that "painting is a science," Constable took care during the 1820s to inscribe his frequent studies of clouds with quite particular information about the time and conditions that accompanied their production. One 1821 study, for example, has the following details written on its back; "Hampstead/Sept 11 1821 10 to 11 Morning/Clouds silvery grey on warm ground/ Light wind to the S.W./fine all day—but rain/in the night following."143 Constable's systematic exercise confirmed his conviction that"no two days are alike, not even two hours; neither were there two leaves alike since the creation of the world."i44 In short, time and the appearance of things were now to be regarded as entirely interdependent.145 More than that, in Constable's work the body of the observer is built into the picture's very existence. Constable's sketch represents not a“God's eye view"of a generic nature but a particular scene witnessed by a particular person at a particular place and time, under particular conditions. In that sense, it is as much a study of the temporal exigencies of human observation, and thus of human subjectivity, as a picture of a cloudy sky.

Constable's studies from the 1820s became an archive from which he could borrow when painting the moody skies of his studio landscapes, pictures that, unlike the sketches, were meant for public exhibition. Contemporary observers found these finished paintings somewhat awkward precisely because they juxtaposed, without the balm of pictorial resolution, time-specific weather effects and more traditional signifiers of the timeless moral philosophy that high art was still supposed to exemplify. Ann