Bermingham has argued that both the cloud studies and the"finished" landscapes share a strategically schizophrenic character. She suggests that Constable adopted a sketchlike application of paint because it "functions as evidence of both a naturalistic observation and a subjective response": "Its dual signification works to collapse the distinction between Constable and the landscape which he paints. ... The goal he set himself at this time [the 1820s] was to make his landscapes the sign of both nature and human nature, of both optical sensation and emotional response. . . . The sky becomes both a signified and a signifier, both the thing represented and the thing which represents, both the natural ‘element' and the chief organ of sentiment.""146

## TRANSMUTATIONS

Culture and nature, transience and fixity, space and time, subject and object—each example cited above articulates these opposing pairs in the same act of representation. From this epistemological dilemma also emerged the desire to photograph. At issue was not just the theorization and depiction of nature, landscape, reflection, or the passing of time but, more fundamentally, the nature of representation and the constitution of existence itself. It is yet further evidence that the period between about 1790 and 1839 was marked by a turbulent phase of scientific and philosophical speculation, of which photography was but one residual effect. Indeed the conjunction of frustrations and aspirations that I have characterized as a "desire to photograph" obviously long precedes, and extends well beyond, the announcement of a photographic apparatus in 1839.

I have set out to look specifically at the meanings of the words and practices actually used by the proto-photographers to articulate their aspirations and latent desires. At this stage two main conclusions could be drawn from my examination of their discourse and its historical context. First, each of the concept-metaphors in which they collectively invested their desire to photograph—nature, landscape, camera obscura, spontaneity—was undergoing a radical and dislocating transmutation during the period in which the proto-photographers wrote. This involved the general refiguring of prevailing relationships between knowledge and subjectivity, as well as the reconceptualization of representation and its metaphysical implications.

The second and related conclusion is that this dislocation is manifest not only in their choice of metaphors but also at the level of the discursive text itself: hence the recurrence of a movement back and forth between two conceptual poles, or, alternatively, of a paradoxical doubling within the compass of a single term or passage of speech. In each case we find not so much a resolution or reconciling synthesis of two options as a dynamic, even contradictory, incorporation of both. Thus the latent desire to photograph could only be expressed somewhat provisionally, as a mode of hesitation and equivocation. In Coleridge's terms, photography was conceived as a becoming rather than a thing, a verb as much as a noun. And, as the various debates around nature, landscape, the camera obscura, and space-time attest, this economy of hesitations produced no less than a newly embodied subject, which in its formation as doublet entailed both photographer and photographed, without remaining completely faithful to either.

This same dynamic is reproduced in the word photography itself. Despite a bevy of other contenders, this term was proposed as early as 1834 by Hercules Florence and was then independently coined by English, French, and German commentators in February 1839.147 A compound of two Greek components—phos (light) and graphie (writing, drawing, and delineation)—photography is significant on a number of levels. As a word, it posits a paradoxical coalition of "light" (sun, God, nature) and "writing (history, humankind, culture), an impossible binary opposition "fixed" in uneasy conjunction only by the artifice of language.148 T'his linguistic construction, replete with the magnetic tension of two in one (a tension writ large in the daguerreotype, which is of course simultaneously a negative and a positive), sidesteps the necessity of deciding to which sphere photography should be consigned. Indeed, as the maintenance of disjunction, photography gives neither the resolution of a third term suspended "between" nature and culture nor the equally convenient irresolution of a perpetual undecidability. U'ncertain of its own identity, photography defers instead to the presumed self-presence of its two constituents.

Both of these were in transitional crisis at the moment of photography's linguistic construction. The corpuscular theory of light proposed by Newton in the eighteenth century was by 1839 being replaced by the wave theory developed by Thomas Young in England and Augustin Fresnel in France. The result was a widespread incoherence in contemporary discussions of light and its properties.149 Writing was also undergoing a radical transformation, being refigured as a cultural and historical rather than a natural or God-given phenomenon.150 No wonder then that photography's nomenclature divided nature from culture even while putting this same hyphenation under erasure. "Photo-Graphy" marked not only the interval between two things but also the operation of continually setting those things aside. As Derrida describes such an operation, "It marks what is set aside from itself, what interrupts every self-identity, every punctual assemblage of the self, every self-homogeneity, self-interiority."151

Indeed, if we look closely at the texture of photography's parts, we find them constituted by an infinite partitioning of a sort that unravels all borders and all identities. The Oxford English Dictionary, for example, traces the etymology of the Greek suffix graphy to an "abstract noun of action or function."152 In other words, graphy can be read as either active or passive (either and therefore never simply one or the other). Operating simultaneously as verb and noun, this writing produces while being produced, inscribes even as it is inscribed. Here, in one brilliant stroke of language, the naming of photography replicates the fascinating dilemma of its own impossible historical and epistemological identity.

4 PICTURES