better pass along for fear of offending your sense of smell, for as you can observe, the face and hands of the gentleman are beginning to decay.

## H. B. 18 October 1840

So now we have the full story, or at least the complete script. The body we see before us belongs to a character known as H. B., a man who is now dead, having in despair committed suicide by drowning. Apparently this is a photographer who has literally succumbed to photography, destined to return forever with the news that he died at his own hand for having invented the very medium that allows his return. Thus the author of this text enjoys an unenviable immortality, the zombie existence of the living dead.

But even this unhappy state of affairs cannot prevent him from leaving us with a joke. It is, as it happens, a joke about photography itself and thus about the making of the very image that we hold. The text refers viewers to the color of H. B.'s face and hands, taking their darkness of color as a signifier of his rotting flesh and warning of the smell.126 In fact, as a keen gardener Bayard has probably been out in the sun and got a little sunburned wherever his skin was exposed. Insensitive to the difference between sunburn and decay, his direct positive process has printed red skin as black, a circumstance that Bayard cleverly turns to his advantage. The joke draws attention to photography's trickery as a mere illusion of the real, as well as to the artifice of the actual text and image we are seeing. It also points to human skin as a potentially "photographic"surface; perhaps there is even a memory of those sun-stenciled apples that a later historian would posit as the initial inspiration of Bayard's desire to photograph.127

So here we have an extraordinary text, perhaps one of the most extraordinary in photographic history. Moreover, in the brilliant combination of this text with this image, Bavard managed to produce a single work that is explicitly all about the practice and implications of photographic representation in general. By undermining the veracity of the photographic image on its reverse, his text seems deliberately to call into doubt the assumed distinction between the literal and the figurative. For in the play he engineered here between text and image, everything is enmeshed with its other.

The photograph itself continues this theme. For Bayard chose to portray himself (and not only in this example) with his eyes closed—that is, as blind. Thus he asked us to see him as someone who does not see; as his own photographer, he saw himself as he could never (his eyes being closed) see himself. In the 1990 catalogue essay for the Louvre, Jacques Derrida suggested that the subtitle of all drawings of the blind, as well as of all self-portraits, should be "the origin of drawing."128 We might make the same claim for this pioneering"photogenic drawing"(as Bayard called it).

In this context, we might also read into Bayard's imaging of the origin of photography something of Derrida's commentary on representation in general, in which rep resentation is assumed to be a complicitous entanglement of sight and blindness, absence and presence, life and death, construction and ruin. Notice again that Bayard poses as an object—a corpse/sculpture/painting/still life (nature morte)—in order to become a subject worthy of our (and the state's) attention and recognition. Nowhere does he attempt to present photography as an analogue of"real life"; indeed, quite the opposite (here there is nothing but representation and representations of representations). We might, for example, now return to the hat on the wall and see it not only as a metonymic repetition of Bayard himself but as a metaphoric eye that mirrors the lens of the camera. Thus in Bayard's image he is continuously photographing himself photographing himself (such that the photograph's point of origin becomes quite ungraspable).129

Here, speaking at photography's origins, speaking as photography's origin, Bayard opens a discourse on photography and death, on photography as death, that has continued in our own century with Walter Benjamin and Roland Barthes, among others. Eduardo Cadava, for example, describes Benjamin's analysis of the photograph in terms that could as easily have been directed at Bayard's Le Noyé.

Death, both the word and the event, is a photograph, a photograph that photographs itself—a photograph that comes as a suspension of reality and its referents. As Benjamin suggests . . . the photograph, like the souvenir, is the corpse of an experience. A photograph therefore speaks as death, as the trace of what passes into history. I, the photograph, the spaced out limit betueen life and death, I, the photograph, am death. Yet, speaking as death, the photograph can be neither death nor itself. At once dead and alive, it opens the possibility of our being in time.130

Bayard's image likewise speaks through its interchange of text and simulated corpse of a theatrical double death, of a movement back and forth between the ecstacy of discovery (the sort of climactic pleasure that the French aptly call le petit mort) and the desolation and ruin of the undiscovered. Speaking simultaneously in past, present, and future tenses, Le Noyé presents Bayard as both subject and object of the photograph, as acting even while acted upon, as a representation that is also real, as self and other, present and absent, dead but also alive, as nature and culture (nature and nature morte)—simultaneously both ... and for that very reason never simply one or the other. Le Noyé is, in other words, an involution that rewrites the identity of all these crucial terms. In short, Bavard's image represents a meta-discourse on the identity of photography that repeats and vigorously underlines that same paradoxical tropos that we have witnessed time and time again in the textual and pictorial discourses of his fellow proto-photographers.

Remember that we are talking here about a work made in October 1840, a little over a vear after the medium was first made available to its delighted but bewildered public. Turning repeatedly on the rhetorical figure of a fake death, Le Noyé engineers a space of uncertainty, a strategic hesitation, a troubling movement back and forth within the very grain of photography's logic. In this sense, Bayard's ghost haunts not only photography but also the whole of Western metaphysics.

NOTHINGNO PRESENT AND IN-

DIFFERENTBEING PRECEDES

DIFFÉRANCE AND SPACING.

—JACQUES DERRIDA, POSITIONS'

his book began with a brief discussion of certain recent Anglo-American accounts of photography. These accounts propose that the meanings and values of any individual photograph are entirely determined by its context, by the operations of the culture that surrounds and informs it. Being wholly compliant with those operations, photography potentially belongs to every institution and discipline but itself. Given that photography has neither a singular identity nor a unified history, these critics argue, a "photography as such" can be no more than a misleading fiction. This argument was propagated in the late 1970s and 1980s as a postmodern counterdiscourse to the formalist vision of photography that, then as now, dominates how photographs are discussed in most art museums and historical texts. Formalist criticism seeks photography's most fundamental characteristics as a medium and thereby articulates the essential "photographicness"of each and every photograph. Thus, from a formalist perspective photography does indeed have a singular, inherent identity, the very"photography as such" that postmodernism denies.

In this sense, it appears that these two views are diametrically opposed. However, as I suggested above, these methodologies share some common approaches to the crucial question of photography's identity. Both, for example, equate the origins of that identity with the unfolding of history (social history on one hand and art history on the other). More importantly, both presume that photography's identity can indeed be delimited, that photography is ultimately secured within the boundaries of either nature or culture.

I have shown that this presumption is at odds with the discourse on photography's identity produced by those responsible for its conception. Based on their own speculations and actions, the proto-photographers did not seem to have a single subject or purpose in mind as the end product of their experimental undertakings; nor were they able to confidently articulate the identity of what they did produce. Unable to decide quite what photography is or how it does what it does, each protophotographer began by referring to more familiar figures—nature, landscape, camera images, time, viewing subject. But the status of each of these figures (they are of course entirely imbricated with one another) was itself uncertain in the early nineteenth century. None of them had a stable identity either. No wonder that photography's inventors had such difficulty placing their conception.

This difficulty was reproduced at the level of language. As we have seen, the inventors' own descriptons of photography carefully avoid any stable definition, end lessly turning back on themselves in a perverse rhetoric of circular negation. Niépce could not decide between physaute (nature herself) or autopbuse (copy by nature)—that is, between nature and her representation—as an appropriate name for his process. Daguerre claimed, quite paradoxically, that the daguerreotype drew nature while allowing her to draw herself. Talbot spoke in similar terms of an "art" that somehow both is and is not a process of drawing. Not content with this designation, he went on to describe photography as an effort to capture both eternity and transience in the same representation, such that time becomes space, and space time. In other words, where postmodern and formalist commentators want to locate photography within either culture or nature, the discourse of the proto-photographers consistently disrupts the very binary logic that underlies all such choices.

Postmodernists and formalists want to identify photography with a single generative source (either culture or nature, either context or essence, either the outside or the inside). The discourse of the proto-photographers, by contrast, presents their invention as a differential economy of relations that completely confuses these categories. As a consequence, none of the elements in the pairs remains either autonomous or simply opposed to its other. Although metaphors of both culture and nature figure prominently in the thinking of the proto-photographers, neither rests as the "origin" of the photographic process. Each is instead deployed in a strangely disjunctive relationship to its other, such that photography (the very word repeats this dilemma) becomes the movement of something continually being divided against itself. Thus, according to its makers'own descriptions, photography is a set of relations that carries within itself the trace of a perennial alterity.

Some might say that the equivocal wordings of the proto-photographers are simply a product of their ignorance or naiveté. These pioneers hesitated to describe what they did not understand or had not yet fully experienced. According to this argument, these hesitations resulted in an awkwardness of expression evidenced as much in the clumsiness of their language as in the "primitiveness"of their images. Photography's inventors just did not know what they were talking about. Such criticisms fail to recognize what this book has tried to make clear: there is no more a primitive photography