than there is a primitive language. The proto-photographers approached photography's identity from within the traditions of natural philosophy, and as sophisticated philosophical thinkers and experienced artists proffered their various words and images. Anyone who considers Talbot a naive writer or Bayard an unthoughtful picture maker has simply not looked at their work closely enough.

In any case, this is not an argument about consciousness, about what the protophotographers really thought or intended. It is about the possibility raised by both postmodernists and formalists, the possibility of finding the ontology of photography's identity in the convolutions of its own history. This account has concentrated on the history of photography's origins, a key trope in this, as in any debate about identity. We have found that the same economy evident in the words and pictures of the protophotographers is reproduced within the larger historical discourse that attends photography's origins. Wherever we have looked, we have found these origins caught up in a perverse movement of displacement and deferral. Every foundational point of origin that photography's historians posited—temporal, authorial, conceptual, textual, or pictorial—has depended on another absent but supposedly more originary moment.

## PHOTOGRAPHY AND DIFFERANCE

No wonder that Jacques Derrida describes all such moments as moment, as a dynamic that inevitably turns in, on, and around its own fulcrum. As he points out, there is always difference at the origin—even at the origin of difference itself: "In this play of representation, the point of origin becomes ungraspable. There are things like reflecting pools, and images, an infinite reference from one to the other, but no longer a source, a spring. There is no longer a simple origin. For what is reflected is split in itself and not only as an addition to-itself or its image. The reflection, the image, the double, splits what it doubles. The origin of the speculation becomes a difference."2

This deserves further elaboration. Derrida's work engages a Western metaphysics organized around a hierarchy of dichotomies such that certain states of being are privileged over others. In any given pair of supposed opposites (culture/nature, man/woman, white/black, presence/absence, and so on), one term is considered the negative, derivative, or corrupted version of the other. By the same token, one term is always given priority, whether temporal or qualitative (or both), over the other. Although this privilege can shift back and forth between the terms, one is always assumed to come first. As Derrida points out, this logocentrism is much more than an abstract philosophical foible; it is an inescapable politics, an order of subordination, that inhabits every thought and action that our culture undertakes.

We have already encountered any number of such dichotomies in our examination of the discourse that surrounds and informs the conception of photography. The nature/culture opposition is perhaps the most obvious, appearing at the center of the thinking of both proto-photographers and postmodern/formalist critics (note how this last pairing represents a logocentric opposition in its own right). Indeed, photography is consistently positioned by its commentators within some sort of play between activity and passivity, presence and absence, time and space, fixity and transiency, observer and observed, real and representation, original and imitation, identity and difference—and the list could go on. Derrida's critique of this last opposition is one of his most famous and has often been elucidated in introductions to his work.³ Arguing that all identity is always already divided by differences (for nothing is ever simply present, referring only to itself), he introduces a silent but visible change in the word difference itself. In French, différance simultaneously contains within its neographism the activities of differing and deferring, a distancing acted out temporally as well as spatially. While exceeding its components,"differance"(to translate Derrida's gesture into English) marks a"sameness which is not identical,"the repressed and unacknowledged condition of possibility for both difference and identity. As Derrida writes,“Differance produces what it forbids, making possible the very thing that it makes impossible."⁴

Derrida brings this deconstructive economy, this differance, to any binary opposition, in the sense that his reading exacerbates into visibility what is already there. "The reading must always aim at a certain relationship, unperceived by the writer, between what he commands and what he does not command of the patterns of the language that he uses." "Photography" is one such pattern of language, an undecidable marking of the kind "that can no longer be included within philosophical (binary) opposition, but which, however, inhabit[s] philosophical opposition, resisting and disorganizing it, without ever constituting a third term."Derrida's practice is not interested in resolving this oppositional logic. His neologisms (of which differance is only one) do not privilege one of the two opposing options, nor do they proffer a bridging or synthetic amalgamation of them both. Like the photography presented in this book, these neologisms instead upset the stability of the political economy that sustains the whole system. Neither simply culture nor nature, yet encompassing both, photography embodies precisely the bewildering spatial and temporal play that Derrida reproduces throughout his work."Nothing, neither among the elements nor within the system, is anywhere ever simply present or absent. There are only, everywhere, differences and traces of traces."7

This play animates every aspect of photography's history. My own account has sought to displace the traditional origin story centered on 1839 and the introduction of photography into the marketplace and replace it with another, the discursive formation of a desire to photograph within the European epistemological field of the iate eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. This shift of analytical focus certainly has its momentary advantages, if only in raising serious questions about what is proper to both "photography" and "history."But it also leaves a number of historical dilemmas and methodological problems still to be addressed.

We might begin with the timing of photography's conception. It has been noted that photography—or at least the desire to have images spontaneously inscribe themselves on a light-sensitive surface—was described by at least twenty different persons residing in seven countries between about 1790 and 1839. This desire's appearance as discourse almost always preceded and exceeded the scientific expertise needed to bring it to fruition. Virtually every account of photography's conception begins with an “impossible" idea, which is then slowly and sometimes haphazardly pursued in the face of constant scientific difficulties and uncertainties. Despite plenty of opportunities, there are no episodes in which this idea arose directly from scientific experiment and discovery itself.8 This suggests that a linear, percussive, evolutionary, cause-and-effect model of historical progress, with science (or for that matter, art) as some sort of “first cause, is just not appropriate to the facts of photography's conception. More on that later.

Although my account has paid unusually close attention to the ways in which the various proto-photographers expressed their aspirations, no one of these figures has been accorded privileged treatment. No one person has been designated photography's "true" inventor. In fact, given the dispersed geography of its conception, photography appears to have emerged as the embodiment of certain arrangements of Western knowledge rather than as a creative “idea" or technological "discovery" traceable to the actions of any particular individual. Photography, it seems, was a product of (and contributor to) certain shifts and changes within the fabric of European culture as a whole. Thus a beginning once thought to be fixed and dependable is now revealed as a problematic field of mutable historical differences.

This still leaves us with the problem of how to designate this phenomenon that I have called the "desire to photograph." For my account has extended well beyond the actions of the proto-photographers to include the aspirations and practices of representative figures such as poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge, painter John Constable, and aesthete Richard Payne Knight, as well as more general developments in a number of aspects of the arts and sciences in the years around 1800. Obviously not all of these developments directly related to the invention of a photographic apparatus or to the perfection of a photographic science, but all of them exhibit that disruptive play of a differance within and between nature and culture, real and representation, fixity and transience, observing subject and observed object. In this sense, the desire to photograph encompasses much more than the invention of a photographic apparatus. It represents, in microcosm, the deconstructive dynamic of an entire epistemology. Yet this desiring economy is no photo-zeitgeist, no originary "spirit of the age." For differance obstinately refuses the mantle of origin, whatever its guise. As Derrida insists: "This does not mean that the différance that produces differences is somehow before them, in a simple and unmodified—in-different—present. Différance is the nonfull, non-simple, structured and differentiating origin of differences. Thus the name 'origin'no longer suits it."

This also distinguishes the desire to photograph from the desire-itself posited by psychoanalysis. Psychoanalysis describes desire in terms of a universal and fundamental lack in the being of the individual subject. Desire, born in the gap between need and demand, continually drives this subject to seek an object of some sort to complete what is in fact an unfillable absence. Although certainly not irrelevant to discussions of photography, this psychoanalytic notion doesn't seem adequate to the historical dimensions of the desire outlined here. What can it tell us about a desire that so suddenly manifests itself within such a broad spectrum of European culture? How can it help us account for the historical, cultural, and morphological specificity of this particular desire, the desire to photograph?

Perhaps a more useful way to think such a desire is by way of what Foucault calls "a positive unconscious of knowledge: a level that eludes the consciousness of the scientist and yet is part of scientific discourse."10 T'his kind of intervention is in line with the archaeological" enterprise that Foucault describes in The Order of Things: "What I am attempting to bring to light is the epistemological field, the episteme in which knowledge, envisaged apart from all criteria having reference to its rational value or to its objective form, grounds its positivity and thereby manifests a history which is not that of its growing perfection, but rather that of its conditions of possibility."11 This stress on a “positivity" that lies simultaneously inside and outside consciousness is informed by a Nietzschean philosophical tradition and by what Foucault elsewhere calls a“tactical engagement" with those"who would subjugate the multiplicity of desire to the twofold law of structure and lack."12 He writes these last words in support of the rhyzomatic reading of desire found in the work of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari. In Anti-Oedipus, for example, these authors speak of wanting to "introduce production into desire, and conversely, desire into production":13 “If desire produces, its product is real. .. . Desire does not lack anything; it does not lack its object. . . . Desire and its object are one and the same thing. .. . Desire is not bolstered by needs, but rather the contrary; needs are derived from desire: they are counterproducts within the real that desire produces."14

As with Derrida's differance, this “productive" desire upsets the usual temporal and spatial order that could say with confidence, "This comes before that." My own shift of analysis from 1839 to the earlier desire to photograph at one level obeys this traditional logic of priority, merely revising the usual historical account to place the desire to photograph before the invention of photography and 1800 before 1839. However this shift from invention to desire also opens up the whole question of temporality. For example, we must ask whether the desire to photograph simply preceded photography or whether photography was in fact always already there.

This complex question leads straight back to the argument between postmodernism and formalism with which we began. Following the logic of differance, in one sense photography has indeed always been; there has never not been a photography. What is photosynthesis, after all, but an organic world of light writing? No wonder the whole history of Western philosophy has engaged light and the metaphor of the sun; as Derrida has suggested, Western thinking is itself a form of photology.15 With this in mind, Eduardo Cadava points out: "There has never been a time without the photograph, without the residue and writing of light. If in the beginning we find the Word this Word has always been a Word of light—the let there be light' without which there would be no history."16

Photography (the writing of light) is the condition of possibility of its own history, of any history whatsoever. How then do we explain the fact that the discursive desire that I have described as photo-prophetic coincides with a quite singular moment in Western culture? This appears to be a contradiction (but, I would argue, an enabling one) in my own account. For, in the face of a traditional history that posits photography as an imminence, an ideal necessity, within European culture ever since the Renaissance, I have continually emphasized that the desire to photograph only appears as a regular discourse at a particular time and place. Following centuries of silence, only from the 1790s do we find growing and unequivocal evidence of a widespread desire to have images spontaneously inscribe themselves. Only then do we witness a regular discursive practice in which the presumed differences between nature and its representation, fixity and transience, time and space, observer and observed are simultaneously called into serious question. Clearly it was only possible to think “photography" at this specific historical conjuncture; photography as a conceptual economy thus has an identifiable historical and cultural specificity. This is why the principal question of previous chapters has been not"Who invented photography?"but rather"Within which specific dynamic of cultural/social forces was it possible for photography to be thought by anybody?"'

This takes us back to the historical dilemma posed by Helmut Gernsheim. Why did no previous artists or philosophers speculate about the possibility of one day fixing the images they saw in their camera obscuras? How do we explain the suddenness of photography's discursive appearance, given the concept's investment in mechanisms such as the camera and light-sensitive chemistry, both of which considerably predate it? How can we write a history that acknowledges photography's continuity with natural philosophy and various traditions of picture making (including Renaissance per-