spective) while taking into account its equally undoubted difference, both temporal and conceptual, from these same traditions?

## CONTINUITY/DISCONTINUITY

How indeed? In a notorious division, Foucault claims that his own historical inquiry "has revealed two great discontinuities in the episteme of Western culture: the first inaugurates the Classical age (roughly half-way through the seventeenth century) and the second, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, marks the beginning of the modern age."17 On the evidence presented in previous chapters, the emergence of the desire to photograph neatly coincided with the second of these supposed discontinuities. The observation that the beginnings of photography paralleled the beginnings of the modern age does not at first seem particularly original or even useful. After all, every orthodox history of ideas recognizes the years around 1800 to be significant. The French Revolution of 1789 is a reference point common to most histories of the beginnings of the modern period; this one event is often projected as the catalyst for the tumultuous changes that shortly occurred throughout Europe. Similarly, even the most conservative historian of photography would agree that the medium's invention and dissemination were closely tied to the advent of modernity and its particular economic, social, and cultural developments in the early nineteenth century.

However, Foucault claims rather more for his model of periodization than the usual textbook division between one historical epoch and the next. Paradoxically, his own notion of a discontinuity between Classical and modern insists on both their continuity with each other and the radical difference between the two.

The order on the basis of which we think today does not have the same mode of being as that of the Classical thinkers. Despite the impression we may have of an almost uninterrupted development of the European ratio from the Renaissance to our own day ... all this quasi-continuity on the level of ideas and themes is doubtless only a surface appearance; on the archaeological level, we see that the system of positivities was transformed in a wholesale fashion at the end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth century. Not that reason made any progress: it was simply that the mode of being of things, and of the order that divided them up before presenting them to the understanding, was profoundly altered.18

In a more fundamental fashion, and at the level uhere acquired knouledge is rooted in its positivity, the event concerns, not the objects aimed at, analysed, and explained in knowledge, not even the manner of knouing them or rationalizing them, but the relation of representation to that which is posited in it.... What came into being ... is a miniscule but absolutely essential displacement, which toppled the whole of Western thought.19

Such claims demonstrate the most provocative aspect of Foucault's method, his engagement with what Michel De Certeau euphemistically calls "the equivocal nature of historical continuity."20 Rather than tracing a continuous linear evolution of ideas that lead neatly from one era to the next and inevitably find their apex in the present Foucault stresses instead history's apparent moments of rupture and discontinuity. He notes the lack of correspondence between, for example, natural history and biology, or general grammar and philology.21 His work therefore concentrates on what traditional histories have tended to ignore, "the fact that within the space of a few years a culture sometimes ceases to think as it had been thinking up till then and begins to think other things in a new way. 7."22

Philology, biology, and political economy uere established, not in the places formerly occupied by general grammar, natural history, and the analysis of wealth, but in an area where those forms of knouledge did not exist, in the space they left blank, in the deep gaps that separated their broad theoretical segments and that were filled with the murmur of the ontological continuum. The object of knouledge in the nineteenth century is formed in the very place where the Classical plenitude of being has fallen silent.23

Foucault describes in this slide from classical to modern no less than “ a general transformation of relations"24 such that, as De Certeau recognizes,“"the same words and the same ideas are often reused, but they no longer have the same meaning, they are no longer thought and organized in the same way."25 According to Foucault, new forms of knowledge, such as photography, inscribe themselves in the space left blank by their (non)predecessors. Thus the cameras of John Locke and Tom Wedgwood can be the same but different, equivalent as optical instruments but representing radically different worldviews (which in turn means that they are also radically different optical instruments). This troubling archaeological notion of historical change allows Foucault to speak of a general transformation, "certainly one of the most radical that ever occurred in Western culture"26 yet to claim that "below the level of identities and differences there is the foundation provided by continuities, resemblances, repetitions, and natural criss-crossings."27

Here is an expression of the complex character of Foucauldian (and photography's) history, a perverse complicity of continuity and resemblance with its supposed opposite, discontinuity and difference.28 For the second of these couplets is only recognizable in terms of its distinction from the first, a reciprocity that, according to its own logic, is an impossibility. 'Thus, a Foucauldian history of photography does not so much replace the idea of continuity with that of discontinuity as problematize the assumed distinction between the two.² At the heart of both Foucault's method and photography's historical identity is once again this tantalizing undecidability, this play of a difference that is always differing from itself.

A life that is also a death, a presence inhabited by absence: photography's genealogy repeats the strange identity of each of its individual instances. As we have seen, the central concerns of the proto-photographers—nature, landscape, camera images, time, subjectivity—were in a state of considerable crisis during the early nineteenth century. Perhaps photography could only be conceived at a moment when classical and modern epistemes were folding over and into each other. In other words, photography's birth pangs coincided with a movement that involved both the demise of the premodern and the invention of a peculiarly modern arrangement of knowledges; the appearance of one was only made possible through the erasure of the other. Photography's historical emergence is therefore perhaps best described as a palimpsest, as an event that inscribes itself within the space simultaneously marked and left blank by the sudden collapse of natural philosophy and its Enlightenment worldview.

As palimpsest, photography's historical identity recalls Derrida's treatment of Freud's work in "Freud and the Scene of Writing."30 In The Interpretation of Dreams (1900) Freud suggested, for the purpose of some preliminary remarks on the psyche, that“we should picture the instrument which carries out our mental functions as resembling a compound microscope or a photographic apparatus, or something of the kind."31 In 1925, in "Note upon the ‘Mystic Writing-Pad'," Freud proposed another working model. In this instance the earlier photographic apparatus was replaced by a writing machine, a Wunderblock. "If we imagine one hand writing upon the surface of the mystic writing-pad while another periodically raises its covering sheet from the wax slab, we shall have a concrete representation of the way in which I tried to picture the functioning of the perceptual apparatus of our mind."32

We might immediately note that Freud retained a quasi-photographic model of the mind when he imagined the unconscious as comprised of hieroglyphs, that is, secretive pictographic imprints on a sensitized psyche. Indeed, his description of the Iltnde riiuck as two hands, one writing as the other erases, calls to mind Bayard, Niépce, Talbot, and Daguerre's renditions of photography as a process whereby nature is perennially drawn even while it draws itself. Thus could it be said that in the shift from optical instrument to mystic writing pad, Freud merely replaced one photographic metaphor with another.33

Derrida argues that Freud saw the psyche as inhabited by “a radical alterity," a sous rature (literally, "under erasure") that could equally be taken as writing (as indeed it soon became in Freud's own developing schema of metaphors). Freud conceived the perceptive surface of the psyche, for example, as both marked and unaltered, as both breached and virgin, as a discontinuous unfolding of space and time best defined, in Derrida's terms, as spacing ("neither space nor time .. . the impossibility for an identity to be closed on itself, on the inside of its proper interiority, or on its coincidence with itself").34 Indeed at the very heart of the Wunderblock is a surface tracery of inscrip tions, a web of erasures that makes any writing possible."What we think of as perception'is always already an inscription.... In fact, Freud speculates that the very mansion of presence, the perceiving self, is shaped by absence, and—writing."35 Thus when Derrida claims that "there is nothing outside of the text" he once again breaches the assumption that representation and real, psyche and body can ever be simply separated or distinguished.36 To this end he takes Freud's photographic writing-machine literally, as an argument that both body and psyche are cntirely implicated in the intertextual play of concrete metaphor, such that "we are written only as we write."37

## POSTMODERNISM AND PHOTOGRAPHY

My own methodological weave of archaeology/genealogy and deconstruction brings us back to postmodernism and its view of photography's historical and political identity.38 We might begin with the relationship that postmodernism posits between photography and power. Despite protestations to the contrary, postmodernists tend to maintain an entirely instrumental view of photography. For them, photography is a mere vehicle for the transfer of power from one place to another. Photography has no power of its own. It is instead temporarily vested with the power of the apparatuses that deploy it.

This explains why John Tagg, for example, is content to write throughout his essays of photography being brought to sites of power, of photography accruing power, of discovering how power touches photography, of the complicity of photography with power. The very wording of these phrases separates photography from power. Power is conceived as an autonomous entity, as a "burden"(with the moral implications that this word carries in its wake) that can be possessed and passed around. Notably absent from Tagg's work is an appreciation of how Foucault's description of power reinscribes it as a shifting set of relationships productively inhabiting all aspects and members of social life. Although Tagg is frequently concerned with bodies that are being subjected to photography, he never deals with the production of actual bodies. He presumes that photography's "subject"' is a production effect of ideology, a state of consciousness inscribed over an existing biological body. Body and mind, biology and culture are again regarded as separate entities, with the subject always preexisting its embrace by the photographic apparatus. By neglecting to address the material production of the subject as body, Tagg limits the effects of power to the realm of what previously would have been called the ideological—to "new kinds of knowledge," to "domains of objects, institutions of language, rituals of truth."39

There are two major problems with this view of power: first, it is at odds with the theory of power offered by Foucault himself. For Foucault, modern power functions not only as a tool of the state apparatus but also as a network of circulating forces, an economy of relations such that “individuals are the vehicles of power, not its points of application."40 This is why he is interested in discovering "how it is that subjects are gradually, progressively, really and materially constituted through a multiplicity of organisms, forces, energies, materials, desires, thoughts, etc."41 He continues, "What I want to show is how power relations can materially penetrate the body in depth, without depending even on the subject's own representations. If power takes hold on the body, this isn't through its having first to be interiorised in people's consciousness."42

Foucault's most famous effort in this direction involved his 1976 book, published in English as The History of Sexuality: An Introduction. Faced with the apparent opposition of sex (the real thing) and sexuality (the discourse on sex), with one seeming clearly to come before the other, he ends up not only reversing the terms of debate but also questioning their separability. "So we must not refer a history of sexuality to the agency of sex; but rather show how 'sex' is historically subordinate to sexuality. We must not place sex on the side of reality, and sexuality on that of confused ideas and illusions; sexuality is a very real historical formation; it is what gives rise to the notion of sex, as a speculative element necessary to its operation."43

The second consequence of Tagg's view is that it sets up a logic of priority in which power always precedes photography, having its ultimate source in the apparatuses of the state. The implication is that real power, the power of the state, comes before its representation, whether through photography or any other cultural medium. As Derrida suggests in his discussions on the history of writing, this basesuperstructure model of power has some important consequences: "Fostering the belief that writing befalls power ... that it can ally itself to power, can prolong it by complementing it, or can serve it, the question suggests that writing can come to power or power to writing. It excludes in advance the identification of writing as power or the recognition of power from the onset of writing. . . . Writing does not come to power. It is there beforehand, it partakes of and is made of it.... The question also led to the singular abstraction: power, writing."4

Is there anything about the history of photography's emergence that might allow us to speak not just of "photography and power"but of"photography as power?" Can we speak of another of these "singular abstractions": photopower? Foucault's work certainly makes clear that any regimentation of what can and cannot be thought at a given moment in history (this is his stated "problem" in The Order of Things) is as much a question of power as it is of knowledge."The exercise of power perpetually creates knowledge and conversely knowledge constantly induces effects of power."4 Accordingly, his oxymoronic concept of desire as a "positive unconscious of knowledge" is soon replaced, via Nietzsche, by the phrase will to power. T'hrough this notion of a will to power Foucault subsequently investigates the emergence in the years around 1800 of a variety of heterogeneous social apparatuses (to which we have now added photography).

I understand by the term "apparatus" a sort of—shall we say—formation which has as its major function at a given moment that of responding to an urgent need. The apparatus thus has a dominant strategic function. ... The apparatus is thus always inscribed in a play of power, but it is always linked to certain coordinates of knowledge which issue from it but, to an equal degree, condition it. This is what the apparatus consists in: strategies of relations of forces supporting, and supported by, types of knowledge.46

Foucault's discussion of the panopticon, that now notorious system of social control and incarceration first proposed by Jeremy Bentham in 1791 (a conception that also coincided with that of photography), is particularly interesting in this context. For this apparatus, like photography and as another of its French appelations suggests (appareil: apparatus, camera), operates according to a certain system of relations between a light source, a focusing cell, and a directed looking. However I raise Foucault's discussion here not to suggest a relationship between photography and the panopticon based on an architectural resemblance between camera and cell, as if one machine is in any simple way a miniature version of the other. Rather, we need to examine the extent to which they might correspond as systems of power, the extent to which they share and constitute a peculiarly modern configuration of power-knowledge-subject.

Many critics assume the panopticon to be a “static, spatial structure" designed to allow an oppressive surveillance of those without power by those who have it.47 However, Foucault's reading is more complex. He reiterates Bentham's own point that as the prisoner never knows when he is actually being watched, he must assume that it is always so; thus the prisoner necessarily surveys and disciplines himself. He becomes the instrument of his own subjection. As far as the exercise of power is concerned, the prisoner is always caught in an uncertain but productive space of hesitation between tower and cell. He is both the prisoner and the one who imprisons (and therefore not simply either). As Foucault puts it, "He who is subjected to a field of visibility, and who knows it, assumes responsibility for the constraints of power; he makes them play spontaneously upon himself; he inscribes in himself the power relation in which he simultaneously plays both roles; he becomes the principle of his own subjection."48

The subject constituted as the locus of disciplinary power, a being positioned as simultaneously subject and object of that power, resembles the “strange empiricotranscendental doublet" that Foucault in The Order of Things had identified with the emergence of the modern episteme.4º According to Foucault, in the years around 1800, "Man appears in his ambiguous position as an object of knowledge and as a subject that knows: enslaved sovereign, observed spectator."so He continues: "Man has not been able to describe himself as a configuration in the episteme without thought at the same time discovering, both in itself and outside itself, at its borders yet also in its very warp and woof, an element of darkness, an apparently inert density in which it is embedded, an unthought which it contains entirely, yet in which it is also caught."51

A being that is both in itself and outside itself, the self beside/in the other, an identical newness, "an unthought which it contains entirely, yet in which it is also caught." Foucault's phraseology recalls that of writers like Coleridge, Knight, Niépce, Daguerre, and Talbot and the discursive figures of nature, landscape, and camera in the years around 1800. Photography, these incubating discourses suggest, simultaneously depends on and produces this new economy of power-knowledge-subject, this continually divided or doubled mode of being. Looking again at the circumlocutions that characterize these proto-photographic texts and their metaphors, they appear to apprehend their own cultural parameters almost exactly as Foucault describes them. Once again we confront a Foucauldian conundrum: "a task that consists of not—of no longer—treating discourses as groups of signs (signifying elements referring to contents or representations) but as practices that systematically form the objects of which they speak."52 As Foucault insists:

In the descriptions for which I have attempted to provide a theory, there can be no question of interpreting discourse nith a vieu to uriting a history of the referent. . . . W bat we are concerned with here is not to neutralize discourse, to make it the sign of something else, and to pierce through its density in order to reach ubat remains silently anterior to it, but on the contrary to maintain it in its consistency, to make it emerge in its own complexity. ... To substitute for the enigmatic treasure of "things" anterior to discourse, the regular formation of objects that emerge only in discourse. To define these objects uithout reference to the ground, the foundation of things, but by relating them to the body of rules that enable them to form as objects of a discourse and thus constitute the conditions of their historical appearance.53