## REAL UNREALITY

This line of thought, with its troubling of the traditional relationship of discourse and referent, of historical appearance and those things anterior to it, recalls another important commentary on photography. In a 1964 essay titled "Rhetoric of the Image, French critic Roland Barthes describes the photograph as a perverse enfoldment of denotation within connotation, as a system of meaning torn internally between culture and nature. Seeking a semiology of the photographic image (and with it an "ontology of the process of signification"), Barthes is "brought up against the paradox ... of a message without a code."54 This, he says, constitutes the “real unreality" of the photograph. The entanglement of one with its other (the coded with the uncoded, the real with the unreal) recurs in Barthes's last series of extended reflections on photography, published in 1980 under the title Camera Lucida.5⁵ This time he orchestrates his analysis of individual photographs by recourse to another pair of binary terms, studium and punctum, an artifice which allows him to distinguish between a given photograph's communal and private meanings. Once again, however, he finds it difficult to maintain the difference between the two. This is particularly clear when he brings these binaries to bear on his discussion of photography in general.

In an earlier book, The Pleasure of the Text (1973), Barthes again structures his discussion around a binary distinction (in this instance, between two opposing orders of pleasure he calls plaisir and jouissance). At the same time, he advises his readers that the erotic is best sought in “intermittence," in the flash "between two edges, the staging of an appearance-as-disappearance."56In Camera Lucida his analysis privileges a photograph of his mother taken in a conservatory when she was five years old. He refers to this photograph frequently but never reproduces it for his readers, despite the fact that he believes that "something like an essence of the Photograph floated in this particular picture."57 He thus stages photography's essence as another of these tantalizing flashes of appearance-as-disappearance, as yet another paradoxical play of absence within presence, blindness in insight.

Nor does the paradox of photography's identity end there. In "Rhetoric of the Image," Barthes describes the introduction of photography into human history as an event of revolutionary proportions: "The type of consciousness the photograph involves is indeed truly unprecedented, since it establishes not a consciousness of the being-there of the thing (which any copy could provoke) but an awareness of its having-been-there. What we have is a new space-time category: spatial immediacy and temporal anteriority, the photograph being an illogical conjunction between the herenow and the there-then."58

He repeats this idea in Camera Lucida. When looking at the image of his mother as a child and thinking of her recent death, Barthes laments the "anterior future" tense that he finds in this and all other photographs. Pondering an 1865 portrait of a condemned man, Barthes similarly observes that the subject depicted there is both dead and is going to die. "I read at the same time: This will be and this has been. ... The photograph tells me death in the future. . . . Whether or not the subject is already dead, every photograph is this catastrophe."59 The catastrophe is heightened by his awareness of the "stigmatum" of the having-been-there of the thing photographed. For him, photography's identity lies in the photograph's impossible but axiomatic articulation of time and history, in its simultaneous presentation of life and death. According to Barthes, then, the reality offered by the photograph is not that of truth-to-appearance but rather of truth-to-presence, a matter of being (of something's irrefutable place in space/time) rather than resemblance.

As Derrida quickly recognizes, Barthes's consistent collapsing of binary terms is the key move in his rewriting of photography.

For above all, and in the first place, this apparent opposition (studium/punctum) does not forbid but, on the contrary, facilitates a certain composition between the two concepts. What is to be understood by composition? Two things which compose together. First, separated by an insuperable limit, the two concepts exchange compromises; they compose together, the one with the other, and we will later recognize in this a metonymic operation; the "subtle beyond" of the punctum, the uncoded beyond, composes with the "always coded" of the studium. It belongs to it without belonging to it and is unlocatable in it; it never inscribes itself in the homogeneous objectivity of the framed space but instead inhabits, or rather haunts it: "it is an addition [supplément]: it is what I add to the photograph and what is none the less already there." ... Neither life nor death, it is the haunting of the one by the other. . . . Ghosts: the concept of the other in the same, the punctum in the studium, the dead other alive in me. This concept of the photograph photographs all conceptual oppositions, it traces a relationship of haunting which perhaps is constitutive of all logics.“

The failure to recognize this same haunting, and to transform it into an enabling politics, ultimately limits the prevailing Anglo-American view of photography. Postmodern criticism would simply reverse a given economy of oppositions and thus move from one side of a duality to the other. It wants to say, not photography but photographies; not nature but culture; not autonomy but context; not the "thing-itself" but discourse; not sameness but difference; not essentialism but antiessentialism. Most importantly, postmodernism comes down on the side of photography and power, not photography as power. As a consequence, photography continues to be conceived as an inconsequential vehicle or passage for “real" powers that always originate elsewhere.

One can already see a number of problems with this instrumental communication-model conception of photography. It neatly parallels, for example, phallocentrism's figuring of woman as a mere passage between man's body and that of "his" offspring, as if her materiality is of no account. Indeed, the postmodern conception of photography described above maintains the binary structure of logocentrism in all of its many manifestations, despite the early and frequent references to Derrida's critique of this logocentrism that appear in writings by Victor Burgin and, more recently, by John Tagg as well. Notwithstanding the deployment of a certain amount of poststructuralist rhetoric, contemporary photographic criticism remains bound to a structuralist mode of thinking, with its phallanx of unacknowledged binary oppositions. Indeed, these oppositions are the very foundation on which a postmodern theory of photography's identity has been erected. Thus, to disturb the self-certainty of this binary composure is to undermine not only postmodernism's concept of a "photography that is not one" but also its assumed political progressiveness.

## REPRESENTATION/REAL

When it comes right down to it, all of these oppositions reiterate a familiar distinction, the presumed divide between representation and the real. Allan Sekula, for example, refers to C. S. Peirce's semiotic schema when defining photographs as "physical traces of their objects," as signs having an indexical relationship to the world they represent. Indeed, according to Sekula, "because of this indexical property, photographs are fundamentally grounded in contingency."61 For Sekula, Peirce's schema also provides a "fundamental ground" for his own theory of photography; apparently indexicality is the only thing about photography that is not contingent. As Sekula would have it, "everything else, everything beyond the imprinting of a trace, is up for grabs."62 But what is the status of any ground that is in permanent contradiction with itself, that is apparently both contingent and not contingent?

Sekula attempts to clarify matters by carefully distinguishing indexical signs from their other, the class of signs known as symbols. "Symbols, on the other hand, signify by virtue of conventions or rules."63 Photography is a type of representation operating, at least in the first instance ("fundamentally"), before any conventions or rules. In coming to this conclusion, Sekula refers to Rosalind Krauss's influential writings about the index. In her two-part "Notes on the Index"(1977), Krauss argues that the contact print or photogram "only forces, or makes explicit, what is the case of all photography."64 Having already enlisted Lacan to establish an opposition between the symbolic (where, she claims, language presents the subject "with an historical framework preexistent to its own being,""forming a connection between objects and their meaning") and the imaginary (a state in which the subject is "disengaged from the conditions of history"), Krauss equates photography firmly with the latter."Its power is as an index and its meaning resides in those modes of identification which are associated with the Imaginary."65

Krauss reiterates the point when she repeats Barthes's aphorism "message without a code," not as a puzzling paradox but as a description of"the inherent features of the photograph," as evidence of the “fundamentally uncoded nature of the photographic image."66

It is the order oj the natural world that imprints itself on the photographic emulsion and subsequently on the photographic print. This quality of transfer or trace gives to the photograph its documentary status, its undeniable reracity. But at the same time this veracity is beyond the reach of those possible internal adjustments which are the necessary property of language. The connective tissue binding the objects contained by the photograph is that of the world itself, rather than that of a cultural system.7

So photography "traces" the order of nature (“the world itself"), not that of culture. And it does so without the internal adjustments, the mediating play of codes, that is apparently the sole preserve of language. However, Krauss's argument depends on a notion of language's fixed relationship to the world itself that, unlike Sekula, she will later refute. "An analogy we could make here is to the color spectrum which language arbitrarily divides up into a set of discontinuous terms—the names of hues. In order for language to exist, the natural order must be segmented into mutually exclusive units."68In her 1980 essay "In the Name of Picasso,"Krauss mounts a vigorous critique of this same nominalism, and with it the primacy she had previously given to a natural order preceding language. Activating the work of Ferdinand de Saussure, she stresses that the sign is a substitute for an always absent referent, such that absence is "the very condition of the representability of the sign."69 Accordingly, she now describes the notion of the sign-as-label as a"perversion."7oRepeating Saussure's dictum that "in language there are only differences without positive terms,"she presents the early collage practice of Braque and Picasso as one antidote to modernism's search for perceptual plenitude and unimpeachable self-presence." For Krauss, cubist collage is a proto-postmodern example of a "representation of representation."71 Where modernism remains invested in the originary presence of "objects of vision,"collage sets up “discourse in place of presence, a discourse founded on a buried origin."72

Krauss continues this line of argument in her subsequent discussions of photography, beginning with her 1981 essay "The Photographic Conditions of Surrealism. Once again she claims that "technically and semiologically speaking" the photograph is an index, “a kind of deposit of the real itself."73 However, some photography, and especially that produced by the surrealists in the 1920s and thirties, has apparently been able to employ specific strategies (which, referring to Derrida, Krauss describes using words such as supplement, en abyme, invagination, spacing, doubling, writing that constitute "reality as representation."74

The manipulations wrought by the surrealist photographers—the spacings and doublings——are intended to register the spacings and doublings of that very reality of which this photograph is merely the faithful trace. In this way the photographic medium is exploited to produce a paradox: the paradox of reality constituted as sign—or presence transformed into absence, into representation, into spacing into writing. .. . Reality was both extended and replaced or supplanted by that master supplement which is writing: the paradoxical writing of the photograph.75

By bringing Derrida to surrealism, Krauss provides photocriticism with a suggestive analogy between the photograph and a kind of writing. Nevertheless, in other respects her account retains a traditional notion of photography similar to that outlined by Sekula. Reality continues to precede a photography that is “merely" its "faithful trace." Photography is the indexical deposit of a real that it may mimic but of which it is never itself a part.76

Some of the theoretical and political consequences of this view of photography appear in Sekula's criticism. Although Sekula recognizes the discursively mediated character of social life (as in, for example, his accounts of the naturalization of the cultural), he continues to reproduce this differential as an ordered system of binary oppositions or contradictory negations (object-subject, self-other, appearancesubstance, bourgeois-proletariat). As a consequence, he maintains a division between, for example, nature and culture (as in his distinction between index and symbol) in a way that inflects his whole project. Rather than examining the manner in which each necessarily inhabits the other, he clings to the possibility of a reversal of terms and a resolutive telos based on noncontradiction. Thus his sometimes emancipatory tone (“Therein lies a promise and a hope for the future") tends to equate photography with the false consciousness of mere appearance and to oppose it to the hidden substance of humanity's real social relations." His criticism always wants to make present an absent, true presence, not to problematize the very categories of absence and presence themselves. No wonder that in his article on "The Body and the Archive," the body, unlike the archive, remains unproblematic. It is seemingly the ground, the existing reality, upon which an instrumental photography lavishes its unwelcome attentions."8 The photograph is once again no more than a transparent vehicle for the oppressive discourses of the state. Its relationship to power, contradictory or otherwise, is tied to its particular function or use, not to its own identity as a historical (and therefore political) practice of representation.

Sekula's reference to the index and Peircean semiotics provides a theoretical justification for maintaining a division between photography and the real. However, things are not so clear cut in Peirce's own writings. Derrida points out that, like Barthes, Peirce "complies with two apparently incompatible exigencies" and warns that it would be a mistake to "sacrifice one for the other."79 To summarize Derrida's argument, Peircean semiotics depends on a nonsymbolic logic even while recognizing that such a logic is itself a semiotic field of symbols. Thus, "No ground of nonsignification .. . stretches out to give it foundation under the play and the coming into being of signs." In other words, Peirce's work in fact never allows us to presume that there is a real world, an ultimate foundation, that somehow precedes or exists outside of representation. Real and representation, world and sign, must, in line with Peirce's own argument, always already inhabit each other.

According to Derrida, by maintaining this contradiction as central to his account of the sign,

Peirce goes very far in the direction that I have called the deconstruction of the transcendental signified, which, at one time or another, would place a reassuring end to the reference from sign to sign. I have identified logocentrism and the metaphysics of presence as the exigent, powerful, systematic, and irrepressible desire for such a signified. Now Peirce considers the indefiniteness of reference as the criterion that allows us to recognize that we are indeed dealing with a system of signs. . . . The thing itself is a sign. . . . The so-called "thing itself" is always already a representamen shielded from the simplicity of intuitive evidence. The representamen functions only by giving rise to an interpretant that itself becomes a sign and so on to infinity. . .. From the moment that there is meaning there are nothing but signs.80

Those who look to Peirce for pragmatic evidence of an extra-photographic real, the thing-itself, the generative source of the indexical signing that is the photographic process, will, if they look closely enough, find "nothing but signs." Accordingly, if we follow Peirce to the letter and rewrite photography as "signing of signs," we must logically include the real as but one more form of the photographic. It too is the becoming of signs. It too is a dynamic practice of signification. Any extended notion of photography's identity must therefore concern itself with the how of this becoming, with the perennial tracing of one sign within the grain of the other. In other words, we must regard photography as the representation of a reality that is itself nothing but a play of representations. More than that, if reality is such a representational system, it is one produced within, among other economies, the spacing of the photographic.

Victor Burgin would be well aware of any move signaled by a Derridean reading of Peirce. Burgin in fact used the above quotation from Derrida in an essay he published back in 1975, referring approvingly to Peirce's concept of “unlimited semiosis"

and often conjuring Derrida's critique of logocentrism as part of his own argument with the discourse of modernism.81 No doubt Burgin would be suspicious of any theory of photography that presumed a simple prerepresentational ground. His own criticism uses a Lacanian reading of psychoanalysis to describe the operations of photography in terms of a productive exercise of power. According to Burgin, the human subject is photography's illusory effect as well as its real producer. But, we should ask once again, what of that subject's body? Is the body also produced by photography, or does the brute matter of flesh and blood somehow precede its embrace by representation?

Burgin is careful to distance himself from the body-centric essentialism of a certain kind of feminism and also from what he calls "the biologistic reductionism which has tended to be the fate of psychoanalytic theory in the English-speaking world."82 Instead he denaturalizes our assumptions about the acquisition of masculinity and femininity and stresses the inherently social character of sexed subjectivity. According to Burgin, photography has a definite role in the construction of this character: "Forms of representation such as photography don't simply express a biologically pregiven femininity' or masculinity'; sexual difference, in the totality of its effects, doesn't precede the social practices which 'represent it,' doesn't function outside such practices, but is constructed within them, through them."83 As a consequence, we must factor into our accounts of photography“the recognition of sexuality as a construct, subject to social and historical change; and the recognition of the body as not simply given, as essence, in nature but as constantly reproduced, revised, in discourse."84 This argument hints at an unacknowledged contradiction. On the one hand, the body is never simply given in nature. On the other, this same body is constantly “reproduced" and "revised." This consistent choice of prefix implies the existence of a prediscursive body locatable at some originary point in time not yet subjected to the reiteration of the social. In "Tea with Madeleine," a paper first delivered in 1983, Burgin attempts to clarify what he means by referring the issue of sexed subjectivity back to just such a moment, the moment of birth. By so doing, he directly addresses the socially coded context ın which sexual differences are first established and confirmed.