earlier "Three American Painters" (1965), in Modern Art and Modernism, 115–21.

## 41. Ibid., 72.

42. John Szarkowski, The Photographer's Eye (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1966), unpaginated.

43. John Szarkowski, Photography Until Now (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1989). For a scathing critique of this exhibition, see Abigail Solomon-Godeau, "Mandarin Modernism: Photography Until Now,"Art in America 78, no. 12 (December 1990): 140–49, 183.

44. Szarkowski, The Photographer's Eye, unpaginated. For more on Szarkowski's approach to photographic history, see Christopher Phillips, "The Judgment Seat of Photography"(1982), in Annette Michelson, Rosalind Krauss, Douglas Crimp, and Joan Copjec, eds., October: The First Decade (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987), 257–93; Jonathan Green, "Surrogate Reality,"American Photograpby: A Critical History 1945 to the Present (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1984), 94–103; Joel Eisinger, "Formalism," Trace and Transformation: American Criticism of Photography in the Modernist Period (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1995), 210–44.

## 45. Szarkowski, Ibid.

46. For some background on the writing of this book, see Marta Braun, "A History of the History of Photography," Photo Communiqué 2, no. 4 (Winter 1980–81): 21–23; Mary Warner Marien, "What Shall We Tell the Children?: Photography and Its Text (Books)," Afterimage 13, no. 9 (April 1986): 4–7; Barbara L. Michaels, "Behind the Scenes of Photographic

History: Reyher, Newhall and Atget,"Afterimage 15, no. 10 (May 1988): 14–17; and Beaumont Newhall, Focus: Memoirs of a Life in Photography (Boston: Bulfinch Press, 1993).

47. Newhall's book has been extraordinarily influential on subsequent attempts to write the history of photography. Most have reiterated the basic structure of his art-historical model, concentrating on certain endlessly reproduced masterworks, usually photographs that are exceptional rather than typical of their genre and on a narrative organized around individual biographies and stylistic developments. Important (but often anonymous) photographic genres such as pornography, snapshots, or advertising, three of the largest in terms of sheer volume of production, are given scant attention (except when they can be tied into an art history). A few examples include: Peter Pollack, The Picture History of Photography (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1969); Ian Jeffrey, Photography: A Concise History (London: Thames and Hudson, 1981); Naomi Rosenblum, A World History of Photography (New York: Abbeville Press, 1984); Jean-Claude Lemagny and André Rouillé, eds., A History of Photography: Social and Cultural Perspectives (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987); Gael Newton, Shades of Light: Photography and Australia 1839–1988 (Canberra: Australian National Gallery, 1988); Sarah Greenhough, Joel Snyder, David Travis, and Colin Westerbeck, On the Art of Fixing a Shadow (Washington: National Gallery of Art and the Art Institute of Chicago, 1989); Mike Weaver, ed., The Art of Photography (London: The Royal Academy of the Arts, 1989); Michel Frizot, ed., Nouvelle Histoire de la Photographie (Paris: Bordas, 1994). One notable exception to this tendency is Heinz Henisch and Bridget

Henisch, The Photographic Experience 1839–1914: Images and Attitudes (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1994).

48. Szarkowski, Photography Until Now, 9.

49. Peter Galassi, Before Photography: Painting and the Inrention of Photography (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1981).

50. Ibid., 12.

51. Ibid., 14.

52. Ibid., 18, 28, 18.

53. Ibid,25

54. Ibid., 29.

55. Abigail Solomon-Godeau, "Tunnel Vision," The Print Collector's Nen'sletter 12, no. 6 (January-February 1982): 175. For a further critique of Before Photography, see Joel Snyder, "Review of Peter Galassi's Before Photography," Studies in Visual Communication (Winter 1982): 110-16.

56. Abigail Solomon-Godeau, "Calotypomania, in Photography at the Dock, 25. Interestingly, Galassi himself describes Beaumont Newhall's account of photography's history as"a tautology which in effect remands the interpretive burden to the scientific tradition" (Before Photograpby, 12). Galassi sees himself revising this "scientific tradition"in Before Photography. This is the same tradition that Eugenia Parry Janis contests in The Art of French Calotype, the exhibition and catalogue being reviewed (negatively, because she sees it as yet another formalist exercise in connoisseurship) in Solomon-Godeau's essay "Calotypomania." See Eugenia Parry Janis, "To Still the Telling Lens: Observations on the Art of French Calotype," The Creative Eye: Essays in Photographic Criticism (Occasional Papers of the Conneticut Humanities Council, no. 4, 1981), 53-64, and André Jammes and Eugenia Parry Janis, The Art of French Calotype (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983).

57. Jacques Derrida, "LIMITED INC..abc," Glyph 2 (1977): 236.

58. Ibid.

59. Szarkowski, "Before Photography," Photography Until Now, 11–19.

60. Victor Burgin, "Photography, Phantasy, Function"(1980), Thinking Photography, 187.

61. John Tagg, "A Democracy of the Image" (1984), The Burden of Representation, 40–41.

62. Allan Sekula, "Traffic in Photographs" (1981), Photography Against the Grain, 97.

## CHAPTER 2

1. My opening paragraph is a photographic paraphrase of a passage on the history of writing from Jacques Derrida's Of Grammatology, trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976), 28.

2. Helmut Gernsheim, The Origins of Photography (London: Thames and Hudson, 1982), 6.

3. From "Motives and particulars of the Bill presented by the Minister of the Interior (sitting of 15th June, 1839)," in An Historical and Descriptive Account of the various Processes of the Daguerreotype and the Diorama by Daguerre (London: McLean, 1839; reprint: New York: Krauss Reprint Co., 1969), 1, 3. François Arago's "Report" of July 6, 1839 to the

Chamber of Deputies was keen not only to distinguish Daguerre's invention from that of Niépce but also to repel foreign claiments (and particularly Talbot) to the title of first inventor of photography.

Had it been possible to disavow the importance of the Daguerreotype, and the place which it cannot fail to hold in the esteem of all men, all hesitation on our part would have ceased when we should have bebeld the pressing avidity of foreign nations in endeavouring to profit by an erroneous date, a fact beld in doubt, pretexts of the most frivilous nature, to substantiate a claim to priority, to try to add the brilliant ornament which will always be formed by photographical processes, to the crown of discoveries which every one of these nations is wont to wear. (as reproduced in Daguerre, Account, 30–31)

Arago's statement to the Académie des Sciences on January 7 is reproduced in Helmut and Alison Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre: The History of the Diorama and the Daguerreotype (New York: Dover Publications, 1968), 82–84. Arago's official statement was in turn preempted by newspaper reports, such as that written by H. Gaucheraud for the Gazette de France of January 6, 1839 (reproduced in Aaron Scharf, Pioneers of Photography: An album of pictures and words [London: British Broadcasting Corporation, 1975], 37).

4. Victor Fouque, The Truth concerning The Invention of Photography: Nicéphore Niepce (sic) his Life, his Endeavours, his Works (Paris: Library of Authors and of the Academy of Booklovers, 1867; reprint, New York: Arno Press, 1973), 1. Fouque's vehement support of Niépce as photography's "true inventor" is supported by recent essays by Jack Naylor, "The Truth Concerning the Invention of Photography," and Jean-Louis Marignier, "Photography: The

Invention of Nicéphore Niépce," in The Journal: New England Journal of Photographic History, nos. 144 and 145 (1995): 30–46.

5. Gernsheim, The Origins of Photography, 6. For more on his discovery of Niépce's "first photograph"see Helmut Gernsheim, "The 150th Anniversary of Photography,"History of Photograpby 1, no. 1 (January 1977): 3-8.

6. Marcel Bovis, "Technical Processes,"A History of Photograpby: Social and Cultural Perspectives, Jean-Claude Lemagny and André Rouillé, eds. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), 269.

7. Josef Maria Eder, History of Photography (New York: Columbia University Press, 1890; revised 1945), 60, 62. See also the section of Eder's chapter on Schulze, headed in typically forthright fashion "Rejection of the erroneous presentation of Schulze's merits by Potonniée in his Histoire de la Photographie, 1925"(62–63).

8. Lynn White, Jr., Machina Ex Deo: Essays in the Dynamism of Western Culture (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1968), 111–12.

9. Humphry Davy, "An Account of a Method of Copying Paintings Upon Glass etc," Journals of The Royal Institution, vol. 1 (London, 1802), as reproduced in R. B. Litchfield, Tom Wedgwood: The First Photographer, an Account of his Life, his Discovery and his Friendship with Samuel Faylor Coleridge including the Letters of Coleridge to the Wedgwoods, and an Examination of Accounts of alleged earlier Photographic Discoveries (London; Duckworth and Co., 1903), 189, 192, 194.

10. Litchfield, ibid., 201. 11. For more details on the milieu in which Wedgwood studied and experimented, see my "Tom Wedgwood and Humphry Davy: 'An Account of a Method," History of Photography 17, no. 2 (Summer 1993): 172–83.

12. The full title of Fulhame's self-published book was An Essay on Combustion, with a riew to a New .Art of Dying and Painting, uberein the Phlogistic and Antiphlogistic Hypotheses are Proved Erroneous. It was republished in Germany in 1798 and in the United States in 1810. Fulhame's work is discussed in more detail in Larry Schaaf, "The First Fifty Years of British Photography: 1794– 1844," in Michael Pritchard, ed., Technology and Art: The Birth and Early Years of Photography (Bath: Royal Photographic Society Historical Group, 1990), 11–12, and in Larry Schaaf, Sun Gardens: Iictorian Photograms by Anna Atkins (New York: Aperture, 1985), 23, 100.

13. Sec Larry Schaaf, "Sir John Herschel's 1839 Royal Society Paper on Photography," History of Photograpby 3, no. 1 (January 1979): 47–60.

14. Humphry Davy, "An Account of a Method of Copying Paintings Upon Glass etc," in Beaumont Newhall, eds., Photography: Essays & Images (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1980), 16.

15. Henry Talbot (1844), as quoted in Scharf, Pioneers of Photography, 17.

16. Newhall, Photography: Essays  Images, 23.

17. An example of this ware is reproduced in Eliza Meteyard, The Life of Josiah Wedgwood, Vol. II (London: Hurst & Blackett, 1866), 585. The name "silvered ware" comes from a letter by Tom Wedgwood written in February 1791. It was also sometimes known as "silver lustre ware."

18. Anthony Carlisle, as quoted in Gail Buckland, Fox Talbot and the Invention of Photography (St. Lucia, Australia: University of Queensland Press, 1980), 41.

19. As quoted in R. B. Litchfield, Tom Wedgwood,   
185-86.

20. Georges Potonniée, The History of the Discovery of Photography, trans. Edward Epstean (New York: Tennant and Ward, 1936), 42.

21. See Martin Gasser, "Histories of Photography 1839–1939," History of Photography 16, no. 1 (Spring 1992): 52. It is reproduced for example in Newhall, ed., Photography: Essays & Images, 13–14, under the title "Photography Predicted." Newhall dates Tiphaigne's "remarkable prophecy" at 1760. For a discussion of the date see Potonniée, The History of the Discovery of Photograpby, note 5, page 46. In The Origins of Photography, Helmut Gernsheim refers to Tiphaigne's book as "a remarkable forecast of photography"(22–23). He also refers to a 1699 fable by Fénelon and a tale by E.T.A. Hoffman as other early "Phantoms of Photography."

22. Tiphaigne de la Roche, Giphantie (1760), as reproduced in Potonniée, The History of the Discovery of Photography, 44.

23. Potonniée, ibid.

24. As quoted in Eder, History of Photography, 145. See also Gernsheim, The Origins of Photography, 28, and my "Tom Wedgwood and Humphry Davy," 183. Young was asked in 1828, the year before he died, by Sir Everard Home to comment on the potential utility of the heliographic experiments of Nicéphore Niépce. He made no connection between the aspirations of Niépce and those of Wedgwood and Davy (and himself?) as published twenty-six years before. After examining some of Niépce's plates, Young replied: "Mr. Nepcés [sic} invention appears to me to be very neat and elegant and I have no knowledge of any similar method having been before employed. How far it may become practically useful thereafter, is impossible for me to judge, especially without knowing the whole of the secret. But I see no reason to doubt of its utility, except that all novelties are liable to unforeseen difficulties"(as quoted in Torichan Pavlovich Kravets, ed., Documents on the History of the Invention of Photography [New York: Arno Press, 1979], document no. 69). In 1839 John Herschel described an experiment similar to the one Young undertook in 1803 as "a strictly photographic process." In the process he added Arago and Fresnel to the list of potential proto-photographers: "The blackening of Chloride of Silver had already been employed by Mssrs. Arago and Fresnel for the purpose of exhibiting by a strictly photographic process, the fringes of interference formed by the Chemical rays and thus demonstrating their susceptibility of Polarization. But for the present purpose it was necessary not only to produce, but to preserve the blackened traces" (John Herschel, "Note on the Art of Photography or The Application of the Chemical Rays of Light to the Purposes of Pictorial Representation" [March 14, 1839], as reproduced in Larry Schaaf, "Sir John Herschel's 1839 Royal Society Paper on Photography," History of Photograpby 3, no., 1 [January 1979]: 57–58).

25. Pierre Harmant, "Paleophotographic Studies: Was Photography Born in the 18th Century?," History of Photography 4, no. 1 (January 1980): 39– 45. Gernsheim (Origins, 29) also lends some credence to a 1796 date.

26. As declared in An Historical and Deşcriptive Account of the Daguerréotype and the Diorama by Daguerre, 39.

27. Letter from Claude to Nicéphore Niépce, February 24, 1824, as quoted in Fouque, The Truth Concerning the Invention of Photograpby, 57. 28. Gernsheim, The Origins of Photography, 42.

29. H. and A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 81.

30. Talbot, The Pencil of Nature (1844–46), unpaginated. Larry Schaaf has suggested that Talbot's thinking on photography in 1833 was actually prompted by his subconscious memory of an 1831 experiment by John Herschel: "I believe that what he was trying to recall was an 1831 demonstration that Herschel had made in Talbot's presence to Charles Babbage and Sir David Brewster. Herschel showed that one could form images in a test tube using light sensitive salts of platinum. . . . Using light to effect a chemical change was, of course, the basis of Talbot's inspiration just two years later, and Herschel's demonstration must have been at least a component of Talbot's subconscious underpinnings fcr the idea" (Larry Schaaf, "The First Fifty Years of British Photography: 1794–1844," in Technology and Art, 11).

31. Pierre Harmant, "Anno Lucis 1839: 1st Part," Camera no. 5 (May 1977): 39.

32. See Martin Gasser, "Histories of Photography 1839–1939," History of Photography. The sexualized economy of this process of historical claim and counterclaim is made explicit by W. Jerome Harrison, author of The History of Photography (1887), in a statement printed in the British Journal of Photography (October 12, 1888): "Inventing is like making love; no man can feel sure of having been the first."" (As quoted in John Hammond, The Camera Obscura: A Chronicle [Bristol: Adam Hilgar Ltd, 1981], 131).

33. See for example History of Photography 1, no. 4 (October 1977), which reproduces a watercolor held in the Lacock Abbey Collection with the remarkable caption "W. H. Fox Talbot (b. 1800), Father of Photography, aged 3, From a watercolour, (artist unknown)." John Werge suggests an even more crowded patrilineal genealogy for photography: "If we consider such men as Niépce, Reade, Daguerre, and Fox Talbot the fathers of photography, we cannot but look upon Thomas Wedgwood as the Grand Father, and the centenary of his first achievement should be celebrated with becoming honour as the English centenary of photography" (John Werge, The Erolution of Photography [New York: Arno Press, 1890, 1973], 125).

34. The tone of these cries of triumph is exemplified in Talbot's self-consciously learned choice of quotation for the title page of his first book of photographs, The Pencil of Nature (1844–46). Taken from Virgil's Georgics (III, 293), the Latin inscription reads: Juvat Ire Jugis Qua Nulla Priorum Castaliam Molli Devertitur Orbita Clivo (roughly translated, "It is a joyous thing to be the first to cross a mountain"). Talbot took out a patent on his Calotype process on February 8, 1841. (For a reproduction of this patent, no. 8842, see Gail Buckland, Fox Talbot and the Invention of Photography [Boston: David R. Godine, 1980], 204–6.) Daguerre had already sought to patent his daguerreotype process "within England, Wales, and the town of Berwick-upon-Tweed, and in all Her Majesty's Colonies and Plantations abroad" on June 1, 1839 and succeeded in doing so on July 15 of that year. See H.&A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 143–49, and R. Derek Wood, "The Daguerreotype Patent, The British Government, and The Royal Society," History of Photography 4, no. 1 [January 1980]: 53–59. There was almost immediate opposition to both of these patents and a number of subsequent injunctions and court cases took place. For a detailed discussion of two of these from 1852 and 1854, both involving Talbot, see R. Derek Wood, "J. B. Reade, F. R. S., and the Early History of Photography: Part II. Gallic Acid and Talbot's Calotype Patent," Annals of Science 27, no. 1 (March 1971): 47–

83., and R. Derek Wood, "The Involvement of Sir John Herschel in the Photographic Patent Case, Talbot v. Henderson, 1854," Annals of Sci ence 27, no. 3 (September 1971): 239–64. See also the chapter headed "Photography: Of Priority, Plagiarism and Patents" in H. J. P. Arnold, William Henry Fox Talbot: Pioneer of Photograpby and Man of Science (London: Hutchinson Benham, 1977), 175–216.

35. Vincent Descombes has even argued that "Foucault's theory of history must be sought in his manner of detailing these births and deaths." See Descombes, Modern French Philosophy, trans. L. Scott Fox and J. M. Harding (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980), 115.

36. Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York: Pantheon Books, 1972), 144.

37. Pierre Harmant, "Anno Lucis 1839: 3rd part," Camera, no. 10 (October 1977): 42.

38. The Athenaeum, no. 606, 435–36, as quoted in R. Derek Wood, "J. B. Reade, F. R. S., and the Early History of Photography: Part I. A Reassessment of the Discovery of Contemporary Evidence,"Annals of Science 27, no. 1 (March 1971): 13–45. The Athenaeum was not the only English journal to be sent such claims. On February 9, 1839, The Literary Gazette published a letter from an experimenter who claimed that he and two friends had, some thirty years previously, devised a process similar to Talbot's. They had given up, however, when they found "that the effects produced were the reverse of true—that which ought to have been black remaining white, and that which ought to have been white becoming black." It had not occurred to them at that time to make “an image of the image on a fresh field of muriate of silver, introduced into the camera obscura for the purpose." The letter is quoted in Keith I. P. Adamson, "1839–The Year of Daguerre," History of Photography 13, no. 3 (July-September 1989), 194.

39. The general desire to photograph that its invention both answered and induced is evidenced by its remarkably rapid spread around the globe. T'he daguerreotype was publicly available in France from August 19, 1839; a survey of other countries shows that daguerreotypes were first taken in England on September 13, in Germany on September 15, in the United States on September 16, in Poland on October 13 (with a "photogenic drawing" being produced there on July 9), in Egypt in November, and in Spain on November 18. Other countries quickly to experience the daguerreotype include Brazil (January 1840), Uraguay (February 29, 1840), Canada (September 17, 1840), Romania (1840), and Australia (May 13, 1841).

40. Contrary to the information given in some histories of photography, Davy's "Account" was in fact widely read and discussed. After appearing in the first issue of the Journals of the Royal Institution of Great Britain in June 1802, the "Account" was subsequently reproduced either in full, in translation, or as an abstract in a number of other journals. These included Nicholson's Journal of Natural Philosophy, Chemistry and the Arts (London [November 1802]), the Annale di chimica e storia naturale (Pavia [1802]), the Annalen der Physik (Halle [1803]), the Magazin for naturvidenskaberne (Berne [1824]), the Annales de chimie, ou recuil de mémoires concernant la chimie et les arts qui en dépendent (Paris [1802]), the Journal für die Chemie, Physik und Mineralogie (Berlin [1807]), Annals of Philosopby 3 ([1802]), Bibliotheque Britanique 22 (Geneva [January 1803]), William Henry's Epitome of Experimental Chemistry (Boston [1810]), Ackerman's

Repository 2 ([October 1816]), John Webster's Manual of Chemistry (Boston [2nd ed., 1828), and the Bulletin des sciences (Paris [c. 1820]). See June Z. Fullmer, Sir Humpbry Davy's Published Works (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1969), 36, and Schaaf, "The First Fifty Years of British Photography: 1794–1844," 18. Moreover David Brewster, later to be a close friend of Henry Talbot's, published a review of the "Account" in the December 1802 issue of the Edinburgh Magazine, and extensive extracts were included in Frederick Accum's System of Theoretical and Practical Chemistry and John Imison's System of Theoretical and Practical Chemistry, both published in 1803. The French were obviously also aware of Wedgwood and Davy's experiments. In a "Report" to the Chamber of Deputies of July 3, 1839, Arago includes the "Account" in his story of the daguerreotype's prehistory but disparagingly describes Wedgwood and Davy's experiments as "unsatisfactory and insignificant." See An Historical and Descriptive Account of the various Processes of the Daguerréotype and the Diorama by Daguerre, 15–16.

41. Daguerre had first publicly announced his invention, prematurely as it turned out, in a statement printed in Journal des Artistes on September 27, 1835 (H. & A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 73). As a consequence, his experiments were known among the Parisian elite. For example, Violet-le-Duc's father wrote to his son in Italy in 1836 to tell him about the purported marvels of the new process (André Jammes and Eugenia Parry Janis, The Art of French Calotype [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987], 146). However, Charles Chevalier would have it that as early as 1824 Daguerre had proclaimed to his friends (the Chevaliers, Paul Carpentier, Peron, "and others") that "I have found a way of fixing the images of the camera! I have seized the fleeting light