and imprisoned it! I have forced the sun to paint pictures for me!" (See H. & A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 49.) As a consequence of these exclamations and Daguerre's promotional efforts, including his publication of a subscription brochure in late 1838, his experiments were apparently familiar to a certain echelon of Parisian society prior to Arago's announcement in January of 1839. A manuscript, written by Jules Pelletan and dated 1838, begins by asserting as much: "For some time there has been much talk in the circles of savants and artists of the fine discovery which M. Daguerre has made." This manuscript was published, with some minor revisions, in the Paris journal La Presse on January 24, 1839. See Peter J. Mustardo, "Early Impressions of the Daguerreotype from the Notebook of an Anonymous Frenchman: A Translation," History of Photograpby 9, no. 1 (January–March 1985): 53– 56, and some correspondence between Pierre Harmant and Mustardo in History of Photography 9, no. 3 (July-September 1985): 260. An article on the invention of the daguerreotype in The Spectator of February 2, 1839 also confirms that there had been some pre-1839 talk of Daguerre's experiments. This article claimed that rumors of his researches had "been the talk of the ateliers in Paris for several years; but no artist having seen any results, it was regarded as a delusion, like the search for the philosophers' stone, or perpetual motion." The article is quoted in Adamson, "1839– The Year of Daguerre," History of Photography, 191.

42. Henry Brougham, The Life and Times of Henry Lord Brougham written by himself in three volumes, vol. 1 (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1871), 69–70.

43. Samuel Morse, as quoted in Richard Rudisill, Mirror Image: The Influence of the Daguerreotype on

American Society (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1971), 35. The letter was first published in the New York Observer (where Morse's two brothers were editors) on April 20, 1839 and then in many other American newspapers.

44. Habersham's recollection was first published in 1914 in Edward Lind Morse, ed., Samuel F. B. Morse: His Letters and Journals, vol. 1 (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1914), 421. It seems likely that Habersham's account was solicited in the early 1850s, along with a testimony from Silliman, as evidence to be used in Morse's favor during a court case in Philadelphia. See Carleton Mabee, The American Leonardo: A Life of Samuel F. B. Morse (New York: Octagon Books, 1943), 309.

## 45. Mabee, The American Leonardo, 82.

46. Benjamin Silliman had met Davy and Accum in London in 1805, having himself been taught chemistry in Philadelphia by a man who had been working with Davy in London in 1802. Following these meetings Silliman returned to the United States to teach chemistry at Yale and subsequently, between 1808 and 1810, taught Samuel Morse in that subject. During this same time he would have been writing his "Notes on various subjects," including "an account of the New Discoveries of Professor Davy" for the second American edition of William Henry's An Epitome of Experimental Chemistry (Boston: William Andrews, 1810). This publication promised, among other things, "to facilitate the acquisition of chemical knowledge, by minute instructions for the performance of experiments." It would seem from this evidence that Silliman and Morse could hardly have been unaware of Wedgwood and Davy's own prior experiments. However, William Henry not Silliman wrote up Davy and Wedgwood's photographic experiments for the book

in question. Henry gave them no more than a short paragraph on page 196, repeating certain phrases used in the "Account" itself and concluding that "this property [of silver nitrate] furnishes a method of of copying paintings on glass, and transferring them to leather or paper." He then referred to the description provided by "Mr. T. Wedgwood, in Nicholson's Journal, 8vo. iii. 167." Silliman added notes to the pages before and after Henry's reference to the "Account" but, significantly, made no comments on the photographic experiments. He instead spoke at length about Davy's later experiments with galvanism. So Silliman may have tried to replicate Wedgwood and Davy's experiments in 1809–10, but the details of Henry's publication provide no evidence of this. As a consequence, 1821 seems the more reliable date for the first photographic experiments on the American continent.

## 47. Mabee, The American Leonardo, 406.

48. For more details, see my "Some Experiments of Mine': The Early Photographic Experiments of Samuel Morse," History of Photography 15, no. 1 (Spring 1991): 37–42.

49. Henry Hunt Snelling, The History and Practice of the Art of Photography; or the Production of Pictures Through the Agency of Light (New York G. P. Putnam, 1849), 9. I am grateful to Joan E. Hostetler for sending me a working draft of her as yet unpublished 1995 essay on Wattles, entitled "James Miles Wattles: A Footnote in Photographic History." See also the accounts of Wattles given in William Welling, Photograpby in America: The Formative Years 1839–1900 (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1978), 4, and in Rudisill, Mirror Image, 35–36.

50. Hubert, as quoted in H. & A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 73–74.

51. For more on Hubert, see Jammes and Janis, The Art of French Calotype, 9–11, 16, 110–11.

52. This report is reproduced as "Annexe 3" in Jean-Claude Gautrand, eds., Hippolyte Bayard: Naissance de l"image photographique (Amiens: Trois Cailloux, 1986), 193 (my translation, with the assistance of Marina Lvoss and Julian Perfanis).

53. The information in this quotation, and the previous one, is taken from Boris Kossoy, "Hercules Florence, Pioneer of Photography in Brazil," Image 20, no. 1 (March 1977): 12–21, and Kossoy, Hercules Florence, 1833: a descoberta isolada de Fotografia no Brasil (São Paulo: Livraria Duas Cidades, 1980). See also Kossoy's Origens e Expansao de Fotografia no Brasil: seculo XIX (Rio de Janeiro: Edicao FUNARTE, 1980). In a review of another of Kossoy's books, Hercules Florence 1833; a descoberta isolada de Fotografia no Brazil (1977), H. K. Henisch refers to Florence's inventions and states that "there is no reasonable doubt of their authenticity." See this review in History of Photography 2, no. 1 (January 1978): 89–91.

54. Eder, History of Photograpby, 181–83, and Pierre Harmant, "Anno Lucis 1839: 2nd Part," Camera, no.8 (August 1977): 37.

55. As quoted in Harmant, ibid., 38. See also Gernsheim, The Origins of Photography, 71. Most of the following information comes from either Harmant or Gernsheim, with, where their information is in conflict, the latter being regarded as the more reliable source.

56. As quoted in Gernsheim, The Origins of Photograpby, 71.

57. Ibid.

58. Ibid., 72.

59. Helmut Gernsheim, Incunabula of British Photographic Literature (London: Scholar Press, 1984), 16.

60. Welling, Photography in America, 4.

61. As quoted in Harmant, "Anno Lucis 1839: 2nd Part," Camera 8, 37. See also my "José Ramos Zapetti," History of Photography 17, no. 2 (Summer 1993): 215.

62. As quoted in Marie-Loup Sougez, Historia de la fotografia (Madrid: Ed. Cátedra, 1981), 208–9 (my translation, assisted by Gail and Hilda Tighe). On Zapetti's claims see also Lee Fontanella, La Historia de la Fotografia en Espagna: desde sus origenes basta 1900 (Madrid: El Viso, 1981), 24.

63. Vernon Heath, V'ernon Heath's Recollections (London, Paris, and Melbourne: Cassell & Co., 1892), 47–49. For more on Heath, see my "Vernon Heath's Recollections (1892)," History of Photography 16, no. 1 (Spring 1992): 78. Further useful information on the camera lucida is provided in Larry Schaaf, Tracings of Light: Sir John Herschel & the Camera Lucida (San Francisco: The Friends of Photography, 1989), and John H. Hammond and Jill Austin, The Camera Lucida in Art and Science (Bristol: Adam Hilger, 1987).

64. Talbot, as reproduced in Newhall, Photography: Essays  Images, 23–24.

65. The Literary Gazette (February 9,·1839), 90, as quoted in Adamson, "1839–The Year of Daguerre," History of Photography, 194.

66. Chambers' Edinburgh Journal, October 19, 1839, as quoted in Floyd Rinhart and Marion Rinhart, The American Daguerreotype (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1981), 429.

67. Niépce wrote to Claude on September 16, 1824, as quoted in Beaumont Newhall, Latent Image: The Discovery of Photograpby (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1967), 27. Niépce wrote to Daguerre on June 4, 1827, as quoted in Victor Fouque, The Truth Concerning the Invention of Photograpby, 72. Daguerre sent Niépce his letter on February 3, 1828, as quoted in Newhall, Latent Image, 34.

68. Arago, in his speech to the Academie des Sciences on January 7, 1839, as reproduced in H. & A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 82.

69. Arago, in his report to the Chamber of Deputies on July 6, 1839, as reproduced in Daguerre's An Historical and Descriptive Account, 14.

## CHAPTER 3

1. Michel Foucault, "Nietzsche, Genealogy, History" (1971), in Language, Counter-Memory, Practice, ed. Donald Bouchard (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1977), 142.

2. Louis Daguerre, An Historical and Descriptive Account of the various Processes of the Daguerréotype and the Diorama, (London: McLean, 1839), 60.

3. Henry Talbot, "Some Account of the Art of Photogenic Drawing, or, The Process by Which Natural Objects May Be Made to Delineate Themselves without the Aid of the Artist's Pencil"(January 31, 1839), as reproduced in Beaumont Newhall, ed., Photography: Essays & Images (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1980), 23–30.

4. Michel Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (New York: Vintage Books, 1970), ix, xi.

5. Michel Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–1977, ed.

Colin Gordon (Brighton: The Harvester Press, 1980), 211.

6. Raymond Williams, Keywords: A vocabulary of Culture and Society (Glasgow: Fontana, 1976), 184, 186. For a general history of the idea of nature up to about 1800, see Clarence J. Glacken, Traces on the Rhodian Shore: Nature and Culture in Western Thought from Ancient Times to the End of the Eighteenth Century (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967).

7. For a more detailed discussion of this issue, see L. J. Jordanova, introduction, in L. J. Jordanova, ed., Languages of Nature: Critical Essays on Science and Literature (London: Free Association Books, 1986), 15–47. As she writes, "Ways of writing about nature are thus bound up with ways of knowing about nature, and hence with questions of scientific method" (28).

8. James Thompson (1700–1748), as quoted in Jane Clark, The Great Eighteenth Century Exhibition (Melbourne: National Gallery of Victoria, 1983), 89.

9. Linnaeus, as quoted in Bernard Smith, European Vision and the South Pacific 1768-1850: A Study in the History of Art and Ideas (London: Oxford University Press, 1960), 5. For more on the Linnaean method see also Frans A. Stafleu, Linnaeus and the Linnaeans (Utrecht: A. Oosthoek's Uitgeversmaatschappij N.V., 1971), and Peter Salm, The Poem as Plant: A Biological View of Goethe's Faust (Cleveland: Press of Case Western Reserve University, 1971).

10. Foucault, The Order of Things, 75–76.

11. Marjorie Nicholson, The Microscope and English Imagination (Northampton, Mass. Department of Modern Languages of Smith College, 1935), 81–82.

12. This sketch of the Enlightenment concept of nature is taken from William Powell Jones, The Rhetoric of Science: A Study of Scientific Ideas and Imagery in Eighteenth-Century English Poetry (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966), 28–29.

13. See for example Madeleine Barthélemy-Madaule, Lamarck the Mythical Precursor: A Study of the Relations between Science and Ideology, trans. M. H. Shank (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1982). As Barthélemy-Madaule says in her second chapter, headed "Nature":"The end of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth century is a period of disjunction between what had been the 'natural history'dominated by the illustrious Buffon, and what would be called 'biology' by Lamarck in France and Treviranus in Germany, among others.... Thinkers did not seem conscious very often (let alone necessarily) of the twofold movement in which they participated and the contradiction they embodied”(22).

14. See Derek Gjertsen, The Newton Handbook (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1986), 7–8.

15. Coleridge, as quoted in Raimonda Modiano, Coleridge and the Concept of Nature (London: MacMillan, 1985), 8.

16. Ibid., 208. Modiano shows that Coleridge's statement is closely based on a passage from Herder's Kalligone, which Coleridge was annotating at the time, and was also closely related to a description of nature provided by Goethe in 1783.

17. Coleridge, as quoted in H. W. Piper, "Coleridge and the Unitarian Consensus," in R. Gravil and M. Lefebure, eds., The Coleridge Connection: Essays for Thomas McFarland (London: MacMillan, 1990), 287.

18. Coleridge, as quoted in T. E. Thorpe, Humphry Davy: Poet and Philosopher (London: Cassell & Co., 1896), 74.

19. Carleton Mabee, The American Leonardo: A Life of Samuel F. B. Morse (New York: Octagon Books, 1943), 29.

20. Earl K. Wasserman, "The English Romantics: The Grounds of Knowledge," Studies in Romanticism, no. 4 (1964): 26.

21. Ibid., 25.

22. Owen Barfield, W'hat Coleridge Thought (London: Oxford University Press, 1971), 22, 198,199.

23. For a more detailed discussion of this concept see Barfield's chapter "Two Forces of One Power," in ibid., 27–40.

24. Modiano, Coleridge and the Concept of Nature, 141.

25. Barfield, What Coleridge Thought, 52.

26. See, for example, Earl Wasserman, "The English Romantics: The Grounds of Knowledge," Studies in Romanticism, 33-34.

What Wordsworth, Coleridge, Keats, and Shelley chose to confront more centrally and to a degree unprecedented in English literature is a nagging problem in their literary culture: How do subject and object meet in a meaningful relationship? By what means do we have a significant awareness of the world? ... The four Romantics, it is clear, are sharply at odds with each other.... But the very fact that their positions do clash so directly ... instead of being merely unrelated, confirms that they all face the central need to find a significant relationship between the subjective and objective worlds. We may conceive of poetry as made up superficially of features, such as nature images,

melancholy, or lyricism; but it is made by purposes, and epistemology is poetically constitutive. All the Romantics, it is true, give extraordinary value to a faculty they call the imagination because they must postulate an extraordinary faculty that bridges the gap between mind and the external world; but no two of them agree on a definition of this faculty, any more than they do on the mode of existence of the external nature they so commonly write about.

27. As quoted in Gail Buckland, Fox Talbot and the Invention of Photography (St. Lucia, Australia: University of Queensland Press, 1980), 31.

28. Nicéphore Niépce, as quoted in Victor Fouque, The Truth Concerning the Invention of Photography: Nicephore (sic) Niépce, His Life, Letters and Works (New York: Tennant and Ward, 1867, 1935), 161.

29. Daguerre, An Historical and Descriptive Account of the various Processes of the Daguerréotype and the Diorama, 41.

30. This note is reproduced in Russian and French in T. P. Kravets, ed., Dokumenty Po Istorii Izobretniia Fotografii (New York: Arno Press, 1944, 1979), 401–2. A not always faithful transcription/translation is provided by Scharf, Pioneers of Photography, 35.

31. As quoted in Helmut and Alison Gernsheim, L.J. M. Daguerre: The History of the Diorama and the Daguerreotype (New York: Dover, 1968), 54, 57.

32. Niépce, as quoted in ibid., 67.

33. Daguerre, as quoted in ibid., 79–81.

34. Ibid., 81.

35. Talbot, "Some Account of the Art of Photogenic Drawing"(1839), in Newhall, Photography: Essays  Images, 25.

36. See the complete document in ibid., 23-30.

37. Talbot, as quoted in Larry Schaaf, Out of the Shadows: Herschel, Talbot  the Invention of Photography (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), 48.

38. Ibid., 65.

39. Ibid., 66.

40. Talbot, "Some Account of the Art of Photogenic Drawing," in Newhall, Photography: Essays  Images, 23.

41. Georges Potonniée, The History of the Discovery of Photography (New York: Tenant and Ward, 1936), 97.

42. Claude Niépce, February 24, 1824, as quoted in Fouque, The Truth Concerning the Invention of Photography, 57.

43. Nicéphore Niépce, September 16, 1824, as quoted in Beaumont Newhall, Latent Image: The Discovery of Photograpby (New York: Doubleday, 1967), 27.

44. Nicéphore Niépce, June 4, 1827, as quoted in H.& A. Gernsheim, L.J. M. Daguerre, 56-57.

45. Ibid., 186.

46. David, as quoted in ibid., 7.

47. As quoted in ibid., 31.

48. Schaaf, Out of the Shadows, 11.

49. Ibid., 12.

50. Ibid., 12.

51. Talbot, as quoted in H.J. P. Arnold, William Henry Fox Talbot: Pioneer of Photography and Man of Science (London: Hutchinson Benham, 1977), 48.

52. William Gilpin (1768), as quoted in Luke Herrmann, British Landscape Painting of the Eighteenth Century (London: Faber & Faber, 1973), 112.

53. William Gilpin, Three Essays on Picturesque Beauty; on Picturesque Travel; and on Sketching Landscape: to which is added a poem, on Landscape painting (2nd ed., 1794; reprint: Westmead: Gregg International Publishers, 1972), 28.

54. Herrmann, British Landscape Painting of the Eighteenth Century, 26. Christopher Hussey tells us that "later in the century Thomas West (A Guide to the Lakes, 1778) recommended the use of two glasses, one on dark foil for sunny days and one on silver for dull days." See Christopher Hussey, The Picturesque: Studies in a Point of View (London: Archon Books, 1927, 1967), 107. In a later publication, A Guide to the Lakes in Cumberland, Westmorland, and Lancashire (1784), West gave the following description of the Claude Glass.

The landscape mirror will also furnish much amusement, in this tour. Where the objects are great and near, it removes them to a due distance, and shews them in the soft colours of nature, and in the most regular perspective the eye can perceive, or science demonstrate. The mirror is of the greatest use in sunshine; and the person using it ought always to turn his back to the object that he views. It should be suspended by the upper part of the case, and the landscape will then be seen in the glass, by holding it a little to the right or left (as the position of the parts to be viewed require) and the face screened from the sun. A glass of four inches, or four inches and a half diameter is a proper size.

As quoted in Doug Nickel, "The Camera and Other Drawing Machines," in Mike Weaver, ed., British Photography in the Nineteenth Century: The Fine Art Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1989), 5. The most notoriously enthusiastic advocate for the Claude Glass was the English poet Thomas Gray; as a result they were sometimes known as Gray Glasses. In a letter from November 1769, Gray described to a friend his view from the Crosthwaite Vicarage garden. "(I) saw in my glass a picture, that if I could transmitt to you, & fix it in all the softness of its living colours, would fairly sell for a thousand pounds, this is the sweetest scene I can yet discover in point of pastoral beauty. the rest are in a sublimer style"(as quoted in Malcolm Andrews, The Search for the Picturesque: Landscape Aestbetics and Tourism in Britain, 1760–1800 [Aldershot: Scolar Press, 1989], 187).

55. A. Walker (1792), as quoted in Andrews, The Search for the Picturesque, 68.

56. Gilpin, Forest Scenery (1791), as quoted in ibid., 69. Elsewhere in his book, Gilpin refers to the flattening, theatrical effect that the Claude Glass mirror image had on landscape forms, making them look "something like the scenes of a playhouse, retired behind each other” (Ibid., 29).

57. Robison was writing in The Atheneaum in May 1839, as quoted in Newhall, Latent Image, 84. His comparison is understandable in that the Claude Glass also closely resembled the daguerreotype in size and packaging. William Mason described the glass in 1827 as "a Planoconvex Mirror of about four inches diameter on a black foil, and bound up like a pocket book" (as quoted in John Dixon Hunt, "Picturesque Mirrors and the Ruins of the Past," Art History 4, no. 3 [September 1981]: 257). Sometimes the glass was rectangular, but a circular mirror was more usual. Daguerre's

early daguerreotypes also sometimes varied in format between circular and rectangular images.

58. Gilpin, as quoted in John Murdoch, "John Constable in the Lake District, September-October 1806," in The V & A Album 3 (London: De Montford Publishing, 1984), 97.

59. As quoted in Carole Fabricant, "The Aesthetics and Politics of Landscape in the Eighteenth Century," in Ralph Cohen, ed., Studies in Eighteenth-Century British Art and Aesthetics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985), 71.

60. William Gilpin Jr., 1788, as quoted in Carl Paul Barbier, William Gilpin: His Drawings, Teaching and Theory of the Picturesque (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963), 111.

61. Dr. William Wollaston took out a patent for his camera lucida in 1806. The idea for such an instrument had apparently come to him during a walking tour with a friend, Henry Hasted, in late 1800. See John H. Hammond and Jill Austin, The Camera Lucida in Art and Science (Bristol: Adam Hilger, 1987), 4-5. There are two versions of the camera lucida as a drawing instrument, the "seethrough" and the "split-pupil." In the first, the artist sees his or her paper and pencil by means of a reflection while in the other the reflection is observed with half the pupil while the other half sees the paper and pencil. In this second type, the brain fuses the two images so that the scene being viewed on the back of the retina appears to be on the paper, thus enabling the hand to trace its features. For an extensive discussion of the camera lucida, see Larry J. Schaaf, Tracings of Light: Sir Jobn Herschel  The Camera Lucida (San Francisco: The Friends of Photography, 1989), and my "Detours: Photography and the Camera Lucida," Afterimage 18, no. 2 (September 1990): 14–15.

62. Rosalind Krauss, "The Originality of the Avant-Garde" (1981), in The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1985), 162.

63. Krauss, ibid., 163, 166.

64. Barbier, William Gilpin, 104.

65. This, for example, is a structuring theme of Goethe's 1809 novel Elective Affinities, trans. Elizabeth Mayer and Louise Bogan (South Bend, Ind.: Gateway Editions, 1963).

66. Barbier, William Gilpin, 103, 106, 72, 143.

67. Gilpin, as quoted in Wendelin A. Guentner, "British Aesthetic Discourse, 1780–1830: The Sketch, the Non Finito, and the Imagination," Art Journal 52, no. 2 (Summer 1993): 44.

68. See Hussey, The Picturesque, 4, and Samuel H. Monk, The Sublime: A Study of Critical Theories in XVIII-Century England (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935, 1960), 155.

69. See Modiano, Coleridge and the Concept of Nature, 20.

70. Coleridge, as quoted in ibid. Coleridge was himself familiar with picturesque theory, having read the work of Gilpin and having written an anonymous review of Knight's poem "Landscape" in 1796; he also owned a copy of Price's Essay on the Picturesque and with Wordsworth annotated a copy of Knight's An Analytical Inquiry into the Principles of Taste (Ibid., 5).

71. The picturesque is described as an "unstable term" in Martin Price, "The

Picturesque Moment," in Frederick W. Hilles and Harold Bloom, eds., From Sensibility to Romanticism: Essays Presented to Frederick A. Pottle (New York: Oxford University Press, 1965), 259–92. Walter Hipple also describes it as acquiring a"systematic ambiguity"around this time. See Walter Hipple, The Beautiful, The Sublime  The Picturesque in Eighteenth-Century British Aesthetic Theory (Carbondale: The Southern Illinois University Press, 1957), 188.

72. Richard Payne Knight (1805), as quoted in Manwaring, Italian Landscape in Eighteenth Century England, 198–99.

73. As quoted in John Dixon Hunt and Peter Willis, eds., The Genius of the Place: The English Landscape Garden 1620-1820 (London: Paul Elek, 1975), 350. Knight's long Inquiry covers many issues and debates, among them the question of novelty, expressed in terms of the irregularity, intricacy, and variety needed to achieve this particular quality in a picturesque scene. This concern broaches the difficult topic of transience and fixity. Knight addresses the art of gardening as much as painting, and this caused him some problems of definition. Gardens, like scenes in nature, offered a sequence of ever-changing novelties that required a mobile viewer and a passage of time in which to look. Painted landscapes, by contrast, were composed from a single, fixed point of view, demanding a static viewing position and representing a more stable and singular conjunction of time and space. No wonder that Knight had difficulty reconciling these two picturesques. As one commentator has written, "Knight was confused by the inevitable difficulty of distinguishing between space and time; of novelties which succeed one another at relatively distinct intervals, and novelties which are juxtaposed; of what is

apprehended in measured sequence and what is apprehended at a glance." See Peter Collins, Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture 1750–1950 (London: Faber and Faber, 1965), 55.

74. Newton's Opticks opens with the following passage: "In a very dark Chamber, at a round Hole, about one third Part of an Inch broad, made in the Shut of a Window, I placed a Glass Prism, whereby the Beam of the Sun's Light, which came in at that Hole, might be refracted upwards toward the opposite Wall of the Chamber, and there form a colour'd Image of the Sun" (as quoted in Marjorie Hope Nicolson, Nenton Demands the Muse: Newton's 'Opticks' and the 18th Century Poets [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1946], 5). Nicolson provides copious detail about the influence of Newton's thinking about optics and light on the epistemology (and especially the poetry) of the eighteenth century.

75. Darwin, as quoted in McNeil, "The Scientific Muse: The Poetry of Erasmus Darwin," in Jordanova, ed., Languages of Nature, 185.

76. Ibid., 185–86.

77. This tendency toward modification even led one mid-eighteenth-century instructional book on drawing to warn its readers about the camera obscura.

It cannot be denied that certain general lessons can in fact be drawn from it of broad masses of shadows and light: and yet too exact an imitation would be a distortion; because the way in which we see natural objects in the camera obscura is different from the way in which we see them naturally. This glass interposed between objects and their representation on the paper intercepts the rays of the reflected light which render shadows visible and pleasantly coloured, thus shadows are rendered darker by it than they would be naturally. Local colours of objects being condensed in a smaller space and losing little of their strength seem stronger and brighter in colour. The effect is indeed heightened but it is false.

M. G. J. Gravesande, in Charles-Antoine Jombert's instructional book on drawing, as quoted in Aaron Scharf, Art and Photography (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1974), 21.

78. Knight, The Landscape, a Didactic Poem (1794), as quoted in Stephen Daniels, "The political iconography of woodland in later Georgian England," in Cosgrove and Daniels, eds., The Iconography of Landscape, 65.

79. Jean Hagstrum, The Sister Arts: The Tradition of Literary Pictorialism and English Poetry from Dryden to Gray (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958), 141–42.

80. See, for example, John Dixon Hunt, "Picturesque Mirrors and the Ruins of the Past," in Art History, 258:

It was the privileged metaphor of artistic representation, authorizing—according to one's emphasis—either accuracy of vision or the capture of the belle nature. To the picturesque tourist and amateur artist it reflected the real world, yet also collected carefully chosen images within the oval or rectangular frame and coloured them with its one, co-ordinating, tint. It was both an objective, cognitive activity and a private, creative one, as the mirror's user turned his back upon the scene and withdrew into his own reflection. The reversed images in the glass, paralleling of course the upside-down images we receive upon our retinas, were a visible token of that joint world of optical and mental refections, the latter being what Locke called "the notice which the mind takes of its own operations, and the manner of them." This doubleness of re-Aection is likewise announced in the relationship of speculation and speculum, the Latin for mirror.

81. Niépce, March 12, 1816, as quoted in Fouque, The Truth Concerning the Invention of Photography, 29.

82. Niépce, May 5, 1816, as quoted in ibid., 30.

83. Talbot, as quoted in Gail Buckland, Fox Talbot and the Invention of Photograpby, 81.

84. Biot, as quoted in H. & A. Gernsheim, L.J. M. Daguerre, 84.

85. Jonathan Crary, "Modernizing Vision," in Hal Foster, ed., Vision and Visuality: Dia Art Foundation Discussions in Contemporary Culture Number 2 (Seattle: Bay Press, 1988), 42.

86. Jonathan Crary, Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990), 3, 4. It is interesting to compare Goethe's supposedly "stunning" suggestion with the sensory experience described by that staid English gentleman William Gilpin in his 1792 essay “On Picturesque Travel":

We are, in some degree, also amused by the very visions of fancy itself. Often, when slumber has half-closed the eye, and shut out all the objects of sense, especially after the enjoyment of some splendid scene; the imagination, active, and alert, collects its scattered ideas, transposes, combines, and shifts them into a thousand forms, producing such exquisite scenes, such sublime arrangements, such glow, and harmony of colouring, such brilliant lights, such depth, and clearness of shadow, as equally foil description, and every attempt of artificial colouring.

As quoted in Alasdair Clayre, ed., Nature and Industrialization (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977), 28.

87. Talbot, as quoted in Buckland, Fox Talbot and the Invention of Photography, 21.

88. Crary, "Techniques of the Observer," October 45 (Summer 1988): 4. Although he here uses the

term post-Kantian, Crary includes Kant among his pioneers of modern vision. Indeed he argues that "clearly Kant's 'Copernican revolution'(Drehung) of the spectator, proposed in the preface to the second edition of the Critique of Reason (1787), is a definitive sign of a new organization and positioning of the subject" (5). Crary projects Hegel as an even more significant figure. "In the preface to his Phenomenology (1807), Hegel makes a sweeping repudiation of Lockean perception and situates perception within an unfolding that is temporal and historical. While attacking the apparent certainty of sense perception, Hegel implicitly refutes the model of the camera obscura" (10).

89. Crary, Techniques of the Observer, 5, 10.

90. Crary, "Techniques of the Observer," October,   
14.

91. Crary, "Modernizing Vision," Vision and Visuality, 36. In the discourses of biology, themselves only recently constituted as a distinctive discipline, the convenient separation of psychology and physiology was now bridged by a third term that was not so much a thing as a "system" of communications between the first two. See Karl M. Figlio, "Theories of Perception and the Physiology of Mind in the Late Eighteenth Century," History of Science 13 (1975): 177–78.

92. Cowper, as quoted in Hagstrum, The Sister Arts, 139.

93. Coleridge, as quoted in Jack David, ed., Discussions of William Wordsworth (Boston: D. C. Heath & Co., 1964), 7.

94. John Clare, "Autobiography" (c. 1824–25), as quoted in Brownlow, John Clare and Picturesque Landscape, 13.

Magic Mirror" is published in Mike Weaver, ed., The Art of Photograpby (London: The Royal Academy of the Arts, 1989), 15–17.

96. Talbot, "Brief Historical Sketch of the Art," The Pencil of Nature (London: Longman, Brown, Green, & Longman's, 1844–46), unpaginated.

97. M. H. Abrams, The Mirror and the Lamp: Romantic Theory and the Critical Tradition (New York: Oxford University Press, 1953), viii, 57.

98. Ibid., 58.

99. Stephen J. Spector, "Wordsworth's Mirror Imagery and the Picturesque Tradition," English Literary History, no. 44 (1977): 87.

100. Coleridge, as quoted in (and deleting Coleridge's own erasions), Kathleen Coburn, "Reflections in a Coleridge Mirror: Some Images in His Poems,"in Frederick W. Hilles and Harold Bloom, eds., From Sensibility to Romanticism: Essays presented to Frederick A. Pottle (New York: Oxford University Press, 1965), 423. Coburn mentions that Coleridge had considered writing an"Ode to a Looking Glass" in 1795–96 and claims that "the mirror, the looking-glass of Narcissus, is in obvious and also in less obvious ways connected with the search for the self"(417).

101. Coleridge, in a letter to his wife, November 16, 1802, in Earl Leslie Griggs, ed., Collected Letters of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Vol. II 1801–1806 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1956), 883.

102. R. B. Litchfield, Tom Wedgwood: The First Photographer (London: Duckworth & Co., 1903), 122.

103. An illustration of Aristotle's observation is found in John Hammond, The Camera Obscura: A Chronicle (Bristol: Adam Hilgar, 1981), ii, and also in Gaston Tissandier, A History and Handbook of Photography (London: Sampson, Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1878), 3.

104. As quoted in Owen Barfield, "The Harp and the Camera" (1977), in Thomas Barrow, Shel ley Armitage and William Tydeman, eds., Reading into Photography: Selected Essays 1959–1980 (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1982), 103.

105. Abrams, The Mirror and the Lamp, 61.

106. Coleridge, as quoted in ibid., 346.

107. Coleridge, as quoted in Hans Aarsleff, From Locke to Saussure: Essays on the Study of Language and Intellectual History (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1982), 205. See also the letters to the Wedgwoods in Griggs, ed., Collected Letters of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Vol. II 1801–1806, 677-709.

108. Coleridge, in Griggs, ibid., 709.

109. Talbot, "Some Account of the Art of Photogenic Drawing" (1839), in Newhall, Photograpby: Essays  Images, 25.

110. Talbot, The Pencil of Nature, unpaginated.

111. Hubertus von Amelunxen, Die aufgehobene Zeit: die Erfindung der Photographie durch William Fox Talbot (Berlin: Nishen, 1988), 44 (translation by Olav Westphalen).

112. Ibid., 40.

113. As quoted in Beaumont Newhall, "Eighteen Thirty-Nine: The Birth of Photography," in Weston Naef, ed., Photography: Discovery and Invention (Malibu: The J. Paul Getty Museum, 1990), 22.

114. The Athenaeum, August 2, 1845, as quoted in Larry Schaaf, "A Wonderful Illustration of Modern Necromancy': Significant Talbot Experimental Prints in the J. Paul Getty Museum,' ibid., 31.

of the Form: Narrative Discourse and Historical Representation (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press), 124.

117. Linda Nochlin, Realism (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1971), 31.

118. William Gilpin, as quoted in Timothy Brownlow, John Clare and Picturesque Landscape (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983), 12. Brownlow argues that in this passage Gilpin, "uses his eye like a cine-camera."

119. Gilpin, Forest Scenery (1791), as quoted in Spector, "Wordsworth's Mirror Imagery and the Picturesque Tradition," English Literary History, 89.

120. Krauss, "The Originality of the Avant-Garde," in The Originality of the Avant-Garde, 164–65.

121. Malcolm Andrews, "Claude Glasses and Rosa-Tinted Spectacles," a lecture delivered as part of a conference titled "Landscape and the Arts I: Europe 1700–1900" (Canberra, July 1984), unpaginated.

122. See J. J. C. Smart, Problems of Space and Time (New York: MacMillan, 1964), and Mark Kipperman, Beyond Enchantment: German Idealism and English Romantic Poetry (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1986).

123. For more details of these experiments and of Coleridge and Wedgwood's involvement in them, see note 44 in my "Tom Wedgwood and Humphry Davy: 'An Account of a Method," History of Photography 17, no. 2 (Summer 1993): 182-83.

124. Trevor Levere, Affinity and Matter: Elements of Chemical Philosophy 1800–1865 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), 31.

125. Ibid., 29–34.

126. Coleridge (1803), as quoted in Patricia S. Yaeger, "Coleridge, Derrida, and the Anguish of Writing," SubStance 12, no. 2 (1983): 91. According to Brownlow (John Clare and Picturesque Landscape, 5), the English poet Clare shared Coleridge's interest in this problem; he claims that in Clare's writing "the mobile and the static are fused together, as if his eye had a special lens."

127. Ross Gibson, "This Prison This Language: Thomas Watling's Letters from an Exile at Botany-Bay (1794)," in Paul Foss, ed., Island in the Stream: Myths of Place in Australian Culture (Sydney: Pluto Press, 1988), 27. Gibson argues that Coleridge's "anxiety" arises from the fact that he is a subject "struggling to understand the significance of science and its observational methods."

128. Coleridge, in a letter to Southey, as quoted in Raimonda Modiano, "Spatial and Sensory Modes of Experience in Coleridge" (Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, San Diego, 1973), 8.

129. Coleridge, in The Statesman's Manual, or The Bible: the Best Guide to Political Skill and Foresight (December 1816), in R. J. White, ed., The Collected Works of Samuel Taylor Coleridge: Lay Sermons (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1972), 30.

130. Coleridge, as quoted in Richard Holmes, Coleridge: Early Visions (New York: Viking, 1989), 344.

131. Kathleen Coburn, ed., The Notebooks of Samuel Taylor Coleridge: Notes, Vol. 1, 1794–1804 (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1957), note 1705 [i]. According to Coburn, "When Coleridge's reservations about Kant's moral philosophy are becoming clearer to himself, he thinks of Schiller who shared his reservations on similar psycholog-

ical grounds. . . . It was also natural that Tom Wedgwood, who had abetted and sympathized with those interests, should come into his mind at this point too." For more on Wedgwood's various interests, see Margaret Olivia Tremayne, ed., The Value of a Maimed Life: Extracts from the Manuscript Notes of Thomas W'edgu'ood (London: C. W. Daniel, 1912).

132. Josiah Wedgwood (1800), in a letter to Thomas Poole, as quoted in Litchfield, Tom W'edgwood, 207.

133. Coleridge, as quoted in Richard Haven, Patterns of Consciousness: An Essay on Coleridge (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1969), 145-46.

134. Eliza Meteyard, A Group of Englishmen (1795 to 1815) being records of the Younger W'edgwoods And Their Friends embracing the history of the Discovery of Photography and a Facsimile Of The First Photograph (London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1871), 295 See also Coburn, The Notebooks of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, note 838, page 842.

135. See Michael J. Morgan, Molyneaux's Question: Vision, Touch and the Philosophy of Perception (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977).

136. Coburn, The Notebooks of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, note 1039.

137. Wedgwood, in Meteyard, A Group of Englishmen, 402–3.

138. Coleridge, as quoted in Litchfield, Tom Wedgwood, 181.

139. Constable, (May 1833), as reproduced in R. B. Beckett, ed., John Constable's Discourses (Suffolk Records Society, vol. 14, 1970), 9–10.

140. Corot, as quoted in Jean-Luc Daval, Photography: History of an Art (New York: Rizzoli, 1982), 14.

141. See Peter Galassi, Before Photography: Painting and the Invention of Photography (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1981).

142. See Guentner, "British Aesthetic Discourse, 1780–1830," Art Journal, 40–47.

143. As quoted in William Vaughan, Romantic Art (London: Thames and Hudson, 1978), 203.

144. Constable, as quoted in ibid., 197.

145. This was made manifest with the widespread introduction of railways (the Paris-St. Germain line opened in 1837). A person who had perhaps previously measured the relations of time and space according to how far an individual could walk or ride in a day could now sit in a still space and witness the world outside racing by in discontinuous fragments. Daumier's painting A Third-Class Carriage (c. 1865), beautifully captures this new experience. The relativity of appearance and time was of course at the heart of impressionist painting from the mid-1860s on. See, in particular, Virginia Spate, Claude Monet: Life and Work (New York: Rizzoli, 1992).

146. Ann Bermingham, "Reading Constable," Art History 10, no. 1 (March 1987): 38–58.

147. For an extensive history of the debate surrounding the term photography, see my "The Naming of Photography: 'A Mass of Metaphor," History of Photography 17, no. 1 (Spring 1993): 22-32.

148. Talbot was the first to use the word fix in relation to photography. On January 25, 1839, Talbot wrote to Herschel about "the possibility of fixing upon paper the image formed by a Camera Obscura, or rather, I should say, causing it to fix itself." On February 8, he wrote again, this time using the word more specifically and selfconsciously (“my method of fixing'") to refer to