34. Nicéphore Niépce, February 2, 1827, as quoted in Victor Fouque, The Truth Concerning the Invention of Photography: Nicéphore Niepce (sic), His Life, Letters and Works (New York: Arno Press, 1973), 66-67.

35. Niépce, December 8, 1827, as quoted in Fouque, ibid., 81.

36. Niépce, as quoted in Helmut and Alison Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre: The History of the Diorama and the Daguerreotype (New York: Dover, 1968), 56–57.

37. Niépce, as quoted in Fouque, The Truth Concerning the Invention of Photography, 66.

38. Lemaître, as quoted in ibid., 67.

39. Claude Nori, French Photography: From its Origins to the Present (New York: Pantheon, 1979), facing page 1.

40. Helmut Gernsheim, The Origins of Photography (London: Thames and Hudson, 1982), 35.

41. Louis-Alphonse Davanne (1824–1912) was a French photographer, critic, and chemist who in the 1850s returned to bitumen of Judea as a potential medium for photo-engraving. He called his process litho-photographie. His own photographs were sometimes signed "A. Davanne." For more on Davanne, see André Jammes and Eugenia Parry Janis, The Art of French Calotype (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983), 163-64.

## 42. Gernsheim, The Origins of Photography, 34.

43. Niépce, as quoted in Georges Potonniée, The History of the Discovery of Photography (New York: Arno Press, 1973), 82.

44. In a letter to his brother dated September 3,   
1824, Claude Niépce affirmed that “the engraving

of views from nature is still more magical than the other" (as quoted in Gernsheim, The Origins of Photograpby, 33).

## 45. Ibid., 34.

46. Helmut Gernsheim, "The 150th Anniversary of Photography," History of Photography 1, no. 1 (January 1977): 3–8.

47. Gernsheim's watercolor is reproduced as the "first photograph" in the following publications: Gernsheim, The Origins of Photography, 32; Lemagny and Rouillé, eds., A History of Photography, 16; Peter Pollack, The Picture History of Photography (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1969), 38–39; Naomi Rosenblum, A World History of Photograpby (New York: Abbeville Press, 1984), 19; Pierre Bonhomme, ed., Les Multiples Inventions de la Photographie (Paris: Association française pour la diffusion du Patrimoine photographique, 1989), 93; Paul Jay, Niépce: Premiers Outils, Premiers Resultats (Chalon-sur-Saône: Musée Nicéphore Niépce, 1978), 26; Peter Turner, History of Photography (New York: Exeter Books, 1987), 13; Paul Jay and Michel Frizot, Nicéphore Niépce (Paris: Centre National de la Photographie, 1983), cover; André Rouillé, La Photographie en France: Textes  Controverses: une Anthologie 1816–1871 (Paris: Macula, 1989), 26; Michel Frizot et al., Nouvelle Histoire de la Photographie (Paris: Bordas, 1994), 21. The Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, which owns Niépce's "first photograph," is bound by an agreement made with Gernsheim and therefore refuses to provide any reproduction of this heliograph other than copies of their benefactor's watercolor. Beaumont Newhall reproduces this watercolor in the 1964 edition of The History of Photography (16) but replaces it with an enhanced, unauthorized reproduction of the "greatly distorted" Kodak version for the 1982 edition (15).

48. Like Davy (in 1802) and Niépce (in 1816), it seems that Daguerre made use of the solar microscope as a means of producing a concentrated image capable of being photographed. He certainly discussed the operations of this instrument with Niépce, sending him a diagram and instructions in a letter dated February 21, 1831. This is reproduced in Jay, Niépce: Genèse d'une Inrention, 302. In 1841 German newspapers reported that Daguerre attempted to take a daguerreotype portrait of the French King, Louis-Philippe, in the garden of the Tuileries. It was a complete failure. See Helmut Gernsheim, introduction, in Stefan Richter, The\_Art of the Daguerreotype (New York: Viking, 1989), 6.

49. Daguerre, 1835, as quoted in H. & A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 73.

50. Daguerre (1838), as quoted in ibid., 80–81.

51. Louis Daguerre, Historique et Description des procédés du Daguerréotype et du Diorama (Paris: Alphonse Giroux, 1839), plate 6, opposite page 68.

52. This image is titled Still Life in Janet E. Buerger, French Daguerreotypes (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), 20–21 (but she dates it 1839). Newhall calls it The Artist's Studio in The History of Photography (1964 edition), 12. The same image is titled Intérieur d'un Cabinet Curiosité in Turner, History of Photography, 13.

53. See the entries on Jean Goujon in Bernard Ceysson et al., Sculpture: The Great Tradition of Sculpture from the Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Century (New York: Rizzoli, 1987), 142–43, and Geneviève Bresc-Bautier and Anne Pingeot, Sculptures des jardins du Louvre, du Carrousel et des Tuileries, vol. 2 (Paris: Ministère de la Culture, 1986), 224–26. Thanks to Sheldon Nodelman for the identification of this sculptor's work.

54. See Pierre du Colombier, Jean Goujon (Paris: Editions Albin Michel, 1949), 135–36 and plate 47. The panel is listed as "After Jean Goujon" and titled Nymphe Fluviale in the Louvre's Description raisonnée des sculptures de la Renaissance française (Paris: Louvre, 1978), 102–3. Hippolyte Bayard also made a photograph of a related work by Goujon: La Vénus à la coquille de Jean Goujon (French Society of Photography 24.291).

55. Cailleux had held various positions at the Louvre since 1821, including curator of drawings from 1827 to 1832. He was made directeur-général of the museum on March 13, 1841. See J. J. Marquet de Vasselot, Répertoire des Catalogues du Musée du Louvre (1797–1917) suivi de la liste des Directeurs et Conservateurs du Musée (reprint: New York: Burt Franklin, 1968), 126, 147. Helmut Gernsheim implies that Daguerre presented his Still Life to Cailleux in 1837, "in the hope that his influence might bring the invention to the notice of artists." Not having any success in this regard, Daguerre then began taking daguerreotypes in the streets around Paris in order to attract publicity. Gernsheim reproduces one of the images, View of the Ile de la Cité and Notre Dame taken before the public announcement of his discovery in 1839. See Gernsheim in Richter, The Art of the Daguerreotype, 2–4. Arago mentions several more early pictures during his speech to the Académie des Sciences on January 7, 1839; "a view of the long gallery connecting the Louvre with the Tuileries; a view of the Ile de la Cité with the towers of Notre-Dame; several views of the Seine with some of its bridges; also views of the [Customs] barriers of the capital." He also mentions witnessing Daguerre's attempt to photograph the moon. See Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 82–83. On July 7, 1839, Daguerre showed a number of his daguerreotypes to members of the Chamber of Deputies.

As reported in the British Literary Gazette of July 13, these included "views of three of the streets of Paris, of the interior of M. Daguerre's studio, and of a group of busts from the Musée des Antiques." The view of Daguerre's studio featured a bust of Homer. See this report in Newhall, Photography: Essays  Images, 18.

56. Julia Ballerini, "Recasting Ancestry: Statuettes as Imaged by Three Inventors of Photography," in Anne Lowenthal, ed., The Object as Subject: Essays on the Interpretation of Still Life (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996), 44, 48.

57. Daguerre, 1838, as quoted in H. & A.   
Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 81.

58. Ibid., 192.

59. Eugenia Parry Janis has also commented on this image. "Thus Daguerre, in choosing fossils among the first things photographed, recorded objects that not only encapsulate immeasurable time, but allude to the essence of the photographic process by showing other ways in which nature managed to imprint itself" (20). See Eugenia Parry Janis, "Fabled Bodies: Some Observations on the Photography of Sculpture," in Jeffrey Fraenkel, ed., The Kiss of Apollo: Photograpby Sculpture 1845 to the Present (San Francisco: Fraenkel Gallery, 1991), 9–23.

60. See H. & A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 193.

61. As reported in ibid., 194.

62. Alexander von Humboldt, writing to a friend on February 7, 1839, as quoted in Beaumont Newhall, introduction in An Historical & Descriptive Account of the Various Processes of the Daguerreotype & the Diorama by Daguerre (New York: Winter House, 1971), 16.

63. Duchâtel, as quoted in Louis Daguerre, An Historical and Descriptive Account of the various Processes of the Daguerréotype and the Diorama (London: McLean, 1839), 3.

64. Le Commerce, January 13, 1839, as quoted in H. & A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 86.

65. H. Gaucheraud, Gazette de France, January 6, 1839, as quoted in ibid., 85.

66. Samuel Morse, in a letter dated March 9, 1839, as quoted in ibid., 89.

67. Hubert, as quoted in ibid., 104.

68. See R. Derek Wood & Pierre G. Harmant, "Daguerre's Demonstrations in 1839 at the Palais d'Orsay," History of Photography 16, no. 4 (Winter 1992): 400–1.

69. This is how it is described, for example, in Gail Buckland, First Photographs: People, Places, and Phenomena as Captured for the First Time by the Camera (New York: MacMillan, 1980), 177.

70. Samuel Morse, in a letter dated March 9, 1839, as quoted in H. &. A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 89.

71. Arago, from his statement to the Académie des Sciences on January 7, 1839, as quoted in ibid., 82.

72. Gaucheraud, Gazette de France, January 6, 1839, as quoted in ibid., 85.

73. Auguste Comte (1798–1857), as quoted in Dennis P. Grady, "Philosophy and Photography in the Nineteenth Century: A Note on the Matter of Influence" (1977), in T. Barrow, S. Armitage, and W. Tydeman, eds., Reading into Photography: Selected Essays 1959–1980 (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1982), 147.

ing the Second Empire 1852–1870 (Westport: Greenwood Press, 1959), 5. Charlton says in the introduction that "almost every writer to be discussed, in fact, is, whether consciously or not, the victim of a divided mind. They are attempting, in differing ways and to differing extents, to reconcile aspirations and convictions that are incompatible"(2).

75. American philosopher Stanley Cavell is one recent scholar who, while casting his analysis of photography in terms of desire and power, simultaneously projects a universal positivist ideal as the medium's determining ontology.

So far as photography satisfied a wish, it satisfied a wish not confined to painters, but the human wish, intensifying since the Reformation, to escape subjectivity and metaphysical isolation—a wish for the power to reach this world, baving for so long tried, at last hopelessly, to manifest fidelity to another.... Photograpby overcame subjectivity in a way undreamed of by painting, one which does not so much defeat the act of painting as escape it altogether: by automatism, by removing the human agent from the act of reproduction.

Stanley Cavell, The World Viewed (1971), as quoted in Joel Snyder and Neil Walsh Allen, "Photography, Vision, and Representation" (1975), in Barrow, Armitage, and Tydeman, eds., Reading into Photography, 63.

76. Hippolyte Taine (1828–1893), as quoted in Jean-Luc Daval, Photography: History of an Art (New York: Rizzoli, 1982), 18. Charlton describes Taine as espousing a contradictory fusion of English positivism and German idealism, a merger "of Mill and Hegel." See Charlton, Posivitist Thought in France, 133–34.

77. Reese Jenkins, "Science, Technology, and the Evolution of Photography, 1790–1925," in Eugene Ostroff, ed., Pioneers of Photography: Their

Achievements in Science and Technology (Springfield: The Society for Imaging Science and Technology, 1987), 20.

78. Janet E. Buerger, "The Genius of Photography," in John Wood, ed., The Daguerreotype: A Sesquicentennial Celebration (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1989), 43, 48, 49. Buerger is not the only historian to locate photography's origins in a desire for a kind of pictorial realism. Svetlana Alpers, for example, argues that photography should be properly seen as part of a Dutch or Keplerian mode of descriptive representation rather than as the "logical culmination of the Albertian tradition of picture-making."Alpers' argument is a product of her more general thesis in The Art of Describing, in which she claims that there is a definite distinction between Albertian and northern pictorial modes of representation. To support her argument, Alpers seeks to persuade readers that photographic conventions are somehow generically different from those found in the Albertian picture.

Many characteristics of photographs—those very characteristics that make them so real—are common also to the northern descriptive mode: fragmentariness; arbitrary frames; the immediacy that the first practitioners expressed by claiming that the photograph gave Nature the power to reproduce herself directly unaided by man. .. . The ultimate origins of photograpby do not lie in the fifteenth-century invention of perspective ... but rather in the alternative mode of the north.

See Svetlana Alpers, The Art of Describing: Dutch Art in the Seventeenth Century (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), 243, 43, 244.

79. Daguerre, 1835, as quoted in H. & A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 73.

80. Daguerre and Bouton, from Notice explicative des tableaux exposés au Diorama (Paris, 1822), as

quoted in Newhall's introduction to An Historical  Descriptive Account, 10.

81. For more on the work and influence of de Loutherbourg, see Francis D. Klingender, Art and the Industrial Revolution, ed. and rev. Arthur Elton (London: Evelyn, Adams and MacKay, 1947, 1968), 96–100. The patent for the Diorama, established only on February 10, 1823, described it as "an improved mode of publicly exhibiting pictures or painted scenery of every description, and of distributing or directing daylight upon or through them, so as to produce many beautiful effects of light and shade." As quoted in Arthur T. Gill, "The London Diorama," History of Photograpby 1, no. 1 (January 1977): 31. The Diorama was so successful in Paris that it was soon replicated elsewhere. The London Diorama for example first opened October 6, 1823 and continued under various managements until April 1851. For further discussions of the Diorama, see Eric de Kuypre and Emile Poppe, "Voir et regarder," Communications, no. 34 (1981): 85–96; Jonathan Crary, "Techniques of the Observer," October 45 (Summer 1988): 22; and William H. Galperin, "The Panorama and the Diorama: Aids to Distraction," in The Return of the Visible in British Romanticism (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993), 34–71.

82. The Times, October 4, 1823, as quoted in H. & A. Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 17.

83. Niépce, as quoted in ibid., 57–58. 84. Niépce, as quoted in Fouque, The Truth Concerning the Invention of Photography, 94.

85. Olive Cook, Movement in Two Dimensions: A Study of the Animated and Projected Pictures which Preceded the Invention of Cinematography (London: Hutchinson, 1963), 42. To add extra veracity to one Swiss scene, Daguerre also included sound;

the audience could hear Alpine horns and folk songs coming from offstage. See Newhall, introduction, in An Historical & Descriptive Account, 11–12.

86. Linda Nochlin, Realism (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1971), 14. For more on the difficulty of the word realism see Raymond Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (Glasgow: Fontana, 1976), 216–21.

87. See T.J. Clark, Image of the People: Gustave Courbet and the 1848 Revolution (London: Thames and Hudson, 1973) and Linda Nochlin, "Courbet's Real Allegory: Rereading The Painter's Studio," in Sarah Faunce and Linda Nochlin, eds., Courbet Reconsidered (Brooklyn: Brooklyn Museum, 1988), 17–41, 222–26. In the posthumously published Lettres à L'Etrangère, Honoré de Balzac claimed that he had foreshadowed daguerreotypy in the final pages of his 1832 novel Louis Lambert (where he speaks, for example, of "the mirror or means of estimating a thing by seeing it in its entirety"). George Parsons explains Balzac's realist aspirations in his 1892 introduction to the English translation: "Balzac undertook to describe the society of his time. .. . His vast plan involved the photographing, the analysis, the classification, of every social element." See Balzac, Lettres à L'Etrangère 1842–1844 Tome Deuxième (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1906), 38, and Balzac, Louis Lambert (Boston: Roberts Brothers, 1892), 143, ix.

88. Daguerre included a "Description of the Process of Painting and Effects of Light invented by Daguerre and applied by him to the Pictures of the Diorama" in his booklet An Historical and Descriptive Account of the various Processes of the Daguerreotype and the Diorama (1839). These passages (which open and close his description) have been taken from pages 81 and 86 of the English edition. Note that Bouton gets even less credit from

101. See Schaaf, ibid., 89. 102. Reese Jenkins, "Science, Technology, and the Evolution of Photography, 1790–1925," Pioneers of Photography, 19–20.

Daguerre for this invention than Niépce received for his work toward the daguerreotype. Daguerre was right to emphasize light as his real medium. "He illuminated certain areas of the canvas with colored lights and painted details in the complementary color. Parts painted red, for example, would disappear when red light shone on them; blue-green areas, on the other hand, would appear black." Newhall, introduction, in A» Historical  Descriptive Account, 12.

89. Constable, writing to Archdeacon Fisher in 1823, as quoted in Cook, Morement in Two Dimensions, 37–38.

90. See Daguerre's 1838 broadsheet, as quoted in Gernsheim, L. J. M. Daguerre, 80–81.

91. Henry Talbot, "Brief Historical Sketch of the Art," The Pencil of Nature (London: Longman, Brown, Green & Longman's, 1844–46), unpaginated.

92. Henry Talbot, "Some Account of the Art of Photogenic Drawing" (1839), as reproduced in Newhall, Photography: Essays  Images, 23–30.

93. Laura Mundy, as quoted in Larry Schaaf, Out of the Shadows: Herschel, Talbot,  the Invention of Photography (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), 40.

94. See Michael Gray, "Secret Writing," in Mike Weaver, ed., Henry Fox Talbot: Selected Texts and Bibliography (Oxford: Clio Press, 1992), 72. Morse had also experimented with a secret writing process early in his career. See my "Some Experiments of Mine': The Early Photographic Experiments of Samuel Morse,"History of Photography 15, no. 1 (Spring 1991), 38.

95. As reproduced in Michael Gray, "Zunächst verbogen, erscheine ich schlie lich doch: Zu den Versuchen von William Henry Fox Talbot," in Hubertus von Amelunxen, Die Aufgehobene Zeit:

Die Erfindung der Photographie durch William Henry Fox Talbot (Berlin: Nishen, 1988), 147.

96. See Eugene Ostroff, "Talbot's Earliest Extant Print, June 20, 1835, Rediscovered," Photographic Science and Engineering 10, no. 6 (November-December 1966): 350–54.

97. Talbot (March 1839), as quoted in Schaaf, Out of the Shadows, 40.

98. See Schaaf, ibid., 47, 38, 39. The J. Paul Getty Museum also lists several prints by Talbot that it dates circa 1835. These include a negative of a piece of floral-patterned lace and another negative titled Rooftop and Chimneys, Lacock Abbey. See Weston Naef, Handbook of the Photographs Collection (Malibu: The J. Paul Getty Museum, 1995), 9-10.

99. See Ian Jeffrey, The Real Thing: An Anthology of British Photographs 1840–1950 (London: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1975), 6–7. A similar reading of the knowing sophistication of Talbot's early photographs is found in Mike Weaver's The Photographic Art: Pictorial Traditions in Britain and America (New York: Harper & Row, 1986) and in his essay "Henry Fox Talbot: Conversation Pieces" in Mike Weaver, ed., British Photography in the Nineteenth Century: The Fine Art Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 11–23.

100. See Schaaf, Out of the Shadows, 41. See also my review of this book, "Out of the Shadows," The Photo-Historian, no. 102 (London: 'The Royal Photographic Society [Autumn 1993]): 15–20.

103. Coleridge, as quoted in Owen Barfield, What Coleridge Thought (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971), 31.

104. Mesmer (1766), as quoted in Brian Inglis, Natural and Supernatural: A History of the Paranormal from Earliest Times to 1914 (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1977), 141.

105. For more on mesmerism and its European reception see Inglis, Natural and Supernatural, 141–58, and Nigel Leask, "Shelley's 'Magnetic Ladies': Romantic Mesmerism and the Politics of the Body," in Stephen Copley and John Whale, eds., Beyond Romanticism: New Approaches to Texts and Contexts 1780–1832 (London: Routledge, 1992), 53–78.

106. Davy, as quoted in Trevor Levere, Affinity and Matter: Elements of Chemical Philosopby 1800— 1865 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), 26.

107. Schelling (1799), as quoted in Thomas Kuhn, The Essential Tension: Selected Studies in Scientific Tradition and Change (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977), 97–98.

108. Taken from Davy's lectures on electrical science between 1810 and 1826, as quoted in John Davy, Memoirs of the Life of Sir Humphry Davy Bart., vol. 1 (London: Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, Green, & Longman, 1836), 326–27. See also Levere, Affinity and Matter, 31.

109. See David D. Ault, Visionary Physics: Blake's Response to Newton (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974), 6–17.

110. John Herschel, A Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy (Philadelphia: Lea & Blanchard, 1831, 1840), 253.

111. See Richard Olson, Scottish Philosophy and British Physics 1750–1880: A Study in the Foundations of the Victorian Scientific Style (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1975), 171.

112. See H. J. P. Arnold, William Henry Fox Talbot: Pioneer of Photograpby and Man of Science (London: Hutchinson Benham, 1977), 51.

113. See D. M. Turner, Makers of Science: Electricity and Magnetism (London: Oxford University Press, 1927), 57–58.

114. See Arnold, William Henry Fox Talbot, 220–26.

115. The most comprehensive selection of Bayard's photography can be found reproduced in Jean-Claude Gautrand and Michel Frizot, Hippolyte Bayard: Naissance de l'image photographique (Amiens: Trois Cailloux, 1986). For further reproductions see also Joseph-Marie Lo Ducco, Bayard (New York: Arno Press, 1943, 1979); Otto Steinert and Pierre Harmant, Hippolyte Bayard ein Erfinder der Photographie (Essen: Museum Folkwang Essen, 1959); André Jammes, Hippolyte Bayard, Ein verkannter Erfinder und Meister der Photographie (Lucerne: Bucher, 1975); and Nancy Keeler, "Souvenirs of the Invention of Photography on Paper: Bayard, Talbot, and the Triumph of Negative-Positive Photography," in Weston Naef, ed., Photograpby: Discovery and Invention (Malibu: The J. Paul Getty Museum, 1990), 47–62.

116. As quoted in Jammes and Janis, The Art of French Calotype, 3.

117. Wey, as quoted in ibid., 4.

118. For more on Antinous and Hadrian, see Royston Lambert, Beloved and God: The Story of Hadrian and Antinous (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1984). Bayard's statuette was a miniature copy of the so-called "Farnese" Statue of Antinous, a reproduction of which was part of the Jean Baptiste Giraud museum of casts from antiquity at the Place Vendôme. Bayard used the statuette in at least four of his still life photographs. In a recent lecture (“Freud and the Culture of

Late 19th-Century Homosexuality," delivered at the University of California San Diego on March 13, 1996), Whitney Davis argued that Antinous represented an unmistakable homoerotic reference point for the intelligensia of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, providing a classical model for the expression of a contemporary homosexual desire. For further evidence of the use of such models, see Whitney Davis, "Winkelmann's 'Homosexual' Teleologies," in Natalie Boymel Kampen, ed., Sexuality in Ancient Art: Near East, Egypt, Greece, and Italy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 262–76, and Whitney Davis, "The Renunciation of Reaction in Girodet's Sleep of Endymion," in Norman Bryson, Michael Ann Holly, and Keith Moxey eds. ↓isual Culture: Images and Interpretations (Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 1994), 168-201.

119. Julia Ballerini, "Recasting Ancestry: Statuettes as Imaged by Three Inventors of Photogra phy,"The Object as Subject, 47. See also Michel Frizot, 'Bayard et son jardin,' Hippolyte Bayard, 77-105.

120. One of Bayard's closest friends was Jules-Claude Ziégler, a painter who in 1839 founded a ceramics factory. Perhaps this ubiquitous vase is one of his? For more on Bayard's circle of friends and associates, see Jammes and Janis, The Art of French Calotype, 144–48.

121. See Michel Frizot, "The Parole of the Primi tives: Hippolyte Bayard and the French Calotypists," History of Photography 16, no. 4 (Winter 1992): 358–70, and Jammes and Janis, The Art of French Calotype, 20.

122. Photography's historians have offered a number of interpretations of Bayard's Le Noyé. André Jammes and Eugenia Parry Janis suggest that the photograph is a "bizarre" parody of David's Death of Marat. Michel Frizot has called it "a timid threat,""a portrait of defeat," the Defeated Self-Portrait. Nancy Keeler disagrees with this reading, pointing out the humor of the image and its ironic treatment of what was then a popular romantic theme. See Jammes and Janis, The Art of French Calotype, 20, 109–10; Michel Frizot, "Bayard et son jardin," Hippolyte Bayard: Naissance de l'image photographique, 98–103; and Nancy Keeler, "Hippolye Bayard: aux origines de la photographie et de la ville moderne," La Recherche Photographie, no. 2 (May 1987): 7–17. See also my own earlier reading in "Le Petite Mort: Photography and Pose," San Francisco Camerawork Quarterly 15, no. 1 (Spring 1988): 3–6.

123. For extensive commentaries on the production and meanings of David's Death of Marat, see Dorothy Johnson, Jacques-Louis David: Art in Metamorphosis (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993); T. J. Clark, "Painting in the Year Two," Representations 47 (Summer 1994): 13–63; Thomas Crow, Emulation: Making Artists for Revolutionary France (Yale University Press, 1995).

124. E. J. Delécluze, Louis David, son école et son temps (Paris: Macula, 1855, 1983), 153.

125. See Antoine Schnapper and Arlette Serullaz, eds., Jacques-Louis David 1748–1825, exhib. cat. (Paris: Editions de la Réunion des musées nationaux, 1989), 219–21.

126. This mention of an offensive smell may well be yet another reference to the figures of Marat and Le Peletier. Both of these martyrs were given elaborate funerals designed by David in which their carefully posed, semi-nude and rapidly decomposing bodies were put on public display. Marat's body was a particular problem, as it was decaying from disease while he was still alive and had to be displayed in hot weather when dead. The body, already green by the day of the funeral,