Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990) that "my discussion of the camera obscura is founded on notions of discontinuity and difference." However, his account insists that the camera obscura and the photographic camera are "radically dissimilar," even as it positions photography as a continuation of the Cartesian logic of the camera obscura. For a more detailed analysis of this confusion, see Geoffrey Batchen, "Seeing Things: Vision and Modernity,"Afterimage 19, no. 2 (September 1991): 5–7.

30. Jacques Derrida, "Freud and the Scene of Writing" (1966), in Writing and Difference, 196– 231,329–31.

31. Sigmund Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams, trans. James Strachey (New York: Avon Books, 1965), 574.

32. Sigmund Freud, "A Note Upon the 'Mystic Writing Pad' (1925)," General Psychological Theory: Papers on Metapsychology (New York: Collier Books, 1963), 212.

33. In a footnote to "Freud and the Scene of Writing," Derrida points out that in Freud's work, "the metaphor of a photographic negative occurs frequently. . . . the notions of negative and copy are the principal means of the analogy." In 1913, for example, Freud explicitly compared the relations between the conscious and unconscious to a photographic process (Derrida, "Freud and the Scene of Writing," Writing and Difference, 330).

34. Derrida, Positions, 43, 94.

35. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, translator's preface, in Of Grammatology, xl.

36. Derrida, Of Grammatology, 158. In the face of a common misunderstanding, I must reiterate

that Derrida's "text" and "writing" go well beyond the marks on the page traditionally associated with these terms. He himself has pointed this out on numerous occasions.

I have often insisted on the fact that "writing" or the "text" are not reducible either to the sensible or visible presence of the graphic or the "literal." Derrida, Positions, 65.

An hour's reading, beginning on any page of any one of the texts I have published over the last twenty years, should suffice for you to realize that text, as I used the word, is not the book. No more than writing or trace, it is not limited to the paper which you cover with your graphism.

Derrida, "But Beyond. .. . [Open letter to Anne McClintock and Rob Nixon])," trans. P. Kamuf, Critical Inquiry 13, no. 1 (1986): 167.

Strategic reasons . . . have motivated the choice of this word to designate "something" which is no longer tied to writing in the traditional sense any more than it is to speech or to any other type of mark. . . . What is at stake is precisely the attempt to put this concept into question and to transform it.

Derrida, 'LIMITED INC .. . abc,' trans. Samuel Weber, Glyph, no. 1 (1977), 191.

## 37. Derrida, "Scene," Writing and Difference, 226.

38. Without wanting to ignore the differences, this book has tried to think the work of Foucault and Derrida together. In this regard, see Gayatri Spivak on Derrida and Foucault in the translator's preface in Of Grammatology, lx–lxii, and her "More on Power/Knowledge" in Thomas E. Wartenberg, ed., Rethinking Power (Albany: SUNY Press, 1992), 149–73. Certain differences were made public in an exchange of articles between the two philosophers regarding Foucault's early book Madness and Civilization: see Derrida, "Cogito and the History of Madness" (1964), in W'riting and Difference, 31–63; Foucault, "My Body, This Paper, This Fire" (1971), trans. Geoff Bennington, Oxford Literary Rerien 4, no. 1 (Autumn 1979): 9–28; Derrida, "To Do Justice to Freud': The History of Madness in the Age of Psychoanalysis," Critical Inquiry 20 (Winter 1994): 227– 66. This passionate exchange has tended to obscure the many sources, aspirations, and practices that the two philosophers share. For commentaries on this aspect of their work, see Tom Keenan, "The 'Paradox' of Knowledge and Power: Reading Foucault on a Bias," Political Theory 15, no. 1 (February 1987): 5–32; Gregory S. Jay, "Values and Deconstructions: Derrida, Saussure, Marx," Cultural Critique no. 8 (Winter 1987– 88): 153–96; Alan D. Schrift, "Genealogy and/as Deconstruction: Nietzsche, Derrida and Foucault on Philosophy as Critique," in Hugh Silverman and Donn Welton, eds., Postmodernism and Continental Philosophy (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1988), 193–13; Roy Boyne, Foucault and Derrida: The Other Side of Reason (London: Unwin Hyman, 1990).

39. Compare Tagg's project with Foucault's, as described by the latter in a 1975 interview.

I think I would distinguish myself from both the Marxist and the para-Marxist perspectives. As regards Marxism, I"m not one of those who try to elicit the effects of power at the level of ideology. Indeed, I wonder if it wouldn"t be more materialist to study first the question of the body and the effects of power on it. Because what troubles me with these analyses which prioritise ideolog) is that there is always presupposed a human subject on the lines of the model provided by classical philosophy, endowed with a consciousness which power is then thought to seize on.

Michel Foucault, "Body/Power," Power/Knowledge, 58.

40. Foucault, Power/Knowledge, 98.

41. Ibid., 97.

42. Ibid., 186.

43. Michel Foucault, The History of Sexuality, V’olume 1: An Introduction, trans. Robert Hurley (New York: Vintage, 1978), 157. Foucault has more to say on the vexing question of the relationship of sex and sexuality in Power/Knowledge (190):

This question was the central difficulty with my book. I had begun to write it as a history of the way in which sex was obscured and travestied by this strange life-form, this strange growth which was to become sexuality. Now, I believe, setting up this opposition between sex and sexuality leads back to the positing of power as law and probibition, the idea that power created sexuality as a device to say no to sex. My analysis was still held captive by the juridical conception of power. I had to make a complete reversal of direction. I postulated the idea of sex as internal to the apparatus of sexuality, and the consequent idea that what must be found at the root of that apparatus is not the rejection of sex, but a positive economy of the body and of pleasure.

44. Jacques Derrida, "Scribble (writing-power)" (1977), trans. Cary Plotkin, Yale French Studies 58 (1979): 117.

45. Foucault, Power/Knowledge, 52.

46. Ibid., 195--96.

47. The phrase, representing a typically narrow reading of Foucault, comes in this instance from Patricia R. Zimmerman, “Our Trip to Africa: Home Movies as the Eyes of the Empire," Afterimage 17, no. 8 (March 1990): 4.

48. Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. Alan Sheridan (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977), 201, 202–3.

49. Foucault, The Order of Things, 318.

50. Ibid., 312.

51. Foucault, The Order of Things, 312, 313, 316, 320-21. Faced with the complexities articulated by this collection of quotations, it is well to repeat the commentary of Paul Rabinow and Hubert Dreyfus: "Although this may sound Hegelian, it is radically opposed to all dialectic thought. Foucault has absolutely no sense that the truth is the whole and that these archaeological and genealogical transformations are stages in a process converging on an ideal community" (Paul Dreyfus and Hubert Rabinow, Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneutics, 263). See also David Carroll, Paraesthetics: Foucault.Lyotard.Derrida (New York: Methuen, 1987), 67; Michael S. Roth, Knowing and History: Appropriations of Hegel in Twentieth-Century France (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1988), 204–5. Both Derrida and Foucault attended Jean Hippolyte's classes on Hegel in the 1950s. For Foucault's own commentary on the distinctions between his practice and a Hegelian history, see Michel Foucault, "The Discourse on Language," The Archaeology of Knowledge, 215-37.

52. Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, 49.

53. Ibid., 47–48.

54. Roland Barthes, "Rhetoric of the Image" (1964), in Image-Music-Text, trans. Stephen Heath (New York: Hill and Wang, 1977), 36.

55. Roland Barthes, Camera Lucida: Refections on Photography, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Hill and Wang, 1980).

56. Roland Barthes, The Pleasure of the Text, trans. Richard Miller (New York: Hill and Wang, 1975), 9. See also Jane Gallop, "The Pleasure of the Phototext, Afterimage 12, no. 9 (April 1985): 16-18.

57. Barthes, Camera Lucida, 73. 58. Barthes, "Rhetoric of the Image,"Image-Music-Text, 44.

59. Barthes, Camera Lucida, 96.

60. Jacques Derrida, "The Deaths of Roland Barthes"(1981), trans. Pascale-Anne Brault and Michael Naas, in Hugh Silverman, ed., Philosophy and Non-Philosophy since Merleau-Ponty (New York: Routledge, 1988), 266–67. For a challenging commentary on this text see Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, "A Response to John O"Neill" in Gary Shapiro and Alan Sica, eds., Hermeneutics: Questions and Prospects (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1984), 183–98. See also the commentary on photography in Marie-Françoise Plissart and Jacques Derrida, "Right of Inspection," trans. David Wills, Art & Text no. 32 (Autumn 1989): 20–97, and especially 90–91.

61. Allan Sekula, "Photography Between Labour and Capital," in Benjamin H. D. Buchloh and Robert Wilkie, eds., Mining Photographs and Other Pictures 1948-1968: A Selection from the Negative Archives of Shedden Studio, Glace Bay, Cape Breton (Halifax: Press of the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design and the University College of Cape Breton Press, 1983), 218.

62. Allan Sekula, "Dismantling Modernism, Reinventing Documentary (Notes on the Politics of Representation)" (1978), in Photography Against the Grain: Essays and Photo Works 1973–1983 (Halifax: Press of the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, 1984), 57.

63. Sekula, “The Body and the Archive" (1986), in Richard Bolton, ed., The Contest of Meaning: Critical Histories of Photography (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989), 372.

1"(1977), in The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1985), 203.

65. Ibid.

66. Rosalind Krauss, "Notes on the Index: Part   
2"(1977), in The Originality of the Avant-Garde,   
211.

67. Ibid., 211–12.

68. Ibid., 216.

69. Rosalind Krauss, "In the Name of Picasso" (1981), in The Originality of the Avant-Garde, 33.

70. Ibid., 33.

71. Ibid., 37.

72. Ibid., 38. Krauss has also discussed the question of origins in a more recent essay.

This is ... merely an evasion of the challenge to the very concept of authorial origin that poststructuralist theory poses, for while the strategy I've just described redraws the profile of the author—making it now a sect, or a class, or a cultit leaves the idea of the origin intact; which is to say, it acts as though it goes without saying that "everything has to begin somewbere." But what if there were no beginning uncorrupted by a prior instance—or what in much of poststructuralist writing is rendered as the "always already"—and what if this somewhere, this localizable origin, were fractured at its very core——and thus were always already self-divided?... To capture this movement of an always already self-divided origin was, I realized, to carry out the examination of the very tools and categories of art history at a level that seemed to me extremely telling.

Rosalind Krauss, "Originality as Repetition: Introduction," October 37 (Summer 1986): 36, 40.

73. Rosalind Krauss, "The Photographic Conditions of Surrealism" (1981), in The Originality of the Avant-Garde, 110.

74. Ibid., 112.

75. Ibid., 112, 118. On Krauss's use of Derrida, see Matthew Biro, "Art Criticism and Deconstruction: Rosalind Krauss and Jacques Derrida," Art Criticism 6 (1990): 33–47. See also her essays on surrealist photography in Rosalind Krauss and Jane Livingstone, L'Amour Fou: Photography and Surrealism (Washington: The Corcoran Gallery of Art, 1985). For an earlier deployment of Derrida's work in American photographic criticism, see Craig Owens, "Photography en abyme," October 5 (Summer 1978): 73–88.

76. For a general critique of Krauss's work, see Craig Owens, “Analysis Logical and Ideological," Art in America 73, no. 5 (May 1985): 25–31. Owens castigates Krauss for adhering to what he calls "logical" (according to Owens, a structuralist and hence modernist mode of criticism) rather than "rhetorical"(or poststructuralist) arthistorical analysis. The result, he says, is that "Krauss has effectively produced a monolithic modernism which denies all difference, heterogenity, contradiction." This is the same Owens who just five years earlier had himself argued that postmodernist art may in fact be identified by a single, coherent impulse," namely allegory. Thus, just like Krauss, he is anxious to return history to order, only this time it is to the order of disorder; to precisely the difference, heterogeneity, and contradiction that Krauss's account has supposedly denied. This simple reversal of oppositional terms is of course a standard structuralist move. And despite calling himself a Derridean (and translating Derrida's "The Parergon"), Owens wants to draw a sharp distinction between logical and rhetorical that is exactly the sort of binary recuperation that Derrida questions (see Geoffrey Batchen, "Recognizing Owens,"Art  Text 45 [1993]: 66–67).

77. Sekula, "Photography Between Labor and Capital," Mining Photographs, 264. This unfashionably utopian phrase appears as the conclusion to Sekula's essay, and in the context of a discussion of the different meanings that might be drawn from group photographs of the Dosco workers. "The group photograph, then, harbours another meaning, a meaning that contradicts the logic of management. Here, posed confidently around the instruments and materials of production, are people who could quite reasonably control those instruments and materials. Therein lies a promise and a hope for the future."

78. See Allan Sekula, "The Body and the Archive," The Contest of Meaning, 342–88.

79. Derrida, Of Grammatology, 48.

80. Ibid., 49–50.

81. See Victor Burgin, "Photographic Practice and Art Theory" (1975), in Victor Burgin, ed., Thinking Photography (London: MacMillan Education, 1982), 54–55.

82. Victor Burgin, "Rereading Camera Lucida" (1982), The End of Art Theory: Criticism and Postmodernity (London: MacMillan Education, 1986), 84. Burgin also speaks of the problems of a biological account of the body in another essay in this collection, "Tea with Madeleine" (1984). Again, he condemns "biologism" even as he himself returns to masculine anatomy as the "prerepresentational" foundation of his narrative.

The question of precisely how "men" and "women" emerge from an initially undifferentiated pre-Oedipal sexuality has provoked storms of confusion, and biologism is the port in which many seek shelter. To deny that biology determines psychology is not, however, to deny that the body figures. . .. The body figures, is represented, in psychic life. In male psychic life these representations turn between the poles of having/not having the phallus. This is so for the female too, but the male has the means of representing the phallus, as an integral part of his body, in the form of the penis. (100)

83. Burgin, in an interview with Tony Godfrey, recorded 1979, published in Block, no. 7 (London) (1982), and reprinted in Victor Burgin, Between (London: Basil Blackwell and ICA, 1986), 59–60.

84. Burgin, in an interview with John Bird, originally published in Block, no. 7 (London) (1982) and reprinted in Between, 84.

85. Burgin, "Tea with Madeleine" (1984), in The End of Art Theory, 96.

86. For a sophisticated analysis of the essentialism debate within feminism, see Vicki Kirby, "Corporeal Habits: Addressing Essentialism Differently," Hypatia 6, no. 3 (Fall 1991): 4–24. As Kirby puts it in her abstract: "The spectre of essentialism means that the biological or anatomical body, the body that is commonly understood to be the "real" body, is often excluded from this [feminist] investigation. The increasingly sterile debate between essentialism and antiessentialism has inadvertently encouraged this somatophobia. I argue that these opposing positions are actually inseparable, sharing a complicitous relationship that produces real effects"(4).

87. Crary, Techniques of the Observer, 6.

88. Derrida, Of Grammatology, 56.

89. Derrida, "Structure, Sign and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences," Writing and Difference, 282.