# PHOTOGRAPHIES / PHOTOGRAPHY ITSELF / ORIGIN STORIES

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Batchen：《Burning with desire the conception of photography》\Batchen：《Burning with desire the conception of photography》\Batchen：《Burning with desire the conception of photography》\auto\Batchen：《Burning with desire the conception of photography》.md

## PHOTOGRAPHIES

Although I use the term postmodernism here as a convenient rhetorical trope, postmodern criticism is by no means homogenous in outlook, having been informed by a variety of sometimes competing theoretical models (Marxism, feminism, psychoanalysis, semiotics). Nevertheless, a remarkably consistent view of the photograph has come to occupy the center stage of critical debate. Indeed, within a certain intellectual milieu, this view has become the dominant way of thinking about the medium. It is now ubiquitous in undergraduate and graduate classes on photographic history and criticism and is frequently reproduced in articles and books on the medium. A paragraph from the writing of English critic John 'Tagg neatly summarizes this viewpoint:

Photography as such has no identity. Its status as a technology varies with the power relations which invest it. Its nature as a practice depends on the institutions and agents which defne it and set it to work. Its function as a mode of cultural production is tied to denite conditions of existence, and its products are meaningful and legible only within the particular currencies they have. Its bistory has no unity. It is a flickering across a field of institutional spaces. It is this field we must study, not photography as such.

What exactly is being said here? To begin with, Tagg suggests that photography cannot be understood as having a static identity or singular cultural status. Photography is, he says, better regarded as a dispersed and dynamic field of technologies, practices, and images. The compliant ubiquity of this photographic field is such that it is indistinguishable from those institutions or discourses that choose to make use of it. Photography's history is, therefore, the collective and multifarious history of those same institutions and discourses. A history of police photography could not, for example, be separated from a history of the practices and institutions of criminology and the justice system. Hence it follows that photography has no coherent or unified history of its own other than as a selective documentation of its various uses and effects.

The meanings of any individual photograph are similarly contingent, being entirely dependent on the context in which that photograph finds itself at any given moment. A photograph can mean one thing in one context and something else entirely in another. The identity of a photograph is thereby equated not with some kind of inherent photographic qualities but with what that photograph actually does in the world. The crucial point is that photographs can never exist outside discourses or functions of one kind or another. There is never a neutral ground where the photograph is able to speak “of and for itself," where it can emit some essential, underlying "true" meaning. Tagg's whole argument is based on the presumption that photographs have no single true meanings.

Particularly influential for Tagg's conception of the photograph is the structuralist Marxism of French philosopher Louis Althusser, with its emphasis on the role of ideological apparatuses in the maintenance and reproduction of the capitalist system. This is clear in one of Tagg's early explanations of his approach to the study of photography.

What I am trying to stress here is the absolute continuity of the photograph's ideological existence with their existence as material objects whose "currency" and "value" arise in certain distinct and historically specific social practices and are ultimately a function of the state. ...

While it is also used as a tool in the major educational, cultural and communications apparatuses, photography is itself an apparatus of ideological control under the central "harmonising" authority of the ideology of the class which, openly or through alliance, holds state power and wields the state apparatus.?

Although Tagg goes on in later articles to criticize the totalizing rigidity of this Althusserean model of political control, his concept of photography retains much of its basic outline. For Tagg, the meanings and values of any individual photograph continue to be entirely determined by its relationship to other, more powerful, social practices. And, as an apparatus of visual representation, photography remains before all else a tool for transporting ideology from one site to another. As he explains this process in his best known essay, "Power and Photography" (1980): "Like the state, the camera is never neutral. The representations it produces are highly coded, and the power it wields is never its own. As a means of record, it arrives on the scene vested with a particular authority to arrest, picture and transform daily life; a power to see and record; a power of surveillance. .. . This is not the power of the camera but the power of the apparatuses of the local state which deploy it and guarantee the authority of the images it constructs."8

Despite a residual Althuserrean framework, Tagg's essay does provide a more complicated description of how this deployment occurs. The result is a pioneering effort to relate the work of French philosopher Michel Foucault to the history of photography. As Tagg explains, Foucault provided cultural critics with a concept of a dynamic "micro-physics" of power, of a "disciplinary power" that circulates within and through the very grain of the social body such that we find "a multiplication of the effects of power through the formation and accumulation of new forms of knowledge." Following Foucault's lead, Tagg concentrates in this and later essays on the photographs used by that "disciplinary archipelago" of agencies and local apparatuses of the state involved in the circulation of power and knowledge. As an instrument of these agencies, photography exercises no power of its own. Consequently, Tagg's account of the political effects of photography focuses not on the medium itself but on the determining mechanisms of its historical frames, on"the ways in which photography has been historically implicated in the technology of power-knowledge."10

Building on Foucault's idea that "discourse constitutes its object," Tagg's essays consistently regard photography as an instrument that facilitates the imposition of power by those who have some (usually the agents of the state) on those who have none (usually already marginalized groups such as the working class, criminals, the insane, native peoples, ethnic subcultures, and so on). In Tagg's schema, photography is but a convenient conduit that enables these more or less powerless subjects to be represented by the forces of modern oppression as objects of knowledge, analysis, and control. Photography itself receives little attention in his analysis, precisely because he pointedly rejects the category of the "in-itself." Indeed, the assumption here is that, as a thing with no fixed identity or historical unity, photography potentially belongs to every institution and discipline but its own.

The basic tenets of Tagg's view of photography are repeated in the work of other contemporary writers on photography. We can also find it figured, for example, in the essays of American photographer and critic Allan Sekula..But whereas Tagg's photocriticism derives from a combination of Althusser and Foucault, Sekula reproduces a dialectical theory of the photograph informed primarily by the Marxism of Georg Lukács. As Sekula has described his own work:

I see my own critical project now as an attempt to understand the social character of "the traffic in photographs." Taken literally, this traffic involves the social production, circulation and reception of photographs in a society based on commodity production and exchange. Taken metaphorically, the notion of traffic suggests the peculiar way in which photographic meaning—and the very discourse of photography——is characterized by an incessant oscillation between what Lukács termed the "antinomies of bourgeois thought." This is always a movement between objectivism and subjectivism.11

Sekula regards the photograph as a mobile, contingent, and inherently social entity, an entity always caught between the twin ideological demands of aestheticism (or subjectivism) and scientism (objectivism). These contradictory demands are induced, he argues, by the "sustained crisis at the very center of bourgeois culture." This crisis is produced by the "threat and promise of the machine," a dialectic that bourgeois culture “continues to both resist and embrace."As Sekula would have it, "the fragmentary and mechanically derived photographic image is central to this attitude of crisis and ambivalence; the embracing issue is the nature of work and creativity under capitalism."12

For Sekula, the photograph appears to confirm the individual subjectivity of those pictured even as it reduces those subjects and their social relations to a visual thing, to a commodified object-image equivalent to all others. As a mechanical, seemingly neutral machinery of representation, informed by the empirical truth-values of positivism, the photograph makes this objectification appear natural and beyond question. However, the photograph's very objectivity can reveal class differences as different, as historical and unnatural, and therefore as potentially open to change. This capacity to both threaten and confirm the established order of capitalism is for Sekula the source of photography's fascination and social power.

For this reason, Sekula identifies photography as a practice uniquely placed to focus “the confidence and fears of an ascendant industrial bourgeoisie."13 Note, for example, Sekula's description of the 1955 “Family of Man" exhibition: "Here, yet again, are the twin ghosts that haunt the practice of photography; the voice of a reifying technocratic objectivism and the redemptive voice of a liberal subjectivism." 14 And his account of photography's mixed reception in 1839: "Photography promises an enhanced mastery of nature, but photography also threatens conflagration and anarchy, an incendiary leveling of the existing cultural order."15 Sekula discovers a similar duality in the photographs produced by Canadian Leslie Shedden between 1948 and 1968 referring to their linkage of "the instrumental realism of the industrial photograph and the sentimental realism of the family photograph."16 Most prominently, Sekula investigates various nineteenth-century photographs of the body and identifies “a fundamental tension develop[ing] between uses of photography that fulfill a bourgeois conception of the self and uses that seek to establish and delimit the terrain of the other."17 In short, Sekula continually stresses that, when looking at photography, "we are confronting, then, a double system: a system of representation capable of functioning both honorifically and repressively."18

What enables this system to function duplicitously is the fact that the meaning of any particular photograph is ultimately a manifestation of the tensions within capitalism itself. Like Tagg, Sekula thinks of photography as the vehicle of larger outside forces and of photographic identity as something fundamentally contingent on these forces. Never neutral, the photograph always finds itself attached to a discourse (or, more accurately, a cacophony of competing discourses) that gives any individual photograph its meanings and social values.

Sekula rests this aspects of his theory of photography on the semiotics of the American nineteenth-century pragmatist philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce. Arguing that photographs are before all else indexical signs, Sekula projects the photograph as a type of representation linked by a relation of physical causality or connection to its objects. According to Sekula, "because of this indexical property, photographs are fundamentally grounded in contingency."1" In other words, as an index the photograph is never itself but always, by its very nature, a tracing of something else.

Like Tagg and Sekula, British photographer and critic Victor Burgin has no time for those who seek a photographic "essence" or who concentrate on a narrow, arthistorical account of photography and its development. Burgin is more interested in approaching photography through its relation to "the general sphere of cultural production."20 In that context, he argues that photography's primary characteristic is its capacity to produce and disseminate meaning. But the meanings of photographs are not determined by, or confined to, the pictures themselves, for meaning is continually being reproduced within the contexts in which these pictures appear. Already we note a familiar conception of the photograph, namely that "meaning is perpetually displaced from the image to the discursive formations which cross and contain it."21 For Burgin, the object of photographic theory is not the photograph as such but rather the practices of signification that precede, surround, inform, and produce any photograph as meaningful. Photographic theory is but an "emphasis within a general history and theory of representations,"just as any individual photograph is but an intersection within a complex and often invisible process of meaning production.22

The "photographic text," like any other, is the site of a complex "intertextuality," an overlapping series of previous texts "taken forgranted" at a particular cultural and historical conjuncture. These prior texts, those presupposed by the photograph, are autonomous; they serve a role in the actual text but do not appear in it, they are latent to the manifest text and may only be read across it "symptomatically."... The question of meaning therefore is constantly to be referred to the social and psychic formations of the author/reader.23

Semiotics and psychoanalysis are two of the ways by which such formations might be articulated, and Burgin's work has been of central importance in bringing these modes of social analysis to bear on photography. He has been particularly concerned with photography's contribution to Western culture's nexus of power, desire, and representation, especially as it involves itself in the “unending process of becoming" enacted by the viewing subject.24 Photographs are always catalysts for, and foci of, that desire invested in looking. As such, the experience of the photograph can be readily incorporated into a Lacanian theory of the subject. Referring to the emphasis placed on the look in Jacques Lacan's discussion of the imaginary, Burgin similarly defines the subjective effect of the camera as a (deceptive) "coherence founded in the unifying gaze of a unified, punctual, subject."25 It follows that the camera's “laws of projection . . . place the subject as geometric point of origin of the scene in an imaginary relationship with real space."26 The implication is that all photographs obey these "laws" and have this "effect.""It is therefore important that photography theory take account of the production of this subject as the complex totality of its determinations are nuanced and constrained in their passage through and across photographs."27

Notice however that this version of photographic theory again displaces attention from the photograph itself (a category that Burgin has in any case already abandoned as antithetical to the semiotics of meaning production). Like the desiring subject he describes, Burgin looks through the photograph in search of something that necessarily has its origins elsewhere. For Burgin, photography is yet one more of desire's tantalizing "red herrings": "Fundamentally, it is the unconscious subject that desires.... But the conscious object of desire is always a red herring. The object is only the representative, in the real, of a psychical representative in the unconscious (Freud's ideational representative' of the instinct). In fact, desire is the instinct, as the Lacanians put it, 'alienated in a signifier'——the trace of a primal, lost, satisfaction. The real object ... is irretrievably absent."28

I have only briefly sketched the theories of photography presented by these three writers. My account is necessarily reductive, leaving out many of the nuanced arguments, revisions, and extensive visual analyses that so animate their individual essays and (in the case of Sekula and Burgin) their photographic works. However, it does outline the development of a particular conception of photography that is now central to Anglo-American postmodern thinking in general.² To repeat Tagg's opening formulation, "Photography as such has no identity," and "Its history has no unity."

This view is hardly peculiar to Tagg, Sekula, and Burgin. One finds it reiterated in the work of any number of other contemporary photo-critics. Feminist scholar Abigail Solomon-Godeau, to take one example, also cogently argues against a notion of“photographic autonomy" in her 1991 collection of essays, Photography at the Dock. She marks her disquiet by the addition of inverted commas around the "disciplinary object photography'" whenever she has cause to refer to it. Stressing the "mutability of photographic meaning,"she asserts that "the photograph is, before all and after all, a building block in a larger structure." Once again, she rejects the category of “the thingitself" in relation to photography, except as it is “something dynamically produced in the act of representation and reception and already subject to the grids of meaning imposed upon it by culture, history, language, and so forth." Accordingly, she says, "I would submit that the history of photography is not the history of remarkable men, much less a succession of remarkable pictures, but the history of photographic uses." Her essays ably examine a number of such uses, looking always for both specific "contextual determinations" of photographic meaning as well as the wider traversal of these meanings by "the lived experience of class, race, gender, and nationality." In short, for Solomon-Godeau photography is best understood as a “conduit"for much larger social and psychic forces. As she puts it, "In the final analysis, photography . . . is ever a hireling, ever the hired gun."30

We see in the work of these critics a general shift in analytic focus from image to frame, from questions of form and style (the rhetoric of art) to questions of function and use (the practice of politics). Having argued that photographic meaning is entirely mutable and contingent, these postmodern scholars also logically conclude that the medium can have no autonomous history or fixed identity. They argue that there can be no such thing as a singular photography at all, only discontinuous, myriad photographies.

## PHOTOGRAPHY ITSELF

This view of photography directly responds to the dominant art-historical agenda of the sixties and seventies—in particular, to the style of criticism known as modernist formalism. Postmodernism has steadfastly opposed itself to the formalist agenda, seeing it as both intellectually fruitless and politically conservative.³1 As far as photog raphy is concerned, this agenda was primarily disseminated in the late sixties and early seventies by writers such as André Bazin and curators such as John Szarkowski. However, in the United States formalism was already well established as a way of talking about art in general through the formidable advocacy of critic Clement Greenberg.

Greenberg's basic argument is now well known: in the modern era the traditional functions of art have been usurped (by photography among other things); to survive, art has had to establish its value as an irreplaceable vehicle of heightened experience within an otherwise alienating culture; to do so each art medium must determine, through a rigorous self-examination of its own operations and effects, those specific qualities unique to itself. Although prefigured in earlier writings, this argument is most cogently outlined in Greenberg's 1961 essay "Modernist Painting.

The essence of Modernism lies, as I see it, in the use of the characteristic methods of a discipline to criticize the discipline itself—not in order to subrert it, but to entrench it more firmly in its area of competence. ... The arts could save themselves from [a] leveling down [to the level of entertainment] only by demonstrating that the kind of experience they prorided was raluable in its own right and not to be obtained from any other kind of activity. Each art had to effect this demonstration on its oun account. What had to be exhibitd and made explicit uas that which was unique and irreducible not only in art in general, but also each particular art. Each art had to determine, through the operations peculiar to itself, the effects peculiar and exclusive to itself. ... It quickly emerged that the unique and proper area of competence of each art coincided with all that was unique to the nature of its medium.32

Using Kant as a philosophical touchstone ("He was the first to criticize the means itself of criticism ... Kant used logic to establish the limits of logic"), Greenberg sought to render the history of modernism as a continual search for each art form's fundamental, irreducible essence.33 The essence of photography is difficult to define in these terms, given what Greenberg called "the transparency of the medium . . . [to the] extra-artistic, real-life meaning of things."34 He was nevertheless willing, in a 1964 essay titled "Four Photographers," to point to pictures by Jean-Eugène-August Atget and Walker Evans that he considered “masterpieces of photography," arguing that "they have become masterpieces by transcending the documentary and conveying something that affects one more than mere knowledge could."35

Other formalist evaluations of photography have relied on similar arguments. In "The Ontology of the Photographic Image"(written in 1945 but first published in English in 1967), French film critic André Bazin promoted the need for a “true realism, the need that is to give significant expression to the world both concretely and in its essence."36 For Bazin, photography's “essentially objective character," the singular quality distinguishing photography from painting, enabled it, above all other media, to achieve this "true realism": "The photographic image is the object itself, the object freed from the conditions of time and space that govern it. No matter how fuzzy, distorted, or discolored, no matter how lacking in documentary value the image may be, it shares, by virtue of the very process of its becoming, the being of the model of which it is the reproduction; it is the model. . . . The photograph as such and the object itself share a common being.' "37

John Szarkowski's approach to photography is closer to that of Greenberg than of Bazin, although all three share a similar intellectual aspiration. Unlike postmodern critics, Szarkowski takes the position that "there really is such a thing as photography."38 The problem is how to define exactly what this "thingness" is. In an interview recorded in 1978, he describes how in his practice as a curator at the Museum of Modern Art he has pursued"the general generic problem of what is this funny medium and what can you do with it and what are its potentials . . . how those energies are used to further explore the potentials of that line, that evolutionary line of the being .. the truth .. . the great genetic pool of [photographic] possibilities."39In other words, Szarkowski finds himself, like the artists he favors, in continual pursuit of the essence of the photographic medium. As he puts it, "I think in photography the formalist approach is . .. concerned with trying to explore the intrinsic or prejudicial capacities of the medium as it is understood at that moment."40

Szarkowski's best known attempt to articulate this approach at the level of curatorial practice is his 1966 exhibition "T'he Photographer's Eye." In his own words, “The Photographer's Eye was an attempt to try to define certain issues, certain fundamental issues, that might begin to offer the armature for a credible vocabulary that really has to do with photography."41 To that end, Szarkowski's catalogue essay argues that photography was not only "born whole" but represents a "radically new picture-making process."42 This new and distinctive process is embodied in every one of photography's instances, whatever the skill or sensitivity (or lack of these same qualities) brought to the medium by its many practitioners. Szarkowski goes on to argue that those pictures that reflect, with "success," on the strangeness of their own process of production should be regarded as "significant beyond their limited intention." This explains why he has consistently included pictures by anonymous photographers in all of his large survey exhibitions, including his 1989 historical overview “Photography Until Now."43 For Szarkowski's interest is not only in what artists have done with the medium but also in what can be learned in general from "photography—the great undifferentiated, homogenous whole of it." With that end in mind, he seeks out those photographs that, consciously or otherwise, exhibit "anonymous and untraceable gifts from photography itself."44

In The Photographer's Eye, Szarkowski identifies five "concepts" that he claims are "peculiar to photography"; specifically "The Thing Itself, The Detail, The Frame, Time, and Vantage Point." Photographs were displayed in groups according to their presumed engagement with these "concepts," resulting in a kind of modernist history of photographic picture making remarkably reminiscent of that propagated by Greenberg for painting. As Szarkowski describes his chosen photographic pictures: "The vision they share belongs to no school or aesthetic theory, but to photography itself. The character of this vision was discovered by photographers at work, as their awareness of photography's potentials grew. If this is true, it should be possible to consider the history of the medium in terms of photographers' progressive awareness of characteristics and problems that have seemed inherent in the medium."45

In various exhibitions and texts, Szarkowski presents the history of photography as an inevitable progression toward self-knowledge. He is joined in this enterprise by many other scholars. Most histories of photography are in fact art histories, faithfully following in the ruts of Beaumont Newhall's influential The History of Photography (which was first published as an exhibition catalogue for the Museum of Modern Art in 193\~).\* In emphasizing art photography above all other genres and practices, these histories tend to privilege the most self-conscious photographs, those that appear to be in some way about their own processes of production. In this sense these histories—and I refer here to almost every recent publication that has attempted to cover the history of the medium—all contribute consciously or unconsciously to the general formalist project.47

Szarkowski makes the connection clear in the opening remarks to his 1989 exhibition catalogue for "Photography Until Now," arguing that art photography embodies the essence of all photography: "It is my hope that this approach will allow the art of photography to be seen not as a special case, peripheral to the larger story of the medium's broad concerns and instrumental functions, but rather, and simply, as that work that embodies the clearest, most eloquent expression of photography's historic and continuing search for a renewed and vital identity."48 This same argument has also been made for particular aspects of photography's history. Many have linked Szarkowski's views, for example, to Peter Galassi's exhibition and catalogue, Before Photography: Painting and the Invention of Photography, produced under the auspices of Szarkowski and the Museum of Modern Art in 1981.49

Galassi expresses the central revisionist premise of his exhibition in the following, now infamous, aphorism: "Photography was not a bastard left by science on the doorstep of art, but a legitimate child of the Western pictorial tradition."50More than this, Galassi is interested in locating photography within one particular pictorial tradition that makes its viewers "participants in the contingent experience of everyday life."51 He identifies the expression of contingent experience with a certain attitude to picture making best represented by the landscape sketch genre that appeared around 1800. According to Galassi, this genre marks the "emergence of a new norm of pictorial coherence that made photography conceivable"; "the new attitude (and its pictorial expressions) had begun to develop before photography was invented"; "photography was born of this fundamental transformation in pictorial strategy."52 He continues: "I have chosen ... to focus on that aspect of landscape painting that is the clearest (if ostensibly the most modest) symptom of the broad artistic transformation that catalyzed the invention of photography. The landscape sketches ... present a new and fundamentally modern pictorial syntax of immediate, synoptic perceptions and discontinuous forms. It is the syntax of an art devoted to the singular and contingent rather than the universal and stable. It is also the syntax of photography."53

One immediate effect of this argument, challenging though it is on other levels, is that it identifies both photography's "syntax" and its conceptual origins with an artistic rather than a social, intellectual, or political "transformation." In accordance with Szarkowski's privileging of the detail as one of photography's inherent characteristics, Galassi stresses photography's "intuitive,"“arbitrary" framing of the world, resulting in pictures full of what he calls “discontinuous, unexpected forms." Moreover, he suggests that the production of this particular kind of modernist picturing is a consequence of "the camera's inability to compose"; that is, is a property inherent in the medium.54

Numerous critics have pointed out the artful convenience of Galassi's selection of both paintings and photographs in order that they comply with his argument's particular emphasis on the growing artistic desire to produce “pictures of bits." Important genres of photographic composition, such as daguerreotype portraiture, are almost entirely absent from his exhibition. Similarly, he ignores the dominant and very conventional landscape school of painting of the early nineteenth century and the many monumental and similarly conventional landscape photographs produced by early practitioners. As Solomon-Godeau asserts:

Galassi can be justifiably accused of committing a tautology and of selecting only the evidence which matihes his hypoth sis . . . to proride an academic and scholarly justification for the curatorial preferences and critical apparatus of MoMA's Photography Department.55

"Bejore Photography" nas thus constructed to proride precisely the thesis that the museum required: to u it, that the history of photography, essentially and ontologically, is not only engendered by art, but is in fact inseparable from it.56

All of this is undoubtedly true. Indeed, the postmodern critique of formalism is convincing on virtually all levels (and this book therefore takes it as a given). But this still leaves an important question unanswered. By what exactly is photography “engendered,"if not by art (or, at least, by the Western picture-making tradition)? What is this thing we call photography?

It should be clear from my discussion thus far that recent approaches to photographv all hinge on photography's historical and ontological identity, a matter that both postmodernists and formalists think they have somehow resolved. In a sense, the entire laborious argument between them reduces down to a single, deceptively simple question: Is photography to be identified with (its own) nature or with the culture that surrounds it? Both postmodernists and formalists presume to know what photography is (and what it isn't). Their argument is about the location of photography's identity, about its boundaries and limits, rather than about identity per se.

## ORIGIN STORIES

In this context, it is interesting that Galassi has seen fit to provide his “photography" with something necessary to all identity claims—a location in time and space, a point of origin prior to which it had no identity, a before photography. This historical move, this gesture to an originary moment of birth, is, as Jacques Derrida tells us, "not just one metaphysical gesture among others, it is the metaphysical exigency, that which has been the most constant, most profound and most potent." 57

This is certainly the case with scholars concerned with the history and meanings of photography. Whatever the theoretical approach, photography's commentators inevitably find themselves having to say something about the medium's invention and its cause or causes. Indeed, the nature of photography's political and cultural identity is often explicitly equated with the nature of its origins. This, after all, is the use value of origin stories as a genre. They allow one the opportunity of, as Derrida puts it, "returning strategically,' ideally, to an origin or to a priority' held to be simple, intact, normal, pure, standard, self-identical, in order to then think in terms of derivation, complication, deterioration, accident, etc."58In other words, as a manifestation of“the metaphysical exigency," any given origin story distills its teller's approach to the practice of storytelling (the practice of thought, of history, of representation) in general.

As we've seen, Galassi locates the origins of photography in a specific shift in artistic aspiration that takes place within European culture in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. In Photography Until Now, Szarkowski is a little more circumspect, initially claiming no more than that "new possibilities" like photography arise from “a complex ecology of ideas and circumstance that includes the condition of the intellectual soil, the political climate, the state of technical competence, and the sophistication of the seed." He then goes on to suggest more concretely that "the invention of photography depended on the confluence of three streams of thought." The first two he identifies as optics and chemistry; “the third was the poetic idea that it might be possible to snatch from the very air a picture formed by the forces of nature."

With this conceptual architecture as his background, Szarkowski then goes on to sketch the same prehistory for photography that has been repeated in virtually every book published on the medium. He quickly traces the development of the camera obscura from the fifth century B.C. onward (“T'he camera is essential to the idea of photography"), mentions some eighteenth-century experiments on light-sensitive substances, and then draws attention to fifteenth-century Italy and the idea, made possible by perspective, that pictures might be “formed by the edges." In this way, Szarkowski is able to bring a broad sweep of history to focus on “the Western pictorial tradition" and what both he and Galassi see as photography's most essential feature— the camera's ability to picture the world as a series of framed views (which Szarkowski calls "the idea of contingency"). However neither of these scholars addresses why this particular ability suddenly came to be privileged or why the “poetic" idea of photography emerged in the early nineteenth century and not before. Indeed, Szarkowski provocatively asserts that, on the evidence available, "photography was not invented to serve a clearly perceived need." It was instead, so it seems, the inevitable product of an artistic sensibility whose own origins lie in the fifteenth century. In other words, photography's identity is founded in history (or, at least, in art history).59

This equation of identity with history brings Szarkowski and Galassi a little closer to the views of those very postmodernists who so vehemently oppose them. For postmodernism would also locate photography's origins within history; it is just not always the same history as that favored by formalism. Victor Burgin, for example provides photography with one origin story that closely resembles that of Szarkowski, arguing that "in its essential details the representational system of photography is identical with that of classical painting: both depend (the former directly, the latter indirectly) upon the camera obscura."60

Many other historians, John Tagg among them, have sought to equate photography's emergence with the concurrent development of particular social and political formations: "The incentive to develop the existing scientific and technical knowledge as a means of fixing the image of the camera obscura came . . . from the unprecedented demand for images among the newly dominant middle classes, at a stage of economic growth in Britain and France when organized industry was displacing traditional patterns of manufacture and laying the basis for a new social order."61 The assumption that the invention of photography answered the demands of a newly dominant bourgeois ideology enables Tagg neatly to incorporate the medium's history into a classbased analysis of contemporary European society. Most importantly, it makes even photography's invention an unavoidably social and political phenomenon. This also suits the theoretical approach of Allan Sekula. Although avoiding the demand to define a specific point of origin (this would come dangerously close to the essentialism that his work claims to dispute), Sekula consistently equates photography's historical appearance with the modern development of the logic of capital: "Photography is fundamentally related in its normative way of depicting the world to an epistemology and an esthetics that are intrinsic to a system of commodity exchange."62

Already it is possible to note a strange congruence taking place within and among these various accounts of photography's origins. The formalists, supposedly concerned primarily with the essence of the photographic, find themselves building the foundation of this essence on history (on that which lies outside the photographic frame). Meanwhile, the postmodernists, supposedly opposed to any search for essence, find themselves seeking to identify photographic epistemologies and aesthetics that are “fundamental,"“essential,"and “intrinsic"(and so are presumably internal to each and every photograph).

Until this point my account has seemed quite straightforward. Schematic though it undoubtedly is, it nevertheless reveals the operation of what appear at first glance to be two diametrically opposed points of view. On one side are those who believe that photography has no singular identity because all identity is dependent on context. On the other are those who identify photography by defining and isolating its most essential attributes, whatever they may be. One group sees photography as an entirely cultural phenomenon. The other speaks in terms of photography's inherent nature as a medium. One approach regards photography as having no history of its own; the other happily provides an historical outline within which all photographs are thought to have a place determined in advance. One stresses mutability and contingency; the other points to eternal values. One is primarily interested in social practice and politics, the other in art and aesthetics. We could go on. The differences seem clear enough.

But are they? Is the difference between essentialist and antiessentialist theories of photography quite as marked as it appears? The postmodern critique of essence, for example, is the critique of identity “as such"; in this case, a critique of the formalist notion of photography as something unified and undifferentiated. Postmodernism wants to say that photography is nothing but difference and replace its singular identity with multiple photographies. But there is an irony in the orchestration of this oppositional logic. In postmodern criticism, the photograph still has an essence, but now it is found in the mutability of culture rather than in its presumed other—an immutable nature. In other words, the postmodern identification of photographies with a sphere of operations that is entirely cultural—the assumption that mutability "as such" can be delimited even if identity "as such" cannot—is itself an essentializing gesture. Why, amid the general postmodern critique of binary structures, does this division between sameness and difference, nature and culture, substance and appearance, continue to be essentialized? Why, in short, assume that nature is frozen in place as the undifferentiated origin against which culture can secure its identity?

Already we begin to see the limitations of these prevailing ways of talking about photography. Despite appearances to the contrary, both share a presumption that, in the final analysis, photography's identity can be determined as a consequence of either nature orculture. The distinction between these two entities, more particularly the politics of the maintenance of all such distinctions, is left unquestioned. Thus the opposition between postmodernism and formalism is binary (each depends on deining itself as not-the-other, allowing neither to actually engage the logic of otherness itself). This oppositional structure is then repeated within the methodology each brings to photography, a problem to which I shall return. The point is that postmodernism and formalism, at least in their dominant photographic manifestations, both avoid coming to grips with the historical and ontological complexity of the very thing they claim to analyze.

This book aims to rearticulate something of that complexity. Following in the footsteps of the scholars discussed above, I will look for the identity of photography in the history of its origins. If nothing else, a repetition of this traditional gesture allows me to make a close, even rigorous examination of this most foundational of photographic stories. More than that, such an examination may help to determine photography's own determinations. Should the identity of photography be confined to the realm of nature or to that of culture? Or will we find that, wherever we look—at photographic theory or at the medium's history—any given foundation is continually being displaced by a dynamic and troubling play of differences? In this sense, the chap ters that follow are not just about the arcane matter of photography's historical identity. They are also about questions of history and identity in general and perhaps even about the question of matter itself.

