## Preface Now that Third World development problems have become such a universal concern and have assumed such an alarming aspect, there is a tendency to look back to the colonial period with renewed interest in the hope that it may shed some light on the nature of the development problem or alternatively be made the scapegoat for current difficulties. It can be argued that if the colonial powers had been more successful in developing the economic and political structures of their colonies, contemporary problems would be less severe and intractable. Conversely, others would claim that the legacy from the colonial period can be overestimated; that it occurred too long ago to have had any very powerful influence on current problems—which stem rather from the inequality and instability of the world’s trading economy and the failure of developing countries to adjust adequately to the responsibilities of independence, than to any alleged shortcomings in colonial rule. Indeed it might be argued that the conditions of relative peace and stability which prevailed in much of the colonial period were more conducive to development than the instability and uncertainty which has afflicted the Third World since the 1960s. These matters are highly controversial and will no doubt always remain so. They have already generated a vast polemical literature, and it is not our intention to add to it. Instead we hope that by attempting an analysis of the aims, activities, achievements and shortcomings of one major colonial power (Great Britain) in its tropical colonies over a period of a little over a century, we may be able to bring into sharper focus the specific problems and obstacles to development as they unfolded; and to assess the usefulness, or otherwise, of policy decisions and initiatives as they were taken. Such an aim may perhaps be considered modest in relation to modern development problems, but analysing and absorbing the lessons of history is never a simple process; and one of the more distressing aspects of contemporary Third World experience has been a tendency to repeat mistakes previously made through an inadequate knowledge and understanding of past activities. If we can lessen that danger, and can highlight some of the achievements and shortcomings of past performance, we might be able to help clarify the planning agenda which developing countries need to elaborate, and to help to set it more firmly in the context of previously hard-won experience. Despite many studies of British imperialism (the most important of which are discussed in what follows) there is still a gap in the literature concerning the long-range development of the tropical colonies during the colonial period (or at any rate from the mid-nineteenth century). It is this gap which we attempt to fill. The official and unofficial sources are voluminous and there is no way in which every relevant source could have been consulted. We have concentrated on a range which seemed the most useful for our purposes, which is a mixture drawn in the main from official government archives, contemporary accounts, official trade statistics and government publications. We have analysed the official trade statistics in some detail, using the records from the colonial customs offices, as printed in the annual governors’ reports, or the Blue Books, and cited the reports themselves. We have also used original material from the Colonial Office, the Board of Trade, the War Office, the Foreign Office, the Treasury and the Cabinet Office in the Public Record Office; and a wide range of official publications and reports relating to colonial affairs. In addition, we have sought to illuminate the picture by citing contemporary accounts of the colonies such as Anthony Trollope’s travels in the West Indies in 1859 and accounts of East Africa, c. 1905, by Sir Harry Johnston and Sir Charles Eliot. We are conscious that much more could have been done in this respect, but limitations of space curtailed what was possible. We are also aware that our sources tend to bias our account towards the official British version. This is unfortunate, but in the present state of knowledge, more or less inevitable. We are sure that more research will be carried out in the future by historians in the former colonies, which will illuminate the economic impact of imperialism from a local perspective, leading eventually to a more balanced assessment of British colonial rule.