## The tropical colonies in the mid-Victorian age (1850–70) Opportunities and problems ## THE UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF THE TROPICAL COLONIES The 1850s make a good starting point for an analysis of the development of the tropical empire, because they were the critical decade during which vital decisions had to be taken as to whether it was worth retaining tropical colonies at all, since the process of granting responsible government to the settlement colonies was in full swing. The economic difficulties experienced by the West Indies after the final ending of slavery in 1838, the high costs (both in money and lives) of maintaining the navy’s anti-slave trade patrols off the West African coast, and the generally disease-laden and unpromising aspect of tropical areas, made many people in Britain feel that the retention of tropical colonies (let alone their expansion) was a foolish and costly enterprise. Disraeli’s famous comment in 1852 about the colonies being a ‘millstone around our necks’ captured this mood, but in the event it proved to be only a passing phase.<sup>1</sup> Despite much agonising Britain did not give up its tropical colonies. On the contrary it began a process—slow and hesitating at first—of gradually expanding them, so that by 1885, (even before the scramble for Africa) the size of the tropical empire was very considerably greater than it had been in 1850.<sup>2</sup> The reasons for this were varied and complex and will be considered in more detail for each region in due course. What then was the inheritance of tropical colonies whose uncertain future the Colonial Office controlled in 1850? In Table 2.1 the tropical colonies are listed with their populations in the early 1850s, and in 1881. In that period of about 30 years their population virtually doubled from around 3.1 million to 6.1 million. The Asian colonies were the most populous at both dates: Ceylon leading the way with a population of a little over 1.7 million in the early 1850s, followed by the Straits Settlements in the Malayan peninsula with just over 200,000 inhabitants and Mauritius with just under that figure. The Asian colonies increased their population from nearly 2.2 million in 1850 to 3.85 million in 1881, but their relative share ## THE TROPICAL COLONIES IN THE MID-VICTORIAN AGE Table 2.1 British tropical colonies c. 1850 with population (in rank of population, by region)
<table><tr><td></td><td>Population c. 1850</td><td>total</td><td>% of New additions</td><td></td><td>Population % of c. 1881 Total</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbean</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Jamaica</td><td>377,433</td><td></td><td></td><td>580,804</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Barbados</td><td>135,939</td><td></td><td>171,860</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Brit. Guiana</td><td>127,695</td><td></td><td></td><td>257,940</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Trinidad</td><td>68,600</td><td></td><td></td><td>153,281</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Antigua</td><td>37,136</td><td></td><td></td><td>34,963</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>Grenada</td><td>32,671</td><td></td><td></td><td>43,757</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>St. Vincent</td><td>30,128</td><td></td><td></td><td>40,548</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>St Lucia</td><td>24,123</td><td></td><td></td><td>40,154</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>Dominica</td><td>22,220</td><td></td><td></td><td>28,211</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>St Kitts</td><td>20,741</td><td></td><td></td><td>29,137</td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>Tobago</td><td>14,378</td><td></td><td></td><td>18,051</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>Nevis</td><td>9,571</td><td></td><td></td><td>11,864</td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td>Montserrat</td><td>7,053</td><td></td><td></td><td>10,296</td></tr><tr><td>14</td><td>Virgin Is.</td><td>6,689</td><td></td><td></td><td>5,287</td></tr><tr><td>15</td><td>Brit. Honduras</td><td>4,500</td><td></td><td></td><td>27,452</td></tr><tr><td>16</td><td>Turks &amp; Caicos Is. included in Jamaica TOTAL</td><td></td><td>29.5%</td><td></td><td>4,778 23.9%</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>918,877</td><td></td><td></td><td>1,458,383</td></tr><tr><td>Asia</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Fiji 130,270 (1874)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1 2</td><td>Ceylon Straits Settle.</td><td>1,713,738</td><td></td><td>2,763,984</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td></td><td>202,540/(1857)</td><td></td><td>423,384</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Mauritius</td><td>192,503</td><td></td><td></td><td>370.766</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Hong Kong</td><td>36,788</td><td></td><td>160,402</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Labuan TOTAL</td><td>1,150 2,146,719</td><td>68.9%</td><td>3,854,639</td><td>5,833 63.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Africa</td><td></td><td></td><td>Lagos (1861)</td><td>75,270</td></tr><tr><td>1 2</td><td>Sierra Leone Gambia</td><td>44,472</td><td></td><td></td><td>60,546 15,150</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Gold Coast</td><td>5,502 1,200</td><td></td><td>Protectorate</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>(1874)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>TOTAL</td><td>51,174</td><td>1.6%</td><td></td><td>800,966 13.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>GRAND TOTAL</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>3,116,770</td><td></td><td>6,113,988</td><td>100</td></tr></table> amongst the tropical colonies fell slightly from 68.9 per cent to 63 per cent, although they still remained by far the most important group numerically. The biggest relative gainers were the West African colonies. With only 51,174 inhabitants in the early 1850s, they had only 1.6 per cent of the population, and were an insignificant group, widely believed to be on the point of abandonment by the British government. Indeed, with the ending of the American Civil War in 1865, and the belief that this would lead to the final cessation of the slave trade (it did not because slavery continued in Brazil and Cuba almost until 1900)<sup>3</sup> the House of Commons set up a select committee to provide the evidence that the retention of the West African colonies was no longer necessary. To many people’s surprise the committee was unable to make the unequivocal recommendation that some of its members had hoped for. As always the facts were found to be much more complicated than most people had thought. The committee reported on 26 June 1865, as follows: That it is the opinion of this Committee: 1 That it is not possible to withdraw the British Government, wholly or immediately, from any settlements or engagements on the West African Coast. 2 That the settlement on the Gambia may be reduced by McCarthy’s Island, which is 150 miles up the river, being no longer occupied; and that the settlement should be confined as much as possible to the mouth of the river. 3 That all further extension of ter ritor y or assumption of Government, or new treaties offering any protection to native tribes, would be inexpedient; and that the object of our policy should be to encourage in the natives the exercise of those qualities which may render it possible for us more and more to transfer to them the administration of all the Governments, with a view to an ultimate withdrawal from all, except, probably Sierra Leone. 4 That this policy of non-extension admits of no exception, as regards new settlements, but cannot amount to an absolute prohibition of measures which, in peculiar cases, may be necessary for the more efficient and economical administration of the settlements we already possess.<sup>4</sup> Essentially the committee came up against three intractable, and linked, problems. These were (1) the need to sustain the settlement of Christian Africans around Freetown in Sierra Leone, who had been liberated from the slave ships at sea, and to keep Sierra Leone as long as the slave trade continued; (2) to suppress the slave trade; and (3) to stimulate ‘legitimate’ trade (basically a trade in palm oil at this time) in order both to finance the administration of the British forts and settlements and to provide an alternative trade to replace the slave trade. These points were well illustrated in the evidence which Richard Burton, the famous explorer, gave to the committee. First he was reassuring about the economic prospects for the palm oil trade especially from the coast round Lagos, which had been annexed by Britain in 1861. Question: What is the present amount of the palm oil trade? Answer: I believe it is between 2,000 and 3,000 tons. Question: And do you think it could be raised up to 100,000 tons? Answer : I think so.<sup>5</sup> But on the intractable problems of suppressing the slave trade (an essential pre-requisite for increasing legitimate trade) he was far less reassuring. Question: Proceeding to the Gold Coast territory, from the Volta to the Assinee, do you consider, with our present objects in view namely, the suppression of the slave trade, as well as the extension of commerce, that we could do that work with fewer ports than the four or five which we now maintain? Answer: If the export of slaves continues in demand, and we remove those forts, the Ashantees will necessarily come down to the coast and they will be in a position to export any number of slaves; on the other hand, supposing the country to be relieved of that export of slaves, we might do without them. Question: So long as the demand for slaves continues, you think that we cannot do without our present forts? Answer : Certainly not without Cape Coast, Accra and Annamaboe, and we ought to reestablish the settlement of Addah on the Volta to have two ports at the mouth of the Volta. I was there in 1862, and I found 400 slaves in the barracoon.<sup>6</sup> Thus, even though Burton was personally in favour of withdrawal, he seemed to recognise that it was not a practical option.<sup>7</sup> Instead the Lagos colony and the Gold Coast protectorate were added to them, so that by 1881 they had over 800,000 inhabitants and comprised 13.1 per cent of the population. They were soon to be joined by Nigeria.<sup>8</sup> ## THE WEST INDIES The most numerous, and the oldest, of the colonies were the West Indian Islands, which had slightly over 900,000 inhabitants in 1850 and nearly 1.5 million in 1881 falling from 29.5 per cent to 23.9 per cent of the total. However, as can be seen from Table 2.1 most of the islands had insignificant populations, and only four of them had more than 100,000 inhabitants by 1881. Of these Jamaica, with over half a million, was much the most populous, followed by British Guiana, Barbados and Trinidad. The West Indian colonies were a source of sore perplexity to the Colonial Office. Their great age as English colonies, going back to the seventeenth century, their vociferous English planter-settlers organised in Parliament in the West India Committee, and their past importance as naval bases, made their abandonment extremely difficult: but the steady decline of their sugar exports after the equalisation of Britain’s sugar import duties in 1854, wreaked havoc with their economies. The loss of the protection they had previously enjoyed made it very difficult for them to compete with sugar from Cuba and Brazil, which was still being produced by slave labour until the 1880s.<sup>9</sup> As the largest and most populous of the island colonies (excluding mainland British Guiana) Jamaica appeared to have more potential in the 1850s than any other except perhaps Trinidad: but with an area of 4,411 square miles Jamaica was well over twice as large as Trinidad (see Table 2.1). An island of great beauty, and a British colony since 1655, Jamaica had long been famous for its sugar production; and yet had a rugged and mountainous terrain which made communication and internal transport difficult, as noted by the novelist Anthony Trollope who visited the West Indies in 1859, to help reorganise their decrepit postal system. Of Jamaica, he wrote that despite its fame for sugar cane one may travel for days in the island and see only a cane piece here and there. By far the greater portion of the island is covered with wild wood and jungle—what is there called bush. Through this, on an occasional favourable spot, and very frequently on the roadsides, one sees the gardens or provision-grounds of the negroes. These are spots of land cultivated by them, for which they neither pay rent, or on which, as is quite as common, they have squatted without payment of any rent. These provision-grounds are very picturesque, They…contain cocoa-trees, breadfruit trees, oranges, mangoes, limes, plantains, jock fruit, sour-sop, avocado pears, and a score of others. In addition there were yams, a West African root which formed the staple food, and occasionally patches of coffee, arrowroot and sugar cane.<sup>10</sup> The existence of these small-holdings lay at the root of what the European planters (and many in the Colonial Office) perceived to be Jamaica’s fundamental economic problem; for they had rendered the former slaves to a considerable extent self-sufficient in food, and hence partly independent of wage-labour, especially at the very low rates being offered by the planters. Hence the sugar planters were afflicted not only with low prices and foreign competition, but with a labour force which was only prepared to work irregularly, and which could not be compelled to turn out at critical periods like planting-time and harvest; though the planters no doubt much exaggerated this reluctance. As a combined result of all these factors sugar exports in the mid-1850s were less than one-third of what they had been in the final days of slavery in the early 1830s, as can be seen from Table 2.2. Table 2.2 Jamaica sugar exports (in tons), 1829/33–1853/55
<table><tr><td>Yearly average</td><td>Tons</td></tr><tr><td>1829-33</td><td>69,206ª</td></tr><tr><td>1835-38</td><td>52,004ª</td></tr><tr><td>1842-45</td><td>33,895</td></tr><tr><td>1853–55</td><td>22,950h</td></tr></table> a To UK only. à To all destínations. Clearly Jamaica’s future lay in a diversification away from sugar production to other types of activity. Trollope believed that meat production might be the answer: I saw various grazing farms—pens they are here called…and I could not but fancy that grazing in Jamaica should be the natural and most beneficial pursuit of the proprietor…I never saw grass to equal the guinea grass in some of the parishes; and at Knockalva I looked at Hereford cattle which I have rarely, if ever, seen beaten at any agricultural show in England. At present the island does not altogether supply itself with meat; but it might do so, and supply, moreover, nearly the whole of the West Indies. Proprietors of land say that the sea transit is too costly. Of course it is at present; the trade not yet existing; for indeed, at present there is no means of such transit. But screw steamers now appear quickly enough wherever freight offers itself; and if the cattle were there, they would soon find their way down to the Windward Islands.<sup>11</sup> Here Trollope put his finger on one of the biggest problems facing West Indian colonies; the absence of an adequate transportation system. Local trade was insufficient to make such a system profitable, but without such a system diversification out of sugar was highly unlikely, especially in view of the strong prejudices which most planters still clung to. Trollope states that it would be highly unwise to advise the planters to give up sugar ‘if you give such advice in a voice loud enough to be heard, the island will soon be too hot to hold you. Sugar is loved there, whether wisely loved or not. If not wisely, then too well’.<sup>12</sup> Trollope also complained about the bad state of the roads, and the miserably unsanitary condition of the towns, especially Kingston, the largest town, but not the capital city (which was at nearby Spanish Town). His pessimism was shared by Governor Sir Charles Grey, who in his annual report to the colonial secretary for 1852, wrote that The revenue does not fully meet the authorised public expenditure, although within the period of my government that expenditure…had been reduced by nearly one third of the whole.<sup>13</sup> He had reduced it from £304,658 in 1847 to £218,648 in 1850, but owing to an outbreak of cholera, and other necessary expenses, the government’s debt had increased substantially, and then stood at ‘between £700,000 and £800,000’. With a falling revenue he foresaw difficulties in meeting future interest payments.<sup>13</sup> He was forced to say ‘with a feeling of great regret that the colony still remains in a very languishing and depressed condition’.<sup>14</sup> The island of Trinidad, although smaller and less developed than Jamaica, seemed to offer brighter prospects. Situated about 10° north of the Equator and only a few miles offshore from Venezuela, it was much flatter than Jamaica, although it had some mountains, and hence offered more scope for agriculture and improved communications. However it is quite small, being about 50 miles from north to south, and 37 miles from east to west and comprising 1,863 square miles in all. In the 1850s it was still relatively underpopulated with slightly fewer than 70,000 inhabitants. This created a labour shortage on the sugar plantations, which was being alleviated by the importation of indentured labourers from India, thus building up potential trouble for the future. Sugar still retained its obsessive predominance in the economy. In 1850 16,837 tons were exported compared with only 1,594 tons of cocoa, the next most important export. Trivial quantities of molasses, coffee, cotton and rum were also exported, but the staples of the future, asphalt from the famous pitch lake, and petroleum were unutilised or undiscovered.<sup>15</sup> Trollope was much taken with the beauty of the island’s scenery, noting in 1859 that it was an island great portions of which are but very imperfectly known; of which but comparatively a very small part has been cultivated. During the last eight or ten years, ten or twelve thousand immigrants, chiefly Coolies from Madras and Calcutta, have been brought into Trinidad, forming now above an eighth part of its entire population; and the consequence has been that in two years, from 1855, namely to 1857, its imports were increased by one-third, and its exports by twothirds.<sup>16</sup> Nevertheless, much of the island was still underdeveloped and Trollope spent most of his time in and around the capital, Port of Spain. He added that a tour through the whole of Trinidad would richly repay the trouble, though indeed, it would be troublesome. The tourist must take his own provisions, unless, indeed, he provided himself by means of his gun, and must also take his bed. The mosquitoes, too, are very vexatious.<sup>17</sup> In spite of a minuscule annual revenue of £88,660, the governor, Lord Harris, was able to report in his despatch of 10 February 1851, that I have been enabled to effect a very decided improvement in the condition of the roads, which…will in a short time become general to the whole island.<sup>18</sup> He had also been repairing decayed bridges and had taken precautions lest the ‘fearful scourge’ of cholera should spread to the island from Jamaica: A sanitary inspector has been appointed, who is in constant communication with the police, in order to enforce the laws bearing on the subject. The wardens have been instructed to be prepared to establish hospitals and dispensaries in their wards at a moments notice, and a good supply of medicine has been secured.<sup>19</sup> Perhaps not surprisingly he had been able to do little about education and reported that I am sorry that I am not able to give a very satisfactory account of the general progress of education, the scarcity of efficient teachers being the principal impediment, and which must continue until a good normal school be established. He regretted that he could not make proper statistical returns, and hoped that when a census had been taken, and a postal service was ‘punctually at work’, he would be able to remedy the defect. This was written eight years before Trollope’s visit on behalf of the Post Office. Despite the paucity of his resources, Lord Harris ended by noting the rising sugar exports, and a belief ‘that the material prospects of the island are good’.<sup>20</sup> The largest underdeveloped colony in the Caribbean was British Guiana, occupying a chunk of the mainland of South America, just to the east of Venezuela. Situated just to the north of the Equator and comprising some 83,000 square miles, British Guiana was nearly as large as the United Kingdom (which is approx. 94,000 square miles), but was largely unexplored and very sparsely populated, with a recorded population of slightly under 128,000 people in 1851. These would have been virtually all resident on the coastal strip, and probably did not include the small, scattered Amerindian population in the remote interior. Like the Caribbean Islands British Guiana was a sugar colony, and produced little else. As late as 1951, 85 per cent of the country was virgin forest, and a further 10 per cent inland mountain savannah, so that in 1850 it is doubtful if the settled coastal belt comprised more than 2 per cent of the land area. Originally settled by the Dutch in the seventeenth century, who drained some of the coastal plain, it was occupied by Britain in 1796, and formally annexed in 1815. Rather unexpectedly, Trollope was much taken with British Guiana (also then known as Demerara) during his short visit in 1859: At home there are prejudices against it I know. They saw that it is a low, swampy, muddy strip of alluvial soil, infested with rattlesnakes, gallinippers, and mosquitoes as big as turkey-cocks; that yellow-fever rages there perennially; that the heat is unendurable…There never was a land so ill spoken of—and never one that deserved it so little.<sup>21</sup> He liked it so much, he said he would happily settle there and described it ecstatically as ‘the one time and actual Utopias of the Caribbean Seas—the Transatlantic Eden’. His subsequent description hardly bore out this high praise, but he believed that there was tremendous agricultural potential inland, which would be realised when the programme of settling indentured labourers from India had been completed.<sup>22</sup> This had been initiated by Governor Sir Henry Barkly (1848–53) and brought moderate prosperity to the colony until the 1870s, based on rising sugar exports. In 1850 sugar exports had amounted to 37,351 hogsheads (Trollope said a hogshead of sugar was supposed to weigh one ton, but seldom did) and planters told Trollope that one million hogsheads a year could be produced in the country, which was equivalent to some 90 per cent of the world’s sugar production at that time. That the world market would expand proportionately Trollope seemed to have no doubt, and the obsession with sugar continued to dominate British Guiana for many years to come. The towns of New Amsterdam and Georgetown, the capital, impressed Trollope: Georgetown to my eyes is a prepossessing city, flat as the country round it is, and deficient as it is—as are all the West Indies—in anything like architectural pretension. The streets are wide and airy. The houses, all built of wood, stand separately, each a little off the road; and though much has not been done in the way of their gardens—for till the great coming influx of Coolies all labour is engaged in making sugar—yet there is generally something green attached to each of them.<sup>23</sup> New Amsterdam, on the other hand, though it impressed Trollope as ‘clean and orderly’ had much decayed in trade owing to a sandbar across the mouth of the river Berbice on which it is situated. It was a town in which ‘three persons in the street constitute a crowd, and five collected for any purpose would form a goodly club’; yet signs of renewed vigour were not lacking, for in his trip from Georgetown to New Amsterdam, Trollope had travelled for fifteen miles on a railway.<sup>24</sup> Signs of economic improvement were also commented on by the governor, Sir Henry Barkly, in his despatch to the colonial secretary, sent in May 1851, where he noted that prospects were not as bleak as had been suggested by a recent Commission of Inquiry into the State and Property of the Colony. In reporting upon the condition and prospects of colonial agriculture…I myself entertain no doubt that a very decided improvement has manifested itself in the position of the planting interests. ## and he ended his report by saying On the whole, whatever prognostications of ill the Commissioners of Inquiry may have indulged in…I must avow myself thankful that the colony has made much greater progress than could have been anticipated in so comparatively brief a space of time, and also far more confident than I should then have ventured to express myself as to its future prosperity.<sup>25</sup> The last of the major colonies, and much the most densely populated, was Barbados, where in 1850 nearly 136,000 people occupied an island only slightly larger than the Isle of Wight. Barbados is 21 miles long from north to south and 14.5 miles broad at its widest point. It comprises 166 square miles and had an average population density of about 820 persons per square mile in 1850. The Barbadians believed this was denser than China and it was certainly very different from the West Indian colonies previously described, all of which were fairly thinly populated.<sup>26</sup> Lying 13° north of the Equator and about 100 miles to the east of St Vincent, the nearest of the Windward Islands, the climate of Barbados is said not to be as oppressively hot as the other islands. It had a special importance as the oldest British West Indian colony, and the headquarters of the British West Indian naval and military garrisons. It had apparently been discovered by the Spanish in 1518, who removed some of the native Indian population as slaves to their colony of Hispaniola (now the Dominican Republic). This policy may have been continued, because the island was said to be uninhabited by 1536. The Spaniards established no settlements and the island was still uninhabited when the first English settlers arrived in 1627. Subsequently Barbados was intensively occupied by planters and their slaves from West Africa and was famous as a sugar island as early as the 1640s.<sup>27</sup> When Trollope visited it in 1859, he commented that But for the heat its appearance would not strike with any surprise a Englishman accustomed to an ordinary, but ugly agricultural country. It has not the thick tropical foliage which is so abundant in the other islands, nor the wild, grassy dells. Happily for the Barbadians every inch of it will produce canes; and, to the credit of the Barbadians, every inch of it does so.<sup>28</sup> Communications were much better than in the larger colonies, the roads being ‘excellent, but so white that they sadly hurt the eye of a stranger’<sup>29</sup> being made from the limestone subsoil which is prevalent in the island. The capital Bridgetown, did not impress Trollope. It was much like a second or third rate English town…the streets are narrow, irregular, and crooked but it had good, respectable well-to-do shops, that sell everything, from a candle down to a coffin, including wedding-rings, corals, and widows’ caps<sup>30</sup> He thought the land was being strained by encouraging the growth of sugar by the use of imported guano manure, which he believed injured the soil and the sugar. Despite what he regarded as the healthy pressure of land shortage which forced the populace to work on the sugar plantations, he believed that the standard of living was quite high, commenting that numerous as are the negroes, they certainly live an easier life than that of an English labourer, earn their money with more facility and are more independent of their masters. A gentleman having one hundred and fifty families on his property would not expect to obtain from them the labour of above ninety men at the usual rate of pay, and that for not more than five days a week. They live in great comfort, and in some things are beyond measure extravagant.<sup>31</sup> It is doubtful if this optimistic picture was very accurate. It is somewhat at variance with the sombre comment of Governor Sir W.M.G.Colebrooke in his despatch to the colonial secretary a few years earlier (27 August 1851), where he stated that the effects of recent changes in the taxation system, whereby more of the revenue was raised by duties on imports, was to throw the burden of the taxes for the most part on the consumption of the labouring classes, and, excepting where export duties are imposed, to exempt the staple products of the colonies in a great degree from taxation, and from the large amount of remittances to absent proprietors deriving their incomes from the colonies, and from the limited investments of capital in local improvements, the population are held stationary in their condition, while increasing in their numbers.<sup>32</sup> However, in some other respects, Barbados was improving. Trade had grown between 1949 and 1851 and the revenue had yielded a considerable surplus on the receipts for the preceding year; and as there is every prospect that the revenue of the present year will be equally productive, I have recommended to the Assembly a reduction of the duties which press upon colonial trade.<sup>33</sup> Here his high Victorian free trade principles came into conflict with his desire to improve social welfare, for in his next despatch he went on to note that, although more money had recently been spent on churches and education, and even though this was much in advance of the other colonies, it was still inadequate to meet the growing requirements of the population, and it is important that the absent proprietors should be generally aware how very disproportionate are their own contributions towards objects so essential to the welfare of the colonies, from whence they derive their resources.<sup>34</sup> When it is realised that the total expenditure of the Barbadian government amounted to only £47,060 in 1850, (about 35 pence a head) of which £23,083 went on the judiciary, the police and the prisons, the decision to reduce taxation seems all the more remarkable. The miserly sum of £1,265 spent on education sharply underlies how limited were mid-Victorian concepts of welfare.<sup>35</sup> The remaining British colonies in the West Indies consisted of a chain of small islands strung out in the shape of a boomerang, and extending from the Virgin Islands, near Puerto Rico in the north down to Tobago, some twenty miles from Trinidad in the south. Most of them were mountainous and covered with luxuriant vegetation. All produced some sugar, but few had much potential for development in the days before cruise liners and jet aircraft made tourism a viable prospect. The more northerly islands were known as the Leewards and the more southerly as the Windwards. As can be seen from Table 2.1 only three of these islands supported more than 30,000 people in 1850. These were Antigua in the Leewards and Grenada and St Vincent in the Windwards. According to Trollope, Antigua’s main asset was the possession of a fine harbour: Neither is Antigua remarkable for its beauty. It is approached by an excellent and picturesque harbour, called English Harbour, which in former days was much used by the British navy; indeed I believe it was at one time the headquarters of a naval station. Premising, in the first place, that I know very little about harbours, I would say that nothing could be more secure than that.<sup>36</sup> Travelling southwards Trollope compared the British Islands of Dominica and St Lucia unfavourably with the larger French colonies of Guadaloupe and Martinique, with their cleaner and more prosperous looking towns. Continuing to St Vincent, which was ‘green and pretty, and tempting to look at’, he commented that this island is said to be healthy, having in this respect a much better reputation than its neighbour St Lucia, and as far as I could learn it is progressing—progressing slowly, but progressing—in spite even of the burden of Queens, Lords and Commons.<sup>37</sup> This latter reference was to the constitutional arrangements, which existed in all the old British West Indian colonies, which Trollope much disliked. In these constitutions the Queen was represented by the governor, the ‘Lords’ by his nominated council, and the ‘Commons’ by an assembly, which was sometimes elected and sometimes appointed, and sometimes a mixture of both; but which was always mainly representative of the small minority of European planters. These assemblies often had powers to block legislation, particularly where it affected taxation; and were almost universally abolished in the later nineteenth century, except in Barbados, the Bahamas and Bermuda. Paternalistic English governors and civil servants were considered to be more efficient and progressive, and in the conditions prevailing at the time, probably were; though by definition could do nothing to encourage indigenous political initiative or experience.<sup>38</sup> Some 70 miles south of St Vincent is Grenada, where Trollope again commented on faded glories. Grenada is also very lovely, and is, I think, the headquarters of the world for fruit. The finest mangoes I ever ate I found there; and I think the finest oranges and pineapples. He admired the capital, St Georges, rather more than most West Indian towns, and noted that the island had been fertile also, and productive—in every way of importance. But now here, as in so many other spots among the West Indies, we are driven to exclaim, Ichabod! The glory of our Grenada has departed…the houses, though so goodly, are but as so many Alhambras, whose tenants now are by no means great in the world’s esteem.<sup>39</sup> That final sentence might perhaps be a fitting summary on the condition of Britain’s West Indian colonies in the 1850s. ## ASIA AND THE PACIFIC The most important British tropical colonies at mid-century were those in Asia. Of these Sri Lanka (known before achieving independence in 1948 as Ceylon) was by far the most populous and developed. A large lozengeshaped island, about 265 miles long from north to south, and about 140 miles across at its widest point from east to west, it is situated between 6° and 10° north of the Equator, and only about 20 miles from the tip of the Indian sub-continent to which it is almost linked by a chain of small islets known as Adam’s Bridge. The interior of the island is occupied by hilly and mountainous country of great beauty, with rugged, jungle-clad mountains rising to nearly 8,000 feet in the south-centre. Here the climate is temperate or sub-tropical, and this region is the centre of the famous tea plantations, which have long been the backbone of the country’s economy, but which did not yet exist in the 1850s.<sup>40</sup> The coastal plains extend inland for 20 to 50 miles, and are densely forested in the south, but give way to dry, sandy savannah lands and scrub in the northern province. The island is very fertile and has been the centre of advanced civilisations for thousands of years. Ancient irrigation works supported extensive cities, whose impressive remains have still not been fully revealed by modern archaeological investigation. The magnificent Buddhist temples at old capital cities, such as Anuradhapura (c. 437 BC) and Polonnaruwa (c. AD 1050) in the north-centre of the island, are some of the world’s most impressive examples of early architecture and sculpture. So the Europeans who conquered Ceylon were not imposing their rule on a backward and primitive people but on one with very ancient cultural traditions, though less advanced in terms of material technology than their European rulers. The British were only the last of a succession of European conquerors, although they were the only ones to establish full control over the mountainous interior. The coastlands were occupied by the Portuguese from 1518, until they were gradually driven out by the Dutch in the early seventeenth century. The Dutch held the island until 1796, when having been conquered by Napoleon, the British regarded their colonies as legitimate prizes in war. Some of the colonies seized at that time, like Java, were returned to the Netherlands at the peace of Paris in 1814–15, but Ceylon, Cape Colony in South Africa, and some places in the Malayan Peninsula were kept by the British, who were specially concerned to retain them as bases on the sea route to India. The magnificent harbour at Trincomalee on the northeast coast of Ceylon was specially important for this purpose, since all ships heading for ports in eastern India, such as Madras or Calcutta, had to pass the eastern coast of Ceylon. Moreover, Colombo was an important revictualling and training centre, after the long voyage from Cape Town, before the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869.<sup>41</sup> The Dutch East India Company had derived a profit from its monopoly of the export of cinnamon, but this trade declined in the early nineteenth century, and the British administration sought to undermine the power of the local chiefs and particularly the rulers of the inland kingdom of Kandy, by destroying the traditional agrarian system, which had been based on communal land-ownership and labour-services (known as rajakaria), rendered by peasants to chiefs. Private ownership of land was gradually introduced and the economy was monetised.<sup>42</sup> The central hill country was opened up to coffee production by European planters in the 1840s. Coffee production rose from 2,093 tons in 1839 to 16,000 tons in 1850, largely as a result of the equalisation of British import duty on coffee in 1846, which allowed coffee from Ceylon into Britain at the same duty as that from the West Indies (i.e. 6d per pound) whereas previously coffee from Ceylon and paid 9d a pound.<sup>43</sup> Between 1840 and 1847 some $\mathcal { L } 3$ million was invested in coffee, but this form of development, while good for the customs revenue, also helped to prepare future problems; for not only were the profits largely exported to Britain, but a large labour force of Tamils from south India was brought into Ceylon to work the plantations. These workers could not be integrated into traditional Sinhalese society; but when the coffee plantations were struck by disease in the 1880s, the workers remained in Ceylon to work the new tea plantations. The resentment caused by this development continued in the 1980s when the Tamil demand for an independent state in northern Sri Lanka erupted into a violent confrontation which threatened the country’s economic future. It would not be appropriate to enter into the rights and wrongs of this dispute here, but there can be no doubt that its origins lie in a somewhat cavalier colonial attitude to economic development in the mid-nineteenth century. The growth of the coffee export trade underlined the inadequacy of transport and communications in the 1850s. In his despatch to the colonial secretary of 22 April 1851, the governor, Sir G.W.Anderson, referred to the government’s programme of road construction, which he said was being actively pursued, although he admitted that ‘the only metalled road throughout is…from Colombo to Kandy’; and that a ‘general scheme of roads, to be hereafter constructed, should, as soon as possible, be laid down…in order to quicken and economise the transit of merchandise’. He added, more pessimistically, that There is a desire for a railroad from Colombo to Kandy, it would, so far, be a vast improvement, but still only partially, as benefiting only one or two of the great planting interests. It was not, however, on this ground that I declined to recommend to your lordship the guarantee of five per cent that was much pressed on me; but that I could by no means anticipate any such surplus revenue that would warrant the colony in coming under so serious and enduring a pledge.<sup>44</sup> Clearly the governor’s faith in the island’s future was limited, and it was not until 1867 that Kandy was linked to Colombo by rail; and not until the last quarter of the nineteenth century that an effective railway system was built in Ceylon.<sup>45</sup> The next most populous tropical colony in Asia consisted of the four small and scattered settlements on the Malayan coast, known as the Straits Settlements; and with a population hardly above 200,000 (1857) it was still very insignificant compared with Ceylon. The British were not yet taking much interest in it, and were only beginning to comprehend its immense economic potential, which was to make it by far the most valuable of the tropical colonies by 1914. This is hardly surprising since the Malay peninsula in the early nineteenth century has been described as a scantily populated, jungle-covered wilderness politically divided into a series of small states of varying degrees of independence and isolation. Settlement was restricted to small, traditionally organised and often temporary Malay coastal and riverine kampongs (rural settlements) to a few diminutive mining centres in the foothills and to a shifting aboriginal population elsewhere.<sup>46</sup> Transport was by river and a few single paths. Exports were confined to very small quantities of tin, gold and spices. Yet the region had immense strategic important, for the whole of the rapidly growing trade between India and China, which was an East India Company monopoly until 1833, had to pass through the narrow Straits of Malacca between Malaya and Sumatra, both sides of which were controlled by the jealous Dutch East India Company, until the British seized Malacca from them in 1795 (after the Netherlands had been conquered by France). British interest in the area in fact dated from a slightly earlier period, when a British trader, Francis Light, persuaded the Sultan of Kedah to cede the island of Pahang to the East India Company in 1786, primarily to provide a naval base for British squadrons operating in the Bay of Bengal. In protecting Madras and Calcutta, they found bases on the east coast of India were useless when the monsoon was blowing from the north east from October to May, since they could not get out of harbour. Neither the possession of Pahang nor Malacca opened the straits, but this was achieved in 1811, when the British occupied Java and all the other Dutch possessions in Indonesia. Under the energetic governorship of Sir Stamford Raffles, the whole area was rapidly opened up to a free and growing trade, and Raffles confidently expected that these conditions would continue after the Peace of 1815. He was bitterly disappointed when Britain decided to build up the restored kingdom of the Netherlands as a bastion against future French aggression by restoring its East Indian possessions to it, including Malacca. Desperate to find a way of keeping the straits from again being closed up by the Dutch monopolists, Raffles persuaded the Sultan of Johore to cede to him the small, the sparsely populated island of Singapore in 1819, on which he built a free-trade port. With the Dutch still in Malacca, relations remained strained until 1824, when a treaty between Britain and the Netherlands effected a new division: the Dutch surrendered Malacca in exchange for a few British settlements in Sumatra. Henceforth the British yielded economic and political control of Indonesia to the Dutch, but kept the trade routes to China unimpeded by their gradual control over, and absorption of, Malaya—a process which was not completed until 1909. The British had two other small outposts on the coast. An area of Pahang called the Dindings, came with Malacca, and a stretch of coast opposite Pahang, called Province Wellesley had been ceded in 1800.<sup>47</sup> In 1850 these scattered settlements were still part of the possessions of the East India Company and were administered (rather reluctantly) from Calcutta. In 1858, they passed to the India Office, when the East India Company was taken over, but it was not until 1867 that they were transferred to the Colonial Office. In the 1850s they were still small and undeveloped, though the entrepôt trade of Singapore was growing very rapidly. Its population, which had only been about 150 when Raffles arrived, had reached 57,421 by 1857 and was growing by leaps and bounds.<sup>48</sup> Singapore had developed as the entrepôt for the expanding trade not only of India and China, but of the whole of Southeast Asia—a trade which had grown rapidly after Britain established trading stations off the Chinese coast at Hong Kong in 1842, and off the Borneo coast at Labuan in 1846. In 1833 the total value of Singapore’s trade had been $\mathcal { L } 3 . 6 2 5$ million, but by 1860 this had risen to £11.6 million.<sup>49</sup> Singapore was also attractive to Chinese merchants, who settled on the island, and brought compatriots in to establish agricultural plantations for export crops. The most popular of these were black pepper and gambier, a plant from whose leaves and branches a dyeing and tanning agent was extracted. These two plants were grown on different parts of the same plantation, having complementary labour requirements. They were both exported, mainly to Britain. By 1851 there were 24,220 acres of gambier and 2,614 acres of black pepper growing on Singapore island, and since the crops were exhausting to the soil, the Chinese cultivators were spreading into the neighbouring Malay state of Johore—a process which would in time help to draw it ever more closely into the British orbit. Nutmegs, cloves and sugar were also being grown for export, but were not very profitable, and over 75 per cent of the cultivated area of Singapore Island was devoted to gambler and pepper. The island is, however, only about 25 miles wide from east to west, and 13 miles long from north to south. Its significance lay not in its own potential for development, but in the haven it supplied for those whose capital could finance development all over Malaya. Pahang played a similar, although less important role. An even smaller island than Singapore (a mere 15.5 by 10.5 miles) it also was attractive as a base for Chinese and European merchants financing agricultural development in the mainland colony of Province Wellesley, only about three miles across the water from Pahang. The northern part of Province Wellesley was occupied by Malay padi-rice growers, who supplied Pahang with food, while the forests and swamps farther south were being exploited by European and Chinese sugar planters. By 1858, eleven large European plantations comprised about 10,720 acres and the Chinese had another 1,000 acres. Sugar was exported to Britain and rum to India and Burma.<sup>50</sup> Finally, between Pahang and Singapore was the old Dutch colony of Malacca, about 250 miles south of Pahang and about 130 miles north of Singapore. After the East India Company took over in 1825, it became ‘a quiet backwater’ with a hinterland of nine squabbling little Malay states, the Negri Sembilan (which means the nine states in Malay). In 1831 the company became involved in their petty quarrels and soon ‘there began a series of wars between the jealous little states which kept the area in ferment for the next forty years, and prevented the Malacca merchants from exploiting their hinterland’, until the 1870s, when the Negeri Sembilan became British protected states and accepted British residents. These were supposed to ‘advise’ the local rulers, but increasingly moved into a controlling position.<sup>51</sup> In the 1850s Malacca’s entrepôt trade, and its traditional tin-mining were in decline, but enterprising Chinese were beginning to develop a new product. This was tapioca, a root which was grown for export to Britain, in the form of dried flour, flakes or pearls. Grown by shifting cultivation, much jungle was cleared for it, and by 1882, some 93,000 acres had been planted. This, however, was the peak and the tapioca acreage had declined to about 10,000 acres in 1911.<sup>52</sup> Malaya’s subsequent prosperity rested on exports of tin and rubber but these were not developed in a major way until the 1880s and 1890s. In the 1850s Malaya was still very much ‘an underdeveloped estate’ and one moreover to which Britain had not yet laid more than a shadowy claim. After the Straits Settlements, the next most populous colony in the eastern group was Mauritius with slightly over 192,000 inhabitants in 1850. A smallish island of roughly triangular shape, Mauritius is about 39 miles long from north to south and about 29 miles from east to west, and lies at a latitude of about 20° south, some 500 miles east of Madagascar. It was apparently uninhabited when visited by the Portuguese explorer, Mascarenhas, in 1505. The Portuguese claimed it, but did not settle, and the island was taken for a naval base by the Dutch in 1598, who named it Mauritius after their stadholder, Count Maurice of Nassau. The Dutch eventually abandoned the island in 1710, and in 1715 it was occupied by the French, again as a naval station to support the empire they were seeking to establish in India. Throughout the eighteenth century French fleets operating from Mauritius were a continual menace to British merchant and naval craft in the Indian Ocean, and in 1810 a military expedition captured the island. The Peace of Paris (1814) confirmed British possession.<sup>53</sup> Mauritius is dramatically mountainous, well watered and has a fertile soil. The coastal lowlands are hot and humid, but there is a fertile central plateau at an altitude of between 1,000 and 1,500 feet where the climate is less oppressive. All kinds of tropical crops and fruits will grow in Mauritius but when the British took over, French planters, using slaves from Africa, had already established sugar as the dominant crop, which continued throughout the whole period of British colonial rule. However the abolition of slavery by Britain in 1834 created a temporary crisis since there was still enough unoccupied land in the island (as in Jamaica) for the exslaves to ‘squat’ as self-sufficient peasant farmers and to refuse to work for wages on the sugar plantations. It was reckoned in 1840, that of 30,000 freed slaves not more than 5,000 could be induced to work as field labourers for wages.<sup>54</sup> The planters’ problems were solved by the importation of indentured labourers from India, for whom even the hard labour on the sugar plantations was preferable to the poverty they had to endure at home. By 1845 there were nearly 82,000 Indian immigrants in Mauritius, and sugar production was well above its level in the days of slavery, and was still rising. An average of 97,500 tons was exported between 1853 and 1855.<sup>55</sup> With the equalisation of the British sugar import duties after 1846, Mauritius, with its expanding supply of cheap Indian labour, enjoyed a certain advantage over the West Indies; and a colony, which had been occupied initially for strategic reasons, began to develop a prosperous economy of its own—albeit one still dangerously dependent on the one crop as was recognised by the new governor, John Higginson in his first despatch to the colonial secretary in 1851. He wrote that ‘sugar is now our only article of export’ and hoped that the introduction of silk cultivation would be successful, ‘as presenting a fresh channel for the development of agriculture, and offering suitable employment to many, chiefly women and children, who are incapacitated from engaging in more laborious occupations’.<sup>56</sup> Higginson was remarkably optimistic about the future of Mauritius, even though he admitted that ‘no new public highways have been constructed’, and there were ‘new lines of communication which might be opened with great advantage to some districts, but I fear they must be deferred for the present’. This referred to a shortage of funds, although he had just cut public expenditure by £18,091 since the previous year, and hoped to reduce taxation in the year to come. He certainly shared that prevalent Victorian scale of priorities which placed development far far below ‘economy’. Nevertheless he ended his report on a hopeful note, On the whole I earnestly trust that the tide of fortune has turned, that the termination of the disasters that have pressed so heavily on the colony, has been hailed with increased energy and exertions on the part of all classes, and that the year 1850–51…may not inaptly be characterised as one of recovery of progress and of promise.<sup>57</sup> Britain’s remaining Asiatic colonies in 1850 were the small islands of Hong Kong and Labuan. Hong Kong had been acquired in 1842 at the close of the ‘opium war’ (1839–41) in which Britain and other western powers forced the Chinese empire to open various ports to foreign trade, and to allow foreign merchants certain privileges. Of these ports Shanghai and Canton were by far the most important, and it was to enforce British rights in Canton and southern China that Hong Kong island was annexed.<sup>58</sup> The island is less than a mile from the Chinese mainland and about 80 miles southeast of Canton. It is only about 11 miles across at its widest point from east to west, and from 2 to 5 miles broad from north to south. It has the finest deepwater harbour on the China coast between Shanghai and Indo-China, and its possession was of great value to Britain for securing the valuable and expanding China trade, which was also an integral part of the India trade, since British imports from India were partly financed by exports of Indian opium to China. In 1840 it was reckoned that of total British imports from India and China, worth £9.6 million, some £3.4 million was paid for by exports of opium to China, even though this trade was supposed to be illegal!<sup>59</sup> When Britain occupied Hong Kong island in 1841 there were only a few fishermen and opium smugglers there, but the British founded the harbour town of Victoria, as a free-trade port, and the population increased very rapidly. In 1850 it was still under 37,000 but by 1881 this had risen to 160,402—a very rapid rise, but still a far cry from the four million who crowd the territory today. Growth was probably slowed before 1860 because Hong Kong harbour was still subject to disturbances on the mainland. This was ended in 1860, when some land opposite Hong Kong island, known as the Kowloon peninsula, was ceded to Britain, thus insulating the whole harbour. Between 1859 and 1866 the shipping entering the harbour rose from 625,536 to 1,063,252 tons.<sup>60</sup> For a tropical region Hong Kong has a relatively mild climate, especially in winter, but the island is very mountainous, so that its economic potential for long lay in its importance as an entrepôt for the huge trade of China and the western Pacific, rather than for itself—though its post-1945 industrial and commercial development has shown that under certain, admittedly rather special, conditions, even very small territories can achieve remarkable development. Labuan’s history has been very different. This little island, comprising only 35 square miles, is 6 miles off the northwest coast of Borneo, and was ceded to Britain by the Sultan of Brunei in 1846 for use as a naval base and refitting port for ships engaged in suppressing piracy, and in the Borneo trade. It seems to have been uninhabited at the time, and had only 1,150 inhabitants in 1850. It did however have coal deposits and these became important after 1850, when steam ships began to replace sailing vessels in the far eastern trade. Now part of Malaysia, its original significance was in enabling British influence to be spread along the north coast of Borneo by Sir James Brooke, the renowned ‘white rajah’ of Sarawak, who obtained that territory by cession from the Sultan of Brunei in 1841, and whose descendants retained it until 1946.<sup>61</sup> ## WEST AFRICAN OUTPOSTS Finally, the last group of tropical colonies were the British settlements on the west coast of Africa. These were, going southeastwards along the coast, the Gambia colony at the mouth of that river, the Sierra Leone colony on the peninsula of that name, and the string of forts and trading stations along the Gold Coast. The earliest of these colonies dates back to the seventeenth century, and they had all been used in the slave trade since their establishment until the abolition of the trade in 1808. The economic importance of these colonies was so minimal in the 1850s that discussion of their condition and development potential can be more conveniently left to the next chapter where the results of the ‘scramble’ for Africa in the 1880s and 1890s are considered.