# The economics of ‘trusteeship’ Colonial development policy, 1921–9 British g overnment funds for any kind of colonial economic development up to the early 1920s were meagre. Table 7.1 sets out the major loans and grants according to the Treasury’s accounts. Over 90 per cent of the funds provided went to railway construction, nearly all of it in East and Central Africa. All but 2 per cent of the financial assistance was in the form of loans, the interest payments on which had to be met from the start of the loan period. This was not a satisfactory record in the view of the imperialists who took charge of colonial affairs during and after the First World War: Lord Milner, Leopold Amery, William Ormsby-Gore and J.H.Thomas.<sup>1</sup> Their aim was to provide more money, possibly on easier terms, in a more comprehensive programme of colonial development. As the unemployment situation in Britain deteriorated in the early 1920s the need for Britain to take measures to stimulate colonial economic development could be portrayed as being more urgent.<sup>2</sup> ## COLONIAL DEVELOPMENT POLICY AND THE POLITICS OF UNEMPLOYMENT By 1921 it was becoming clear that the industrial dislocation and high levels of unemployment of 1919 and 1920 were not temporary phenomena caused by the return to peacetime conditions, but a more fundamental problem requiring vigorous action. The unemployment crisis also brought the problems of colonial development to the Cabinet’s attention, for it seemed clear to the government that one aspect of the problem was a lack of demand for British goods and that the colonial empire might become an important source of orders. The Colonial Office assured the Cabinet in October 1921 that ‘everything possible is being done to enable the Colonies to make a substantial contribution towards the immediate problem of placing orders in this country’. In addition to immediate orders the colonial empire would be raising £25 million for schemes already contemplated, plus a further £20 million if the colonies in question could raise the necessary loans. Finally, a further £17,500,000 could be expended if ‘a Treasury guarantee, a free grant or any other form of Treasury assistance was given’. The secretary of state, Winston Churchill, envisaged considerable benefits arising from imperial government assistance: Table 7.1 Financial assistance to colonial development by the British government, 1896–1923
<table><tr><td>Purpose</td><td>Date(s)</td><td>Recipient</td><td colspan="3">£000</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Loans</td><td>Grants</td><td>&#x27;Total</td></tr><tr><td>Railway Construction</td><td>1896-1905</td><td>Uganda</td><td>5503</td><td></td><td>5503</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1910-13</td><td>Uganda</td><td>295</td><td></td><td>295</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1912-15</td><td>Nyasaland</td><td>180</td><td></td><td>180</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1921-3</td><td>Nyasaland</td><td>186</td><td></td><td>186</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1912-13</td><td>Kenya</td><td>375</td><td></td><td>375</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1921-2</td><td>Tanganyika</td><td>105</td><td></td><td>105</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1910–13</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>200</td><td></td><td>200</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Total</td><td>6844</td><td></td><td>6844</td></tr><tr><td>Public Works</td><td>1921-2</td><td>Uganda</td><td>400</td><td></td><td>400</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1921-2</td><td>Tănganyika</td><td>37</td><td></td><td>37</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1897–8</td><td>Dominica</td><td></td><td>15</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1897-8</td><td>St Vincent</td><td></td><td>15</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Total</td><td>437</td><td>30</td><td>467</td></tr><tr><td>Research</td><td>1906–23</td><td>Imperial</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Institute, etc.</td><td></td><td>127</td><td>127</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Grand Total</td><td>7281</td><td>157</td><td>7408</td></tr></table> Source: Memorandum from Treasury to Colonial Office, June 1923, CO 323 905 20593. A large amount of work would be provided in this country without delay, for it would, of course, be a condition of Imperial assistance that any plant or materials required should be ordered in this country. The works would benefit the colony, develop markets for British goods, and enhance the purchasing power of individual inhabitants in the Colonies, with future benefits to British trade.<sup>3</sup> Others in the Cabinet were not convinced. The Treasury view was that Crown colonies did not in fact have any great difficulty in raising loans in the London market, and that making grants to colonies ‘would be putting the colonies into a better position than the public utility undertakings at home’.<sup>4</sup> This was as far as the demand for financial assistance to colonies which wanted to raise loans reached in 1921. The question continued to be pursued, notably by Leo Amery in 1922. In August he pointed out that since 1920 the colonial empire had raised loans amounting to $\mathcal { L } 3 4$ million and a further $\mathcal { L } 1 0$ million would be borrowed by the end of 1923. Much of this had been and was being spent in the United Kingdom. This, however, was the limit of the colonies’ unaided efforts. On the other hand, there were many development projects, especially for railway construction in East and West Africa and British Guiana, which might ultimately prove remunerative ‘but for which none of the Governments concerned could venture to make themselves responsible, unless not only the interest, but also the capital—or at any rate as much of it as represented materials bought in this country—were found by the Imperial Treasury as a free gift’.<sup>5</sup> In October 1922, he advanced the view to Cabinet that the empire was potentially highly valuable but that it had never been ‘systematically developed’. What was needed was a flexible, continuous and long-term programme of development offering ‘substantial inducements’ to governments, public authorities or private companies to undertake at once schemes which would normally be started over the next decade, including those which might not prove remunerative for many years ‘and which a poor and struggling Colonial Government could not venture to take up unless both the immediate cost and the future risk were reduced to a minimum’. To effect this he suggested an Empire Development Bill should be introduced authorising the expenditure of $\mathcal { L } 1 0$ million per annum for fifteen years for the promotion of development schemes. An ‘Imperial Development Advisory Board’ should be set up to administer the schemes. Assistance would consist of grants of interest, guarantees for loans raised by colonial governments, and direct subsidies up to 50 per cent of the value of orders placed in the United Kingdom. The kinds of schemes envisaged were those for transport facilities, irrigation, power supply and similar public utilities, and Amery made special note of the necessity to prevent the Treasury from exercising control over the schemes and subjecting them to criticism ‘based solely on the desire to prevent expenditure’.<sup>6</sup> No action was taken, but the question came up at the Imperial Economic Conference which took place in October and November 1923. Although discussion was related mainly to dominion problems rather than those of the colonial territories, they were included when the empire countries were invited to consider a proposal whereby they would submit schemes of economic development which the imperial government would facilitate by grants of interest on the necessary loans, up to a maximum of three-quarters of the interest for five years. On behalf of the colonial empire, William Ormsby-Gore, parliamentary under-secretary of state, welcomed the proposals, but warned that their success would depend entirely on the conditions imposed: ‘if it means Treasury control I am afraid it does not mean Colonial development. That has been our experience in the past’.<sup>7</sup> In November, however, the Cabinet Committee on Unemployment recorded the view that in present circumstances the arrangements adopted by the Imperial Economic Conference would not result in any appreciable development in the Colonies and Protectorates…and it was suggested that Colonial development on a substantial scale could best be obtained by setting aside a capital sum of £20,000,000 for the purpose.<sup>8</sup> This suggestion was vigorously resisted by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Neville Chamberlain, who wrote to the committee: It seems to me premature to assume without further evidence or argument that the extremely generous proposals which we submitted to the Imperial Economic Conference will be quite ineffective in stimulating the development of the Colonies…and to embark upon an inquiry of which the object is presumably to formulate even more generous terms of assistance—which I should have the greatest difficulty in accepting.<sup>9</sup> By December it was apparent that the only replies to the economic conference’s proposals had been from the small colonies, and all of them were negative. The Colonial Office then suggested a scheme for railway building in Kenya and Uganda to cost about £6 million, which the Committee on Unemployment regarded as ‘promising’.<sup>10</sup> In January 1924 the Labour government, which had won the general election in December 1923, took office, and the new Cabinet Committee on Unemployment took stock of the situation. Legislation was drafted to implement the conference’s proposals for an extension of the Trade Facilities Act to include grants of up to three-quarters of interest for a maximum of five years. The previous Unemployment Committee’s approval of the Kenya-Uganda railway scheme was accepted and the committee recommended a loan of £3,500,000 interest free for five years and repayable over thirtyseven years. The committee felt that the scheme would not only relieve unemployment but also ‘contribute materially towards the solution of the British cotton shortage problem’.<sup>11</sup> Arrangements for the loan were introduced in the Colonial Office estimates presented to Parliament on 25 February 1924.<sup>12</sup> The new government also had before them the report of a committee set up in July 1923 under the chairmanship of Lord Ronaldshay, to consider what role private enterprise had to play in the existing and future transportation services of East and West Africa.<sup>13</sup> This report concluded that there was no further scope at present for railway building in West Africa, but that a number of desirable projects in East Africa—especially the extension of the Nyasaland railway from the Shire Highlands to Lake Nyasa—were being held up for want of funds. None of these projects, however, was within the capabilities of private enterprise. The report stated: There is, indeed, little reason to suppose that private firms will be found willing to finance, construct and operate railways unaided by Government in the present stage of development of Tropical Africa.<sup>14</sup> The terms of reference of the committee did not include discussion of which railways should be built and how they should be financed, and in a minority report, Sir Edwin Stockton MP, called for another inquiry, ‘to consider ways of developing our Tropical African Dependencies other than those with which we were called on to deal’.<sup>15</sup> It was partly in response to the Ronaldshay Report and Stockton’s comments that one of the terms of reference of another commission of inquiry into East Africa, the establishment of which was announced by the secretary of state for the colonies, J.H.Thomas, in April 1924, included a consideration of the measures to be taken to promote the general economic development of the British East African dependencies.<sup>16</sup> Meanwhile the process of bringing forward schemes of colonial development involving large orders in the United Kingdom continued, and in March 1924 the colonies were asked to furnish details of general utility works which might be started.<sup>17</sup> Once again, railway works—to the value of £710,000 in Tanganyika and £1 million to £1.2 million in Nyasaland—were put forward: again a loan free of interest ‘for a considerable period’ was regarded as essential. In addition, the construction of a bridge over the Zambesi (estimated to cost £500,000) was put forward as a possible project. These proposals remained in abeyance while the East Africa Commission was sitting. In October 1924 the Labour government was defeated in the general election. In the following year there was another call for a substantial loan for Crown colony development, somewhat similar to that of Amery’s of October 1922, this time from the President of the Board of Trade, Sir Philip Cunliffe-Lister: We should speed up, as much as possible, railway construction and other development in the Empire, particularly in Africa. I am convinced that nationally the most remunerative expenditure we can incur is in the development of markets which will be complementary and not competitive. Africa fulfils this condition to a peculiar degree, and is at the same time the great potential supply of raw cotton.<sup>18</sup> The report of the East Africa Commission, was published in May 1925. It concluded that the further economic development of both native and nonnative production in East Africa was dependent upon increased transport facilities, in particular new railways. However, the report continued, ‘The outstanding problem is the finance of such undertakings. It is clear to us that, unless the Imperial Government is prepared to assist liberally in this matter, little or nothing can be done’.<sup>19</sup> Accordingly, the commission recommended the introduction of an East Africa Transport Loan Bill to provide a guaranteed loan of £10 million to be used for transport development in East Africa, with the proviso that the loan should be interest free for the first five years. The commission felt that the burden which this placed on the British taxpayer could be justified on the grounds of the moral obligation Britain had to develop her possessions; but also ‘we maintain that the indirect benefits of increased trade and production within the Empire will more than counterbalance any initial sacrifice’. Approximately half of the sum advanced would be spent in the United Kingdom, much of it on railway and engineering equipment. One of the commission’s members suggested the establishment of a ‘National or Imperial Development Board’, into which a fixed sum would be paid annually and from which schemes of imperial development would be financed. These schemes would be submitted by the Colonial Office. The board would advance money to colonial government, public utility companies, etc. as loans, at low rates of interest or free of interest for a number of years.<sup>20</sup> The commission’s recommendations were strongly supported by cotton, iron and steel and engineering lobby groups in Britain.<sup>21</sup> In October it was discussed in Cabinet. Amery argued that the Central and East African colonies were among the safest and most profitable areas for investment in the empire, for ‘their development lies entirely in the field of the production of raw materials, notably cotton, which are urgently needed by British manufacturers, while every pound of tropical produce grown in these territories increases the purchasing power of their inhabitants for British manufactured goods in return’.<sup>22</sup> Cabinet agreed to a £10 million guaranteed loan for East African and a £4.5 million one for Palestine, but did not agree to the suggestion that the loan should be interest free for five years.<sup>23</sup> Amery wrote in a memorandum in March 1926: ‘I think we are all agreed that such a course would not be justifiable, and that were this to be provided for in the Bill to be laid before Parliament it would be difficult to get it accepted by the House of Commons.’<sup>24</sup> Presumably the reasoning behind this decision was that unemployment in 1926 was not such a serious issue as in 1924 because the levels were lower and the government had no need to face the electorate for another three years. The Bill became law on 15 December 1926 as the Palestine and East Africa Guaranteed Loan Act. From 1921, then, the continuing crisis of high unemployment levels in Britain stimulated interest in schemes for colonial economic development, particularly railway construction in tropical Africa. This, it was soon discovered, could not be provided by private enterprise, and required grants of interest during the construction period, as happened in the case of the Kenya-Uganda railway loan of 1924. Finally, in 1926, £10 million was provided by Britain for development loans to East Africa, although without provision for periods free of interest, partly as a result of pressure from British manufacturing interests and partly in response to the consequence of the high level of unemployment. By 1926 several proposals for a more comprehensive system of colonial development by means of imperial money paid into a development fund had been suggested, but not yet taken up. Early in 1929, as a general election approached, Cabinet again turned to colonial economic development as a response to the unemployment crisis.<sup>25</sup> Proposals for development of the colonies (among other measures) to help solve the unemployment problem, however, received little encouragement from the Treasury which asserted that the effects of colonial development ‘in stimulating British industry, even assuming that it is not merely a diversion of resources, is less than is often supposed’.<sup>26</sup> The expenditure of £10 million over five years on railway development in the colonies, for instance, would increase iron and steel exports by only 1 per cent per annum, and those of rolling stock by 3 per cent. Moreover, the adoption of the proposal that the imperial government should pay the interest on loans raised for colonial development would result in ‘the premature adoption of uneconomic schemes’ which would only make matters worse. In March Amery returned to the idea of a ‘permanent Empire development policy’ to be implemented by establishing an annual fund of £ 1 million, administered by a board of technical advisers, from which interest in whole or part could be paid on loans for colonial development. The Treasury reiterated its view: ‘Attempts to accelerate colonial development by easy borrowing terms are apt to lead to wasteful and illadvised expenditure’, and ‘orders immediately placed in this country for materials are often disappointingly small’.<sup>27</sup> On 10 April 1929 Amery submitted another memorandum to the Cabinet on ‘Colonial Development in relation to the problem of unemployment’. He felt that colonial development so far had been unbalanced: ‘We have asked too much of the colonies and have offered too little ourselves for what is, after all, our problem, and unless we change these lines we shall continue to arrive at the same negative results when the Colonies are asked to do more than they are already doing.’<sup>28</sup> He proposed, therefore, a Colonial Development Fund of between £750,000 and £1,000,000 per annum, from which interest charges on loans for development projects involving orders in Britain could be met for a number of years. Schemes similar to those undertaken with the help of the East Africa Guaranteed Loan were envisaged, but it was now recognised that the rejection of the East Africa Commission’s proposal that loans should be interest free for five years ‘has made it impossible to proceed with any longterm development projects under this Act’. Only £3.5 million of the £10 million provided had been lent.<sup>29</sup> These proposals were agreed to by Cabinet and on 30 April Amery announced to the Commons that a Colonial Development Fund would be set up to provide imperial assistance for colonial development.<sup>30</sup> The Conservatives lost the election and a new Labour government took office at the beginning of July. Treasury warned against expecting too much from the Colonial Development Bill: It is not of course to be expected that employment at home will be immediately and directly affected by the Bill to a very large extent, though schemes for construction in the Colonies bring orders here. The Bill is primarily based on a far-sighted policy of Imperial development as one of the surest foundations of prosperity at home; the full fruits of this policy will be increasingly reaped in the years to come.<sup>31</sup> The Bill was presented both as a method of promoting colonial economic development and of relieving unemployment in Britain. Its urgency was stressed by the parliamentary under-secretary of state: I hope that the House will agree to this Bill and that we shall not be delayed too long, as we are anxious to see the schemes of development begun and useful work provided for many of our people as we believe it will be—useful work for those who are unemployed or partially employed today.<sup>32</sup> The Bill became law at the end of July 1929. It seems clear that the proposal in 1929 for a Colonial Development Fund arose out of persistently high levels of unemployment combined with the need to fight a general election. As Amery himself pointed out, another measure like the East Africa Guaranteed Loan Act was not going to work, and a more comprehensive approach was required. The essential idea, however, was not a new one and had been put forward on a number of occasions since Amery’s original proposal for an ‘Empire Development Bill’ in 1922. As an unemployment measure, it may be doubted whether the Colonial Development Act would have helped reduce unemployment even if the early 1929 position had persisted. As it was, as the world depression of 1930–3 deepened, the Act quickly became irrelevant to the problem of reducing Britain’s unemployment.<sup>33</sup> In May 1930, with unemployment standing officially at 1,750,000 persons, the Cabinet Committee on Unemployment Policy reported to the Cabinet ‘the broad and undisputed fact that so far the schemes we have sanctioned do not appear to have made any substantial impression upon the volume of employment’. It was estimated that by 28 February 1930, the Colonial Development Advisory Committee (see Chapter 8) had approved schemes the expenditure on which would provide employment for only 8,000 workers. By the beginning of 1931, according to Skidelsky, 13,000 men were being employed directly through the Colonial Development Act, at which date 2,671,000 were without work.<sup>34</sup> In March 1931, the National Committee on Expenditure, found that the ‘element of benefit to the trade and industry of this country which is an essential condition of advances under the [Colonial Development] Act, is somewhat remote’.<sup>35</sup> It felt that Britain could afford neither to subsidise local colonial governments nor to finance ‘a policy of development which will bring no appreciable benefit to this country for a long time ahead’. Consequently they recommended that only £750,000 per annum should be spent in future, and greater regard given to the effects of advances from the Fund in the United Kingdom.<sup>36</sup> Measures introduced to promote colonial economic development in the 1920s were characterised by their ad hoc and expedient nature. Despite a realisation and acknowledgement that the process of colonial economic development was inevitably a long-term one, the measures were brought in hastily and often in immediate reaction to changes in the level of British unemployment. Moreover, the size and effectiveness of these measures were undermined by the preponderance of the Treasury view’ which was at best sceptical of the benefits to Britain of expenditure on capital works in the tropical colonies and which ensured that the amount of money actually provided remained very small and not on easy terms. The inappropriate nature of the kind of assistance being proffered was emphasised by the fact that the sums actually spent fell far short of the amounts (themselves small) nominally provided: offers of financial assistance which consisted, for the most part, of loans on more or less commercial terms, were not ones the colonial governments, or their advisers in the Colonial Office, could readily take up. As we shall see in Chapter 8, by the end of the 1920s many of Britain’s tropical colonies were over-burdened with external debt; if they had added to this burden by accepting further loans under the various schemes of colonial assistance which were suggested (though not all were enacted) their vulnerability by 1930 would have been even more serious. ## IMPERIAL PREFERENCE AND THE EMPIRE MARKETING BOARD Prior to 1929 the actual amounts of money spent by the British government for developing the ‘great estate’ were insignificant and provided in an unsystematic manner. There were other—equally ad hoc— initiatives resulting from the post-war economic crisis: the reorganisation of the Imperial Institute, the establishment of the Empire Cotton Growing Corporation, the establishment of the Imperial College of Tropical Agriculture and the Empire Settlement Act 1922.<sup>37</sup> Tariff reform and Imperial preference—the concomitant to economic development in the Joseph Chamberlain programme—was also given emphasis by the economic consequences of the First World War. As seen in Chapter 6, the 1917 Imperial War Conference endorsed preference in principle, but it became clear that taxes on imported foodstuffs and raw materials were not politically possible, and all the British government promised, in 1918, was that ‘a preference will be given to our colonies on existing duties and upon any duties which for our purposes may be subsequently imposed’.<sup>38</sup> Imperial preference on existing import duties came into force in September 1919. In most cases imports originating in the empire paid two-thirds or five-sixths of the full import duty and covered tea, cocoa, coffee, chicory, currants, dried and preserved fruits, sugar, glucose, molasses, saccharin, motor spirit, tobacco, articles included under the Safeguarding of Industries Act 1916, wine, beer and spirits.<sup>39</sup> At the Imperial Economic Conference in October 1923 the British delegation promised to give greater preference to certain imports which were already taxed and to extend tariffs to several new commodities.<sup>40</sup> They also agreed to establish an Imperial Economic Committee on a permanent basis to advise empire governments on economic and commercial matters.<sup>41</sup> Sir Philip Lloyd-Graeme, chairman of the conference and President of the Board of Trade, concluded ‘We have all been saying here: we have got this great undeveloped Estate; and the whole job of this Conference is to push on with its development.’<sup>42</sup> At the end of October Stanley Baldwin announced that the government could not fight unemployment effectively without a general policy of protection. However, he was careful to make it clear there would be no tax on wheat, flour, meat, bacon, cheese, butter or eggs, so the degree of imperial preference involved was small. The Conservative government was defeated in the December general election, and the new Labour government declined to implement the promises of wider and higher preference made at the Imperial Economic Conference or set up an Imperial Economic Committee.<sup>43</sup> The Labour government fell in September 1924 and the Conservatives—Baldwin having renounced protection in June—won the ensuing election. The new Conservative government reversed Labour’s decision on establishing a permanent Imperial Economic Committee (IEC), though the terms of reference were narrowed: instead of being empowered to give advice on all economic and commercial matters affecting the empire, the IEC was To consider the possibility of improving the methods of preparing for market and marketing within the United Kingdom the food products of the overseas parts of the Empire with a view to increasing the consumption of such products in the United Kingdom in preference to imports from foreign countries and to promote the interests both of producers and consumers.<sup>44</sup> As regards the extension of tariffs and imperial preference, the government accepted that it had no mandate to tax foodstuffs and that a ‘complete system of Preference’ was therefore impossible. The government decided to compensate the empire for the tariff changes promised in 1923, and now not to be implemented, by a grant of £1 million per annum, which was the estimated value to the overseas empire of the lost preferences. This grant was to be spent by the IEC in ‘finding entirely new and untried ways of developing trade with the Empire, trade which will bring in Empire stuff in lieu of foreign stuff.<sup>45</sup> In 1925 the IEC recommended that the grant of £1 million per annum should be spent by an ‘Executive Commission’ which would undertake a ‘National Movement’ to increase empire buying by the British public. There should be continuous publicity on a national scale with a view to spreading and fostering [the idea] that Empire purchasing creates an increased demand for the manufactured products of the United Kingdom and therefore stimulates employment at home.<sup>46</sup> The executive commission to carry out this task was established in May 1926 as the Empire Marketing Board (EMB). In the course of its seven years’ existence the EMB developed four main areas of activity designed to promote the consumption of empire foodstuffs and raw materials in the United Kingdom: research, market intelligence, economic investigations and publicity.<sup>47</sup> It was discovered at the outset that one of the reasons why some empire produce could not compete with foreign produce on the United Kingdom market was that the empire goods were of an inferior quality in relation to price. The EMB concluded that there was no point in trying to use advertising to persuade the British consumer to buy inferior empire articles, and decided to use approximately half of its grant to support research projects in the United Kingdom and the overseas empire which were designed to raise the standard of empire primary exports.<sup>48</sup> The EMB did not initiate research but simply responded to applications for financial assistance from various research establishments and government departments. This resulted in it supporting a varied collection of projects with no provision for coordination between them. Moreover, the EMB made commitments to research bodies for a number of years in advance, which tied up its funds and made it difficult to vary funding in the light of changed circumstances.<sup>49</sup> The EMB’s market intelligence activity took the form of publishing weekly ‘intelligence notes’ on various empire products sold in Britain such as dairy produce, fresh fruit, dried and canned fruit. These notes contained details of imports and prices and were distributed free to the appropriate trade bodies. Economic investigations were carried out into the production and marketing of the major primary products entering world trade from the overseas empire as well as into general questions such as agricultural research, geophysical surveying and the importance of empire markets for British manufactures. These reports were published either as EMB or IEC publications. Publicity work was the most controversial part of the EMB’s activities. It took a number of forms: newspaper advertisements, shop window display material, the organisation of ‘Empire Shopping Weeks’, documentary films, leaflets, radio broadcasts, exhibitions, distribution of material to schools in Britain and overseas and to overseas empire newspapers, lecture programmes and tours and posters on specially constructed hoardings. The results were not convincing: after seven years, during which time hundreds of posters were displayed on some 2,000 hoardings throughout Britain, extensive press advertising undertaken, Empire Shopping Weeks organised by the score, and one million people (many of whom were children in organised school parties) visited the EMB cinema in the Imperial Institute at South Kensington, criticisms of the EMB remained unabated. There were three main areas of concern: first, that the EMB could not show whether, and if so, to what extent, its campaigns had increased empire trade; second, that its posters and press advertisements were ineffective because they were insufficiently aggressive, too subtle and too intellectual; and third, that the British agricultural industry was being adversely affected by the advertising of empire imports.<sup>50</sup> As defenders of the EMB pointed out, it was engaged in selling an idea rather than specific commodities. The idea it sold was the Joseph Chamberlain concept of ‘developing the great estate’. That is, that the empire could produce everything Britain needed in the way of foodstuffs and raw materials and that the empire represented Britain’s best market for manufactured goods. Buying empire produce created work at home and opportunities for increased migration to the empire. Unlike the dominions, and to a lesser extent India, the tropical colonies were not expected to develop industries which competed with British imports and so, by the 1920s, these colonies fulfilled the role of ‘complementary economies’ to a greater extent. The task of the EMB, and especially of its poster artists, was to illustrate this economic relationship in picture form. Their attempts indicated that the racial division of labour, inherent in Chamberlain’s programme, was still very much alive.<sup>51</sup> In 1932, in the wake of Britain’s decision to abandon free trade and adopt a policy of imperial tariff preference, the EMB was abolished. ## THE ECONOMICS OF TRUSTEESHIP The measures taken between 1900 and 1929 by the British government represented an attempt to ‘develop the estate’ by the use of public funds in various forms. The loans and grants were intended to benefit the British economy by making the colonies better customers and suppliers. Although they involved the use of public capital, the philosophy was fir mly that of assisting British private enterprise, rather than of supplanting it. However, when looked at from the colonial viewpoint, there were serious problems for the success of this development strategy. These problems were to do with the structure of the colonial economies, the role of expatriate private enterprise and the philosophy of the local British administrators. References to the wealth of colonial territories, especially in Africa, was often qualified by the word ‘potential’ when reports were being drawn up in the early twentieth century. The circumstances of British colonies, like other underdeveloped societies, was that of extreme poverty. Rising real per capita incomes and living standards through sustained economic growth might be attainable but colonial economic development required large amounts of investment in social overhead capital as well as in productive enterprise. In most cases sufficient capital was not available on terms the colonies could afford. Moreover, structural changes in the colonial economy leading towards the growth of the domestic sector were essential if the earnings generated by the export sector were to flow on to the benefit of the colony as a whole. Increased production of goods and services for the domestic market might be expected to lead to a more diversified and stronger economy but usually required measures by government designed to facilitate and encourage the growth of the indigenous investor and business community. Colonial rule was not a form of government which could easily accomplish this. An overwhelming emphasis on exports, on the other hand, could lead to unbalanced development, with disastrous consequences if the world’s demand for such exports declined and with the added problem of a drain of export earnings to foreign investors. The colonies were not only poor but caught in a relationship of dependence with the industrialised countries who bought their exports. They exported only primary produce, almost always in an unprocessed state. As demand for their exports grew, and as the colonial government and expatriate private enterprise developed export production, so dependence on one or several products increased. Almost without exception, British colonies became more dependent on a narrower range of export commodities between the wars and in most cases secondary industry based on processing did not develop. The colonies were therefore in no stronger a position to withstand the contraction of the international economy in the 1930s than they had been at the beginning of the 1920s. Indeed, to the extent that their economies were more integrated with the world economy by the end of the decade, they were in a more vulnerable position. Many British tropical colonies were in a highly vulnerable position because of their extreme reliance on export cash crops and minerals. Table 7.2 shows the way in which the external trade of the tropical colonies virtually stagnated in the second half of the 1920s. Insofar as the trade balance indicates the direction of capital flows, the large export surpluses earned in some territories suggests that they may have experienced a net capital outflow. Yet physical production continued to rise, as illustrated by Table 7.3. With certain exceptions, the export drive inherent in the philosophy of ‘developing the estate’ resulted in dramatic increases in the volume of commodities entering world markets from Britain’s tropical colonies between 1912–14 and 1927–9, from both plantation and peasant modes of production.<sup>52</sup> This occurred despite falling or weak commodity prices following the end of the 1919–20 boom. Table 7.4 indicates the extent of the price decline in the early 1920s, followed by patchy recovery in the middle years and further falls in 1929. Import prices fell also so that the terms of trade rose in most cases from 1922, following their collapse in 1921, to a peak around 1926 or 1927. Thereafter the terms of trade were static or falling prior to the major decline caused by the onset of the Great Depression. Public works expenditure to support the export sector had led to very high levels of external debt, shown in Table 7.5, the servicing of which was becoming an increasing burden for the colonial economies by the beginning of the 1930s. The failure of the British development measures to work was partly due to the role played by expatriate private enterprise. Their investments extended to mining, agricultural production, and trading, but with a few notable exceptions—of which rubber in Malaya was one—interest concentrated on the first and third of these areas. Mining ventures could usually attract British capital, though direct and indirect government assistance was also a factor.<sup>53</sup> Foreign trading enterprises were often the oldest form of commercial contact between the colonial people and Europe, and they continued to dominate the import and export trades. In both trades profits were expatriated and local enterprise discouraged or ignored. Agricultural ventures were less popular. Even in the rubber industry in Malaya expatriate enterprise found itself in difficulties after 1921 and had to be assisted by the British government for much of the inter-war period.<sup>54</sup> This produced a situation where—except for mining— capital was in short supply in Britain’s colonies, and inevitably this placed a brake on the speed at which growth could take place. Poverty and a narrow export base made local capital accumulation difficult. <sub>rts,</sub> <sub>exports</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>balanc</sub><sup>e</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>trade,</sup> <sup>selected</sup> <sup>colonies,</sup> <sup>19</sup>
<table><tr><td>Colonies</td><td>1920</td><td>1921</td><td>1922</td><td>1923</td><td>1924</td><td>1925</td><td>1926</td><td>1927</td><td>1928</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td></tr><tr><td>Imports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>West Africa East Africa</td><td>42574 13847</td><td>20914 6587</td><td>21005 6979</td><td>22808</td><td>20458</td><td>26155</td><td>23476 13640</td><td>28879</td><td>29858</td><td>25106</td><td>22987</td></tr><tr><td>Central</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>8717</td><td>11214</td><td>14408</td><td></td><td>14025</td><td>15499</td><td>15610</td><td>13380</td></tr><tr><td>Africa</td><td>1173</td><td>1372</td><td>1020</td><td>1015</td><td>1233</td><td>1914</td><td>2509</td><td>2952</td><td>3304</td><td>4398</td><td>5717</td></tr><tr><td>Eastern</td><td>165460</td><td>84958</td><td>77005</td><td>91743</td><td>105337</td><td>144830</td><td>152060</td><td>151861</td><td>135100</td><td>137562</td><td>109102</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbean</td><td>29794</td><td>18877</td><td>14851</td><td>15819</td><td>15447</td><td>16103</td><td>15769</td><td>16741</td><td>17349</td><td>18248</td><td>16143</td></tr><tr><td>Pacific</td><td>1652</td><td>1484</td><td>843</td><td>988</td><td>1066</td><td>1263</td><td>1464</td><td>1215</td><td>1455</td><td>1454</td><td>1219</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>254500</td><td>134192</td><td>121803</td><td>141090</td><td>154755</td><td>204673</td><td>208918</td><td>215673</td><td>202565</td><td>202378</td><td>168548</td></tr><tr><td>Exports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>West Africa</td><td>33795</td><td>15852</td><td>17801</td><td>20908</td><td>25646</td><td>29156</td><td>30215</td><td>31774</td><td>32945</td><td>31653</td><td>26034</td></tr><tr><td>East Africa</td><td>9761</td><td>5931</td><td>6874</td><td>9032</td><td>12175</td><td>14375</td><td>12425</td><td>12017</td><td>14012</td><td>14471</td><td>11101</td></tr><tr><td>Central Africa</td><td>1205</td><td>976</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Eastern</td><td>143027</td><td>83789</td><td>1031 82991</td><td>882 106451</td><td>1031 117187</td><td>991</td><td>1153 188484</td><td>1715 162285</td><td>1552</td><td>1522</td><td>1550 101945</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbean</td><td>25890</td><td>12804</td><td>12755</td><td>15409</td><td>13705</td><td>190175 11101</td><td>14256</td><td>16219</td><td>131972 15716</td><td>141728 15824</td><td>13381</td></tr><tr><td>Pacific</td><td>2876</td><td>2538</td><td>1843</td><td>1550</td><td>1491</td><td>2147</td><td>1696</td><td>1980</td><td>2692</td><td>1708</td><td>1452</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>216554</td><td>121890</td><td>12395</td><td>154232</td><td>171235</td><td>247945</td><td>248229</td><td>225990</td><td>198889</td><td>206906</td><td>155463</td></tr><tr><td>Balance</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>West Africa</td><td>-8779</td><td>-5062</td><td>-3204</td><td>-1900</td><td>5188</td><td>3001</td><td>6739</td><td>2895</td><td>3087</td><td>6547</td><td>3047</td></tr><tr><td>East Africa</td><td>-4086</td><td>-656</td><td>–105</td><td>315</td><td>961</td><td>-33</td><td>-1215</td><td>–2008</td><td>-1487</td><td>-1139</td><td>-2279</td></tr><tr><td>Central</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Africa</td><td>32 -22433</td><td>-396 -1169</td><td>11</td><td>-133</td><td>-202</td><td>-923</td><td>-1356</td><td>-1237</td><td>-1752</td><td>-2876</td><td>-4167</td></tr><tr><td>Eastern</td><td>-3904</td><td>-6073</td><td>5986 -2096</td><td>14708</td><td>11850</td><td>45345</td><td>36424</td><td>10424</td><td>-3128</td><td>4166</td><td>-7157</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbean</td><td>1224</td><td>1054</td><td></td><td>-410</td><td>-742</td><td>-5002</td><td>-1513</td><td>-522</td><td>-1633</td><td>-2424</td><td>-2762</td></tr><tr><td>Pacific</td><td></td><td></td><td>900</td><td>562</td><td>425</td><td>884</td><td>232</td><td>765</td><td>1237</td><td>254</td><td>233</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>-37946</td><td>–12302</td><td>1492</td><td>13142</td><td>16480</td><td>43272</td><td>29311</td><td>10317</td><td>-3676</td><td>4528</td><td>-13085</td></tr></table> Table 7.3 Selected commodity exports, annual averages, 1912–14 to 1937–9
<table><tr><td>Commodity</td><td>Colony</td><td>1912-14</td><td>1917-19</td><td>1922-4</td><td>1927-9</td><td>1932-4</td><td>1937-9</td></tr><tr><td>Cocoa</td><td>Trinidad</td><td>456</td><td>564</td><td>520</td><td>512</td><td>357</td><td>254</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">cwt,000</td><td>Gold Coast</td><td>947</td><td>2223</td><td>3869</td><td>4487</td><td>4667</td><td>5203</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>80</td><td>343</td><td>675</td><td>957</td><td>1399</td><td>2094</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>76</td><td>72</td><td>64</td><td>73</td><td>77</td><td>76</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Coffee cwt,000 Sugar cwt,000</td><td>Kenya-Uganda</td><td>22f</td><td>107</td><td>171</td><td>226</td><td>354</td><td>612</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritius</td><td>4486</td><td>4444</td><td>4586</td><td>4758</td><td>4003</td><td>5908</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>759</td><td>1081</td><td>854</td><td>1316</td><td>1920</td><td>2516</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Guiana</td><td>1816</td><td>1940</td><td>1731</td><td>2165</td><td>2627</td><td>3628</td></tr><tr><td>Tea 1b,mill</td><td>Ceylon</td><td>192</td><td>195</td><td>1866</td><td>238</td><td>229</td><td>226</td></tr><tr><td>Bananas</td><td>Jamaica</td><td>14</td><td>5</td><td>12</td><td>20</td><td>16</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>stems,mill Copra</td><td>Malayaª</td><td>11</td><td>24</td><td>161</td><td>175</td><td>199</td><td>181</td></tr><tr><td>tons,000</td><td>Geylón</td><td>52</td><td>69</td><td>75</td><td>100</td><td>72</td><td>66</td></tr><tr><td>Palm Kernels</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>174</td><td>203</td><td>218</td><td>252</td><td>286</td><td>317</td></tr><tr><td>tons,000</td><td>Sierra Leone</td><td>45</td><td>50</td><td>57</td><td>64</td><td>70</td><td>70</td></tr><tr><td>Palm Oil tons,000</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>76</td><td>87</td><td>105</td><td>124</td><td>119</td><td>127</td></tr><tr><td>Groundnuts</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>13</td><td>49</td><td>42</td><td>114</td><td>213</td><td>218</td></tr><tr><td>tons,000 Rubber</td><td>Malayab</td><td>27</td><td>286</td><td>567</td><td>2425</td><td>1290</td><td>1315</td></tr><tr><td>lb,mill</td><td>Ceylón</td><td>25</td><td>73</td><td>91</td><td>145</td><td>144</td><td>135</td></tr><tr><td>Cotton</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>5461</td><td>4501</td><td>8005</td><td>10894</td><td>8547</td><td>14710</td></tr><tr><td>lb,000</td><td>Kenya-Uganda</td><td>11654d</td><td>13041º</td><td>38417</td><td>63366</td><td>105937</td><td>148741</td></tr><tr><td>Sisal</td><td>Kenya-Uganda</td><td>979d</td><td>4771°</td><td>9735</td><td>16001</td><td>19750</td><td>30382</td></tr><tr><td>tons</td><td>Tanganyika</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>13832</td><td>38309</td><td>67555</td><td>95047</td></tr><tr><td>Tobacco</td><td>Nyasaland</td><td>3112d</td><td>4058e</td><td>6178</td><td>12479</td><td>12673</td><td>13496</td></tr><tr><td>lb,000 Copper</td><td>N. Rhodesia</td><td>1426</td><td>991</td><td>256</td><td>5184</td><td>101771 208329</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>tons Bauxite</td><td>Br. Guiaua</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>85</td><td>171</td><td>51</td><td>384</td></tr><tr><td>tons,000 Manganese</td><td>Gold Coast</td><td>nil</td><td>31</td><td>143</td><td>371</td><td>219</td><td>396</td></tr><tr><td>tons,00 Tin</td><td>Malayab</td><td>64527</td><td>59473</td><td>72268</td><td>94951</td><td>50675</td><td>78794</td></tr><tr><td>tons</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>4391</td><td>8648</td><td>8483</td><td>13042</td><td>6237</td><td>13358</td></tr><tr><td>Petroleum</td><td>Trinidad</td><td>10</td><td>14</td><td>85</td><td>168</td><td>203</td><td>385</td></tr><tr><td>crude, gall, mill</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table> <sup>a</sup> Federated Malay States only 1912–14 and 1917–19; <sup>b</sup> Straits Settlements only 1912–14 and 1917–19;<sup>c</sup> Copper ore, concentrate, bar and ingot 1912–14, 1917–19 and 1922–24; copper ore, concentrate and blister 1932–1934; copper blister and electrolytic, 1937–1939; <sup>d</sup> 1 Apr. 1912–31 Mar. 1915; <sup>e</sup> 1 Apr. 1917–31 Mar. 1920; <sup>f</sup> 1 Apr. 1913–31 Mar. 1915. Source: Statistical Abstract for the British Empire, Nos. 57, 58, 63, 68, 69 (1909–45). <sub>r</sub>m<sup>s</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>trade,</sup> <sup>selected</sup> <sup>colonies</sup> <sup>1920-30</sup> <sup>(19</sup>
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td></td><td>1920</td><td>1921</td><td>1922</td><td>1923</td><td>1924</td><td>1925</td><td>1926</td><td>1927</td><td>1928</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>E</td><td>160.6</td><td>74.7</td><td>76.3</td><td>72.0</td><td>69.7</td><td>79.2</td><td>83.7</td><td>113.2</td><td>102.0</td><td>84.9</td><td>77.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I</td><td>235.4</td><td>198.3</td><td>123.1</td><td>105.7</td><td>109.2</td><td>111.3</td><td>109.0</td><td>102.0</td><td>101.4</td><td>96.2</td><td>87.6</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>T</td><td>68</td><td>38</td><td>62</td><td>68</td><td>64</td><td>71</td><td>77</td><td>111</td><td>101</td><td>88</td><td>88</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>E</td><td>160.7</td><td>94.6</td><td>88.8</td><td>91.4</td><td>98.4</td><td>102.8</td><td>104.7</td><td>104.4</td><td>102.0</td><td>95.0</td><td>78.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>202.1</td><td>168.4</td><td>118.7</td><td>110.0</td><td>118.1</td><td>117.9</td><td>101.1</td><td>108.0</td><td>107.9</td><td>105.2</td><td>94.2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T</td><td>80</td><td>56</td><td>75</td><td>83</td><td>83</td><td>87</td><td>104</td><td>97</td><td>95</td><td>90</td><td>84</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya-Uganda</td><td>E</td><td>241.9</td><td>89.1</td><td>96.4</td><td>105.1</td><td>126.2</td><td>125.6</td><td>99.6</td><td>88.5</td><td>107.2</td><td>104.0</td><td>78.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>249.3</td><td>199.1</td><td>133.7</td><td>118.2</td><td>121.9</td><td>117.7</td><td>112.3</td><td>105.4</td><td>96.8</td><td>99.4</td><td>94.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T</td><td>97</td><td>45</td><td>72</td><td>89</td><td>104</td><td>107</td><td>89</td><td>84</td><td>111</td><td>105</td><td>83</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritius</td><td>E</td><td>444.9</td><td>292.3</td><td>130.8</td><td>130.8</td><td>117.9</td><td>105.1</td><td>102.6</td><td>115.4</td><td>98.7</td><td>87.2</td><td>65.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I</td><td>232.6</td><td>127.3</td><td>114.4</td><td>106.6</td><td>105.3</td><td>116.5</td><td>113.3</td><td>102.6</td><td>102.1</td><td>95.4</td><td>83.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T</td><td>191</td><td>230</td><td>114</td><td>123</td><td>112</td><td>90</td><td>91</td><td>112</td><td>97</td><td>91</td><td>78</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>E</td><td>126.0</td><td>80.4</td><td>86.0</td><td>108.1</td><td>105.3</td><td>145.6</td><td>133.0</td><td>116.5</td><td>88.1</td><td>86.3</td><td>71.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>201.1</td><td>117.8</td><td>106.9</td><td>98.6</td><td>93.6</td><td>105.8</td><td>103.3</td><td>102.7</td><td>99.2</td><td>97.4</td><td>80.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T</td><td>63</td><td>68</td><td>80</td><td>110</td><td>113</td><td>138</td><td>129</td><td>113</td><td>89</td><td>89</td><td>89</td></tr><tr><td>Malaya</td><td>E</td><td>192.2</td><td>84.6</td><td>77.4</td><td>121.6</td><td>119.7</td><td>232.0</td><td>189.1</td><td>155.4</td><td>99.2</td><td>45.9</td><td>58.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>243.7</td><td>95.7</td><td>158.7</td><td>169.3</td><td>106.6</td><td>112.5</td><td>116.0</td><td>105.7</td><td>96.8</td><td>96.6</td><td>92.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T</td><td>79</td><td>88</td><td>49</td><td>72</td><td>112</td><td>206</td><td>163</td><td>147</td><td>103</td><td>48</td><td>63</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>E</td><td>206.5</td><td>107.4</td><td>110.0</td><td>141.2</td><td>99.4</td><td>93.5</td><td>97.5</td><td>101.9</td><td>97.8</td><td>101.0</td><td>80.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>【</td><td>266.5</td><td>141.7</td><td>103.4</td><td>111.1</td><td>120.6</td><td>116.6</td><td>110.1</td><td>102.7</td><td>97.8</td><td>99.0</td><td>92.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T</td><td>77</td><td>76</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>80</td><td></td><td>99</td><td></td><td>102</td><td>87</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>106</td><td>127</td><td>82</td><td></td><td>89</td><td></td><td>100</td><td>84.3</td><td>79.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>E</td><td>168.6</td><td>106.7</td><td>93.1</td><td>97.5</td><td>89.6</td><td>97.6</td><td>97.9</td><td>117.6</td><td>97.6</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I T</td><td>177.6 95</td><td>153.1 70</td><td>112.4 83</td><td>102.5 95</td><td>105.8 85</td><td>114.1 86</td><td>108.8 90</td><td>101.9 115</td><td>100.0 98</td><td>98.3 86</td><td>94.2 85</td></tr></table> <sub>ed</sub> <sub>index</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>u</sub>n<sup>it</sup> <sup>value</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>principa</sup> <sub>d</sub> <sub>index</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>u</sub>n<sup>it</sup> <sup>value</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>principal</sup> <sub>s</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>trade:</sub> E <sup>divided</sup> <sup>by</sup> <sup>I</sup> <sub>atistical</sub> A<sup>bstract</sup> <sup>for</sup> <sup>British</sup> <sup>Empire,</sup> <sup>No</sup> <sub>al</sub> <sub>Abstract</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>British</sub> <sub>Emp</sub>i<sup>re</sup> <sup>Nos</sup>. <sup>57,</sup> <sup>58;</sup> <sup>Colonial</sup> <sup>A</sup>
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>1913</td><td>1919</td><td>1920</td><td>1921</td><td>1922</td><td>1923</td><td>1924</td><td>1925</td><td>1926</td><td>1927</td><td>1928</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>0.4</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.2</td><td>5.0</td><td>5.0</td><td>5.0</td><td>8.5</td><td>8.5</td><td>8.5</td><td>10.0</td><td>13.5</td><td>13.5</td><td>16.9</td></tr><tr><td>Uganda</td><td>0.3</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.7</td><td>0.9</td><td>0.9</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td>n.a,</td><td>n.a.</td><td>0.1</td><td>0.8</td><td>1.6</td><td>2.4</td><td>3.1</td><td>3.1</td><td>3.1</td><td>3.1</td><td>5.2</td><td>5.2</td><td>5.2</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>0.1</td><td>0.2</td><td>0.2</td><td>0.3</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.5</td><td>0.6</td><td>0.7</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.9</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast.</td><td>2.5</td><td>3.4</td><td>7.4</td><td>7.3</td><td>7.3</td><td>7.3</td><td>11.8</td><td>11.1</td><td>11.8</td><td>11.8</td><td>11.8</td><td>11.8</td><td>13.0</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>8.3</td><td>12.0</td><td>10.3</td><td>13.6</td><td>13.6</td><td>19.3</td><td>19.3</td><td>19.3</td><td>23.6</td><td>23.6</td><td>23.6</td><td>23.6</td><td>28.4</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>6.1</td><td>7.0</td><td>7.0</td><td>10.0</td><td>13.0</td><td>13.0</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>15.9</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritius</td><td>1.3</td><td>1.3</td><td>1.2</td><td>1.3</td><td>1.3</td><td>1.3</td><td>1.6</td><td>1.7</td><td>1.8</td><td>1.8</td><td>1.9</td><td>1.9</td><td>2.8</td></tr><tr><td>West Indies</td><td>6.4</td><td>6.8</td><td>7.0</td><td>8.0</td><td>8.8</td><td>9.3</td><td>9.3</td><td>9.6</td><td>9.8</td><td>10.0</td><td>10.3</td><td>10.3</td><td>10.2</td></tr><tr><td>British Guiana</td><td>0.9</td><td>1.2</td><td>1.2</td><td>1.2</td><td>2.4</td><td>2.6</td><td>2.6</td><td>2.7</td><td>2.7</td><td>2.7</td><td>2.6</td><td>2.6</td><td>4.8</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>26.3</td><td>33.4</td><td>35.9</td><td>48.3</td><td>54.3</td><td>61.5</td><td>66.2</td><td>71.3</td><td>76.0</td><td>77.8</td><td>83.7</td><td>86.1</td><td>99.1</td></tr></table> <sub>ublic</sub> <sub>debt,</sub> <sub>selected</sub> <sup>colonies,</sup> <sup>1913</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>1919</sup> The slow growth of a capitalist class in most colonies was not, however, simply a result of the economic circumstances. The colonial authorities followed policies which were directly and indirectly inimical to the development of colonial capitalism. In West Africa, for example, a conflict occurred between the metropolitan desire to develop the estate and the local authorities’ deter mination to protect the native from such development. Soon after Joseph Chamberlain’s call to British businessmen to invest in the newly won tropical lands, William Lever was refused permission to establish oil-palm plantations in West Africa. After several attempts, he went elsewhere, to the Congo. Later he was asked to set up oilcrushing mills in Nigeria, since this was considered by the local authorities to be a legitimate role for expatriate enterprise. This time it was Lever’s turn to refuse. The palm oil industry of Nigeria—accounting for up to one half of the colony’s export earnings—stagnated, for the locally owned plantations which were established were negligible.<sup>55</sup> The policy of the local colonial governments was not to oppose all forms of economic development. Some African colonial administrations— such as that of Sir Gordon Guggisberg in the Gold Coast in the 1920s— energetically built roads, harbours and railways, borrowing heavily on the London market to do so.<sup>56</sup> The export industries of Malaya were excellently served with infrastructure by the government. But where development seemed to lead away from a peasant-based society, local officials were far more cautious. Traditional ways of life were to be preserved as part of the policy of trusteeship. In West Africa natives were not to be allowed to drift to towns or work on European plantations and become wage-workers. In Malaya there was a racial segmentation of the economy, and the role assigned to the Malays was that of subsistence rice farmers who should remain in their villages.<sup>57</sup> Only in colonies where there were white settlers, as in East and Central Africa, was widespread rural wage employment for natives considered desirable, indeed essential, to provide the settlers with a labour force, but they were often discouraged from competing with the settlers in producing cash crops for export themselves, with varying degrees of success.<sup>58</sup> The image of the native which colonial administrators held was sometimes highly romantic, seeing them as ‘sturdy peasants’ of the kind long-disappeared in England, who were too backward to cope with modern capitalism.<sup>59</sup> Even where a vigorous export industry, such as cocoa in the Gold Coast, was in native hands, officials persisted in regarding the cocoa farmer as basically a subsistence peasant who grew cocoa as a cash crop sideline, who lacked the long-term perspective of a capitalist and who was unresponsive to market forces.<sup>60</sup> Indigenous capitalism undoubtedly emerged and grew—even flourished from time to time—in some of Britain’s tropical colonies during the inter-war period, but it seemed to do so despite the policies of the colonial regime rather than because of them.<sup>61</sup> To this antipathy towards local nascent capitalists was added the hostility of British firms. Trading companies were undercut by local traders and British manufacturers objected to import-substituting industries in the colonies. Even local governments found their railways losing money because of competition from motor transport companies owned by natives.<sup>62</sup> There was much opposition locally to the establishment of secondary industry, and in London the protective instincts of Colonial Office officials were encouraged by interested sections of Britain’s trade and industry to produce a strong resistance to secondary industry in the colonial empire, as we shall see in the next chapter. The twin pillars of British colonial economic policy were reinforced during the 1920s. Private enterprise remained predominantly British and the rise of native capitalism was resisted. The colonial economies remained complementary to the British economy, providing foodstuffs, raw materials and absorbing manufactured goods. The degree of dependence on a narrow range of primary exports increased in most cases, and tendencies towards the colonial economies becoming less complementary were successfully resisted. The general economic experience of colonies under British rule from 1900 to 1929 was one of bursts of growth in the export sector, but not development towards the creation of a strong diversified economy which might be regarded as a more appropriate fulfilment of ‘trusteeship’.