## Depression and disillusion The colonial economies in the 1930s ## THE WORK OF THE COLONIAL DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE<sup>1</sup> As a result of the 1929 Colonial Development Act, British colonial aid was intended to be more systematic in the 1930s. In August 1929, the Colonial Development Advisory Committee (CDAC), established under the Act to administer the Colonial Development Fund, determined the procedure to be followed for applications for assistance. It decided that a colonial government must first submit the project to the Colonial Office which would then either pass it on to the committee (with or without a recommendation that it be assisted), or return it to the colony for revision. If revised and resubmitted by the colony, the Colonial Office would pass the scheme to the CDAC, though an application without the secretary of state’s recommendation stood little chance of success. From January 1930 the financial adviser to the secretary of state, Sir John Campbell, attended the CDAC meetings and presented the Colonial Office view. If the governor, or another senior official of the colony making the application was in London at the time it came before the committee, he generally appeared and explained the case, but there was no formal provision for a direct submission from the colony to the committee and the CDAC had no power to initiate schemes itself. The number of applications, the cost of schemes accepted for assistance, the amounts of assistance recommended by the CDAC and the actual amounts paid out of the fund in each of the financial years of the committee’s operations between 1929 and 1939 are shown in Table 8.1. Between 1929 and 1939 the committee received 822 applications and accepted 641 of them (78 per cent) as suitable for assistance. Of these, 24 were later abandoned and so 617 schemes assisted by the committee were actually completed or were still in operation by 31 March 1939. The total cost of these 617 was £17,287,000 and the CDAC recommended a total of £7,910,000 to assist them. That is, it found on average 45.8 per cent of the cost of each scheme, though such an average does not mean very much with so varied a group of projects. The remainder had to be found by the colonial governments themselves from public loans or surplus revenue. Assistance took three forms: a free capital grant, a loan (generally interest free for three to five years) and a free grant of interest on a loan raised elsewhere. Free capital grants accounted for 48.3 per cent of all assistance, or, if free grants of interest are included (as is shown in Table 8.1), 61 per cent, and thus were more important than loans. The actual amounts paid out from the Colonial Development Fund fell short of the committee’s recommendations as schemes required the money gradually and some were still in operation in 1939, though in three years the amount paid out exceeded the amount recommended. Overall, by 1939, £6,378,000 had been spent in the colonial empire under the Act, 57.1 per cent of it in the form of grants. <sub>in</sub> <sub>each</sub> <sub>period</sub> <sub>except</sub> <sub>for</sub> <sub>1929–30</sub> <sub>1</sub> <sub>August</sub> <sub>to</sub> <sub>28</sub> <sub>February)</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>1930–31</sub> <sub>1</sub> M<sup>arc</sup> (<sup>(</sup> <sub>lonial</sub> <sub>Development</sub> <sub>Advisory</sub> <sub>Committe</sub>e<sup>,</sup> <sup>Nos</sup>. <sup>1</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>10;</sup> <sup>Abstract</sup> <sup>accounts</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>Colonial</sup> <sup>Developme</sup> <sub>tance</sub> <sub>from</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Colonial</sub> <sub>Developme</sub>n<sup>t</sup> <sup>Advisory</sup> <sup>Comm</sup>
<table><tr><td>Periodª</td><td>No. of appli- cations</td><td>No. of applic- ations accepted</td><td>No. accepted excluding those later abandoned</td><td>Cost of Schemes in col. 3 (£)</td><td>Assistance by way of grant to schemes shown in col. 3 (£)</td><td>Assistance by way of loan to schemes shown in col. 3 (£)</td><td>Total assistance recom- mended (£)</td><td>Actual grants paid out (£000)</td><td>Actual loans paid out (£000)</td><td>Total assistance actually paid out</td></tr><tr><td>1929–30</td><td>62</td><td>50</td><td>46</td><td>5379327</td><td>756580</td><td>580200</td><td>1336780</td><td>222.3</td><td>119.5</td><td>(£000) 341.8</td></tr><tr><td>1930-31</td><td>177</td><td>118</td><td>110</td><td>2996683</td><td>856766</td><td>329119</td><td>1185885</td><td>407.5</td><td>438.8</td><td>846.3</td></tr><tr><td>1931-32</td><td>86</td><td>48</td><td>43</td><td>423796</td><td>205466</td><td>15225</td><td>220691</td><td>400.1</td><td>207.8</td><td>607.9</td></tr><tr><td>1932-33</td><td>48</td><td>38</td><td>38</td><td>347763</td><td>144911</td><td>118444</td><td>263355</td><td>257.9</td><td>113.4</td><td>371.3</td></tr><tr><td>1933-34</td><td>55</td><td>43</td><td>40</td><td>2136631</td><td>421669</td><td>320732</td><td>733401</td><td>299.0</td><td>506.9</td><td>805.9</td></tr><tr><td>1934-35</td><td>96</td><td>83</td><td>82</td><td>1691133</td><td>435214</td><td>649187</td><td>1084401</td><td>409.9</td><td>329.9</td><td>739.8</td></tr><tr><td>1935-36</td><td>91</td><td>75</td><td>73</td><td>1016245</td><td>447778</td><td>421066</td><td>868844</td><td>321.2</td><td>365.4</td><td>686.6</td></tr><tr><td>1936-37</td><td>69</td><td>60 55</td><td>60</td><td>1258668</td><td>505987</td><td>304058 288317</td><td>810045</td><td>430.6</td><td>269.0</td><td>699.6</td></tr><tr><td>1937-38</td><td>61 77</td><td>71</td><td>54 71</td><td>930475 1178052</td><td>492571 565973</td><td>59905</td><td>780888 625878</td><td>478.6 415.2</td><td>256.0 129.5</td><td>734.6</td></tr><tr><td>1938-39</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>544.7</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>822</td><td>641</td><td>617</td><td>17286773</td><td>4823915</td><td>3086253</td><td>7910168</td><td>3642.4</td><td>2736.1</td><td>6378.5</td></tr></table> The number of applications submitted was fairly low during the first seven months (sixty-two) but then increased to an average of 13.6 per month in the thirteen months March 1930 to March 1931. Thereafter the number fluctuated between four per month in 1932–3 and eight in 1934–5. Once the initial backlog of schemes which had been previously shelved for lack of funds had been submitted the number of applications tended to fall gradually. More than three-quarters of the applications were successful in obtaining some funds (though sometimes less than the amount asked for) and the ‘success rate’ was somewhat higher from 1934 onwards, reaching 92 per cent in 1938–9. The committee went through a more strict phase, from 1930 to 1932, when, largely under pressure from the Treasury, schemes which appeared not to have any immediate benefit to the colony or the United Kingdom, or were on the borderline between what was seen as ‘economic development’ and ‘social development’ were regarded less favourably. From 1933 there was a steady relaxation in the CDAC’s attitude. Twenty-four schemes were abandoned—3.8 per cent of the total assisted— usually because the local government could not afford to pay its share of the cost. The most expensive scheme, the Zambesi Bridge project in Nyasaland cost $\mathcal { L } 3$ million; the cheapest was for the visit of a medical expert to Barbados costing $\mathcal { L } 7 8$ . With such a wide range, calculating the ‘average cost’ is not a very useful exercise. However, only thirteen schemes cost more than £200,000 and relatively low-cost schemes predominated. In fact, few large-scale schemes were submitted to the committee after 1931, the only major exception being one for a deepwater harbour at Por t of Spain, Trinidad, to cost $\mathcal { L } 1$ m i l l i o n , recommended for assistance in 1933. Briefly then, the majority of applications were successful, relatively few were abandoned and grants were rather more important than loans. Perhaps the most striking aspect was that most activity was in the early years: 30 per cent of all applications were received before 1931 and schemes recommended for assistance by March 1931 cost £8.4 million— slightly under half the total for the whole period. After this initial burst of enthusiasm, applications tended to fall, and from 1931 applications never exceeded eight per month, compared to an average of twelve per month up to March 1931. The kind of schemes assisted were not the large-scale schemes of transportation and communications which the designers of the Act had envisaged; indeed, most were not large-scale schemes at all. According to J.H.Thomas, the typical project which he had in mind when introducing the money resolution for the Bill, was the construction of Takoradi harbour in the Gold Coast, which had cost about £3.5 million. He also mentioned the Zambesi Bridge project—estimated to cost £3 million—as a suitable object.<sup>2</sup> In fact, very few large-scale projects were undertaken with money from the fund. The kind of development which was seen as necessary in the 1930s was not the high-cost transport and communications schemes of the 1900–30 period. In the depressed trade conditions of the 1930s there seemed to be little scope for further large-scale transportation projects. Rather colonial governments focussed their attention on smaller-scale projects, for example, for urban water supply, housing, provision of electrical light and power, public health and sanitation and secondary roads. The Colonial Development Act set out thirteen categories of scheme, shown in Table 8.2. The two most important categories were ‘internal transport and communications’ and ‘public health’. Over the period 1929–40 these two accounted for 30 and 16 per cent of the assistance respectively. The most neglected categories were fisheries, forestry and electricity; the first two of these indicated a failure to develop the natural resources of the tropical colonial empire with money from the fund (as did the fairly low proportion given to mineral development), and the last the dislike of the committee for schemes which they regarded as not particularly developmental. More importantly, agricultural development schemes accounted for only 13 per cent of the total number and 5 per cent of the assistance, a remarkable fact when it is remembered to what extent all colonies relied on the production and export of agricultural produce, and that the need for a greater degree of export diversification in most colonies was an important problem in the 1930s. Since the committee did not initiate schemes, the lack of attention to agriculture, fishery and forestry schemes was an indication of the attitude of the local governments towards developing these resources. Well over half of the transport and communication schemes were for roads and bridges and this category also accounted for over half the assistance given to transport and communications. All but one of the railway schemes were submitted before April 1931, whereas only fifteen schemes for roads and bridges were submitted before that date. Moreover, few of the railway schemes involved the construction of new line, but were rather for the relaying and realignment of existing track, much of which had seemingly been poorly built. Railway schemes were also more geographically concentrated than road schemes: eight of the eleven railway schemes were in African colonies south of the Sahara. Clearly, new developments in transport in the 1930s involved road and air rather than railways. These projects were much less costly than the railway schemes: the eleven air transport schemes cost on average £41,527 each (though they ranged from £118,000 to £342), the seventy-one road schemes, £32,745 (with a range of $\mathcal { L } 3 0 0 { , } 0 0 0$ to £550), whilst eleven railway schemes cost on average £431,365 (ranging from $\mathcal { L } 3$ million to £6,000). Thus there is little doubt that as far as transport schemes financed by the CD AC were concerned, the pattern in the 1930s was for colonies to favour cheaper projects, usually for road transport, filling-in some of the gaps left by the earlier railway development and acting as ‘feeders’ for the railways. This minor transport revolution was, of course, closely linked to the growth of motor traffic in the colonial empire in the inter-war period. Table 8.2 Types of development schemes assisted by the Colonial Development Act, 1929–39
<table><tr><td>Category</td><td>No. of schemes assisted</td><td>%</td><td>Assistance granted (£000)</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Agriculture &amp;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>veterinary</td><td>85</td><td>13.3</td><td>387.6</td><td>4.9</td></tr><tr><td>Fisheries</td><td>8</td><td>1.2</td><td>166.1</td><td>2.1</td></tr><tr><td>Forestry Land reclamation,</td><td>15</td><td>2.3</td><td>79.1</td><td>1.0</td></tr><tr><td>drainage and</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>irrigation Transport &amp;</td><td>21</td><td>3.3</td><td>356.0</td><td>4.5</td></tr><tr><td>communications</td><td>118</td><td>18.4</td><td>2626.2</td><td>33.2</td></tr><tr><td>Harbours</td><td>17</td><td>2.7</td><td>450.9</td><td>5.7</td></tr><tr><td>Medical &amp; public health</td><td>114</td><td>17.8</td><td>1036.2</td><td>13.1</td></tr><tr><td>Water supply &amp; sanitation</td><td>69</td><td>10.8</td><td>893.9</td><td>11.3</td></tr><tr><td>Electricity supply</td><td>5</td><td>0.8</td><td>63.3</td><td>0.8</td></tr><tr><td>Mineral resources</td><td>3</td><td>0.5</td><td>704.0</td><td>8.9</td></tr><tr><td>Geological surveys</td><td>32</td><td>5.0</td><td>245.2</td><td>3.1</td></tr><tr><td>Research</td><td>115</td><td>17.9</td><td>553.7</td><td>7.0</td></tr><tr><td>Miscellaneous</td><td>39</td><td>6.0</td><td>348.0</td><td>4.4</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>641</td><td>100.0</td><td>7910.2</td><td>100.0</td></tr></table> Source: Reports of the CDAC, 1929–39. As the 1930s progressed, transport and communications schemes tended to become relatively less important and public health ones relatively more important. In 1929–30, 33 per cent of assistance went to transport and communications, while public health received only 7 per cent, and in 1933–4 the proportions were 10 and 7 per cent respectively. However, by 1936–37 transport and communications accounted for 3 per cent while public health received 25 per cent; and in 1937–38 the proportion of assistance given to public health again exceeded that granted to transport and communications schemes. In the last year of the committee’s operation, 1939–40, public health received over 40 per cent of the total assistance. The CDAC’s policy towards public health and medical schemes illustrated very well attitudes current in the 1930s towards financing economic development. On the one hand, there was an older school of thought which stressed the need to spend money on infrastructure and ‘practical research’ —i.e., research which yielded useful results quickly. On the other hand, there was evidence of a growing feeling that the problems of the low standard of living in the colonies and their inability to increase prosperity (indeed the very opposite in many cases) was not going to be cured merely by more roads, railways, harbours, etc., but by tackling the ‘social problems’ of bad housing, disease, high infant mortality rates, malnutrition and so forth, more directly. These two views produced a conflict within the committee (and probably within individual committee members) because they were responsible for the expenditure of public money which was supposed to benefit the United Kingdom taxpayers who were providing it, as well as the colonial population. Yet they were aware of growing social problems in the colonies, the severity of which became increasingly clear with the publication of such reports as the Report on Labour Conditions in the West Indies (1938), the Report of the Advisory Council on Nutrition in the Colonial Empire (1939)<sup>3</sup> and Lord Hailey’s influential An African Survey (1938). However, even, with such evidence of the appalling living standards in the colonial empire, the committee always had the Treasury looking over its collective shoulder, as well as differing opinions among its members. It is not surprising, then, that the majority of schemes rejected by the committee because they were ‘not of a development nature’ were public health and medical schemes. The CDAC gave as many as thirty-three different reasons for rejecting schemes over the course of its operations, but in approximately half the cases the reason amounted to the judgement that the project was not developmental. This affected schemes other than public health, of course, but public health ones were the most vulnerable, and their ‘success rate’ was less than average—67.5 per cent compared with 78.0 per cent for all applications. In 1930 the committee expressed a willingness to devote 10 per cent of the fund to public health schemes each year, and in a circular letter to the colonies the secretary of state wrote: It may not…be so widely realised that the Committee are also prepared to give liberal assistance towards schemes of public health and research, which are not the less important because they involve a smaller outlay. You may rest assured that the economic importance of measures to safeguard the health of all classes of the community is fully appreciated in this country. Grants have been made towards works of drainage and water supply, and the erection of hospital buildings and labourers’ dwellings.<sup>4</sup> Up to 31 March 1931, 25 per cent of the committee’s assistance was to public health schemes, and between 1 April 1931 and 31 March 1937, 44 per cent.<sup>5</sup> This high level was drastically reduced in the next year to 5 per cent of total assistance, and in 1933–4 to 7 per cent. By March 1934, £496,981 had been allocated to assist public health in four and a half years, which was slightly above the target set in 1930 of 10 per cent.<sup>6</sup> Increasingly, however, the committee saw medical and health schemes as ‘less developmental’ than others submitted, and from 1934 they hardened their attitude towards them. This was made easier when Sir Alan Rae Smith took over from Sir Basil Blackett as chairman in September 1935.<sup>7</sup> Assistance did not dry up completely—aid was given to a tuberculosis hospital and clinic in Jamaica in 1935 and to a tuberculosis sanitarium in Cyprus in 1936, but only because in both cases the Rockefeller Foundation was involved in medical research in the island and the proposed scheme would facilitate this.<sup>8</sup> An application from Trinidad for a tuberculosis sanitarium in 1935 was turned down on the grounds that it was a service which should be provided by the government of Trinidad in the normal way. There was no element of international research in Trinidad’s case.<sup>9</sup> In 1937 an application from Trans-Jordan for assistance in building a hospital at Amman was rejected on the argument that the hospital would engage in purely curative work rather than ‘the attacking of causes leading to the spread of disease and the effecting of improvements in the health of the community generally’.<sup>10</sup> This change of attitude—or more strict interpretation of their policy— was reflected in the proportion of assistance given to public health: 7 per cent in 1933–4, 4 per cent in 1934–5 and 8 per cent in 1935–6. In 1936–7, however, the proportion was 25 per cent and the next year, 31 per cent despite the committee’s attitude on ‘purely curative’ public health schemes, which indicated that health schemes which they did feel able to assist were being submitted in some numbers. In 1938–9 the proportion fell once more, to 10 per cent—the level set by Blackett in 1930. In the final 16 months of the committee’s existence it seemed to revert to the pre-1934 attitude, for no less than 40 per cent of its assistance went to schemes for the advancement of public health.<sup>11</sup> One of these was for a new hospital in Uganda for which the committee gave a free grant of £240,000, a quite unprecedented amount for a single public health scheme. In outlining their grant the committee reaffirmed the opinion—which had been put forward by Lord Passfield in 1929 and the Colonial Development Public Health Committee in 1930—that If the productivity of the East African territories is to be fully developed, and with it, the potential capacity of those territories to absorb manufactured goods from the United Kingdom, it is essential that the standard of life of the native should be raised and to this end the eradication of disease is one of the most important measures.<sup>12</sup> This was the CDAC’s attitude towards colonial development in a nutshell: that virtually any development in the colonies—from railways to public health—would help both Britain and the colony itself. This emphasis on indirect benefits to Britain explains why the committee paid relatively little attention to the proportion of their grants to be spent in the United Kingdom.<sup>13</sup> In this way too the committee reached a compromise on schemes regarded as on the borderline between ‘developmental’ and ‘nondevelopmental’ whereby such schemes could still benefit the United Kingdom and increase the productiveness of the colony. Over the period from 1929 to 1940 the view that ‘social development’ was important gradually gained ground, and, perhaps as a result of the reports referred to above and Lord Hailey’s Survey, in the last year of the committee’s work possibly gained ascendancy. ## COLONIAL ECONOMIC POLICY IN THE 1930S The impact of the 1929 Colonial Development Act on the British colonial empire in the 1930s was not great. The problems faced by the colonial economies were deep-seated, while the resources of the CDAC were very limited. The amount of money regarded as suitable for developing the empire and reducing unemployment levels in Britain—£1 million per annum—was partly decided upon as a result of an exaggerated concept of the working of the multiplier. J.H.Thomas was under the impression that the money would all be used to pay half of the interest on loans raised elsewhere—an impossibility for most colonies— and would thus result in some £40 million of work being undertaken each year.<sup>14</sup> Leo Amery was of the opinion that money spent abroad would be three times as productive as money spent on public works at home.<sup>15</sup> In reality, a nominal amount of £1 million a year spread over some 45 underdeveloped countries and 55 million people disappeared almost without trace. For the colonial empire as a whole Colonial Development Fund money represented only 7 per cent of the £96 million spent on capital works in the colonies between 1929 and 1938.<sup>16</sup> Faced with the pointlessness of large transport and communications developments after 1931, the CDAC gradually—and for some members, reluctantly—fell back on attempting merely to ameliorate the shockingly low levels of health, housing and social conditions which were just beginning to be recognised. The 1929 Act also failed because it had to work within a constricted framework of colonial economic policy. The complementary relationship between the colonies and Britain which had been built up by the dynamics of the international economy since the late nineteenth century effectively prevented the colonies from breaking out of the straitjacket of increasing dependence on a narrow group of export cash crops and mineral ores in the 1930s. Indeed, as the economic plight of Britain worsened so the constraints on the colonial economies were tightened. This can be seen in the reluctance of the British government, and many colonial governments, to encourage the diversification of colonies’ economies by the establishment of processing and secondary manufacturing industry. There was a sharp contrast between the CDAC’s aid to transport and communications in the earlier part of the decade and public health in the later part on the one hand, and their efforts in establishing new or extending existing local industries in the colonies on the other. Between 1929 and 1939 the committee granted assistance to twenty-seven schemes involving the setting up of new or the extension of existing industries, although four of these, including one for a paper pulp factory to cost £930,000 in Kenya, were withdrawn by the local government in the same or succeeding financial year. All but two of the schemes assisted were for processing of some kind, and two were for the promotion of tourism. That only 1.2 per cent of all assistance from the Colonial Development Fund was spent on local industry was hardly a true indication of the potential for the development of such industry in the colonies. The initiative for colonial economic development lay with the local governments and the Colonial Office and neither, for differing reasons, was very interested in expanding secondary industry. In the case of many local governments, especially in Africa, this was a result of a clash between a ‘Native Policy’, such as indirect rule in Nigeria and Tanganyika, which sought to preserve indigenous political institutions and rule through them, on the one hand, and the social effects of industrialisation which were seen as undesirable, such as urbanisation, detribalisation, unemployment and so forth, on the other. ‘Developing the African along his own lines’, the catchphrase of indirect rule in Africa, tended to be interpreted solely in political terms, perhaps because it was the course of least resistance. Many of the governors in Africa in the inter-war years who were capable of instituting reform—Clifford, Guggisberg, Byrne, Cameron—concentrated on refining the political structure through which they ruled and resisting the claims of the so-called ‘westernised Africans’ living in the cities.<sup>17</sup> Often ‘political development’ as in the establishment of indirect rule became an end in itself: in 1936 for example, the anthropologist Lucy P.Mair published Native policies in Africa.<sup>18</sup> Her main purpose was to show that indirect rule was a socially and culturally less disruptive system of government than French assimilationism or Rhodesian segregationalism. It appeared to have no aims, however, beyond the preservation of ‘native institutions’ as viable units. As G.L.M.Clauson, assistant secretary of state at the Colonial Office, and head of the economic department, wrote in 1939, ‘Every Colonial Government is a going concern, but I am not at all sure that most Colonial Governors have any clear conception of where it is going except perhaps in the immediate future’.<sup>19</sup> Even if local governments did wish to establish new industries and extend existing ones, there were major obstacles. First, there was the fact that many colonies lacked the expertise, especially as in the depression government staff was often reduced. Second, and more importantly, the Colonial Office and the British government were opposed to the establishment of manufacturing industry in the colonial empire. The major export commodities from British colonies were foodstuffs, raw materials and minerals, and nearly all the foodstuffs were in their unprocessed state. The prices of these commodities tended to fluctuate severely throughout the inter-war period, generally in a downward direction. In many colonies the export base was narrower at the end of the 1930s than it was before the First World War. The traditional attitude of the British government was that the metropolitan and the colonial economies were complementary not competitive. At the Imperial Economic Conference of 1926 Leo Amery, secretary of state for the colonies, said one of the most striking features of modern industrial development is the marriage of tropical production to the industrial production of the temperate zone. They are essentially complementary regions, and owing to their character and the character of their inhabitants they are likely to remain so.<sup>20</sup> In the House of Commons in 1929 Amery referred again to the complementary nature of colonial trade and pointed out that the Colonies are essentially agricultural and producers of primary commodities. It is not very probable, or indeed, very desirable in the interests of the populations themselves, that industrial development should be unduly accelerated in their case.<sup>21</sup> The situation changed, however, with the abandonment of free trade in 1931 and the conclusion of the Ottawa Agreements in 1932. These developments raised a number of issues which had not been foreseen at the time. First, there was the problem of colonial countries replacing the Japanese as producers of cheap goods. This was most important with regard to rubber and canvas footwear manufactured in Hong Kong and, to a lesser extent, Singapore, and imported into Britain under a preferential duty. On two occasions in the 1930s the Canadian and British footwear producers attempted to come to an agreement with Hong Kong over quotas, but were unable to agree among themselves sufficiently to present a united front. Since the Canadian and British producers could not agree, the Far Eastern manufacturers were able to continue, but the conflict served as a warning to British business that there were great dangers in imperial preference, as well as benefits, if the colonies became industrialised. This was recognised too by the British government. Neville Chamberlain, Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1934, stated that While it was improbable that West Africa would set up factories to compete with those at home, there was a real and serious danger of such factories being established in Malaya and possibly other parts of the Colonial Empire, and we might well be faced with very serious developments of a problem of industrial competition of which we had already had some experience in the case of India.<sup>22</sup> The response to this was to set up an inter-departmental committee in 1934 to consider industrial development in the colonies. The committee recommended that in the first place colonial industries should not be ‘artificially’ encouraged, and second, that where local workshops and factories already existed the government should seek to impose restrictions on conditions and working hours to bring them more into line with those of the United Kingdom—the constant complaint of the British manufacturer being that colonial producers benefited from low costs through ‘sweated labour’.<sup>23</sup> The report was considered by Cabinet in February 1936 but was sent back for reconsideration with little discussion. Chamberlain thought that there should be a different policy for each of the three types of colony— the eastern ones which were already industrialised such as Hong Kong, relatively prosperous colonies like Jamaica and lastly the African and other colonies where little industry existed.<sup>24</sup> Meanwhile a third problem of protectionism had arisen, that of colonies creating a differential between excise duty and import duty so as to favour locally produced import substitutes, particularly in beer, matches, soap, edible oils and fats and cement. Among the most persistent complainants to the Colonial Office were Ind Coope and Allsopp Ltd, two brewers, and Unilever. Clement Davies, managing director of Unilever, for example, wrote personally to Malcolm MacDonald, secretary of state for the colonies, in July 1935, It does seem extraordinary that these colonies, without improving the lot of their own people…should in effect stop imports from this country, especially imports of goods manufactured by a company which purchases from those colonies raw materials which are grown in those colonies and upon which the colonies exist.<sup>25</sup> These complaints, in addition to the Hong Kong dispute and the passing of legislation such as Malta’s Encouragement of New Industries Act and Jamaica’s Safeguarding of Local Industries Law—which enabled the local governments to grant monopolies for the production of scheduled commodities—led to a new inter-departmental committee being set up in 1937. This was ‘to consider and report how far it is desirable to frame and pursue a policy either to encourage or to discourage the establishment of industrial enterprises in the Colonial Empire’, as the question was ‘constantly turning up in one form or another’.<sup>26</sup> The problem proved so difficult, however, that even by December 1938 only the second draft of the committee’s report had been written. The committee came to the broad conclusion that industries in the colonies which could only exist with government assistance, usually in the form of an excise duty-import duty differential, ‘Will place a permanent burden on the local community and are more likely to impoverish that community than enrich it.’<sup>27</sup> Therefore where the Colonial Office had the power—and effectively it did not in colonies such as Malaya, Malta, Ceylon and Jamaica—local governments should not be allowed to assist local industries by means of licencing or tariff policy. This was as far as the committee reached by the end of 1938 and its report was considered far too revealing and contentious to circulate to the colonies, and it was put aside. Sir John Campbell remarked of the report, ‘It is altogether too dangerous, too full of explosive possibilities, too little susceptible of reduction to clear formulae, for a report which will presumably be circulated generally and will doubtless be published eventually, or leak out eventually.’<sup>28</sup> The policy reached by the committee, however, was essentially the same as that exercised by the Colonial Office in a piecemeal fashion in dealing with individual cases. In nearly every case of a new industry being established some form of protection was regarded by the promoter and/or the local government as necessary, and if the colony was one over which the Colonial Office had sufficient influence, the granting of protection was refused. The belief that industries established behind tariff protection were uneconomic in the long run, that infant industries never grow up and that the colonies should remain primary producers, was widely held in the Colonial Office. J.A.Calder, assistant secretary at the Colonial Office argued in June 1939 that the order of priority for colonial development should be firstly agriculture for food and export, secondly—‘and a long way behind’—the development of mineral resources, and lastly secondary industry: an important matter in itself but one for which there can be, comparatively speaking, little scope until the standards of living of the agricultural primary producers have been raised to much higher levels than exist at present in the Colonial Empire. The manufacturing industry, which can be established in a colony only at the price of a monopoly protected by a high tariff, ends in producing a locally manufactured article which is too expensive for the primary agricultural producers to buy.<sup>29</sup> The Colonial Office advocated strict free trade for the colonies at a time when all other countries, including Britain, had abandoned the principle. At the same time there was a strong element of protecting the United Kingdom manufacturer and exporter involved in the Colonial Office’s policy towards colonial industrial development. In 1936 J.Melville, an assistant principal, wrote, in connection with a scheme for sugar refining in Palestine, that the Colonial Office policy towards industrialisation in the colonies ‘is to oppose the establishment in the Colonial Empire of a new industry which is likely to affect adversely the interests of established United Kingdom industries’.<sup>30</sup> Sir Henry Moore, assistant secretary, noted that the recommendations of the 1937 interdepartmental committee on colonial industry went as far as they could for, ‘No doubt a more forward policy would alar m the home manufacturers’;<sup>31</sup> and in 1939 he wrote: at present any proposals for the creation of secondary industry in the Colonial Empire are received with a marked lack of enthusiasm, if not with suspicion. The reason for this, I suggest, appears to me to be found in the more or less unwritten rule that any proposals, whether in the field of industry or tariffs, which give rise to any conflict of economic interest, should be approached from the standpoint that United Kingdom trade interests must rank first, Dominion trade interests second, and those of the Colonial Empire last.<sup>32</sup> Sir Henry Moore, unlike the other administrative officials in the Colonial Office had been a colonial governor (of Sierra Leone); most of his colleagues had never visited the colonies they dealt with. The Colonial Office was always anxious to avoid giving the impression that they were holding a brief for the United Kingdom manufacturer, but the Board of Trade and the Treasury were quite clear whose interests came first. It is doubtful whether the Cabinet would have allowed a secretary of state for the colonies to promote industrial development behind tariff walls even if he had wanted to do so; the most Sir Phillip Cunliffe-Lister, for example, when he was colonial secretary in 1934 had asked for was that Cabinet would ‘approve the principle that we should endeavour to get all the advantages we possibly could for the Colonial Empire [in tariff negotiations] provided this involved no prejudice or damage to the United Kingdom’.<sup>33</sup> In the 1920s the Colonial Office was petitioned by cotton and engineering manufacturers, not to mention the Board of Trade, for transport development to open up East Africa; in the 1930s footwear, margarine and beer manufacturers wrote angry letters demanding protection from ‘unfair’ competition. The failure of the 1929 Colonial Development Act and the lack of any real power of the CDAC suggests that it was the colonial and imperial governments rather than the committee itself which were responsible for the failure to promote economic development in the 1930s. The local governments, on whom the responsibility for initiating schemes rested, tended to be limited in outlook, both through natural conservatism and the belief in a form of political rule which implied an unchanging social and economic structure. Local governments were, however, very much influenced by the Colonial Office which regarded the establishment of secondary industry in the colonies as undesirable for social and economic reasons, and by the British government who saw in colonial industrialisation the spectre of ‘unfair competition’, and indeed in the case of Hong Kong felt that this had already arrived. Although Britain abandoned free trade in 1931 and most industrialised countries had done so already, the colonies were expected to give a tarif f pref erence to British manufactur es and to refrain fr om encouraging local manufacturing enterprise. Reviewing the measures taken to promote colonial development in the 1920s and 1930s it seems clear that the provision of British colonial aid in the inter-war period was closely linked to problems at home and tended at best to take the form of piecemeal treatment of symptoms rather than causes, and at worst hurried reaction to crises. The Colonial Office had no clear strategy for the long-term economic crises and no clear strategy for the long-term economic development of the colonial empire, and for most colonies could see no alternative to a total reliance on primary produce for export. As the governor of Nigeria wrote in 1939 to the secretary of state, Table 8.3 Public debt, selected colonies, 1928 to 1938 (£m)
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>1928</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td><td>1931</td><td>1932</td><td>1933</td><td>1934 1935</td><td></td><td></td><td>1936 1937 1938</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Kenya Uganda</td><td>13.5 1.1</td><td>13.5 1.1</td><td>16.9 1.1</td><td>16.9 1.1</td><td>16.9 2.0</td><td>17.2 2.2</td><td>17.2 2.2</td><td>17.2 2.2</td><td>17.6 2.2</td><td>17.6 2.2</td><td>17.6 2.2</td></tr><tr><td>Tanga-</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>nóika Nyasaland</td><td>5.2 0.8</td><td>5.2 0.8</td><td>5.2 0.9</td><td>8.2 1.1</td><td>8.2 3.2</td><td>8.2 3.3</td><td>8.2 5.0</td><td>8.2 5.1</td><td>8.2 5.2</td><td>8.2 5.3</td><td>8.2 5.4</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Goast</td><td>11.8</td><td>11.8</td><td>13.0</td><td>13.0</td><td>13.0</td><td>13.0</td><td>11.9</td><td>11.4</td><td>11.4</td><td>11.4</td><td>11.4</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>23.6</td><td>23.6</td><td>28.4</td><td>28.4</td><td>27.8</td><td>27.8</td><td>28.0</td><td>28.0</td><td>24.8</td><td>24.8</td><td>24.8</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>15.9</td><td>15.9</td><td>16.0</td><td>16.0</td><td>14.9</td><td>14.0</td><td>12.5</td><td>14.6</td><td>12.2</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritius</td><td>1.9</td><td>1.9</td><td>2.8</td><td>2.8</td><td>3.4</td><td>3.4</td><td>3.3</td><td>2.9.</td><td>2.9</td><td>2.9</td><td>3.1</td></tr><tr><td>West Indies British</td><td>10.3</td><td>10.3</td><td>10.2</td><td>10.4</td><td>10.4</td><td>11.0</td><td>9.1</td><td>8.4</td><td>9.7</td><td>10.3</td><td>10.3</td></tr><tr><td>Guiana</td><td>2.6</td><td>2.6</td><td>4.7</td><td>4.6</td><td>4.7</td><td>4.7</td><td>4.5</td><td>4.6</td><td>4.9</td><td>4.5</td><td>4.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>83.7</td><td>86.1</td><td></td><td></td><td>99.1 102.4 105.6 106.8 104.3 102.0</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>99.4 101.8 99.7</td><td></td></tr></table> Source: Statistical Abstract of the British Empire, Nos. 57, 58, 65 & 67; Colonial Annual Reports. the plain fact is that no British Government has yet laid down a clear cut policy in this important matter of colonial development…. All that the Government of 1929 did was to recognise the propriety of granting casual assistance, strictly limited in amount, towards development…. The ‘doctrine of individual self-sufficiency’ has never been abandoned.<sup>34</sup> Some degree of aid was channelled through the CDAC, but responsibility for initiating schemes rested with the local governments whose low level of applications for funds led to the Colonial Development Fund being underspent in most years. And yet when, in 1938 and 1939, the reorganisation of the CDAC was under discussion and it was suggested that the new development committee should be able to initiate schemes, this was firmly rejected on the grounds that such powers would undermine the authority of the secretary of state.<sup>35</sup> ## THE IMPACT OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION The various official loans, culminating in those under the Colonial Development Act, made to the tropical colonies as part of Britain’s antiunemployment policies were only a small part of public investment in the colonies in the 1920s and 1930s. Public debt in the nine colonies shown in Table 8.3 increased by over $\mathcal { L } 7 0$ million between 1919 and 1930 and peaked at about £125 million in the mid-1930s. Very little of this debt was locally subscribed after the British capital market reopened at the end of the First World War. Thus the colonies’ public debt was also largely their public foreign debt and had to be serviced as to interest and repayments from export earnings. Indeed, the high prices paid for export commodities in the early 1920s convinced colonial governments that they should borrow heavily through the London money market in order to press on with the transport and communications projects regarded as vital to expand export volumes and hence overall export revenue. Implicitly they held the view that export growth and economic growth were positively correlated. The war showed up the inadequacies of colonial infrastructure; the post-war boom appeared to provide the means to finance more rapid economic development from the public purse. Most of these loans contracted in the 1920s were for railways, roads and harbours; typically they were spread over twenty-five to thirty-five years and carried a rate of interest of between 4 and 6 per cent. The projects on which these borrowed funds were expended were generally ones which took a considerable time to complete and where the economic returns were not usually dramatic. Their potential contribution to export earnings was through reduction of transport costs and easing of handling bottlenecks, but this would only augment export earnings if export prices remained reasonably high. In the 1930s export prices collapsed and, as a result, a substantial gap opened up between total public debt and gross export values. Since debts were not permitted to be written off or modified as to servicing, a serious foreign debt burden developed in many tropical colonies by the later 1930s. The impact of the world depression on colonial indebtedness varied. Least troubled was Malaya where good export earnings from rubber and tin had enabled the public debt/export ratio to be kept relatively low and where the government-owned railways were profitable even in the early 1930s. Table 8.4 shows the debt burden for a number of tropical colonies in the mid-1930s. The burden was greatest on the more recent additions to the British Empire—East, Central and West Africa. In these colonies public debt charges absorbed over one-quarter of public expenditure in most cases. The colonies in Asia were less affected by debt servicing problems because they had been borrowing for longer and had not expanded their public debt so readily as the African ones in the postwar boom. The debt crisis in Britain’s tropical colonies in the 1930s should be kept in perspective. These funds were lent for a long period which permitted sinking fund payments to be low (generally 1 to 1.25 per cent), and the average rate of interest, although about one-third higher than before the First World War, was less than 5 per cent.<sup>36</sup> A few colonies were able to take advantage of the lower rates of interest prevailing by the mid-1930s to refinance earlier loans. Others received grants from the Colonial Development Fund (CDF) to pay interest for a number of years. Prior to Table 8.4 Public debt burden, selected colonies, 1936
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>Year</td><td>Public debt (£000)</td><td>Public debt charges (£000)</td><td>Public debt charges as a % of public debt</td><td>Public debt charges as a % of gross government expenditure</td><td>Public debt charges as a % of exports of dômestic</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>1936</td><td>17581</td><td>1043</td><td>5.9</td><td>31.8</td><td>produce 29.1</td></tr><tr><td>Uganda</td><td>1936</td><td>2236</td><td>135</td><td>6.0</td><td>8.4</td><td>3.1</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td>1936</td><td>8191</td><td>436</td><td>5.3</td><td>24.5</td><td>10.9</td></tr><tr><td>N. Rhodesia</td><td>1936</td><td>2347</td><td>120</td><td>5.1</td><td>16.3</td><td>2.1</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>1937</td><td>5264</td><td>278</td><td>5.3</td><td>42.1</td><td>31.4</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>1936-7</td><td>11435</td><td>660</td><td>5.8</td><td>23.5</td><td>7.2ª</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>19356</td><td>27965</td><td>1609</td><td>5.8</td><td>28.0</td><td>14.4b</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>19356</td><td>14082</td><td>632</td><td>4.5</td><td>7.8</td><td>3.5ª</td></tr><tr><td>Máuritius</td><td>1936-7</td><td>2879</td><td>174</td><td>6.0</td><td>16.5</td><td>6.5º</td></tr><tr><td>Malaya</td><td>1936</td><td>7617</td><td>758</td><td>9.8</td><td>12.5</td><td>15.8</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>1936-7</td><td>3974</td><td>233</td><td>5.9</td><td>11.9</td><td>4.9c</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>1936</td><td>4223</td><td>240</td><td>5.7</td><td>12.9</td><td>4.8</td></tr><tr><td>Brit. Guiana</td><td>1936</td><td>4857</td><td>242</td><td>5.0</td><td>23.3</td><td>10.8</td></tr></table> <sup>a</sup> 1936; b1935; c1937. Source: Economic Survey of the Colonial Empire; Statistical Abstract of the British Empire, Nos. 66, 67, 68. 1936, for example, a CDF grant of £500,000 paid most of Nyasaland’s interest costs, though when it expired the Nyasaland government had to devote over 40 per cent of its annual expenditure to servicing its public debt (see Table 8.4). Nevertheless, the colonial debt problem in the 1930s highlighted the development strategy of the previous decades and brought into question the appropriateness of financing large-scale transport and communication projects by long-term loans which could become a serious burden to the borrowing colonies. Since the immediate motivation of the British government for encouraging colonial governments to borrow development capital was to stimulate orders for British industry, it was sometimes suggested in the later 1930s that outright grants, especially for the least developed African colonies, would be a more effective policy. At the same time as debt servicing became a more significant item in colonial public expenditure, the slump in export earnings also resulted in considerable reductions in total government outlays. With the exception of Northern Rhodesia, where an economic boom occurred in the second half of the 1930s based on the expansion of copper mining, colonial treasuries were reduced by up to 50 per cent at the depth of the depression. Most colonies relied heavily on customs revenue and it was inevitable that in the trade slump this would fall severely. Other sources of revenue, such as direct taxation, could not easily be developed and by the late 1930s customs revenue still accounted for about 45 per cent of total government revenue. Expenditure also declined, though at first not by so great a proportion as revenue as budget deficits continued to be run in nearly all colonies until 1933. Table 8.5 illustrates the change brought about by the depression: from the budget deficits of the late 1920s and early 1930s, financed by external borrowing, to the budget surpluses which were regarded as necessary in the second half of the 1930s to continue to finance the colonial debts. At the lowest point, public expenditure fell in most of the colonies shown in Table 8.5 by between 5 per cent (Jamaica) and 50 per cent (Federated Malay States) compared with the average for 1929. The impact of the depression can be further illustrated by examination of the main items of colonial government expenditure shown in Table 8.6. Debt servicing, pensions paid to retired British officials and expenditure on law and order could account together for as much as 40 per cent of government expenditure in some colonies, and administration costs absorbed at least a further one-third, much of it in salaries of British colonial officials. This left relatively small amounts for social services and even less for economic development. The mini-boom in world trade which occurred in 1937 lifted colonial government revenues. Public expenditure was generally above the predepression levels by 1938, except in the eastern colonies of Ceylon, Malaya and Mauritius. Some of the impact of reduced government outlays was offset by falls in the general price level (Britain’s retail prices fell by 15 per cent between 1927–9 and 1933). Nevertheless the world trade collapse and financial crisis resulted in significant falls in real living standards for most of the 1930s in the tropical colonies, some of the social and political consequences of which were evident by the late 1930s and are discussed in Chapter 9. By the mid-1930s colonial government services were reduced in terms of staff and expenditure to a point not experienced since the end of the First World War.<sup>37</sup> The Great Depression was transmitted to tropical primary producing and exporting countries by the collapse of prices paid for their exports. Britain’s tropical colonies—like most indebted primary exporters— responded to falling prices by raising the volume of produce exported. Although in the short run this reaction could cushion the fall in export earnings, it added to the world economy’s over-supply of foodstuffs and raw materials and eventually led to further price reductions. The pattern of price collapse varied between the main export commodities but generally the years of steepest descent were 1929 to 1934. Some price recovery occurred in the mid-1930s, usually peaking in 1937, but prices declined thereafter and were sluggish in 1938 and 1939. The capacity to increase output also varied: some export crops were newly established in the immediate pre-war or post-war period and production was expanding at the onset of the depression (e.g. cotton, sisal, and coffee); in other cases, the industry was a long-established one which was operating at near to full capacity by the late 1920s (e.g. sugar, tea, palm oil and copra). Table 8.5 Balance of public revenue and expenditure, selected colonies, 1929–38 (£000)
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td><td>1931</td><td>1932</td><td>1933</td><td>1934</td><td>1935</td><td>1936</td><td>1937</td><td>1938</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>-171</td><td>-197</td><td>-149</td><td>-109</td><td>-46</td><td>+5</td><td>+56</td><td>+165</td><td>+80</td><td>+127</td></tr><tr><td>Uganda</td><td>+76</td><td>-228</td><td>-52</td><td>+66</td><td>+74</td><td>+166</td><td>+127</td><td>+89</td><td>+219</td><td>-156</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td>-92</td><td>-354</td><td>-299</td><td>+36</td><td>-86</td><td>-151</td><td>+224</td><td>+176</td><td>+171</td><td>-133</td></tr><tr><td>North Rhodesia</td><td>+117</td><td>+125</td><td>+36</td><td>-177</td><td>+10</td><td>–20</td><td>+27</td><td>-24</td><td>+73</td><td>+176</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>-21</td><td>+14</td><td>-20</td><td>+25</td><td>+13</td><td>-11</td><td>+26</td><td>+41</td><td>+27</td><td>+32</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>464</td><td>-222</td><td>-540</td><td>-2</td><td>+372</td><td>+82</td><td>+41</td><td>-27</td><td>+175</td><td>+291</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>-245</td><td>-708</td><td>–1330</td><td>+1</td><td>-149</td><td>+124</td><td></td><td>+239+1716</td><td>+1592</td><td>-655</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylonª</td><td>-1356</td><td>+49</td><td>+126</td><td></td><td>–902 +1005</td><td>+800</td><td>-621</td><td>-523</td><td>+780</td><td>-149</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritiush</td><td>-271</td><td>-82</td><td>-341</td><td></td><td>416+1229</td><td>+145</td><td>+173</td><td>+49</td><td>+31</td><td>+406</td></tr><tr><td>Malaya</td><td>-334</td><td>-1973</td><td>-1145</td><td>-1158</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>-357+1367+1312+1795</td><td>+1134</td><td>-128</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>-17</td><td>-125</td><td>–50</td><td>+87</td><td>-149</td><td>+4</td><td>-57</td><td>+6</td><td>+205</td><td>+74</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>+257</td><td>+57</td><td>-451</td><td>-4</td><td>+1</td><td>+4</td><td>+2</td><td>+706</td><td>+393</td><td>+253</td></tr><tr><td>British Guiana</td><td>+126</td><td>-80</td><td>-159</td><td>-16</td><td>+19</td><td>+66</td><td>-39</td><td>+10</td><td>–30</td><td>-10</td></tr></table> <sup>a</sup> Year ended 30 September; <sup>b</sup> Year ended 30 June; <sup>c</sup> Federated Malay States. Excess of ordinary revenue over ordinary recurrent expenditure shown +. Source: Statistical Abstract for the British Empire, Nos. 68, 69. Table 8.6 Analysis of recurrent public expenditure, selected colonies, 1934.
<table><tr><td colspan="7">Object of expenditure (% of total)</td></tr><tr><td>Colony</td><td>Public debt Pensions charges</td><td></td><td>Law &amp; orderª</td><td>Sociat servicesh</td><td>Economic services</td><td>Adınini- stration d</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>9.2</td><td>8.6</td><td>4.4</td><td>21.9</td><td>20.7</td><td>35.2</td></tr><tr><td>Uganda</td><td>8.3</td><td>6.2</td><td>4.0</td><td>25.5</td><td>16.8</td><td>39.2</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td>6.2</td><td>3.9</td><td>4.9</td><td>16.9</td><td>10.8</td><td>57.3</td></tr><tr><td>N. Rhodesia</td><td>12.8</td><td>10.2</td><td>3.5</td><td>20.8</td><td>10.2</td><td>42.5</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>15.2</td><td>8.6</td><td>4.7</td><td>16.8</td><td>14.5</td><td>40.2</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>16.8</td><td>9.9</td><td>6.8</td><td>16.6</td><td>16.4</td><td>33.5</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>4.3</td><td>10.4</td><td>3.9</td><td>25.8</td><td>11.6</td><td>44.0</td></tr><tr><td>Sierra Leone</td><td>7.6</td><td>9.6</td><td>6.6</td><td>19.9</td><td>7.2</td><td>49.1</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>13.4</td><td>11.4</td><td>2.4</td><td>32.2</td><td>12.4</td><td>28.2</td></tr><tr><td>Fed. Malay States</td><td>15.4</td><td>16.0</td><td>2.7</td><td>18.4</td><td>11.6</td><td>35.9</td></tr><tr><td>Straits</td><td>0.1</td><td>7.6</td><td>13.4</td><td>28.5</td><td>13.7</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Settlements</td><td></td><td>6.9</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>36.7</td></tr><tr><td>Hong Kong</td><td>4.8</td><td></td><td>17.0</td><td>25.5</td><td>8.7</td><td>37.1</td></tr><tr><td>Barbados</td><td>3.9</td><td>7.9</td><td>1.0</td><td>32.3</td><td>8.4</td><td>46.5</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Guiana</td><td>26.6</td><td>9.9</td><td>0.5</td><td>28.8</td><td>1.3</td><td>32.9</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Honduras</td><td>23.1</td><td>6.9</td><td>0.5</td><td>19.8</td><td>5.8</td><td>43.9</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>5.1</td><td>1.8</td><td>0.9</td><td>32.5</td><td>4.9</td><td>51.8</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>10.7</td><td>7.8</td><td>0.3</td><td>37.8</td><td>14.3</td><td>29.1</td></tr><tr><td>Antigua</td><td>4.8</td><td>9.9</td><td>0.5</td><td>45.6</td><td>9.7</td><td>29.5</td></tr><tr><td>St Kis</td><td>3.7</td><td>9.7</td><td>0.7</td><td>47.2</td><td>8.7</td><td>30.4</td></tr><tr><td>Fiji</td><td>13.6</td><td>5.7</td><td>0.7</td><td>27.7</td><td>12.7</td><td>39.6</td></tr></table> <sup>a</sup> Defence, police, prisons, judiciary; <sup>b</sup>medical, public health, education, labour, food subsidies, housing; cAgriculture, veterinary, forestry, transport and communications, public works, mines, water supply and irrigation, electricity; dincludes self-balancing departments and miscellaneous. Export earnings, shown in Table 8.7, plummeted from over £207 million (for the tropical colonial empire as a whole) in 1929 to £155 million in 1930, £104 million in 1931 and to a low point of £93 million in 1932. Recovery to a pre-1929 level of export earnings took until 1937 to achieve and was followed by a further fall in 1938. The impact of the depression on the direction of exports from the colonial empire was fairly slight: the average proportion consigned to the UK in 1927–9 was 25 per cent, in 1937–9 it was 29.6 per cent. This shift was presumably the result of tariff preferences given in the British market to empire produce after the Ottawa Conference in 1932, together with the breakdown of the international monetary system and emergence of the Sterling Area of which the colonial empire was part. However, the level of tariff preference for most tropical products was small and in some cases (e.g. cocoa) the UK market could not absorb all of the colonial empire’s exports and in such instances the effect of the preference was negligible. An important consequence of the drive to expand exports in the tropical colonies from the late nineteenth century was the rising volume of imports. By 1929 the tropical colonial economies were far more dependent upon imported goods (about one quarter of which came from Britain) than at the beginning of the century. Total imports were valued at over £200 million a year from 1925 to 1929. As can be seen from Table 8.7, with the decline of export earnings after 1929, most colonies experienced balance of trade deficits until imports could be curtailed and export earnings increased to produce export surpluses again from 1933. For the rest of the decade colonies required large export surpluses in order to service their foreign debt to Britain and imports continued to be low compared with the mid-1920s.<sup>38</sup> To the extent that colonial imports consisted of mass consumer goods, which predominately they did, constriction of imports resulted in a decline in living standards. Imported capital goods were also limited, which made it more difficult in the later 1930s to develop new areas of economic growth (in particular import-substituting industry) which required such imports to set up or expand. Thus the burden of external debt which forced colonies to try to earn large export surpluses in a world economy which was virtually static was felt not only through its depressive effects on material living standards, but also by the constraints it imposed on structural diversification. The price collapse in the international economy in the early 1930s affected primary products to a greater degree than manufactured and capital goods. As the tropical colonies were entirely reliant on primary produce exports and generally their imports consisted largely of secondary goods (but not wholly, for some colonies imported large quantities of basic foodstuffs, especially rice), a deterioration in their terms of trade was unavoidable. Table 8.8 presents an estimate of the terms of trade of eight colonies which between them accounted for about 90 per cent of the trade of the tropical colonial empire. The experience of each colony was different and since the import mix was diverse while the range of exports quite small (and statistics relating to the former were less comprehensive than those for exports), these ‘terms of trade’ calculations must be regarded only as an indication of the relative price movements.<sup>39</sup> Generally the price fall for primary products preceded that of manufactures so that terms of trade moved swiftly down in 1930 to 1933 in most cases. Once primary prices levelled out an improvement in the terms of trade was experienced as cheaper imports began to arrive. Import prices also levelled out in the mid-1930s and as export prices rose in the brief boom of 1936–7, the terms of trade continued to rise; this improvement was ended in 1938, while in 1939 some export prices were stimulated by the onset of the war in Europe. <sub>rts,</sub> <sub>exports</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>balanc</sub><sup>e</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>trade,</sup> <sup>selected</sup> <sup>colonies,</sup> <sup>19</sup>
<table><tr><td>Colonies</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td><td>1931</td><td>1932</td><td>1933</td><td>1934</td><td>1935</td><td>1936</td><td>1937</td><td>1938</td><td>1939</td></tr><tr><td>Imports</td></tr><tr><td>West Africa</td><td>25106</td><td>22987</td><td>12184</td><td>14057</td><td>12688</td><td>10857</td><td>16790</td><td>21240</td><td>29328</td><td>17933</td><td>15658</td></tr><tr><td>East Africa</td><td>15610</td><td>13380</td><td>9235</td><td>7610</td><td>7576</td><td>8633</td><td>10427</td><td>11292</td><td>14879</td><td>13221</td><td>12532</td></tr><tr><td>Centrat Africa</td><td>4398</td><td>5717</td><td>6138</td><td>2669</td><td>2602</td><td>3445</td><td>3589</td><td>3009</td><td>4798</td><td>6001</td><td>5406</td></tr><tr><td>Eastern</td><td>137562</td><td>109102</td><td>72295</td><td>61222</td><td>56870</td><td>72786</td><td>74209</td><td>77646</td><td>100876</td><td>84551</td><td>93563</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbeat</td><td>18248</td><td>16143</td><td>12901</td><td>12422</td><td>12280</td><td>13287</td><td>13599</td><td>15400</td><td>19064</td><td>18898</td><td>19189</td></tr><tr><td>Pacifc</td><td>1454</td><td>1219</td><td>926</td><td>855</td><td>929</td><td>887</td><td>1121</td><td>1347</td><td>1576</td><td>1504</td><td>1464</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>202378</td><td>168548</td><td>113679</td><td>98835</td><td>92945</td><td>109895</td><td>119735</td><td>129934</td><td>170034</td><td>142108</td><td>147812</td></tr><tr><td>Exports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>West Africa</td><td>31653</td><td>26034</td><td>16535</td><td>17123</td><td>15868</td><td>15274</td><td>19756</td><td>26553</td><td>34734</td><td>18403</td><td>19251</td></tr><tr><td>East Africa</td><td>14471</td><td>11101</td><td>8334</td><td>8625</td><td>10135</td><td>10143</td><td>12319</td><td>14966</td><td>16602</td><td>13958</td><td>14120</td></tr><tr><td>Central Africa</td><td>1522</td><td>1550</td><td>1686</td><td>3313</td><td>4245</td><td>5167</td><td>5524</td><td>6821</td><td>12895</td><td>11092</td><td>11044</td></tr><tr><td>Eastetn</td><td>141728</td><td>101945</td><td>65135</td><td>52967</td><td>59996</td><td>84030</td><td>86563</td><td>94712</td><td>131352</td><td>89255</td><td>112130</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbean</td><td>15824</td><td>13381</td><td>10983</td><td>11056</td><td>9820</td><td>11038</td><td>11705</td><td>1313657</td><td>15877</td><td>16057</td><td>16005</td></tr><tr><td>Pacifc</td><td>1708</td><td>1452</td><td>997</td><td>1662</td><td>1438</td><td>1270</td><td>1549</td><td>1757</td><td>1822</td><td>1645</td><td>1620</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>206906</td><td>155463</td><td>103670</td><td>94746</td><td>101502</td><td>126922</td><td>137416</td><td>158466</td><td>213282</td><td>150410</td><td>174170</td></tr><tr><td>Balance</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>West Africa</td><td>6547</td><td>3047</td><td>4351</td><td>3066</td><td>3180</td><td>4417</td><td>2966</td><td>5313</td><td>5406</td><td>470</td><td>3793</td></tr><tr><td>East Africa</td><td>-1139</td><td>-2279</td><td>-901</td><td>1015</td><td>2559</td><td>1510</td><td>1892</td><td>3674</td><td>1723</td><td>737</td><td>1588</td></tr><tr><td>Central Africa</td><td>-2876</td><td>4167</td><td>-4452</td><td>644</td><td>1643</td><td>1722</td><td>1935</td><td>3812</td><td>8097</td><td>5091</td><td>5638</td></tr><tr><td>Eastern</td><td>4166</td><td>-7157</td><td>-7160</td><td>-8255</td><td>3126</td><td>11244</td><td>12354</td><td>17066</td><td>30476</td><td>4704</td><td>18567</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbean</td><td>-2424</td><td>-2762</td><td>-1918</td><td>-1366</td><td>-2460</td><td>-2249</td><td>-1894</td><td>-1743</td><td>-3187</td><td>-2841</td><td>-3184</td></tr><tr><td>Pacific</td><td>254</td><td>233</td><td>71</td><td>807</td><td>509</td><td>383</td><td>428</td><td>410</td><td>246</td><td>141</td><td>156</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>4528</td><td>-13085</td><td>-10009</td><td>-4089</td><td>8557</td><td>17027</td><td>17681</td><td>28532</td><td>42761</td><td>8302</td><td>26358</td></tr></table> Import volumes also declined in the depression, particularly of manufactured goods such as cotton textiles, but also of basic foodstuffs. There was a tendency for cheaper, lower quality imports to be substituted for the more expensive, higher quality ones: dried and salted food replaced canned food, rubber and canvas footwear replaced leather footwear, rice replaced flour and so on. Colonies which normally imported large quantities of basic foodstuffs found their import bill declined dramatically as both prices and volumes fell: this largely explains the less adverse terms of trade movements in the cases of Mauritius, Ceylon and the West Indies. Malaya experienced very volatile export prices as rubber and, (to a lesser extent), tin prices crashed in the early 1930s before recovering under the influence of government pricesupport schemes.<sup>40</sup> Malaya benefited too from cheaper rice imports from 1931 on. The tropical African colonies were probably the most adversely affected in international trade by the 1930s depression. Coffee, cotton, cocoa, sisal, palm oil and palm kernels and groundnuts generally fell in price by over 50 per cent in the first half of the decade and were not ‘strategic’ to the rearmament programmes to enjoy rising demand in the late 1930s. Some of these export crops were ones which had expanded rapidly in the 1920s and in which indigenous and expatriate capital and enterprise had been heavily invested. Their anticipated expansion also underpinned much of the public expenditure on railways, roads and harbours after the First World War. In contrast to the Eastern and West Indian colonies, the tropical African ones imported a relatively high proportion of manufactures and did not benefit to the same extent therefore from cheaper basic foodstuffs. <sub>r</sub>m<sup>s</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>trade,</sup> <sup>selected</sup> <sup>colonies,</sup> <sup>1929–39</sup> <sup>(19</sup>
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td></td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td><td>1931</td><td>1932</td><td>1933</td><td>1934</td><td>1935</td><td>1936</td><td>1937</td><td>1938</td><td>1939</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>E 1 T</td><td>84.9 96.2 88</td><td>77.0 87.6 88</td><td>48.4 79.0 61</td><td>53.0 76.2 70</td><td>44.8 72.8 62</td><td>37.7 70.9 53</td><td>42.6 73.5 58</td><td>51.9 69.8 74</td><td>87.0 79.6 109</td><td>42.0 78.9 53</td><td>42.3 81.0 52</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>E 1 T E</td><td>95.0 105.2 90 104.0</td><td>78.8 94.2 84 78.3</td><td>48.0 80.7 60 57.9</td><td>50.0 76.2 66 57.2</td><td>47.9 73.8 65</td><td>43.2 67.8 64 57.8</td><td>52.7 71.3 74 58.9</td><td>59.4 71.6 83 58.9</td><td>69.5 80.0 87 70.2</td><td>43.6 80.3 54</td><td>43.0 78.6 55</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya-Uganda</td><td>I T E</td><td>99.4 105 87.2</td><td>94.4 83 65.4</td><td>76.1 76 60.3</td><td>72.8 79 65.4</td><td>55.8 67.8 82 66.7</td><td>67.5 86 64.1</td><td>69.4 85 56.4</td><td>67.7 87 55.1</td><td>81.3 86 55.1</td><td>51.6 82.8 62 55.1</td><td>50.9 81.3 63 61.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>【 T E</td><td>95.4 91 86.3</td><td>83.6 78 71.3</td><td>62.1 97 50.8</td><td>59.9 109 42.8</td><td>52.2 128 48.7</td><td>52.8 12] 60.4</td><td>54.0 104 66.4</td><td>54.9 100 72.8</td><td>57.2 96 81.5</td><td>61.6 89 69.4</td><td>58.7 105 81.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>【 T E</td><td>97.4 91 45.9</td><td>80.5 78 58.0</td><td>65.8 97 35.6</td><td>59.8 109 32.2</td><td>55.3 128 43.1</td><td>57.7 121 63.4</td><td>58.9 104 84.0</td><td>55.6 100 74.8</td><td>55.8 96 91.4</td><td>57.8 89 66.9</td><td>56.6 105 85.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1 T E</td><td>96.6 48 101.0</td><td>92.6 63 80.6</td><td>76.4 47 68.7</td><td>72.2 45 72.4</td><td>61.8 70 73.9</td><td>58.0 109 80.3</td><td>60.7 138 81.6</td><td>60.8 123 79.6</td><td>60.9 150 82.9</td><td>60.5 111 91.3</td><td>58.4 146 98.2</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>1 T</td><td>99.0 102</td><td>92.4 97 79.6</td><td>79.2 87 55.8</td><td>75.7 96</td><td>67.2 110</td><td>64.6 124</td><td>67.5 121</td><td>67.2 118</td><td>73.1 113</td><td>72.7 126</td><td>70.1 140</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>E I T</td><td>84.3 98.3 86</td><td>94.3 85</td><td>77.1 72</td><td>58.4 74.5 78</td><td>55.8 67.0 83</td><td>61.5 63.8 96</td><td>53.7 65.4 82</td><td>61.8 66.5 93</td><td>72.3 75.8 95</td><td>57.2 73.0 78</td><td>65.4 73.1 90</td></tr></table> <sub>ed</sub> <sub>index</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>u</sub>n<sup>it</sup> <sup>value</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>principa</sup> <sub>d</sub> <sub>index</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>u</sub>n<sup>it</sup> <sup>value</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>principal</sup> <sub>s</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>trade</sub>: E <sup>divided</sup> <sup>by</sup> <sup>I</sup> <sub>atistical</sub> A<sup>bstract</sup> <sup>for</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>British</sup> <sup>Empire,</sup> Attempts by Britain to exclude Japanese competition in manufactures from these colonies also had the effect of keeping manufactures import prices higher than elsewhere.<sup>41</sup> The African colonies revealed most acutely the problems which arose from the international division of labour at a time of widespread trade contraction. The depression also highlighted the narrow range of exports of the tropical colonies. In many cases the range was narrower by the end of the 1930s than in the pre-war or 1920s periods, as shown in Table 8.9: this was true of Kenya—Uganda, Tanganyika, Northern Rhodesia, Nyasaland, the Gold Coast, Ceylon, Malaya, Mauritius, Barbados, Jamaica, British Guiana and British Honduras. Despite the development of new cash crops and mineral exports, the export base remained narrow: the first three export commodities by value accounted for over 70 per cent of total export earnings in all the colonies included in Table 8.9 (except Nigeria) and as much as 98 per cent in several instances. This represented a degree of vulnerability to the vagaries of the international economy which had become a structural feature of tropical colonial economies by the Second World War and was one which would prove difficult to alter substantially. By the end of the 1930s, then, a severe economic crisis had developed in Britain’s tropical colonies. Some attempt had been made to follow the philosophy of the Joseph Chamberlain model of developing the ‘Great Estate’ but it was predicated on a continuing expansion of the world economy and of Britain’s place within it. When the international economy faltered in the mid-1920s and collapsed altogether in the Great Depression in the 1930s it left the very open colonial economies to varying degrees depressed, debt-ridden and disillusioned. The Great Depression weakened Britain’s relationship with its tropical colonies and created a growing recognition of a specific ‘colonial problem’ and of a need for colonial reform. It is to these aspects that we turn now. <table><tr><td colspan="8">Table 8.9 The three principal exports of selected colonies as a percentage of all exports of domestic produce, 1899–1901, 1909–11, 1921–3 and 1934–8</td></tr><tr><td>Colony</td><td>1899-1901a</td><td></td><td>1909-11</td><td></td><td>1921-3</td><td></td><td>1934–8</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>Rubber</td><td>39.6</td><td>Cocoa Gold</td><td>37.9 33.2</td><td>Cocoa</td><td>77.5 Cocoa</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Palm oil Palm kernels</td><td>28.0</td><td></td><td>Gold Kola</td><td>11.6</td><td>Gold</td><td>29.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>11.8</td><td>Rubber</td><td>9.8 Total</td><td>4.9 77.5</td><td>Manganese</td><td>6.4 92.1</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeriab</td><td>Total</td><td>79.4</td><td>Total</td><td>80.9</td><td>33.9</td><td>Total</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>51.7</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>49.2</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>21.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Palm oil</td><td>23.8</td><td>Palm oil</td><td>35.2</td><td>Palm oil</td><td>26.5 Groundnuts</td><td>19.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rubber</td><td>9.4</td><td>Rubber</td><td>4.3</td><td>Tin ore</td><td>10.9 Cocoa</td><td>16.1</td></tr><tr><td>Sierra Leone</td><td>Total</td><td>84.9</td><td>Total</td><td>88.7</td><td>Total</td><td>71.3 Total</td><td>57.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>55.8</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>65.3</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>68.6 Diamonds 20.2</td><td>36.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Kola</td><td>21.5</td><td>Kola</td><td>19.8 Kola</td><td></td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>35.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rubber Total</td><td>8.9</td><td>Palm oil</td><td>7.2 Palm oil Total</td><td></td><td>Iron ore</td><td>20.3 92.8</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya-Ugandac</td><td></td><td>86.2</td><td>Total</td><td>92.3</td><td></td><td>93.8 Total</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ivory Rubber</td><td>59.8 11.8</td><td>Cotton Hides</td><td>33.2 17.3</td><td>Cotton</td><td>41.6 Cotton 11.6</td><td>47.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Hides</td><td>7.6</td><td></td><td>Coffee 8.9 Sisal</td><td></td><td>Coffee 5.8 Sisal</td><td>15.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>78.6</td><td>Ivory</td><td>59.4 Total</td><td></td><td>Total</td><td>7.0 69.2</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td></td><td></td><td>Total</td><td></td><td>Hemp</td><td>59.0 Sisal</td><td>43.2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a, n.a.</td><td>n.a. n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a. n.a.</td><td>Groundnuts</td><td>22.1 14.7</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>n.a.</td><td></td><td>π.a. n.a. n.a.</td><td></td><td>Coffee</td><td>14.2</td><td>Cotton Coffee</td><td>14.8 12.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>n.a. n.a.</td><td></td><td>n.a. Total</td><td>51.0</td><td>Total</td><td>70.6</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>n.a. Coffee</td><td>76.9</td><td>Cotton</td><td>n.a. 29.0</td><td></td><td>71.9</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rubber</td><td>17.5</td><td>Tobacco</td><td>21.6</td><td>Tobacco</td><td>Tobacco 18.6</td><td>47.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Cotton Tea</td><td></td><td>Tea Cotton</td><td>34.4 15.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ivory Total</td><td>2.9 97.3</td><td>Coffee</td><td>11.1</td><td></td><td>5.2 Total</td><td>97.8</td></tr><tr><td>N. Rhodesiad</td><td></td><td></td><td>Total</td><td>61.7</td><td>Total</td><td>96.2</td><td>87.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Copper Cattle</td><td>43.6 23.3</td><td>Lead Cattle</td><td>57.8 Copper 13.3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Zinc</td><td>3.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a. n.a.</td><td>n.a. n.a.</td><td>Maize Total</td><td>5.1 72.0</td><td>Tobacco Total</td><td>9.2 Cobalt 80.3 Total</td><td>3.4 94.6</td></tr></table> <sub>le</sub> <sub>8.</sub>9 <sup>(continu</sup>
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td colspan="2">1899–1901ª</td><td colspan="2">1909-11</td><td colspan="2">1921–3</td><td colspan="2">1934–8</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritius</td><td>Sugat</td><td>92.1</td><td>Sugar</td><td>96.1</td><td>Sugar</td><td>99.1</td><td>Sugar</td><td>97.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Alõe fibre</td><td>2.2</td><td>Aloe fibre</td><td>0.2</td><td>Aloe fibre</td><td>0.2</td><td>Alõe fibre</td><td>0.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Molasses</td><td>1.0</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n1.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Rum</td><td>0.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>95.3</td><td>Total</td><td>97.7</td><td>Total</td><td>99.3</td><td>Total</td><td>98.2</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>Tea</td><td>54.6</td><td>Tea</td><td>51.6</td><td>Tea</td><td>50.8</td><td>Tea</td><td>61.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Plumbago</td><td>14.8</td><td>Rubber</td><td>11.6</td><td>Rubber</td><td>20.9</td><td>Rubber</td><td>20.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Copra</td><td>4.2</td><td>Coconut oil</td><td>9.2</td><td>Coconut oil</td><td>8.6</td><td>Coconut oil</td><td>5.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>73.6</td><td>Total</td><td>72.4</td><td>Total</td><td>80.3</td><td>Total</td><td>86.9</td></tr><tr><td>Malayae</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Tin</td><td>62.3</td><td>Rubber</td><td>56.0</td><td>Rubber</td><td>48.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>t.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Rubber</td><td>31.8</td><td>Tin</td><td>45.4</td><td>Tin</td><td>28.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Copra</td><td>1.1</td><td>Copra</td><td>5.4</td><td>Copra</td><td>3.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Total</td><td>95.2</td><td>Total</td><td>96.8</td><td>Total</td><td>79.8</td></tr><tr><td>Fiji</td><td>n.a.</td><td>t.a.</td><td>Sugar</td><td>64.5</td><td>Sugar</td><td>75.2</td><td>Sugar</td><td>73.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Copra</td><td>23.6</td><td>Copra</td><td>18.8</td><td>Copra</td><td>16.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Bananas</td><td>9.2</td><td>Bañanas</td><td>3.7</td><td>Bananas</td><td>4.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Total</td><td>97.3</td><td>Total</td><td>97.7</td><td>Total</td><td>94.6</td></tr><tr><td>Barbardos</td><td>Sugar</td><td>59.6</td><td>Molasses</td><td>48.9</td><td>Sugar</td><td>58.5</td><td>Sugar</td><td>54.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Molasses</td><td>15.5</td><td>Sugar</td><td>40.5</td><td>Molasses</td><td>36.4</td><td>Molasses</td><td>43.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Fish</td><td>2.5</td><td>Coiton</td><td>5.8</td><td>Cotton</td><td>1.6</td><td>Rum</td><td>0.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>77.6</td><td>Total</td><td>95.2</td><td>&#x27;Total</td><td>96.5</td><td>Total</td><td>98.1</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>Bananas</td><td>37.4</td><td>Bananas</td><td>38.9</td><td>Bananas</td><td>47.7</td><td>Bananas</td><td>56.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sugar</td><td>9.1</td><td>Sugar</td><td>8.1</td><td>Sugar</td><td>18.7</td><td>Sugar</td><td>17.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Coffee</td><td>8.3</td><td>Rum</td><td>5.9</td><td>Coffee</td><td>5.3</td><td>Rum</td><td>4.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>54.8</td><td>Total</td><td>52.9</td><td>&#x27;T&#x27;otal</td><td>71.7</td><td>Total</td><td>78.1</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>Gocoa</td><td>38.9</td><td>Cocoa</td><td>54.2</td><td>Cocoa</td><td>29.9</td><td>Petroleum</td><td>57.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sugar</td><td>23.7</td><td>Sugar</td><td>28.3</td><td>Sugar</td><td>31.7</td><td>Sugar</td><td>21.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Asphalt</td><td>6.7</td><td>Asphalt</td><td>8.2</td><td>Petroleum</td><td>12.5</td><td>Cocoa</td><td>10.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>69.3</td><td>Total</td><td>90.7</td><td>Total</td><td>74.1</td><td>Total</td><td>89.1</td></tr></table> <table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>1899-1901ª</td><td></td><td>1909-11</td><td></td><td>1921-3</td><td></td><td>19348</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">British Guiana</td><td>Sugar</td><td>72.9</td><td>Sugar</td><td>66.9</td><td>Sugar</td><td>59.4</td><td>Sugar</td><td>65.2</td></tr><tr><td>Rum</td><td>14.8</td><td>Gold</td><td>11.4</td><td>Diämonds</td><td>22.7</td><td>Bauxite</td><td>10.8</td></tr><tr><td>Cocoa</td><td>2.1</td><td>Gum</td><td>6.9</td><td>Gum</td><td>4.8</td><td>Rice</td><td>6.1</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>87.8</td><td>Total</td><td>75.2</td><td>Total</td><td>86.9</td><td>Total</td><td>82.1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="10">British Honduras</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td>Lumber</td><td>59.6</td><td>Lumber</td><td>39.2</td><td>Lumber</td><td>54.6</td><td>Lumber</td><td>51.8</td></tr><tr><td>Bananas</td><td>9.1</td><td>Chicle Gum</td><td>22.1</td><td>Chicle Gum</td><td>12.8</td><td>Bananas</td><td>16.8</td></tr><tr><td>Coconuts Total</td><td>3.0 71.7</td><td>Coconuts Total</td><td>10.7 72.0</td><td>Bananas Total</td><td>9.4 76.8</td><td>Chicle Gum Total</td><td>16.3 84.9</td></tr><tr><td colspan="10">a Total exports including bullion and coin; b Southern Nigeria only, 1900–1 and 1909–11; 1899–1901 East Africa Protectorate; 1910, 1911</td></tr><tr><td colspan="10">only; d 1910, 1911 only; e 1909–11 and 1921-3 Federated Malay States; 1934–8 British Malaya, estimated total exports of domestic produce; f 1900-2. Source: Statistical Abstract for the British Empire, No. 51, (1899–1913), No. 58 (1922–5), No. 68 (1929–38).</td></tr></table>