# The ‘colonial question’ and towards colonial reform, 1930–40 ## OTTAWA AND ITS AFTERMATH The commercial and financial collapse which overwhelmed the British economy in 1930 and 1931 led to two major breaks with past economic policy. In September 1931 a massive haemorrhage of the Bank of England’s gold and foreign exchange reserves caused the gold standard to be jettisoned and the pound to float: within three months it had lost 31 per cent of its gold value. In February 1932, the policy of free trade, which had been the cornerstone of British international commercial practice for at least 70 years, was abandoned as the new National government introduced a general 10 per cent import levy. The end of free trade meant that the government was at long last in a position to introduce a system of imperial tariff preference. The imperial economic conference, scheduled for Ottawa in July, was the venue for implementation of the long-held dream of the ‘imperial visionaries’ of an empire trade bloc.<sup>1</sup> For the tropical colonies, the Ottawa Agreement meant a greater access to the British market in return for greater penetration of British exports of manufactured goods in their markets. Britain was able to give preference to imports from its colonies by allowing them in free of duty while imposing an import duty on the same commodities from non-empire sources. In practice, the benefits to the colonies were insubstan-tial: the foreign product was usually subject to only a 10 per cent impost which in the international conditions of rapidly declining commodity prices in the early 1930s and world over-supply of these commodities, amounted to very little advantage for colonial producers at all. Moreover, in some commodities the colonies produced more than Britain consumed (even in normal times) and thus the preference had virtually no effect on the world price. For certain commodities Britain was not an important market, or not a market at all. In other cases, Britain did not give any preference because it would not impose an import duty on foreign raw materials such as cotton and petroleum oil. In any event, Britain’s demand for imports fell considerably in the depression (by 45 per cent in value and 13 per cent in volume between 1929 and 1933), so that even if the colonies’ share of the British market increased as a result of Ottawa (perhaps a doubtful proposition) it represented a slightly greater share of a smaller total. The main problem, as outlined in the previous chapter, was steeply declining world prices for tropical exports and the consequent severe deterioration in their terms of trade. The agreements made at Ottawa, however, did nothing to arrest the downward slide in prices and worsening terms of trade. The British government hoped to offset to some extent the decline in its export trade by expanding the share of British imports to the empire market, including the tropical colonies. Prior to the Ottawa Agreement most of Britain’s colonies did not include any large degree of imperial preference in their import tariff schedules. Only in the West Indies, Cyprus, Mauritius and Fiji was a significant degree of preference granted. As a result of Ottawa, the colonies were expected to introduce imperial preference on a wider range of imports and to increase the level of existing preferences. Some colonies did so, but the general application of preference in colonial tariff regimes was hindered by the fact that some colonies had few dutiable items (particularly the Straits Settlements and Malay States) and a number were prevented from implementing imperial preference by international treaties which forbade discrimination in their customs duties and which had been signed on their behalf by Britain during the heyday of free trade. Now such treaties were regarded as a nuisance. Nevertheless they prevented Nigeria, the Gold Coast, Kenya, Uganda, Nyasaland, Tanganyika and Zanzibar from reciprocating Britain’s concessions at Ottawa. Where preference was created it was usually achieved by increasing the level of duty on foreign imports rather than by reducing the tariff on British or empire products, which therefore did not make British goods any cheaper in the colonial markets. Following Ottawa, the degree of preference granted by those tropical colonies which were free to do so varied between 25 per cent and 50 per cent. The chief beneficiary of colonial preference was intended to be British textile exports which had lost much ground to Japan, but there were considerable obstacles to the adoption of discriminatory measures in the colonies against Japanese textile imports. Indeed, although Japan was the target of Britain’s efforts to secure a greater share of the colonial imported textile market for Lancashire, it was Indian textile exports which were the more effective competitor in the colonial empire, and India’s position was protected by the Ottawa Agreement.<sup>2</sup> To reinforce tariff preference, which was unlikely to be of much assistance to the British exporter, quotas on foreign textile imports to Britain’s colonies were introduced, except in those colonies which were prevented by international treaty from engaging in trade discrimination. In 1933 the possibility of denouncing the 1911 Anglo-Japanese Trade Treaty so as to be able to discriminate against Japan in colonial markets was canvassed among the colonial governors. Their replies were not at all encouraging from Lancashire’s point of view. Only in West Africa— where Japanese imports had only recently begun to penetrate and where Lancashire still dominated—was there any enthusiasm for anti-Japanese action: Sir Donald Cameron, governor of Nigeria, recommended that all Japanese goods should be prohibited from West Africa— ‘in the past the native of Nigeria has done quite well without cheap Japanese goods and can continue to do so’.<sup>3</sup> Other governors, however, were more concerned with the likely social and political consequences of denying the mass of the population access to low priced Japanese manufactures. The East African governors objected that discrimination against Japanese goods would increase the cost of living to ordinary people and lead to retaliation by Japan. In any case, they pointed out, it would be India rather than Britain which would be the major beneficiary of any reduction in Japanese imports.<sup>4</sup> The view from Singapore was similar: the governor of the Straits Settlements argued that anti-Japanese measures would hurt the poorer classes who could not afford the high priced British products and might provoke Japan to military reaction which in ‘the present desperate weakness of Singapore’ would be ‘extremely hazardous’. He concluded that ‘the fortunes of the Lancashire cotton industry, great though they are, should not be allowed to jeopardise the future of this Colony’.<sup>5</sup> ## The Manchester cotton manufacturers were not impressed: we can only view with dismay and despair the spectacle of our trade in our own Empire markets being allowed by our Government to pass to Japan whilst we are faced with the prospect of more mills being closed and the calamitous effects of still further unemployment. Other countries such as France use their possessions to keep their own industries alive.<sup>6</sup> By March 1934 it was recognised that an agreement with Japan was not possible and negotiations were formally ended. The Board of Trade then moved to introduce a quota system in the colonial empire to limit the volume of Japanese textile imports. East Africa was omitted because of the Congo Basin treaties, but all other colonies were instructed to prepare a quota system which would limit all foreign imports though ‘the system would in fact only operate to restrict Japanese imports’.<sup>7</sup> Some colonial governments objected: Malta, Cyprus, the Seychelles, Grenada, Barbados, Sierra Leone, the Federated Malay States, the Straits Settlements, Hong Kong, Mauritius and Ceylon. Only Hong Kong’s objection was sustained on account of its free-port status; the others were told to force the legislation through using the official majority in the legislative assembly or, where such a majority did not exist, as in Ceylon, orders-in-council of the British government. Ceylon was the most intransigent but, Cabinet noted, to acquiesce in refusal of Ceylon to pass effective legislation would mean that an impossible situation would be created both in this country and in all colonies where the same legislation has been passed and where the same arguments that Ministers have advanced can be used from the consumers’ point of view. Moreover, quota legislation has been carried by exercise of official majority in some colonies, e.g. Straits Settlements.<sup>8</sup> In the end, Britain agreed to impose a 10 per cent duty on imports into Britain of foreign soya beans, which competed with Ceylonese copra, in return for compliance with the quota regulations. The Colonial Office was aware that since empire oilseeds production exceeded British import requirements this would not actually assist Ceylon, but assumed the Ceylonese politicians would think it would.<sup>9</sup> The quota system continued in all colonies except those in East Africa and Hong Kong until the Second World War. By making the base period for calculation of the quota the years 1927–9, Japanese imports were curtailed. The shortage of Japanese goods, however, caused their price to the consumer to rise to close to that charged for the better quality British product, and colonial government revenue from import duties to be constricted. The main beneficiary of the quota system was not Lancashire since Indian competition proved to be far more damaging than Japanese, but those individuals or companies in the colonies fortunate enough to obtain an import licence for Japanese goods, and such importers were frequently British firms such as the United Africa Company or Jardine and Company. The Colonial Office conceded some time later that it had acted in a haphazard way and in panic. It was pointed out by the Colonial Office that the quotas have undoubtedly caused certain hardship to the poorer classes—and the poorer classes in some Dependencies are extremely poor—[and] in many places, not only in Ceylon but also, for example, in Malaya and Grenada, there has been considerable opposition to the scheme, which has only been carried through by the use of official majorities…. The Colonies have definitely made certain sacrifices for Lancashire and Lancashire has…reason to be grateful to them.<sup>10</sup> For the meagre gains Britain obtained from discriminatory duties and textile quotas there was a high price to pay in colonial resentment and opposition. The Economist commented in May 1934 the cheapness of Japanese cotton exports has been doing the world a considerable service by helping the consumer in tropical countries to maintain his purchases. But for the future it appears that among the benefits of British rule the doubtful privilege of buying expensively from Lancashire is to be forced upon the ‘native’ in many corners of the globe.<sup>11</sup> Thus whilst the Joseph Chamberlain concept of colonial economic development fell largely into abeyance during the 1930s depression, his aim of imperial tariff preference was achieved. However, it raised the question of whether the benefits were worth the cost. The share of Britain in the imports of the colonial empire increased during the 1930s from 26.1 per cent in 1927–9 to 28.1 per cent in 1936–8; similarly, the colonies sent a greater proportion of their exports to Britain: 24.9 per cent in 1927–9 rising to 28.5 per cent in 1936–8. The tropical colonies became a better market for British goods: they took 7.6 per cent at the earlier date, 8.6 per cent at the later; and as suppliers to Britain, the colonies improved their share from 4.9 per cent to 5.6 per cent.<sup>12</sup> Against these modest gains—if gains they really were and not simply a diversion of trade—had to be weighed not only the political implications of colonial opposition, but the reaction of some of the other major trading nations. Certainly Britain’s Ottawa system—together with restriction schemes for colonial production of rubber, tin and tea—was regarded with hostility by the United States and as a direct attack on their economic security by Germany and Japan. Britain was to a limited extent able to mollify American official opinion by signing the Anglo-American Trade Treaty in 1937 and modifying some of the more objectionable aspects of the Ottawa system. But the perceived threat which the system posed to Germany and Japan was not overcome. ## IMPERIAL AGGRESSION Access to colonial raw materials and colonial markets by non-colonial countries appeared to be made more difficult in the 1930s as Britain and other imperial nations tightened the economic ties between the metropolitan, centre and their tropical possessions. Germany, Italy and Japan took action which ostensibly at least was designed to redress these apparent disadvantages. In doing so, the ‘Colonial Problem’ of these years can be regarded as a contributory factor to the political instability which ultimately deteriorated into all-out war. Germany’s claims for the return of its colonies lost at the Versailles Peace Conference in 1919 were first raised by Hitler in March 1935.<sup>13</sup> Despite the emphasis given to the prestige value of colonies, Britain’s reaction was to try to diffuse the economic arguments surrounding the question of access to colonial raw materials. In September 1935, British Foreign Secretary Sir Samuel Hoare called on the League of Nations to establish an inquiry into the whole problem of raw materials in colonies. The League agreed to the appointment of a Committee for the Study of the Problem of Raw Materials which reported in September 1937.<sup>14</sup> Meanwhile, in March 1936, the colonial question was again brought up by Germany following its successful re-occupation of the Rhineland.<sup>15</sup> The British Foreign Office view was that concessions would have to be made to Germany somewhere, either in Europe or Africa, and of the two, commented Sir Robert Vansittart (permanent head of the Foreign Office), ‘I would prefer it to be in Africa, in regions with which we were well able to dispense.’<sup>16</sup> To determine which, if any, these regions might be, Cabinet set up a sub-committee of the Committee of Imperial Defence to consider the ‘Transfer of a Colonial Mandate or Mandates to Germany’. In a lengthy report the sub-committee discussed the question from every angle, but concluded that there was no British territory in Africa which could be given up and that asking the dominions to transfer their mandates to Germany was out of the question. Reflecting the Foreign Office view, however, the sub-committee also conceded that If, however, wider considerations are held to outweight these grave objections, and if the transfer of territory has to be considered, the least objectionable course would be for France to join with us in the surrender of the whole or part of Togoland or the Cameroons, or both.<sup>17</sup> The Colonial Office opposed any transfer of territory—it ‘would open the door to measures compelling the natives to produce which no decent person could contemplate without a shudder’<sup>18</sup> —but the Cabinet Committee on Foreign Policy remained divided. In November 1937 Lord Halifax (Lord President of the Council), following a meeting with Hilter at Berchtesgaden reported that the ‘colonial issue’ was now the only one which undermined Anglo-German relations.<sup>19</sup> Chamberlain seized on Halifax’s report to urge the idea of a repartition of tropical Africa whereby two lines should be drawn across Africa, the northern line running roughly to the south of the Sahara, the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, Abyssinia and Italian Somaliland, and the southern line running roughly to the south of Portuguese West Africa, the Belgian Congo, Tanganyika and Portuguese East Africa. There should be general agreement among the Powers concerned that all the territories between the two lines should be subjected to the proposed new rules and regulations covering the administration of the terri-tories…those Powers which now held the territory, together with Germany who would be given a territory of her own, would each administer their own territories subject to the over-riding rules and regulations laid down.<sup>20</sup> Chamberlain could see no reason why Germany should reject this offer: ‘In essential matters it met the German desiderata and gave them what they so strongly insisted upon, namely equality of opportunity and treatment.’<sup>21</sup> Chamberlain’s plan was put to the German government on 3 March 1938. By this time, however, the Austrian crisis was ‘boiling hard and on the point of boiling over’.<sup>22</sup> Hitler was not in the least interested in the colonial question and though he promised a reply to Chamberlain’s Africa plan, it never came.<sup>23</sup> Despite the Munich crisis in October 1938 and the German invasion of Czechoslovakia in March 1939, colonial revision was pursued by British proponents of appeasement up to July 1939.<sup>24</sup> According to Wolfe Schmokel, late in July 1939 Germany was offered a 25-year defence pact, ‘junior partnership’ in the Ottawa Agreements and the return of its colonies in stages. None of these later offers were taken up by Germany.<sup>25</sup> For four years the question of German colonial restitution was in the news in Britain and in the colonies. The fact that colonial revision did not occur was due not so much to considerations of trusteeship on Britain’s part (though moral repugnance was expressed in 1936 and 1937, it was noticeably muted in Cabinet committee in 1938 and 1939) but to the unwillingness of Germany to enter into negotiations for a general settlement in Europe. The prospect of a repartition of Africa or handing colonial territory to Germany did British prestige tremendous damage in Britain and in the colonies among those who looked to British rule for economic and social and eventually political progress. It may be that there was an element of bluff in both countries’ posturing on the ‘colonial question’, but this only served to keep the issue in the limelight and to tarnish Britain’s reputation in Africa and elsewhere.<sup>26</sup> In this atmosphere of uncertainty it was hardly surprising that confidence in British rule in the colonies was threatened, as the governor of Nigeria wrote to the secretary of state in April 1939: there are clear signs that a considerable section of the British public is rapidly awakening from the complacency, indeed the apathy, with which it has been accustomed to regard colonial problems, and is beginning to have an uneasy feeling that all is not as it should be and, in particular, that certain other powers have some justification for suggesting that they would have succeeded in doing more than we have done for the development of tropical Africa, had they been in a position to make the attempt.<sup>27</sup> One country which did make an attempt to become a major imperial power in tropical Africa was Italy, which invaded Ethiopia in 1935.<sup>28</sup> In May 1936—two months after Germany re-occupied the Rhineland— Addis Abbaba fell to Italian forces which had used air bombing and poison gas against a virtually unarmed population. In July the League of Nations dropped all sanctions against Italy as Britain and France acknowledged de facto recognition of Italy’s conquest<sup>29</sup> Britain formally recognised Italian possession and Mussolini as ‘Emperor of Abyssinia’ in November 1938.<sup>30</sup> There was little emphasis placed by Britain during the crisis on the impact the Italian conquest was likely to have on colonial opinion and even when this aspect was raised it was played down. Essentially the Abyssinian crisis was viewed from the perspective of European power politics.<sup>31</sup> Yet the invasion and violent conquest of Africa’s last independent state (as it was widely viewed) by Italy produced a rising tide of anger, resentment and disillusion throughout the non-white world. The historian of non-white reaction to the invasion, Monique Rubens, wrote: From the United States to Japan non-whites bitterly condemned Mussolini’s aggressions, writing letters of protest, forming ad hoc pro-Ethiopian committees, organizing mass demonstrations, collecting funds on Ethiopia’s behalf and offering her their military services.<sup>32</sup> The crisis had an impact on nationalist sentiment and anti-colonialism in East and West Africa, in Egypt, among colonial activists in London, and, perhaps most importantly, in the West Indies. In places where colonial nationalism was already well established—Egypt, the West Indies—the reaction was most visible, but, as Asante showed in the case of West Africa, even where an anti-colonial movement was only in its infancy, the crisis had the effect of raising political consciousness and undermining British (and Western) prestige.<sup>33</sup> Some people, previously supportive of British rule, found it incomprehensible that Britain would desert Ethiopia and do nothing effective to prevent its destruction.<sup>34</sup> In the West Indies the events of 1935–6 sparked off demonstrations and rallies which built up a momentum of their own during 1937, fuelled by the continuing depressed conditions in the West Indies, and exploded into the widespread labour riots of 1937 (Trinidad) and 1938 (Jamaica).<sup>35</sup> Even if the British government appreciated the far-reaching consequences in its tropical empire of letting such a symbol of African resistance to colonial aggrandisement as Ethiopia be overrun in an onslaught of nineteenth-century style militaristic imperialism, it is doubtful whether it would have acted any differently. But the full extent of colonial revulsion was not apparent until the disturbances of 1938 brought them to the fore, and by then the impetus given to colonial nationalism could not be rolled back. Japan’s launching of a full-scale war against China in July 1937 threatened the European colonial possessions in Southeast Asia. Alarm bells may have sounded in the various capitals, especially as Japan and Germany had signed the Anti-Comitern Pact in November 1936, but the policy of appeasement prevented any forceful action against Japan. Britain’s defence strategy rested on the concept of ‘Fortress Singapore’ and the fortification programme was considerably expanded in 1938 as the Japanese threat loomed. Singapore could be defended from the sea but not from the land. British Malaya was not capable of supporting Singapore: it lacked any secondary industry and was dependent on imported food (mainly rice from Burma) for two-thirds of its needs. The absence of secondary industry was partly a result of British imperial policy which sought to restrain the spread of manufacturing in the tropical colonies; the dependence on overseas food supplies was directly a result of the plantation, mining and cash-crop development policy of the previous decades. British capital had created a valuable prize for Japanese aggression but had not provided it with the means for defending itself. The only notable strategic assets of the Malay peninsula were its roads and railways, all of which led south to Singapore. The real blow to British prestige came, of course, with the retreat from the Japanese and the surrender of Singapore in February 1942, but the threat to Britain’s colonies in Southeast Asia from Japan in the 1930s created some feelings of unease about Britain’s ultimate ability to halt the Japanese expansion. Certainly it was clear that Britain had lost the economic and commercial war against Japanese goods and shipping companies and this inevitably led to some questioning, however hesitant, of Britain’s military strength. Malay nationalists felt that it was wise to be more active in the late 1930s, to counter Chinese nationalism in Malaya and to ensure that the British authorities did not forget their commitment to the Malay population. The small Indian community in Malaya was also more vocal now, since for some at least, Japanese imperialism might be a means to removing Britain’s grip from India itself.<sup>36</sup> ## TOWARDS REFORM OF COLONIAL POLICY Taken together, the German demands for colonial restitution, Italy’s conquest of Ethiopia and Japanese expansion in East Asia, posed a challenge to British imperialism which undermined confidence in Britain’s ability and willingness to protect its colonies. These events damaged the prestige upon which British rule in the colonies largely depended and in many of the tropical territories was a direct stimulus to nationalist sentiments and forces. If the apparent weakness of Britain in the face of imperial aggression provided the context for the development of the ‘colonial problem’, specific manifestations occurred in a series of outbreaks of discontent in the tropical colonies which revealed the extent to which the Great Depression had undermined standards of living amongst the mass of colonial inhabitants. The main outbreaks were in Northern Rhodesia, Mauritius, West Africa and the West Indies, and the reports of the commissions of inquiry which generally followed produced a mass of published evidence of the economic and social problems (including labour problems) which beset the tropical colonies in the 1930s. Strikes and rioting took place at three mines on the copperbelt in Northern Rhodesia in May 1935 following the Northern Rhodesian government’s decision to alter the method of assessing poll tax. As a result mine workers found their tax liability raised by between 20 per cent and 50 per cent without any commensurate increase in wage rates. Although this was the immediate cause of the strikes, a great many complaints were put to the commission of inquiry by workers concerning pay and conditions. At one of the mines, Luanshya, Northern Rhodesia police—some of whom ‘seemed to have lost their heads’ —opened fire on crowds of demonstrators, killing six miners and wounding 22 others.<sup>37</sup> The secretary of state’s adviser on labour affairs, Major Orde-Brown, also reported on labour conditions in Northern Rhodesia in 1938 and recommended further improvements be made to the migratory labour system.<sup>38</sup> In Mauritius in September 1938 there occurred a series of strikes in the sugar industry and in the docks which led to a state of emergency being declared and labour leaders deported.<sup>39</sup> In the West African colonies of the Gold Coast and Nigeria cocoa farmers protested the creation of a buying cartel by the leading European merchant firms by holding-up supplies of cocoa for six months. In its early stages the stoppage was accompanied by sporadic strikes by dock workers and transport workers.<sup>40</sup> The report of the commission of inquiry highlighted the marketing problems of small capitalist farmers who were engaged in supplying a cash crop to the international market which exhibited highly volatile price fluctuations.<sup>41</sup> In addition, the League of Nations instituted a number of investigations which were relevant to conditions in the British colonies: one on international access to colonial raw materials (already referred to) focussed attention on the exploitation of colonial economies by the industrial countries and raised doubts about the effectiveness of colonial trusteeship. In 1935 it published a report on nutrition and public health which was discussed in the General Assembly in September.<sup>42</sup> As a consequence of the publicity which this gave to the question of nutritional standards, the Colonial Office established its own inquiry in 1936 into ‘Nutrition in the Colonial Empire’, the results of which were published in 1939. This survey indicated serious deficiencies in the diets of tropical inhabitants: there are few of the constituents considered necessary in Europe for a nutritionally adequate diet which are generally available in sufficient quantities in the Colonial Empire…there are few parts of the Colonial Empire (or indeed of any tropical country) where the diet of the majority of the population is at present anything like sufficient for optimum nutrition…. Colonial diets are very often far below what is necessary for optimum nutrition. This must rest not only in the prevalence of specific deficiency diseases but in a great deal of illhealth, lowered resistance to other diseases, and a general impairment of well-being and efficiency. There is in our minds no doubt whatever that these conclusions are correct.<sup>43</sup> By the late 1930s the Permanent Mandates Commission of the League of Nations had recorded too many violations of the terms of the mandates (not to say the spirit) without having developed any effective means of countering such violations, for there to be any great confidence in the mandates system in its current form as a mechanism for protecting colonial indigenes from the ravages of the international economy.<sup>44</sup> By the end of the 1930s there was in Britain an outpouring of publications on the ‘colonial question’ in its various forms, not only from left-wing critics of imperialism, ranging from the Marxists George Padmore (How Britain Rules Africa, 1936) and Leonard Barnes (Empire or Democracy?, 1939) to the Fabians Arthur Creech Jones and Rita Hinden (Plan for Africa, 1941), but also from the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Raw Materials and Colonies, 1936, The Colonial Problem, 1937, Germany’s Claims to Colonies, 1938, 1939), under whose auspices Lord Hailey published An African Survey in 1938. There were also a number of popular tracts of which the most influential was W.M.Macmillan, Warning from the West Indies, 1938.<sup>45</sup> It was undoubtedly the West Indian riots in 1937 and 1938 which received the greatest publicity and which were most significant in fostering reform of colonial policy.<sup>46</sup> The extent of the violence and loss of life took the British press by surprise and led to a reaction which brought into question conditions throughout the colonial territories. The Times commented on 25 May and 11 June 1938: Long years of neglect by the Colonial Office, by local Governments and by employers have resulted in a state of things which is as dangerous as it is deplorable…. Everyone recognises that things cannot be allowed to remain as they are…. [11 June] Recent events in the West Indies have shaken the complacency with which most people in this country have been accustomed to regard the Colonial Empire…they have created an uneasy suspicion that economic and social improvements may be just as badly needed in other parts as well. For once there was a lively debate on a colonial issue in the House of Commons when the question of the West Indian rioting was aired on 14 June.<sup>47</sup> The government responded by establishing a Royal Commission to investigate economic, social, labour and political conditions in the West Indies. The commission’s findings were presented to the government in February 1940 but at that time were suppressed as being too critical of British colonial policies to be released in wartime. Part of its conclusions ran: The social services in the West Indies are all far from adequate for the needs of the population, partly as a result of defects of policy, and largely through the paucity of the funds at the disposal of the Colonial Governments which are in the main necessarily responsible for these services…The diets of the poorer people are often insufficient and usually ill-balanced, although nutritious foods of all kinds necessary for health can be produced without much difficulty in almost every West Indian Colony…. The reason for this appears to lie fundamentally in the divorce of the people from the land without the provision of compensatory arrangements which would help to ensure adequate food supplies for the dis-placed population…. Housing is generally deplorable, and sanitation primitive in the extreme. 48 It was hardly surprising that the full report was not published until 1945. Efforts to improve the economic and social aspects of British colonial policy were evident from 1934 when the Colonial Office undertook an internal reorganisation and created an economic department for the first time. Social problems became more evident later in the decade and in 1937 a social department was also established and a labour adviser appointed.<sup>49</sup> There was more emphasis placed on the need to tackle economic problems by the use of scientific research and on the need for personnel with technical expertise. The colonial Civil Service was overhauled in the later 1930s, a process which culminated in the establishment of a unified service in 1938. The need for better training of administrative staff was acknowledged, as was the requirement for more technical experts to be appointed, but financial constraints made implementation of these aims difficult.<sup>50</sup> The permanent heads and the deputy heads of the various departments in the Colonial Office in Whitehall were even encouraged to make visits to colonies by the end of the 1930s, though few actually did so prior to the war. The main target for reform in the later 1930s, however, was the Colonial Development Act 1929. By 1937 the Act was recognised as a failure, both in terms of its impact on British levels of unemployment and on colonial development. Many regarded the Act as too narrow in scope, insufficiently funded and as too amateur in its approach to the selection of development projects to be assisted. The inability of the Colonial Development Advisory Committee or the Colonial Office to initiate development proposals was viewed by some in the Colonial Office as a major obstacle to its effectiveness. At the end of June 1938, shortly after the dramatic events in the West Indies, the Colonial Office set up a departmental committee to examine the question of reform of the Colonial Development Act. The newly appointed secretary of state for the colonies, Malcolm MacDonald, intended to submit a proposal to Cabinet in the autumn for an enlargement of the Act. MacDonald’s view was that much more money must be spent on social services, the inadequacy of which had been exposed by the crisis in the West Indies. In addition: Colonial affairs had come into particular prominence lately and the eyes of the world were upon us. We had, he thought, reached a critical stage when we must either decide whether to carry on the present hand to mouth basis or to deal with the problem of colonial development in a much bigger way than heretofore. In his view the latter course was essential if our reputation as a Colonial power was not to suffer irretrievable damage. Apart from the question of political expediency there was moreover our responsibility as trustees for peoples of the Colonial Empire.<sup>51</sup> He envisaged an increase in the Colonial Development Fund from £1 million to $\mathcal { L } ^ { 7 }$ or $\mathcal { L } 8$ million per annum. The CDAC could remain, but its scope would have to be broadened to include social services, especially the provision of educational services. Since the colonial governments obviously required assistance in drawing up development schemes to submit to the CDAC, he suggested that a team of three or four officials could travel around the colonial empire helping colonial governments prepare development projects. There should be greater coordination between the Colonial Office, CDAC, and CEMB (Colonial Empire Marketing Board, established in 1937). Finally, ‘It was important that the taxpayer in this country should be assured that the Colonies were at any rate doing their best to stand on their own two feet.’<sup>52</sup> What of the 1929 Act’s aim of assisting the British economy? It was pointed out by Sir John Campbell, the secretary of state’s financial adviser who had attended many of the CDAC’s meetings over the previous eight years, that the committee had gradually watered down the principle that schemes it assisted should benefit the United Kingdom; nevertheless, it was a stipulation which had inhibited colonial governments in submitting proposals and this was one reason why actual expenditure from the Colonial Development Fund had tended to fall short of the annual grant to it from Parliament. MacDonald thought that the House of Commons would accept now that colonial development had its own merits, but that this principle would not entirely disappear: ‘and the House would want some economic justification for the schemes, in terms of benefits to the United Kingdom’.<sup>53</sup> In December 1938 the Colonial Office prepared an internal report on colonial development. In the aftermath of the Munich crisis it was recognised that there would be less money available for colonial aid as Britain would have to devote more of its national resources to rearmament. However, the Munich crisis also made Britain more vulnerable to international criticism as MacDonald pointed out: In future, criticism of Great Britain would be directed more and more against her management of the Colonial Empire, and it was essential to provide as little basis as possible for such criticism. It was an essential part of her defence policy that her reputation as a Colonial power should be unassailable.<sup>54</sup> The report prepared early in 1939 recommended an enlargement of CDAC to eight members (from its current five) and the establishment of an ad hoc committee within the Colonial Office to report on specialised topics. Senior Colonial Office staff would receive sabbatical leave of six or twelve months to visit colonies and colonial governments would be expected to draw up five-year plans of economic and social development. The CDAC would not be able to initiate schemes, but would be encouraged to submit proposals directly to the secretary of state. There should be greater provision of funds for recurrent costs of development projects (the heavy burden of which, it was suggested, was another reason colonial governments had been hesitant to make full use of the 1929 Act) and for social services. Those colonies receiving assistance from the Treasury would have the level of funding increased and its scope widened to include economic development and social services. Less poor colonies would receive assistance from the CDF for both capital and recurrent costs of development schemes, whilst the least poor colonies would be expected to find all their recurrent costs and meet some of the capital requirements: these colonies would examine their taxation systems to see if they could enhance their revenues. The new CDF would total $\mathcal { L } 3$ million per annum. The Colonial Development Act would be replaced by a new Act which would place much less emphasis on the benefits to British trade and industry (without omitting these altogether) and more emphasis on social services.<sup>55</sup> As a separate issue, Lord Hailey was asked to report on the provision of funds for scientific research into problems affecting the colonies, a problem which he highlighted in An African Survey. Hailey reported in May 1939 and recommended the establishment of a colonial research fund of £500,000 per annum to be administered by the Colonial Office. MacDonald preferred to put both requests to the Treasury as a single package but delayed doing so pending receipt of the recommendations of the West India Royal Commission expected in August or September. He had already told the Cabinet when it had set up the Royal Commission that the British government would be obliged to spend whatever amounts Lord Moyne recommended on rehabilitation and development in the West Indies, so Treasury would not be willing to consider a new CDF and Research Fund until it knew what the bill for the West Indies crisis was likely to be.<sup>56</sup> Meanwhile the Second World War broke out. The Treasury reaction to the onset of war as regards colonial aid was to suspend the CDF and cancel all grants-in-aid.<sup>57</sup> The Colonial Office took a more positive line. MacDonald met with his chief advisers on 4 September 1939, the day after Britain declared war. He argued that the war made it more vital, not less, that a reform of colonial development policy be pursued. Britain must be able to retain its reputation as a colonial power in case after the war there were moves for all colonies to be placed under international mandate. In his view, It was very important too that we should keep the colonies contented during the war, and he felt that a big scheme of colonial development, announced quite soon, would impress people here and abroad.<sup>58</sup> The recommendation of the Colonial Office Committee on Colonial Development had been that the CDF should be increased from $\mathcal { L } 1$ million to $\mathcal { L } 3$ million a year, but prior to the outbreak of the war MacDonald had contemplated asking for £10 million per annum, and he felt that this should be pursued in the new circumstances. The Colonial Office set about drafting a memorandum for the secretary of state to take to Cabinet. The draft put forward three reasons why a more forward colonial policy should now be undertaken: (1) A series of strikes and disturbances in the West Indies, Mauritius and elsewhere had brought home to people that all was not well in the economic or social field in these Colonies. This impression was confirmed by such reports as that of Major Orde Browne, my Labour Adviser, on his visit to the West Indies. Also, the Report of the Committee on Nutrition in the Colonial Empire brought home to people how low is the standard of living in almost every part of the Colonial Empire and how great the volume of preventable ill health and inefficiency. (2) Lord Hailey in his great ‘Survey of Africa’ published at the beginning of this year emphasised that ‘the present is possibly the most formative and therefore the most critical period of African history’. He brought home to the public the fact that the lines our policy took now might mould the future of the whole continent. (3) The ‘Colonial question’ as an international problem has focussed attention on Colonial matters. Foreign Governments have been quick to take note of talk about our ‘slum Empire’. They have alleged that we are neglecting our vast possessions, that they impose a strain on our resources that we are unable to stand and that there should be some redistribution of Colonial territories. These arguments, it may be noted, are not confined to our present enemy but were heard also from Italy and from Poland. In the face of the evidence which I have mentioned above, public opinion here and in the world generally, particularly perhaps in America, has felt that there was at least some justification for these suggestions.<sup>59</sup> With the outbreak of war it was important to press ahead with measures for colonial development in order to ‘keep the Colonial Empire contented’, to impress public opinion in Britain and in the United States and counter Nazi propaganda ‘that we neglect our Colonial Empire’. To guard against the possibility of internationalisation of colonies after the war ended, ‘we must be able to show that our record as a Colonial Power is so good that there can be no question of our being asked to surrender our colonies to anyone else’. A new fund, to be termed the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund, would be established with £10 million per annum for ten years, together with a Colonial Research Fund of £1 million per annum also for ten years. Advisory committees would be set up to advise the secretary of state on expenditure from both funds. In practice it was not expected that the full amounts of these funds would be spent in the first two or three years. The draft memorandum then outlined the chief problems encountered by the colonies in financing economic development projects. The principle that colonies should pay their own way had continued to be applied and had starved most colonies of sufficient development funds, despite the Colonial Development Act of 1929. The West Indies was the ‘depressed area’ of the colonial empire and presented particular problems which the Royal Commission would consider and which would inevitably involve additional expenditure by the British government. African colonies remained undeveloped and were unable to provide even basic social services to most of their inhabitants: Nigeria alone could easily absorb the £1 million per annum provided under the 1929 Act ‘if we are to do our duty by her’. In order to ensure that money provided by Britain was properly spent colonies would draw up ‘comprehensive plans’ for their economic and social development.<sup>60</sup> This memorandum was sent to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir John Simon, with an additional warning I think that in the present critical state of much colonial opinion trouble in some places is almost a certainty if we do not proceed with a policy of reasonable development of schemes for employment and social services…. I can think of few things what would have a more reassuring effect in the neutral world (and particularly in the United States), or that would add more to our moral prestige, than an announcement that despite the burdens that are put upon us by the necessity of fighting the war, we are going as far as conditions permit to find some additional money for promoting the welfare of the many million of peoples in the Colonial Empire for whom we are the trustees.<sup>61</sup> Despite these sentiments, the Treasury remained unimpressed: it complained about ‘welfare expenditure apparently without any end in view’ and thought the draft memorandum was ‘not very far short of amounting to saying that the only thing to do is to put the Colonies on the dole from henceforth and forever’.<sup>62</sup> Sir Henry Moore felt the Treasury officials had not grasped the essential point: Politically the whole point is that we should be able to make a big thing out of the ‘welfare’ side. If it is just going to be ‘development’ on the old lines it will look merely as if we are going to exploit the Colonies in order to get money to pay for the war!<sup>63</sup> Meetings took place in January and February 1940 between the Colonial Office and the Treasury in which the political arguments were accepted and a compromise was reached: the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund to be set up would be reduced from the proposed £10 million per annum to £5 million per annum, and the Research Fund from £1 million to £500,000 and in return the Treasury would somewhat expand the writing-off of colonial debt: as well as cancelling loans-in-aid and some CDF loans, the Treasury agreed to cancel railway loans made to Kenya, Uganda and Nyasaland and other loans made to Tanganyika.<sup>64</sup> The Colonial Office proposal was put to Cabinet in February 1940 with these terms and including a commitment of £1.4 million to fund the recommendations of the Moyne Royal Commission on the West Indies which were now to be published (though the report itself was not) ‘as an earnest of our good intentions’.<sup>65</sup> A central organisation for developing welfare services in the West Indies would be established under a comptroller with suitable staff, and an inspector general of agriculture for the West Indies would be appointed. In his statement to Cabinet, MacDonald argued that There was a widespread feeling that all was not well with the Colonial Empire. Some unfavourable comparisons were made between our own administration and that of other powers, and it was urged on all sides that bold measures of amelioration and reform were required.<sup>66</sup> The Colonial Development Act, he continued, had been much appreciated in the colonies and had made constructive progress, but it had been limited by the total amount it was able to spend and its somewhat confined scope, especially as regards education and general (as opposed to specific) public health schemes. The secretary of state could not help concluding that the standard of health services were ‘still such as to justify much of the criticism which has been made’. He did not think that the proposals should be suspended because of the war, on the contrary, there were additional reasons for going ahead. The expenditure of funds in the colonies would not involve the use of reserves of foreign exchange, and in the narrow sense such expenditure could be justified on its own merits. In addition, the social conditions in the colonies provided ammunition for Britain’s enemies, including those in neutral countries. Nor, he continued, although there is a ferment of loyalty in the Colonial Empire at present, can we overlook the possibility of trouble there later on…in particular there is serious danger of trouble in the West Indies if no action is taken to implement the recommendations of the Royal Commission.<sup>67</sup> Finally, MacDonald felt that when the war ended Britain must ensure that it was in a position to face any criticism which might be levelled at the administration of its colonial empire. Cabinet approved the proposal and a statement on colonial development and welfare was released in March 1940.<sup>68</sup> The Colonial Office achieved in wartime what was probably beyond its reach in peace time, that is, a greatly enlarged measure for colonial development and social services. Certainly more trenchant opposition by the Treasury could have been expected if the proposal had been put up in peacetime, outbursts of unrest and discontent in the colonies notwithstanding. By the outbreak of the war British colonial policy was in crisis and it was hardly to be expected that the mere passing of the Colonial Development and Welfare Bill in 1940 would of itself—whatever its propaganda merits—provide a lasting solution to the ‘colonial problem’. Lord Hailey argued in connection with the African colonies in 1938 that History will doubtless look back on this period as being the most critical stage of African development; errors that are made now for lack of the knowledge which well-considered scheme of special study might supply may well create situations which the future can rectify only at the cost of great effort and much human distress.<sup>69</sup> His recommendation for research funds was included in the 1940 Act and, as we shall see in the next chapter, Lord Hailey was now brought more directly into the process of planning for post-war colonial reconstruction. The reality of the tropical colonies in 1938 and 1939, however, was low and declining material standards of living, widespread abject poverty, stunted and distorted economic development and a serious burden of foreign debt. If 1938 had proved to be the final peacetime year of British rule over its tropical colonies (a not altogether inconceivable outcome during the war), its record as a colonial power would have been regarded as deplorable. History might then well have judged the more vociferous critics of British imperialism—such as Leonard Barnes, Alfred Viton, W.E. du Bois, George Padmore and Nnamdi Azikwe—to have been not far from the mark.<sup>70</sup> There was a noticeable air of failure in the contemporary assessments of the achievements of British colonial rule in the economic and social spheres by the end of the 1930s. It was this feeling of failure which was the real legacy of the ‘colonial question’ in the 1930s, and which also provided the context in which wartime aspirations for postwar colonial reconstruction and rehabilitation were made.