## The triumph of the Chamberlain view New directions in colonial economic development after the Second World War With the establishment of the Overseas Food Corporation and the Colonial Development Corporation in 1947 (Chapter 10), the British government for the first time moved into direct production of commodities in the tropical colonies. Faced with a severe shortage of primary products, the long-term nature of colonial development and welfare schemes and an apparent failure of private enterprise—whether expatriate or indigenous—to lift output quickly, the state became a producer in addition to carrying out its more traditional tasks of building infrastructure and providing economic and social services. ## THE TANGANYIKA GROUNDNUT SCHEME, 1946–54 Tanganyika bore the brunt of the ‘new colonialism’.<sup>1</sup> The Tanganyika Groundnut Scheme was a large-scale project which was intended to demonstrate what the state was capable of in tropical Africa when it harnessed modern Western technology and expertise. The scheme was designed not only to provide ‘the largest possible production of groundnuts in the shortest practicable period of time’, but also to be a pioneer in new ways of organising and managing production and to amount, indeed, to a revolution in economic development under tropical con-ditions.<sup>2</sup> The idea that groundnuts could be grown on a large scale in East Africa using mechanised methods of clearing and cultivation came initially from the managing director of the United Africa Co. (UAC), Frank Samuel. The UAC, a subsidiary of Unilever Ltd, was a British firm mainly concerned in the import and export trade of Britain’s West African colonies, although Unilever itself owned extensive oil-palm plantations in the Belgian Congo.<sup>3</sup> A proposal was drawn up with the Tanganyika Department of Agriculture and submitted to the Ministry of Food in March 1946. Cabinet authorised the despatch of a mission of three experts led by A.J.Wakefield, a former director of agriculture in Tanganyika, to East Africa to report on the feasibility of Samuel’s plan. They arrived in June and spent nine weeks touring in Tanganyika, Kenya and Northern Rhodesia examining possible sites suitable for mechanised groundnut growing. The Wakefield plan, presented to the Ministry of Food in September 1946, was an ambitious one. It entailed clearing and planting 107 farming units of 30,000 acres each (totalling 3.21 million acres) in three colonies over a five-year period, to produce 600,000 tons of groundnuts per year by the fifth year and with an eventual annual output of 800,000 tons. The cost was estimated at £24 million, and the annual saving to Britain on its food import bill at £10 million. In October 1946, the Wakefield Plan was accepted in principle by the Ministry of Food and in December the plan was adopted in full (with minor revisions) and published as a government white paper. It was recommended that work should begin at once on sites in Tanganyika with a view to clearing and planting 150,000 acres by the end of 1947 so that the first harvest would be available early in 1948: ‘Time…is of the essence and a delay of even a week or two in establishing new areas of oil seed production may mean missing the 1947 planting season.’<sup>4</sup> Both the Samuel and Wakefield proposals were based on the use of mechanised methods of clearing virgin bush, preparing the soil, planting and harvesting the groundnuts. As much machinery as possible—and as little labour—was to be used in all phases of production: heavy bulldozers, tractors, rooters, sowing machines and combine harvesters. Only mechanised production, it was argued, could produce the volume of groundnuts required to alleviate Britain’s severe oil and fat shortages. Peasant production was dismissed as being quite inadequate.<sup>5</sup> Indeed, argued Wakefield, one of the major benefits which would result from the scheme, apart from producing large quantities of groundnuts, would be to provide an alternative form of agricultural production which in time could be emulated by African farmers organised in large-scale cooperatives. The government agreed: By far the most important long-term advantage of the scheme from the African point of view, is…the revolution in agricultural technique which it represents…. The scheme is an example of the bold economic planning which is necessary to raise the standard of living of the African peasant, dependent as this must be for many years to come on agriculture, and based as it is on primitive methods of cultivation. It was true that the African inhabitants of Tanganyika would not consume any of the groundnuts (malnourished though they might be compared with those in Britain who were destined to consume them) but they needed to be given an ‘ocular demonstration’ of the superiority of large-scale mechanised agriculture: ‘It is the hope of His Majesty’s Government that the Groundnut Scheme will provide that ocular demonstration.’<sup>6</sup> The Wakefield mission recommended that the scheme be run by a government-owned corporation which would have considerable freedom of action in day-to-day operations. It also suggested that work begin in the southern province of Tanganyika, one of three areas in the colony identified as suitable for mechanised groundnut production. The reason for preferring the southern province was that it had better soil and more rainfall than the other two areas. The government agreed to establish a corporation to operate the scheme; in the meantime, to avoid delays, it asked the UAC to start the project acting as managing agents for the ministry of food. Although the scheme was one of far-reaching economic—and possibly social—development located in a trusteeship territory held by Britain under the auspices of the United Nations, the Colonial Office was excluded at the outset from responsibility for it. This decision emphasised the prime purpose of the scheme as winning food for Britain—as John Strachey, the new minister for Food, said to the men starting up the project— ‘On your success depends, more than on any other single factor, whether the harassed housewives of Britain get more margarine, cooking fat and soap, in the reasonably near future.’ Moreover, its ‘revolutionary’ approach to agriculture in Africa was one which it was felt the Colonial Office might regard as diametrically opposed to its traditional policy of building up peasant farming.<sup>7</sup> Strachey recognised that this scheme was risky, but, he asked his Cabinet colleagues in January 1947: What…are the risks of not undertaking this project? First: in 1950 we may have the same, or a lower, margarine ration than today. Or second: in 1950 we may have to spend so many dollars on buying fats from dollar sources that we shall have too few left to buy other indispensable dollar imports…a large enterprise of this type is the only way in which our Central African possessions can be rapidly developed, so that they may become an economic and strategic asset instead of a liability, as to a large extent they are now.<sup>8</sup> The UAC took on the job of managing agency—albeit, as they claimed later ‘most reluctantly’ and at no profit to themselves<sup>9</sup> —and an advance party of personnel arrived in Dar-es-Salaam in February 1947. The first area to be developed was at Kongwa in the central province, about 200 miles inland from Dar-es-Salaam and about twenty miles north of the central province railway. Kongwa was chosen in preference to the southern province because of its access to the railway and because the bush appeared to be easier to clear, as there were no trees. However, Kongwa was the least favoured of the three areas in terms of soil quality and adequate rainfall, so this decision by the managing agency was a significant one. Work at Kongwa was beset with difficulties from the outset. The equipment needed for clearing the bush and preparing the soil for planting was inadequate and nearly all of it was second-hand, purchased from military disposal dumps around the world. There were long delays in moving equipment through the congested lighterage port of Dar-es-Salaam and up to the Kongwa site. Once in operation frequent breakdowns were experienced so that only a small number of the bulldozers and heavy tractors available were in working order at any one time. These problems had not been foreseen, so to begin with there were no repair workshops and few spare parts. Bulldozers could flatten the bush but roots proved almost intractable. The rooting equipment, although specialised, was not designed for such conditions. It cleared the ground very slowly and was subject to damage. Progress was slow and fell well behind schedule. By the end of the year only 7,500 acres were ready to plant, in contrast to the target of 150,000 acres, and 3,400 acres of this consisted of grasslands that did not require clearing. Planting was also retarded because the US-designed machines were not suitable for African conditions. Mechanical harvesting fared no better: after the rains, the denuded ground baked hard in the sun and proved too difficult for the harvesters, with the result that many groundnuts were left in the ground or had to be dug up by hand. Yields were disappointing: 850 Ib per acre had been confidently predicted by Wakefield, 750 Ib by the Ministry of Food, but the harvest in early 1948 yielded only 355 Ib per acre.<sup>10</sup> In March 1948 the Overseas Food Corporation, set up to administer the groundnut scheme, took over from the managing agents. Clearing continued at Kongwa and a start was made at the southern province site and at Urambo in the western province. Problems similar to those which dogged progress at Kongwa were experienced at the other two areas and by the end of 1948 only 2,800 acres had been cleared at Urambo and 560 in the southern province.<sup>11</sup> It was clear that the Wakefield plan required re-examination. In December 1948 the Overseas Food Corporation produced a ten-year plan which envisaged bringing 2,355,000 acres under cultivation by 1958 but which would—by the substitution of sunflower for groundnuts to a considerable extent—produce as much vegetable oil as the 3.25 million acres of the Wakefield plan. However, this revision would require the corporation to borrow around £67 million and the Overseas Food Corporation’s total borrowing limit was only £50 million. In January 1949 the British Treasury refused to sanction an increase in the corporation’s borrowing powers, and the corporation had to devise a new plan.<sup>12</sup> Meanwhile, planting was completed early in 1949 for the second harvest of the scheme. At Kongwa, 25,000 acres of groundnuts were planted accompanied by 20,000 acres of sunflower (which could be cultivated on semi-cleared land) and 2,000 of maize for African labourers’ rations. Another 2,000 acres were planted with sunflower at Urambo, together with 500 of groundnuts, bringing the total planted to 49,000 acres. The harvest at Kongwa was ruined by inadequate rainfall during the growing season— only 12 inches fell when a minimum of 20 inches was needed—and yields of groundnuts declined to 144 Ib unshelled per acre.<sup>13</sup> At Urambo the groundnut crop failed, afflicted by the drought and an outbreak of disease. Sunflower proved even less susceptible to mechanised planting and harvesting than groundnuts and yields were poor.<sup>14</sup> The Overseas Food Corporation’s new plan in 1949 reduced the total area to be cultivated from 2,355,000 acres to 600,000. Most effort was to be made in the southern province where 420,000 acres would be cleared and planted by 1954. Kongwa and Urambo would now be limited to 90,000 acres each as opposed to the previous targets of 450,000 acres and 300,000 acres respectively. This plan was approved by the Ministry of Food in November 1949. Clearing at Urambo fell behind schedule as machinery continued to fail under African conditions and only 65,000 acres of the projected 90,000 were cleared. At Kongwa semi-drought conditions slowed progress.<sup>15</sup> In the southern province less than 1,000 acres were planted. The total for the 1949–50 season was 65,550 acres in contrast to 102,000 acres planned, and 48,100 acres of these were under sunflower. Results were again disappointing: groundnut yields were 244 Ib per acre at Kongwa compared to 532 Ib at Urambo, while sunflower was affected by disease in both areas. At Urambo mechanised harvesting was more or less abandoned.<sup>16</sup> By 1950 it was evident to the Overseas Food Corporation that it would be unable to meet its financial commitments to the Exchequer to operate on a commercial basis and repay advances made to it. Clearing had fallen well behind even the reduced targets and the cost of clearing had proved to be at least ten times greater than originally estimated by the Wakefield mission. The three harvests so far had been very poor so that the contribution of the scheme to Britain’s food needs were negligible.<sup>17</sup> The lesson of three years of effort in Tanganyika had shown the corporation that: The groundnut is not a plant which lends itself readily to mass methods over vast acreages. The attainment of economic yields demands intensive farming. The conception of 30,000 acre units with a thin spread of European supervision and machinery has proved unworkable<sup>18</sup> The failure of mechanised clearing was acknowledged having proved impracticable within either the time or the cost envisaged in earlier plans. Mechanical clearing can be done, but it cannot be done at an economic cost in relation to the value of the arable land created. Simpler and slower methods must be substituted for a part of the mechanical technique so far employed in order to reduce these costs.<sup>19</sup> A radical revision was proposed and accepted at the beginning of 1951. The corporation’s losses to 31 March 1951—£36.5 million—were written off and the corporation financed from annual votes by Parliament from then on. Responsibility for the corporation was transferred from the Ministry for Food to the Colonial Office. The area under cultivation was drastically reduced: to 12,000 acres at Kongwa, 45,000 at Urambo and a maximum of 60,000 in the southern province over the following three years. The objective of the scheme was changed: it was now to be ‘a scheme of large-scale experimental development to establish the economics of clearing and mechanised or partially mechanised agriculture under tropical conditions’, but one which ‘cannot in itself contribute significantly towards Britain’s food supplies’.<sup>20</sup> Over the next four years the corporation’s work was gradually wound down, large numbers of European and African employees were retrenched, surplus equipment sold and support facilities, such as a 120-mile oil pipeline in the southern province, closed. Non-productive assets—townships, hospitals, power generators, shops and police force—were transferred to the Tanganyika government. Agricultural experiments confirmed that groundnuts could not be grown at Kongwa or Urambo and experimental work was switched to raising cattle and growing tobacco respectively.<sup>21</sup> Hand labour continued to be substituted for mechanical methods in planting and harvesting operations in the southern province where experiments were carried on into growing food crops such as maize and sorghum as well as with African varieties of groundnuts.<sup>22</sup> At all three sites trials were conducted in the development of African tenant farms with rather inconclusive results and at Kongwa the trial was discontinued.<sup>23</sup> By 1953 there seemed little point in organising such experimental work from Britain and in the following year the scheme was converted into a colonial development and welfare project and its administration taken over by the Tanganyikan govern-ment.<sup>24</sup> The Overseas Food Corporation was then dissolved. The Tanganyika Groundnut Scheme was a failure from every point of view. It did nothing to ease Britain’s vegetable oil and fat shortages, it consumed more food locally than it produced and diverted labour from regional food production. It lost the British government over $\mathcal { L } ^ { 3 6 }$ million and yet it was of no benefit to Tanganyika. Even the facilities built by the corporation were of little value: Kongwa, for example, was left with a small modern hospital but this was far from the main centres of population. Naturally the comment was frequently made that the money could have been better spent elsewhere—particularly on improving Northern Nigeria’s rundown railway system where frequent break-downs and shortages of locomotives and rolling stock were preventing a stockpile of groundnuts far larger than the Tanganyika scheme ever produced from reaching the coast.<sup>25</sup> Undoubtedly the scheme was undertaken at great speed driven on by the perceived urgency of the oil and fats shortages.<sup>26</sup> When the initial difficulties arose in 1947 the British government urged the scheme on as being more on the lines of a military operation which must go ahead at all cost than a commercial undertaking.<sup>27</sup> There were no pilot schemes to try out the equipment on smaller areas nor any experimentation prior to starting on a full-scale basis. This was deliberate policy.<sup>28</sup> Sir Leslie Plummer, the chairman of the corporation, commented, ‘the way in which you discover snags attendant on large-scale mechanised agriculture is to proceed with large-scale mechanised agriculture’, an opinion which was shared by the Wakefield mission.<sup>29</sup> In Plummer’s view any results from small-scale experimental pilots as to yield, use of machinery, effect of variations in rainfall or the training of managers, drivers and machine operators, would not ‘have been conclusive or of real value to the Corporation’.<sup>30</sup> As the blueprint for the scheme, the Wakefield mission report was criticised when its estimates and assumptions proved ‘seriously misleading’.<sup>31</sup> As members of the mission explained, there was ‘a total lack of any experience of mechanised agriculture’: no-one had ever attempted what was being proposed; the areas chosen lacked infor mation regarding rainfall patterns and soil composition.<sup>32</sup> The estimates for the cost of clearing the bush by bulldozers were based on clearing for airstrips during the war.<sup>33</sup> Many of the problems were of a logistic and engineering nature but the three-man mission did not include an engineering expert. One of the mission’s members (an accountant) summed up: ‘It was all guesswork, and our guess was as good as anybody else’s.’<sup>34</sup> The novel feature of the Tanganyika Groundnut Scheme was its use of agricultural machinery on a large-scale—which was a complete failure. In other respects it did not represent a ste p forward in colonial development: its management was that of the plantation or estate already familiar in European agriculture in East and Central Africa. The role of the African in the scheme was that of a low-paid unskilled or semi-skilled labourer, working for a European manager. The corporation operated the scheme in a highly centralised fashion, with many of the key decisions being made in London, and with no attempt in practice to integrate the scheme into the Tanganyikan rural economy. There was no effective transfer of technology and its cost was equivalent to three year’s worth of CDW funding for the whole colonial empire. Even if it had been successful, its cost was such that few other tropical colonies could have afforded to emulate it. As it was, its failure was a blow to British prestige in the colonies and elsewhere and perhaps made it more difficult in the later 1950s for imaginative schemes of economic development to be undertaken in the colonies. And this was compounded by the fact that in the early 1950s the Tanganyika scheme was not an isolated example, as shown by the operations of the Overseas Food Corporation’s sister body, the Colonial Development Corporation. ## COLONIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION, 1948–62 The Colonial Development Corporation (CDC) also began its work with a great sense of urgency: as soon as the Overseas Resources Development Bill passed through Parliament in June 1947, and eight months before it received Royal Assent in February 1948, its chairman-designate, Lord Trefgarne, was appointed and by November he had a Board appointed and able to meet for first time. The corporation’s first official meeting was in March 1948. The CDC was set up with a complex organisational structure involving five regional corporations (West Indies, West Africa, Central Africa, East Africa and Far East) and nine commercial operating divisions, a total of fifteen managers/chairmen below the level of the two joint controllers, an executive council and the chairman. The commercial operations divisions consisted of equipment and supplies, animal products, agriculture (crops and forestry separately), fisheries, minerals, engineering and works, factories, marketing and hotels. Its headquarters staff in London numbered 216 by the end of 1949 and 340 by the end of 1950. Additionally there were over one hundred staff working in the regional offices or on particular schemes, not counting employees recruited locally in the colonies.<sup>35</sup> The aims of CDC were two-fold: first, to increase colonial output, especially exports: ‘It is…only by increased production and trade that these territories can earn the funds with which to purchase many of the commodities and supplies which they at present lack’.<sup>36</sup> Second, to save dollars. Although the colonial empire was a net dollar-earner, this was mainly so because of West African cocoa and Malayan rubber and tin. The perceived need was to reduce purchases from, and to increase sales of produce to, the United States. This aim also required lifting output. The problem faced by colonial agriculture was indentified as a ‘low level of agricultural technique and mechanisation’ which would have to be raised.<sup>37</sup> The CDC intended to fulfil its mission to raise the physical output of the colonial economies by engaging directly in production itself—by owning and operating plantations, ranches, mines and factories. This attitude was part of the ethos of ‘getting the job done’ and it also reflected a belief in the ability of Western technology and management skills— especially mechanised methods in agriculture—to raise productivity in the colonies. The sense of urgency and predilection for hands-on methods was reinforced by a strong desire on the part of the CDC board to exercise its independence from close control by the Colonial Office or government.<sup>38</sup> However, the CDC’s desire for quick results and to be free from having to check back with the Colonial Office over every proposal led to some unwise choices of development projects. The CDC’s philosophy was to ‘prefer venture to caution, launch the project and do their best to push it through every obstacle to success’, which displayed perhaps an understandable enthusiasm after the many years of neglect of colonial development, inaction and excessive caution by the Colonial Office, colonial governments and the Treasury.<sup>39</sup> Like the OFC, the CDC saw itself as engaged on a crusade to bring about a new era in colonial development using methods not attempted before and tackling problems considered to be at the root of colonial economic stagnation head on and with full vigour. Yet the corporation swung too far in the opposite direction and this led to problems when the successes which it had pushed so hard for and so loudly heralded did not materialise, benefiting neither the British taxpayers nor the colonial inhabitants. By the end of 1949, the CDC had approved twenty-nine projects of which nineteen were operational. These were selected from those submitted by colonial governments or private concerns operating in the colonies, using as criteria the likelihood of increasing exports on a longterm basis and ‘subject to this condition, the corporation has naturally aimed at selecting the projects which show promise of either earning or saving dollars, in the interests of the territory itself and the sterling areas as a whole’.<sup>40</sup> The devaluation of sterling by 30 per cent in September 1949 intensified the need to find alternative sources of supply within the sterling area of commodities normally purchased from the United States and made the dollar area an even more attractive market. Colonial development could assist by production of such commodities as tobacco, cotton, sugar and softwoods, by increasing production of rice for colonial consumption and by stepping-up exports of cocoa, rubber and tin to the US market. Whatever the prospects for colonial development helping to close the dollar gap, most of the projects established by the CDC were for the production of food for the UK market. Quite apart from the enormous problems encountered in raising the output of agricultural and animal products, there arose the question of marketing in Britain. The sole buyer in the UK for nearly all colonial food exports was the Ministry of Food, and the CDC therefore sought assurances and long-term contracts from the Ministr y of Food for the foodstuffs it was proposing to produce in the tropical colonies, but without success: the Ministry of Food could buy from UK, dominion, colonial and foreign sources and was not willing to jeopardise its buying power and flexibility by offering a guaranteed market for colonial foodstuffs in the British market. T his caused fur ther uncer tainty in the CDC’s calculations as to the viability of projects—how much could be sold in the United Kingdom, and at what price. By 1950 the CDC had lost £1.7 million with a loss of £1.3 million in 1950 alone.<sup>41</sup> Of the £1.7 million, trading losses on the schemes which were operational amounted to £296,000, a further £776,000 was for investments written off in failed projects and £618,000 represented the overhead costs of head office and regional offices, of which threequarters was due to staff wages. The CDC’s income consisted of the profits which could be made from its projects, but of the twenty schemes which were operating by the end of 1950, only eight registered a profit. It had not been anticipated that the CDC would show a net profit in its first five years, but the extent of its losses and the dramatic failure of a number of schemes caused considerable concern. In October 1950 the CDC’s chairman, Lord Trefgarne, resigned following widespread criticism of one failed scheme, the Gambia Poultry Farm (see below for discussion of individual schemes), and was replaced by Lord Reith, a man whose control of the BBC in the 1920s and 1930s had given him a reputation for fearless efficiency. The main problem seemed to be cost overruns resulting from initial underestimation and rising costs of materials and equipment during the Korean War. The rapid expansion of schemes—‘the pace set by urgent needs which the corporation was set up to meet’ —exposed a lack of adequate investigatory work and pilot schemes: ‘Where the Corporation has tried to avoid the expense and delay of adequate experiments and trials…the consequences have certainly been unfortunate.’<sup>42</sup> From now on, Reith warned, ‘Schemes which show little or no prospect of paying their way are being radically overhauled, as with the Gambia Poultry Farm; they will be shut down if no sound alternative can be devised.’<sup>43</sup> Reith spent the next four years putting this policy into practice, jettisoning twenty-nine projects and writing off over £9 million in irretrievable losses in the process. As well as having to abandon schemes, the CDC continued to make operating losses. In 1951 its projects (including loans) made a net loss of £643,000, to which administration costs were added to bring the operating loss to £1,070,000.<sup>44</sup> In 1952 its projects lost £635,000 and administration costs brought the overall operating loss to £1,097,000. Only in 1953 did the net loss on projects decline—as some were abandoned and others increased their revenues— to £148,000 which with administration expenses brought the net operating loss of the CDC to £644,000. In 1954 a net profit on projects and loans to colonial governments was recorded for the first time—of £167,000—but with administration expenses a net operating loss of £201,000 was made. However, this marked a turning point, the last year in which a net operating loss was made by the CDC. The harrowing experience of the CDC in the early 1950s, when failed schemes outnumbered successful ones and the financial results were alarming, suggested a number of lessons of a general nature, not least of which was’ that any sug gestions for immediate large-scale development must be treated with particular caution’.<sup>45</sup> Other ‘lessons’ learned included not overstocking expensive heavy equipment, not overusing expensive European personnel and being aware of rising costs and over-capitalisation. CDC policy now emphasised the need for partners—governments and private enterprise—to share the risk and provide expertise. In Reith’s view, the company suffered from ‘inaccurate esti-mating, and from incompetence’ which cooperation with outside investors might help alleviate.<sup>46</sup> However, attracting private capital proved almost impossible in the first half of the decade, though some colonial governments became willing partners. The CDC lacked ‘financial discip-line and sense of responsibility at head office and throughout the world’, its projects were often ‘misbeg otten’, ‘mishandled’ and ‘prejudiced by extravagance and inefficiency’.<sup>47</sup> Looking back from 1954, Reith concluded ‘too much was attempted too quickly in early years’.<sup>48</sup> The failure of so many of the CDC’s projects meant that ‘preoccupation of senior staff with liquidations and riddances and reorganisation has been, in the last four years, a serious and sickening limitation on activity’.<sup>49</sup> It also brought to a head the CDC’s financial relations with the British government, for as the CDC wrote off capital invested in failed schemes the question was raised as to whether it would have to continue paying interest to the government on this capital and whether it would have to be repaid. Negotiations dragged on for several years. In 1953 the government agreed to waive interest due from the CDC on approximately three-quarters of the capital advanced for schemes now abandoned, but insisted that the lost capital itself must be repaid. Suggestions that advances to the CDC should only be repayable if the project they were used for was profitable, made in 1952, fell on deaf ears in the Treasury. As a result, CDC projects veered away from agricultural schemes, which were the most risky, and towards loans to colonial governments and public utilities, even thought it was argued this prevented the corporation from fulfilling what it saw as its ‘real function’.<sup>50</sup> After seven very lean years, the CDC at last made a net profit of £409,000 in 1955 after all out-goings including interest paid to the British government. The special losses account was increased to $\mathcal { L } ^ { 8 }$ million, but this, claimed Reith, was the end of its rise: from now on all schemes either were viable or would become so and if any losses did occur it would be as a result of normal market forces rather than being ‘rashly undertaken or badly managed’.<sup>51</sup> In Reith’s view ‘the past is passed’. Certainly this was true financially as the CDC continued to make net operating profits from 1955 to its transfor mation into the Commonwealth Development Corporation in 1963. Continued disagreement between the CDC and the British government over the special losses account, which by 1958 had risen to £8.8 million, led to an independent inquiry being held in 1959 under the chairmanship of Lord Sinclair of Cleve.<sup>52</sup> This inquiry was sympathetic to the problems which the CDC now faced as a result of its earlier financial losses and project failures. The CDC’s policy of shifting its activity away from risky direct projects and towards ‘finance house’ type business was regarded as both necessary and responsible. The Sinclair Committee recommended that CDC debts to the British government be converted into stock, current borrowing for ‘finance house’ type projects to pay interest immediately, funds borrowed for other projects to enjoy an interest free period of seven years and the special losses to bear no interest at all and be repaid if and when the CDC’s other obligations to the British government had been met. The Sinclair Committee reported in September 1959 but it was not until April 1961 that the secretary of state for the colonies announced new financial arrangements for the CDC, by which time the special losses account had reached £9.9 million. The government declined to swap debt for equity and insisted that the CDC must repay all of the lost capital plus accumulated interest on the special losses account. This totalled £230 million. A formula was devised whereby the CDC kept £250,000 from each year’s net operating profits, but gave 60 per cent of the remainder to the government to repay this debt. This was accepted by the CDC—under its new chairman, Lord Howick—as providing ‘a sounder, stronger and more realistic basis for its future operations than has obtained hitherto’, but it did not remove the burden of past debt from the CDC’s balance sheets and thus made it difficult for the CDC either to attract more private capital in partnership in projects or alter its policy of seeking low-risk investments and ‘finance house’ type business.<sup>53</sup> The extent to which loans to governments and statutory authorities and to commercial enterprises dominated CDC activity in the later 1950s is indicated by Table 12.1. There was a marked fall in the share of CDC income from direct projects and subsidiaries from 1955, the first year in which the CDC became profitable. By the end of the 1950s only one-quarter of CDC’s total revenue came from these projects. Similarly, the importance of income from interest on loans can be seen in Table 12.2 from 1958 (the first year for which information on interest is shown separately from dividends). By the end of the 1950s the CDC received four-fifths of its earned income in the form of interest payments on loans which it had made. The chairman defended this policy on the grounds that the CDC must be able to cover its overheads before it could look to investing in riskier development schemes: Table 12.1 Sources of Colonial Development Corporation income, 1950–62
<table><tr><td>Year</td><td>Total income £&#x27;000</td><td>Direct projects (%)</td><td>Subsidiary companies (%)</td><td>Loans to govt &amp; SAs (%)</td><td>Other investments (%)</td></tr><tr><td>1950</td><td>89.5</td><td>4.2</td><td>17.7</td><td>29.7</td><td>48.5</td></tr><tr><td>1951</td><td>202.7</td><td>3.9</td><td>21.1</td><td>51.6</td><td>23.4</td></tr><tr><td>1952</td><td>470.7</td><td>5.4</td><td>55.1</td><td>34.1</td><td>5.4</td></tr><tr><td>1953</td><td>639.0</td><td>3.6</td><td>52.7</td><td>35.6</td><td>8.1</td></tr><tr><td>1954</td><td>807.6</td><td>8.8</td><td>43.0</td><td>38.1</td><td>10.1</td></tr><tr><td>1955</td><td>1,123.6</td><td>14.9</td><td>13.8</td><td>37.1</td><td>34.1</td></tr><tr><td>1956</td><td>1,570.1</td><td>8.9</td><td>21.5</td><td>34.9</td><td>34.7</td></tr><tr><td>1957</td><td>1,857.6</td><td>3.1</td><td>25.6</td><td>41.6</td><td>29.7</td></tr><tr><td>1958</td><td>2,352.4</td><td>7.9</td><td>26.8</td><td>36.1</td><td>29.2</td></tr><tr><td>1959</td><td>2,367.9</td><td>10.8</td><td>17.4</td><td>40.4</td><td>31.4</td></tr><tr><td>1960</td><td>2,832.8</td><td>6.6</td><td>22.2</td><td>38.5</td><td>32.7</td></tr><tr><td>1961</td><td>3,900.0</td><td>5.7</td><td>20.3</td><td>39.2</td><td>34.8</td></tr><tr><td>1962</td><td>4,932.9</td><td>6.9</td><td>18.3</td><td>42.7</td><td>32.1</td></tr></table> SAs, Statutory authorities Source: Profit/Loss Accounts, CDC Annual Reports. Table 12.2 Sources of Colonial Development Corporation income, 1958–1962
<table><tr><td>Year</td><td>Total income £000</td><td>% from profits</td><td>% from dividends</td><td>% from interest</td></tr><tr><td>1958</td><td>2,352.4</td><td>9.9</td><td>14.3</td><td>75.8</td></tr><tr><td>1959</td><td>2,367.9</td><td>10.8</td><td>15.2</td><td>74.0</td></tr><tr><td>1960</td><td>2,832.8</td><td>6.6</td><td>12.9</td><td>80.4</td></tr><tr><td>1961</td><td>3,900.0</td><td>5.7</td><td>19.7</td><td>74.6</td></tr><tr><td>1962</td><td>4,932.9</td><td>6.9</td><td>9.7</td><td>83.4</td></tr></table> Source: as for Table 12.1. critics who complain that CDC is not venturesome enough—‘not doing the job it was set up to do’ —should understand [that]…CDC must pay its way…profit and loss account must show a profit—taking one year with another. Each year some projects will contribute a plus and some a minus…since an undue number of early projects showed minuses and had to be abandoned or severely cut back, CDC must necessarily avoid riskier and less profitable schemes until balance is restored’.<sup>54</sup> From 1956 a second source of conflict with the British government developed as the CDC was told to cease investment in colonies which were about to become independent—in this case, the Gold Coast and Malaya— as it ruled that the operations of the CDC must be confined to Britain’s colonies. The CDC responded by adopting a strategy of establishing development agencies in colonies which were approaching independence which could act as vehicles for post-independence economic development under the guidance of the CDC, though it still could not invest its own money in any particular scheme. In 1961 the government set up a review into the question of the geographical constraints on CDC activities and as a result announced the creation of a new body to take over from the CDC: the Commonwealth Development Corporation, which from 1963 would operate throughout the Commonwealth.<sup>55</sup> ## CDC PROJECTS Although the CDC was not charged with production of any particular commodity in the colonies, foodstuffs and agricultural raw materials were its main concern in its early years of operations. This reflected a view that there was a world shortage of primary products in the immediate post-war years and of tropical foodstuffs in particular. Many foods were still rationed in Britain, including fats and vegetable oils, some of which could be produced in Britain’s colonies. Local supplies of food-stuffs in the colonies were regarded as inadequate. They caused malnutrition and in some colonies a heavy reliance on food imports. The CDC recognised the problems of growing food in tropical conditions, especially that of soil erosion and soil exhaustion, and stressed the need for extensive preliminary investigation before going ahead with food pro-duction.<sup>56</sup> In practice, however, the CDC frequently did not heed its own advice, with disastrous consequences. Over the fifteen years to 1962 the CDC was involved in forty-two schemes for producing foods, including animal products and fisheries, and thirty-five of these were started during the first five years of operation (1948–52 shown in Table 12.3). The CDC was not very successful at producing food, whether to alleviate hunger in the colonies, assist Britain’s food shortages or earn export revenue: twenty-nine of the forty-two schemes started were failures and three-quarters of those begun in the first five years failed. Fisheries were regarded as an underdeveloped area of the <sub>projects</sub> <sub>were</sub> <sub>generally</sub> <sub>co</sub>m<sup>mercial</sup> <sub>nial</sub> <sub>Deve</sub><sup>lopment</sup> <sup>Corporation</sup> <sup>projects</sup> <sup>for</sup> <sup>food</sup> <sup>produc</sup>
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>Year</td><td>Project Name</td><td>Purpose</td><td>Result</td></tr><tr><td>Falkland Is.</td><td>1948</td><td>South Atlantic Sealing Co.</td><td>Seal oil for UK</td><td>Abandoned 1952</td></tr><tr><td>Gambia</td><td>1948</td><td>Poultry Scheme</td><td>Poultry products for UK</td><td>Abandoned 1951</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>1948</td><td>Lake yasa Fishery</td><td>Dried fish, local market</td><td>Abandoned 1951</td></tr><tr><td>Gambia</td><td>1949</td><td>Gambia Rice Farm</td><td>Rice, local and export market</td><td>Abandoned 1952</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>1949</td><td>Niger Agricultural Project</td><td>Groundnuts, local and export</td><td>Abaridoned 1953</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Honduras</td><td>1949</td><td>Sittee Cocoa Ltd</td><td>Cocoa &amp; bananas for export</td><td>Abandoned 1952</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Honduras</td><td>1949</td><td>B.H. Fruit Co. Ltd</td><td>Bananas for export</td><td>Abandoned 1952</td></tr><tr><td>Malayaª</td><td>1949</td><td>Malayan Cocoa Ltd</td><td>Cocoa for export</td><td>Began trading 1961</td></tr><tr><td>Dominicaa</td><td>1949</td><td>Melville Hall Estate</td><td>Bananas, citrus for export</td><td>Profitable most years</td></tr><tr><td>Dominica</td><td>1949</td><td>Castle Bruce Estate</td><td>Citrus, coconut for export</td><td>Abandoned 1853</td></tr><tr><td>Dominica</td><td>1949</td><td>Packing &amp; Grading Station</td><td>Citrus for export</td><td>Abandoned 1952</td></tr><tr><td>Falkland Is.</td><td>1949</td><td>Abattoir &amp; Freezer</td><td>Sheepmeat, beef for export</td><td>Abandoned 1955</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaicaª</td><td>1949</td><td>Cool Store</td><td>Citrus for export</td><td>Profitable from 1952</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>1949</td><td>West African Fisheries</td><td>Fish for local market</td><td>Abandoned 1953</td></tr><tr><td>Gambia</td><td>1949</td><td>Atlantic Fisheries Ltd</td><td>Shark for vitamin A for UK</td><td>Abandoned 1952</td></tr><tr><td>Bahamas</td><td>1949</td><td>Eleuthera Is. Estate</td><td>Vegetables for local market</td><td>Abandoned 1954</td></tr><tr><td>Bechuanaland</td><td>1950</td><td>Bechuanaland Cattle Ranch</td><td>Fatten cattle</td><td>Abandoned 1960</td></tr><tr><td>Bechuanaland</td><td>1950</td><td>Lobatsi Abattoir</td><td>Beef for S. African market</td><td>Profitable from 1955</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Honduras</td><td>1950</td><td>B.H. Stock Farms</td><td>Cattle &amp; sheep, local market</td><td>Abandoned 1951</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>1950</td><td>Grand Cayman Turtle Cannery</td><td>Turtle soup for US market</td><td>Abandoned 1954</td></tr><tr><td>Malayaª</td><td>1950</td><td>Kulai Oil Palm Estate</td><td>Palm oil for export</td><td>Profitable from 1950</td></tr><tr><td>N. Borneo</td><td>1950</td><td>Rice Project</td><td>Rice for local market</td><td>Abandoned 1950</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>1950</td><td>Kasunga Tobacco Estates</td><td>Tobacco for export</td><td>Made losses 1951-62</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>1950</td><td>Limpašsa Dambo Farm</td><td>Rice for local market</td><td>Abandoned 1951</td></tr><tr><td>Seychelles</td><td>1950</td><td>Seychelles Fishery</td><td>Dried fish, E. Africa market</td><td>Abandoned 1952</td></tr><tr><td>Swazilandª</td><td>1950</td><td>Swaziland Irrigation Scheme</td><td>Rice, sugar, local &amp; export market</td><td>Profitable from 1958</td></tr><tr><td>Tristan da Cunha</td><td>1950</td><td>Tristan da Cunha Fishery</td><td>Crawfish, lobster, S. African market</td><td>Losses, sold 1961</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Honduras</td><td>1951</td><td>Cramer Estates</td><td>Cocoa for export</td><td>Abandoned 1956</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaicaa</td><td>1951</td><td>Citrus Growers Ltd</td><td>Loan to company to expand</td><td>Loan repaid</td></tr><tr><td>Gambia</td><td>1951</td><td>Yundum Farm</td><td>Experimental farm</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>N. Borneo</td><td>1951</td><td>Kasunga Cattle Ranch</td><td>Beef cattle (investigation)</td><td>Abandoned 1954</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Somaliland</td><td>1951</td><td>Abattoir</td><td>Camel &amp; sheepmeät</td><td>Abandoned 1952 Abandoned 1952</td></tr><tr><td>Bechuanalanda</td><td>1952</td><td>Molopo Holding Ranch</td><td>Fatten cattle for Lobatsi abattoir</td><td>Profitable from 1953</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>1952</td><td>Kenya Fish Farms</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Swaziland²</td><td>1952</td><td>Ubombo Ranches</td><td>Fish farming, local market Loan to rančhing company</td><td>Abandoned 1953 Loan repaid</td></tr></table> colonies’ economies, as one to which advanced Western technology could be successfully applied, and as an important element in the fight against ‘the continuing shortage of oils and fats’.<sup>57</sup> All of the fishery projects were started in the first five years of operations and all failed. They involved sealing off the Falkland Islands, deep-sea fishing off Nigeria and Gambia, and in the Seychelles and at Tristan da Cuhna, as well as a scheme for developing fish products on Lake Nyasa and another one for fish farming in Kenya. Together they cost the CDC about £1 million in lost capital invested. The main causes of failure were the cost, delay in supplying and frequent breakdown of boats and equipment, high European salaries which added to overheads, far smaller catches than had been anticipated and, as far as selling in local markets was concerned, a great difficulty in competing with local fishers. Schemes were generally under-costed and poorly managed. Some were also overly ambitious. The CDC made only six attempts to produce food using farming schemes as opposed to plantations, and two of these were investigations in Gambia (in 1951 and 1959) which yielded no positive results. The remaining four were started prior to 1951 and reached the production stage before being abandoned as commercially unviable. Each involved the use of mechanical methods for clearing, planting and/or harvesting. Three were for rice in the Gambia, Nyasaland and North Borneo, and one, the Niger Agricultural Project in Nigeria, produced groundnuts.<sup>58</sup> The lost capital was put at around £750,000. Reasons for their failure were the cost of mechanised cultivation, including costs associated with problems of breakdown and maintenance in tropical conditions of machines designed for European or North American farming; high overhead costs resulting from the employment of European technicians, mechanics, machinery operators and supervisors; inadequate time allotted for experimental work because the schemes were urged on to full production by the world food crisis; and the fact that both rice and groundnuts were crops which were produced by peasant farmers in many parts of the world and against which the produce of these kind of farms had to compete in open markets. The CDC did try to obtain long-term contracts for its food production from the Ministry of Food, but the latter interpreted its duty to buy as cheaply as possible in world markets rather than to provide a guaranteed market for colonial producers including the CDC. Consequently, when foodstuffs were grown, the prices they fetched were far from remunerative. Animal products schemes suffered a deal of failure too, but two of the six projects the CDC started were successful. Of these six, five were for beef cattle and one for poultry; of the cattle schemes, two were short-lived experiments, one consisted of a small commercial loan to an existing South African cattle ranch operating in Swaziland which was successful in the sense that it was repaid on time; and there were two schemes in Bechuanaland where the CDC itself attempted to run beef cattle one of which was eventually profitable. The Gambia Poultry Farm was the first of the CDC’s large foodproducing projects to fail and the first to bring serious parliamentary criticism down on the CDC. It was a scheme closely associated with the CDC chairman, Lord Trefgarne, who took personal responsibility for its success. When its collapse became inevitable in 1950 he resigned.<sup>59</sup> The concept was to develop a large-scale poultry farm growing its own supplies of feedstuffs and supplying the British market with chickens and eggs. It aimed at an output of 20 million eggs and 1,000,000 Ib of dressed chicken per year. Begun at the end of 1948, it expected to have 90,000 hens in place by the end of 1950 and 10,000 acres of land mechanically cleared and cultivated for feedstuffs. Although Lord Trefgarne expressed ‘every confidence in this soundly conceived and executed undertaking’ in 1949, early in 1950 it became clear that the sixteen crawler tractors used to clear and plough the land were failing to do so—because they were inadequate for the job and kept breaking down—which meant the feedstuffs were insufficient for the chickens and half the flock died.<sup>60</sup> Moreover, the laying performance of the birds was below initial estimates, the flock succumbed to disease and most of the poultry and eggs shipped to Britain were declared unfit for consumption. The scheme was abandoned early in 1951 following a report that showed it could never be viable. The CDC lost over £800,000 in this scheme, £532,000 of which was written-off capital. The CDC had expressed the belief at the outset that Animal husbandry in the colonies holds out very large possi-bilities…. The Boards believe that the prospects are of an order which, if vigorously pursued, will make a material contribution to world meat supplies.<sup>61</sup> As with other food production schemes, however, early failures accompanied by large financial losses and hostile public criticism, led the CDC to completely avoid this area of development in subsequent years. The CDC was hardly more successful with its projects for food processing where five out of its eight schemes failed. These comprised three abattoirs, two schemes for storage, packing and grading of fruit, two canneries and a flour mill. Two of the abattoirs failed, the one on the Falkland Islands for the development of an export trade in frozen beef and mutton was a complete disaster which cost the CDC £525,000. The causes were rising costs of equipment and delays in its delivery, high turnover of managerial staff on site, insufficient supply of stock, sub-standard produce which led to one-quarter of exports being rejected by UK inspectors and the high cost of construction work carried out by the CDC’s engineering branch. In the West Indies a citrus packing and grading station in Dominica was built in 1949 but abandoned after three years of losses caused by an inadequate supply from the growers. This problem was avoided by a Jamaican cooling store operated by the CDC from 1952 as its supplies were guaranteed by the local citrus growers’ association and it returned modest profits to the CDC throughout. Both of the cannery projects attempted by the CDC ended in failure. Investment in a Kenyan flour mill, however, in 1956 was viable and produced interest and dividends for the CDC, though it played no role in managing the mill. The type of food production where the CDC experienced least failure was plantation schemes where fifteen projects were launched and seven failed. Seven schemes involved the purchase of moribund plantations in Dominica, the Bahamas, Malaya, Swaziland, British Honduras and Tanganyika growing bananas, citrus, coconuts, vegetables, palm oil, rice, sugar and cocoa. Of these, four were abandoned, while Melville Hall Estate on Dominica survived but operated at a loss. The outstanding success was Kulai Oil Palm Estate in Malaya purchased in 1950 and rehabilitated. Good management and high prices for plantation-quality palm oil were the main reasons for its making profits and an average return on the investment of £1 million of 2.3 per cent per annum. A further five plantation schemes were ones where the CDC started from scratch, though the results were not much better: three were abandoned and the two surviving schemes in 1962 were still making losses. Food production in the colonies was the major activity of the CDC in its early years and the least successful. Three-quarters of the foodproducing schemes in the first five years failed and some of the surviving schemes were not commercially viable. The CDC set itself the task of alleviating food shortages in the colonies and in Britain but could not be said to have done so as far as fisheries and rice and groundnut farms were concerned and only one of its animal products schemes (Molopo) was at all successful. Amongst the plantations Kulai Oil Palm Estate was definitely a success and possibly the Swaziland irrigation scheme and the investments in two sugar plantations could be counted as successes; two food processing plants were also successful. Of the thirty-five early schemes for producing more food for a hungry world, then, at least thirty were failures which produced little or nothing in increased supplies and contributed considerably to the CDC’s growing problem of indebtedness. Like foodstuffs, agricultural raw materials and forestry products were regarded as being in short supply after the war and the CDC was anxious to develop new and existing colonial sources to help alleviate the problem. It embarked on seven schemes for the production of agricultural raw materials and four forestry projects, all but two of these in its first five years (see Table 12.4). These endeavours proved somewhat less disasterprone than those for foodstuffs, though were not outstanding commercial successes. Table 12.4 Colonial Development Corporation projects for agricultural raw materials and minerals, 1948–52
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>Year</td><td>Project Name</td><td>Purpose</td><td>Result</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Guianaª</td><td>1948</td><td>British Guiana Timbers</td><td>Lumber exports to UK market</td><td>Profitable from 1956</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasalandª</td><td>1948</td><td>Vipya Tung Estates</td><td>Tung oil, UK market</td><td>Profitable from 1962</td></tr><tr><td>N. Borneoª</td><td>1948</td><td>N. Borneo Abaca Ltd</td><td>Rubber, hemp for export</td><td>Profitable from 1956</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyikaa</td><td>1949</td><td>Tanganyika Wattle Estate</td><td>Wattle bark extract for export</td><td>Began production 1959</td></tr><tr><td>Swazilandª</td><td>1949</td><td>Usutu Forests</td><td>Conifers for pulp mill, export market</td><td>Began production 1961</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Honduras</td><td>1950</td><td>Barton Ramie Estate</td><td>To grow ramie bre, export</td><td>Abandoned 1955</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>1950</td><td>Omo Sawmills</td><td>Timber for local market</td><td>Losses, sold off 1961</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>1951</td><td>East Africa Ramie</td><td>To grow ramie (investigation)</td><td>Abandoned 1956</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>1952</td><td>Nyika Forestry Syndicate</td><td>Pine trees for pulp (investigation)</td><td>Abandoned 1956</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Guiana</td><td>1948</td><td>B.G. Goldfields Ltd</td><td>Gold mining, export</td><td>Abandoned 1958</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>1948</td><td>Turks and Caicos Salt</td><td>Salt production</td><td>Abandoned 1956</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>1950</td><td>Macalder-Nyanza Mines Ltd</td><td>Copper for export</td><td>Abandoned 1960</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td>1950</td><td>Coalfields Investigation</td><td>Coal (investigation)</td><td>Abandoned 1953</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyikaª</td><td>1950</td><td>Tangold Mining Co Ltd</td><td>Loans to mining company</td><td>In default 1962</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td>1951</td><td>Murongo Mines</td><td>Tin, wolfram (investigation)</td><td>Abandoned 1955</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>1952</td><td>Vitingini Lead Mine</td><td>Lead deposits (investigation)</td><td>Abandoned 1953</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td>1952</td><td>Liganga Iron Ore Mine</td><td>Iron-ore (investigation)</td><td>Moribund 1954</td></tr></table> <sub>ce</sub> <sub>CDC</sub> A<sup>nnual</sup> <sup>Re</sup> <sub>m</sub><sup>mercially</sup> <sup>viable</sup> <sup>sch</sup> The CDC undertook four forestry projects one of which, an investigation into the possibilities of growing pines in Nyasaland, which was not followed up. Two of the others were for sawmills using native forest but neither was successful: one at Omo in Nigeria was sold off in 1961 following a series of losses, and a scheme in British Guiana begun in 1948 only survived losses throughout the 1950s by writing off a large part of its capital in 1961. In both cases the CDC blamed poor local management and a fickle market for timber products. In the case of British Guiana Timbers Ltd, the CDC was influenced in its original decision to invest by the propect of sales to the US market for much needed hard currency. The chairman commented a few year later: ‘[The] Company earns dollars but it has been at monstrous cost in sterling.’<sup>62</sup> The most successful of the forestry projects was Usutu Forests in Swaziland. From 1949 the CDC spent ten years and $\mathcal { L } 1 3$ million growing a 95,000 acre pine forest which it then sold at a profit to Courtaulds Ltd, who erected a pulp mill in partnership with the CDC and first went into production in 1962. This scheme was much closer to the model developed in the later 1950s which saw the appropriate role of the CDC as a pioneer which broke new ground and then went into partnership with an established and successful private company once the production stage was reached. Usutu was, however, one of the few schemes which ultimately conformed to this plan; in the earlier years the CDC tended to go in for direct production which frequently failed, in the later years it veered toward safe commercial loans. Mining was the one other area where the CDC addressed the post-war shortages of primary products head on and with a similarly distinct lack of success as experienced with food, agricultural raw materials and forestry. Five mines were brought into operation by the CDC and a further six schemes were investigated but not followed up. Only two of the five were successful and one of these was not viable commercially being in default of interest in 1961 and 1962. The one clear success was at Kilembe in Uganda where an existing copper and cobalt mine required a capital injection which CDC agreed to provide in 1953. The CDC invested $\mathcal { L } 1$ million in equity (20 per cent of the total) and made loans of $\mathcal { L } 1 . 0 5$ million. The project’s profits fluctuated with variable copper prices in the later 1950s, but it paid its first dividend to CDC in 1961 of $6 ^ { \hat { 1 } } /$ per cent. The major shareholder was a Canadian-based international mining company. Part of the recipe of success here seemed to be control and management by an experienced private concern. The failed mining ventures showed some of the same problems encountered in the agricultural projects: delays in equipment delivery, mechanical failure, poor management, cost-overruns and lower than expected mineral prices. The two major failures were in British Guiana and Kenya, British Guiana Consolidated Goldfields and Macalder-Nyaza Mines Ltd. Mining was a notoriously risky business, the CDC did not have any particular expertise and was under pressure to achieve quick results. Inevitably it tended to fail and where it was successful it was in junior partnership with an experienced mining house. The fifty-two schemes for production of foodstuffs, raw materials, forestry and minerals began during the first five years of the CDC’s operations, represented three-quarters of all the projects started in that period. The remainder were mainly in service industries and were substantially more successful in commercial terms although two attempts at developing transport services failed and the CDC lost over £1 million on its engineering and works division alone. The CDC proved no more interested in schemes to promote industrialisation in the colonies than occurred under the Colonial Development and Welfare Act: it started only six industrial projects in its twelve years, one of which was abandoned. Its main novel contribution was in financing several building societies and constructing eight hotels. The CDC was not established in order to make loans to colonial governments, which could apply for CDW funding, though it was not precluded from making such loans by its charter. Increasingly it did so, in order to provide a safe return on its funds as its more direct projects ran into difficulties. Loans to colonial governments and their statutory authorities accounted for 40 to 50 per cent of the CDC’s advances, onethird of its committed capital and around 35 per cent of its income on average in the second half of the 1950s. These loans differed from commercial loans to private companies in that they were risk-free, though like commercial loans they usually involved the CDC in little or no management activity. The loans were put to varied uses: of the seventeen loans made between 1948 and 1962, five were for agricultural projects, four were for housing, two each were for electricity supply, air transport and water supply, one was for property development in Lagos and one was for a hotel in Freetown. The agricultural projects consisted of rice growing in British Guiana, an abattoir in Kenya, plantation rehabitation in the British Cameroons, tea-growing in Kenya and small-holder development in Malaya. A little over half its total lendings went to the two electricity supply projects in Malay and the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland (Kariba). In these investments CDC money fulfilled a function similar to that of CDW funds, though there was no formal integration of the projects of the two sources of finance. In both types of colonial development the initiative really lay with the local government which conceived of the project and carried it through, often contributing its own funds as well. That the CDC survived to 1962 and then formed the core of the Commonwealth Development Corporation was perhaps surprising in view of its failures during its first five years. As a Labour government creation involving the use of public money to invest in production in the colonies, and one which was in serious financial difficulties, it might well have been scrapped by the Conservative administration. The CDC was saved by the resistance and hard work of its chairman, Lord Reith, who managed to keep the government at bay on the one hand while shifting the CDC away from risky direct projects in primary production and towards safe loans and investments in the services sector and cutting administrative costs on the other.<sup>63</sup> In breaking new ground in state-directed economic development in the colonies the CDC discovered why so little had been accomplished during the previous half-century or more of British rule and why private enterprise was so often unwilling to be adventurous and had so often failed. Agricultural development in the tropics was extremely hazardous and the experience of the CDC in its early years showed the problems of depending on European technology and expertise to obtain quick results. Under Reith the CDC too became much less adventurous but also much less unprofitable. The eventual financial success of the CDC from the British government’s point of view tended to obscure the question of whether it made any worthwhile contributions to the problem of economic development in the tropical colonies from the viewpoint of the colonial inhabitants. The CDC felt that it had helped to increase production, earn more export revenue and raise living standards, though in the total context of colonial economics its contribution remained small. Insofar as it did assist even in a minor way to point to some new avenues for economic development during the final phases of colonial rule it could be concluded that the experiment of 1947 was worthwhile, although the results achieved were rather different by the early 1960s from those envisaged at that time. The new directions in colonial economic development and the revolution in ways of producing in the tropics which the OFC and CDC pursued between 1946 and 1955 were fraught with difficulties. Not least of these was the conflict between the needs of Britain for quick results in the form of supplies of foodstuffs and other primary products and the needs of the colonies for schemes of economic development to raise the productivity and eventually the living standards of the mass of their inhabitants. Many of the projects begun by these two corporations, as we have seen, ended in disaster and failure because of inappropriate organisation and techniques, particularly the attempts to use mechanised agriculture. In most cases it could hardly be claimed that the activities of these corporations led to any significant transfer of Western technology to the colonial economies since much of it failed under tropical conditions. The imaginative projects undertaken by these corporations tended to steal the limelight in post-war colonial economic development which only increased their negative influence when they collapsed. The less spectacular but safer efforts of colonial development and welfare continued to be made, albeit at levels of expenditure which were quite inadequate in the time-frame of British colonial rule. If the British government had not been distracted by the allure of the ‘big scheme’ driven by a crash-through mentality it is possible that more attention and more resources (including the £45 million lost by the OFC and the CDC) would have been devoted to the work of the colonial governments assisted by CDW funds and with rather better results for the colonial economies.