## Developing the ‘great estate’ The legacies of colonialism and development The British government was rather wary of making specific promises on colonial development. Its statements about its long-term aims in this regard were made mainly in the post-war years in response to Britain’s economic crisis and international and colonial nationalist criticism that Britain was failing to fulfil its obligations as an imperial power. Emphasis was often placed on the role of export production: Against the background of national economic difficulties there are four features of economic development in the Colonies which can be readily appreciated and which are consistent with the indispensable objective of strengthening the colonial economies. First, the Colonies are already producing important quantities of many commodities in world demand, notably rubber, cocoa, fibres, vegetable oils, sugar and tropical fruits, and improvements and expansion in these established industries offer the greatest contribution to Europe’s distress…. Second, there exist possibilities of production in new fields; but considerable practical and material difficulties have to be overcome if these possibilities are to be of medium or long-term significance. Third, if results are to be obtained the necessary priorities have to be given for plant and materials in short supply, and also for supplies of consumer goods. Fourth, machinery has to be devised to make available the necessary capital, and to undertake the tasks of investigation and supervision. [June 1948]<sup>1</sup> The Colonial Empire produces foodstuffs and raw materials which the Western nations need. The more of them they can export, the more money they will earn with which to purchase consumer goods, improve their social services, and further expand their production through the provision of better or more extensive basic services— roads and railways, water and power supplies, irrigation schemes, and so on. With the rise in Colonial living standards comes a further advantage to the Western countries, in the stimulus given to the colonial markets for their manufactured goods. [June 1949]<sup>2</sup> ## The problem of unbalanced development was also acknowledged: I turn first to consider economic developments in the Colonial Territories. On the economic side, our aim is to seek to build, in every one of the Territories, a stable economy by developing its agricultural, mineral or industrial resources, by improving methods of production, by safeguarding the natural wealth of the country and by instilling ‘good husbandry’ in all economic activities, and, most important, by diversifying those activities so that development is not lop-sided, and, consequently, dependent upon a few basic products. [July 1950]<sup>3</sup> The United Kingdom’s economic development policy for the Colonies may be summed up as aiming to build in every territory a stable economy that is not dependent on a few basic products. Much of the assistance the United Kingdom makes available to the Colonies is devoted to this end. [March 1951]<sup>4</sup> The importance of the colonies own financial and other resources and the primacy of private enterprise was also stressed: Most Colonies have plans for long-term development financed primarily from their own resources but assisted by grants from Colonial Development and Welfare funds and from public loans raised on the London market…. The major role in the development of direct production is played by private enterprise, and it is the aim of Governments to create and maintain conditions favourable to it. [May 1954]<sup>5</sup> The theory of economic development which officials held in relation to the tropical colonies was one of export-led growth. Exports were regarded as essential to economic growth, first to service external loans and second to pay for the import of capital goods which were required. Imports were mainly financed by export earnings plus foreign borrowing because levels of domestic savings in the colonial economies were extremely low.<sup>6</sup> Imports of capital goods (and services such as those provided by engineering consultants) were needed to develop the infrastructure of the colonial economies which in turn was necessary in order to attract private investment, mainly foreign but possibly domestic as well. Developing the capacity of the colonies to import goods and services from Britain was an essential element in the colonial relationship of ‘complementary economies’. The colonies were to complement the British economy by exporting primary products and importing manufactured goods. In this sense the Chamberlain concept of development persisted in the minds of officials throughout the colonial era. However, two major modifications to the Chamberlain view were made. In the 1930s it was recognised that loans needed to be supplemented (or replaced) by free capital grants as the colonies were too poor to afford sufficient loan capital; additionally, it gradually came to be accepted that social welfare development could not wait until a higher level of economic development had been achieved, but must be provided in order to alleviate the worst manifestations of poverty and that this expenditure should be financed mainly by colonial governments assisted by external grants of aid. These were partial qualifications to the earlier attitude but, of course, their impact depended on how much aid Britain was willing or able to supply and the condition of colonial public finances. In the latter stages of the colonial era there was some reversion to the earlier position that colonies should be as self-sufficient as possible. Export earnings were partly commandeered by the colonial governments via taxation to be used to pay for economic and social services and development projects, and to service the foreign loans they had raised. Loans were used mainly to finance development schemes, often for transport and communications. Export earnings also serviced foreign private investment, nearly all of which was in the export sector. Because exports were regarded as the ‘engine of growth’ the export industries received the bulk of the state’s attention and resources and most of the private foreign investment (and domestic investment where this occurred), to the relative neglect of the subsistence sector and the non-export market sector (i.e. food and simple manufactures produced for the home market).<sup>7</sup> As discussed at various points earlier in this book, there were a number of problems with this approach to economic development. First, despite the emphasis placed on their growth, exports did not always increase in real terms as fast as might have been expected from their initial surge prior to the First World War. The best decade for growth was the final one of the colonial era. Moreover, the export sector in some colonies was small in relation to the entire economy, especially where large subsistence or semisubsistence sectors existed.<sup>8</sup> Exports may have been the ‘engine of growth’ but often were not a very powerful engine. Exports as an ‘engine of growth’ were rendered even less effective because of the high propensity for consumption which the colonies exhibited. A substantial part of export earnings were used to finance the import of consumer goods, including basic foodstuffs and even luxury goods in colonies with a large number of European settlers. A policy of encouraging import substitution would have had the effect of raising the proportion of capital goods in the total import mix.<sup>9</sup> Such ‘leakages’ occurred because the colonies lacked an importsubstitution policy, the absence of which largely resulted from the persistence of the ‘complementary economies’ approach. Second, linkages between the export sector and the rest of the colonial economy were quite weak. Such linkages are often characterised as backward, forward and final demand linkages.<sup>10</sup> The nature and power of these varied between the tropical colonies and differed between export industries which consisted predominately of plantations, or peasant producers or mining. Backward linkages referred to the supply by the non-export sector of inputs to the export industries; for example, plant and equipment, tools and machinery, fertiliser. However, in the colonial economies, most of these were imported. The most important backward linkage was transport, principally government-owned railways and harbours and privately owned trucking enterprises. Forward linkages were industries for which the export commodity was an input and chiefly consisted of processing. Since most primary produce was exported in an unprocessed state, however, this linkage was usually weak. Final demand linkages were those which connected the export industry to the domestic economy via the expenditures of workers employed in the export activity. The sale of food and consumer goods to plantation or mine workers was an obvious example. Overall, the purchasing power of the export workers depended on their wage levels which typically were extremely low. They did not, therefore, constitute a buoyant home market for other sectors of the economy. Some part of their demand, moreover, was satisfied by imported goods, including foodstuffs in many cases. Additionally, some part of the incomes of, say, plantation or mine managers was paid abroad. Peasant producers of exports, such as West African cocoa farmers, Ugandan cotton growers, Malayan rubber small-holders, might have higher disposable incomes than plantation and mine workers, but there was little sign of their demand stimulating the non-export sector to develop extensive trades and industries to satisfy them during the colonial period. In any case, the prices received by the grower for export commodities were generally low and the export trade itself was in the hand of expatriate trading firms for the most part. Peasant producers also spent a portion of their income on imported goods. Because colonialism favoured expatriate enterprise over indigenous and metropolitan processing industry over local, these various linkages were never able to develop strongly. Although it is not possible to measure linkages in the colonial economies without reliable input: output data, it can be concluded that these linkages were weak and that therefore the export sectors, structurally speaking, remained enclaves. The problem was partly one of slow growth of exports, but mainly it was one of their ineffectiveness in stimulating activity in the rest of the economy. This meant that even when they did grow rapidly their impact on the development of the entire colonial economy was restricted. One of the functions of government, in these circumstances, was to tax the export sector and use the revenue for development projects elsewhere; the extent to which this was in fact done depended on the willingness of the government to impose fiscal burdens on the export sector, its willingness or ability to actually spend its revenues, and the appropriateness of the projects it financed with the proceeds. We have noted in earlier chapters the limitations which applied to this process. What was required was more than simply stimulation of a narrow range of unprocessed primary exports but, in addition to encouraging export earnings to rise, action to improve the linkages between the export sector and the rest of the economy and to obtain resources from the export industries which could be invested in raising productivity in the non-export area. As W.A.Lewis pointed out, the fundamental problem facing the tropical colonies was the very low levels of productivity (output per worker and output per acre) in traditional agriculture.<sup>11</sup> Because productivity was so low it was possible to effect quite dramatic increases by relatively small investments in tools, improved seed strains and animals, equipment, fertilisers, small-scale irrigation, marketing and distribution, scientific research and so forth, but instead the economic development effort of the colonial authorities was diverted to large-scale transportation and communications works to benefit chiefly the export sector, or grandiose and wasteful agricultural projects like those of the OFC and the CDC. The tropical colonies received the benefit of little effective scientific agricultural research even in the post– 1945 era, but what was undertaken related almost entirely to peasants’ cash crops or plantation crops for export. Typically colonial economies exhibited periods of export growth but this did not lead to a transformation of the economy as a whole. This remained the formidable task of the post-independence governments and development agencies. Third, the colonial export sectors were dominated by foreign firms which produced directly, by foreign trading companies which purchased produce for export from settlers and peasant producers and by foreign banks which financed the export and import trades. This high level of foreign ownership in the export industries led to an outflow of profits which accumulated externally in the hands of these firms. If the outflow exceeded re-investment and new investment the colony suffered a net drain of private capital. When the state became a purchaser of export produce during and after the Second World War in some colonies, public capital accumulation also occured externally as the profits were largely retained in London as sterling balances. Some degree of foreign ownership in the colonial economies was inevitable and necessary if the level of investment was to be raised. For some colonies, at some times, there was a net inflow of private capital and no doubt it was preferable for a colony to be attractive to foreign investors than to be completely neglected by them. The fact remained, however, that foreign investment imposed costs on the host economy. It was the role of government to minimise these costs, which related chiefly to the drain of profits and employment practices, by adopting policies which maximised the advantages of foreign investment to the host nation, for example through improved taxation measures. This was a difficult exercise for any government, but impossible for a colonial government where the bulk of foreign investment came from the citizens and firms of the imperial power. The purpose of colonial rule was to create conditions as favourable as possible for expatriate investment and British firms were often able to obtain more advantageous treatment from a British colonial government than they would have received from an independent one. These firms were also notoriously poor at effectively transferring the advanced knowledge, skills and technology at their disposal to the inhabitants of the colonies where they invested. They did not provide training facilities or employ indigenes at any but the most unskilled tasks. Any notion of the employment of natives in management positions, which would have required some period of work experience at head office in Britain, was completely out of the question until the imperatives of decolonisation forced a change of policy. The colonial governments sometimes criticised expatriate firms for this practice, but in reality were themselves no more willing to train and employ indigenes in responsible positions in colonial administration until the very end of colonial rule. Indeed, for most of the period they decried the emergence of the ‘educated native’. Thus colonialism denied these countries one of the major potential benefits of direct foreign investment, the transfer of technology and skills and the stimulation which the activity of the foreign firm in the host economy can give to local capitalists.<sup>12</sup> Finally, the tropical colonies faced unstable and usually declining terms of trade, the extent of which is shown in the relevant tables in the text (6.7, 7.4, 8.8, 10.5, 11.4, 11.5). There were several reasons why this happened. One factor was the narrow export base of the colonies. As we have seen, the three main exports in most cases accounted for 70 per cent or more of export earnings (Tables 8.9, 11.6). Despite lip service which was sometimes paid to the need to diversify exports (for example, in the quotations cited at the beginning of this chapter), the emphasis which colonialism placed on export growth inevitably led to overinvestment in particular export commodities and therefore to a narrowing of the export base. Export diversification as a long-term goal was a chimera. In addition, when ‘new’ export commodities were promoted—to meet Britain’s needs rather than those of the colonies—it frequently led to disastrous results, for instance, Tanganyikan groundnuts and Gambian poultry. In the second place, declining terms of trade in the colonies reflected the global tendency for primary products to decline in price in relation to the prices of manufactured goods.<sup>13</sup> Of the export commodities of the colonies, tropical foodstuffs such as coffee, tea, cocoa, sugar and fr uit, should have been less affected by this phenomenon as the temperate zone countries which were the main consumers of these foodstuffs could not (except in the case of sugar) produce their own supplies and nor were synthetics developed as substitutes for tropical foodstuffs. Even so, these commodities did suffer price collapses as well as periods of low static prices since the elasticity of demand in the industrial countries was low, and there were many tropical producers vying for the existing markets (even in cases where British colonies produced a large proportion of world output, as in cocoa) which lowered prices. Vegetable oils were one important group of tropical foods produced in British colonies which did suffer from competition from temperate zone production and the substitution of animal fats or mineral oils. Some foodstuffs were affected by the ability of the industrial countries to economise in their use in the manufacturing process (e.g. cocoa). Other tropical primary products (agricultural raw materials like rubber, cotton and sisal and minerals) entering world trade were even more vulnerable to competition from the temperate zone countries, to the substitution of synthetics and to economies in manufacturing. Third, the terms of trade declined because the primary products were exported in their raw state. Some degree of processing prior to export would have enhanced the value and therefore the relative price of primary commodities. Local processing, however, was not part of the colonial paradigm. It should also be pointed out that the cost of ocean transport (including insurance) increased substantially over the colonial period. External transport costs added to the price paid for imports while at the same time squeezed the price paid by the exporting firm to the producer, except where the producer could ship directly to the final market, which was not usually the case. A broader base of exports would have created more stable export growth, although in periods of world trade depression or stagnation there was less scope for tropical countries to raise export earnings. Such periods, however, were ones in which import substitution could have been encouraged to save on imports and absorb resources (especially labour) released from the depressed export sector. Import substitution would also have lessened the burden on export earnings to pay for imported consumer goods, though in the circumstances it might not have been viable for import substitution to go much beyond fairly simply manufactured commodities. If these could also have been exported it would have widened the export base and shifted its structure away from commodities whose relative prices were falling. Additionally, for a number of tropical colonies, import substitution included producing more basic foodstuffs for domestic consumption which in turn required a greater proportion of the resources available for economic development to be devoted to raising the productivity of non-export agriculture. Improvements to the productiveness of domestic agriculture and the development of secondary industry were necessarily complementary, not competitive, activities.<sup>14</sup> The provision of external capital not tied to export earnings (i.e. greater amounts of economic aid) would have reduced the dependence on the external market and allowed a reorientation of resources towards the non-export sectors. Domestic markets (and perhaps regional markets) could have had as much potential for growth—possibly more in foodstuffs and simple manufactures—as trade with the industrial countries, but the fundamental necessities of colonialism precluded a serious pursuit of alternatives to what amounted at times to a virtual ‘export or die’ mentality. The argument here is not that a more balanced approach to economic development was not considered—the Select Committee on Colonial Development in 1948 argued A large-scale advance in agriculture means reaching into every village, forming farmers’ groups and agricultural societies, demonstrating new techniques on farmers’ holdings, promoting co-operatives and providing fertilisers, improved tools and cattle. Individual farmers must become links in a chain reaction that stirs the whole community.<sup>15</sup> Rather, it is that the resources provided were not enlarged sufficiently to meet this goal and government priorities in practice were not re-ordered to give greater emphasis to the domestic economy.<sup>16</sup> The theory of economic development held by the colonial authorities thus remained at the rather superficial level of attempting to maximise production of primary products for export without any real investigation as to how export earnings could be used to achieve diversification and development in the economy as a whole. In short, a colonial economy. From these generalisations we turn now to the specific questions raised in Chapter 1 concerning the obstacles to achievement of colonial economic development in practice: the widespread illusions about the richness of the colonies’ resources; the problems of capital supply; the considerable political divisions and uncertainties in Britain; and the different views and perspectives about what type of colonial development was needed.<sup>17</sup> It was not surprising that initially there should have been illusions about the economic potential of the tropical colonies, for they were largely unknown to the British, and in the case of Africa comprised a vast area. What was more surprising was that the myths should have persisted for so long, in fact to the closing years of the colonial epoch. The very luxuriance of tropical vegetation (the ‘huge greenhouse with free heat and water’ in Leverhulme’s phrase) masked the thinness and instability of tropical soils, while the legends of the gold of ancient Ghana and the very real gold and diamonds which were beginning to pour out of South Africa in the 1880s encouraged the belief that the unexplored centre of Africa would turn out to be a mineral Eldorado. We have noted the easy assumption of unlimited wealth in the tropical colonies of Churchill and Chamberlain before the First World War, of Milner, Amery, Ormsby-Gore, Thomas and others in the 1920s and 1930s and of Cripps, Creech Jones and Strachey in the years after the Second World War. The persistence of this view led to the kind of thinking behind the Tanganyika Groundnut Scheme and many of the early projects of the Colonial Development Corporation. Colonialism, with its constant emphasis on alleged benefits to Britain, encouraged this kind of shallow analysis. Perhaps ignorance and self-delusion together with a desire for quick results go some way towards explaining the longevity of the tropical myth. The consequences of such illusions about the extent and speed with which the tropical colonies could be developed were particularly damaging when the resources which were available were in reality so meagre. The British tropical colonies were among the poorest societies on earth and yet the view that small amounts of capital would unlock the ‘riches of the tropics’ remained an underlying belief of many of those who had taken on the task of overseeing colonial economic development policy and made the success of such policy much more problematical. Undoubtedly the low level of capital investment was the major obstacle to economic growth and development in the tropical colonies. As we have seen, the provision of public capital for basic services such as transport and communications, urban amenities, water supply and so forth was an essential part of the Chamberlain approach to colonial development which assumed that private investment would follow once such infrastructure was in place. Investment by colonial governments in the economic development of their countries was severely handicapped by their small public revenues and limited ability to borrow funds from London. Colonial public revenues were closely tied to taxes on trade and these were necessarily kept fairly low. Expatriate firms operating in colonies were taxed lightly or not at all so that the burden of colonial taxation fell mainly on the mass of the people—who were generally the least able to bear it. Since colonial governments had to provide a range of social services in addition to paying the costs of administration, defence and the pensions of retired British officials, their meagre resources were too stretched to finance expensive infrastructure as well. Colonial governments could borrow from the London money market, and many of them did so at various times, but the amounts which they could afford to service were really quite small and a number ran into a foreign debt crisis. Borrowing internally depended on local capital markets which, as we have seen, were not regarded as necessary or desirable by the colonial regime and therefore remained very limited or non-existent in the colonial era. A further source of public finance was British government aid. The main ways in which this was made available have been detailed throughout this book. The shortcomings of aid were obvious: far too little was given and up to the 1930s nearly all of it was in the form of loans. Even after the Second World War in the final years of colonial rule, the amounts provided were not large in relation to either the size of the colonial empire or Britain’s national income. Partly this may have been because the amount of money required to provide adequate transportation systems and other public works was underestimated. More importantly, aid under conditions of colonial rule was viewed from the perspective of the centre. Its provision was regarded as a cost to the British taxpayer while its efficacy was measured in terms of its benefits to the British economy and to the prolongation of British authority. The Colonial Office bureaucrats sometimes laid stress on the benefits to the colonies, but it was the Treasury view which was the dominant one. In any case, just as frequently the Colonial Office advised the colonies that they should be grateful that anything at all was being done for them by the hard-pressed British economy. The Treasury both depreciated the effectiveness of public development expenditure and demanded that the British economy should benefit from such outlays of taxpayer’s funds as were allowed and the power of the Treasury line explains why it was impossible during the colonial era to produce any significant transfers of funds from the ‘centre’ to the ‘periphery’. The Colonial Development Corporation, too, was required in its operations to show an overall profit in the medium term and to engage (unsuccessfully as it turned out) in projects which were intended to help Britain. British colonial aid was given grudgingly and tied to the needs of the British economy as they were perceived from time to time and as a result was ineffective in promoting economic development. Private British capital did not, on the whole, respond to the Chamberlain strategy as anticipated. Possibly less subject to the illusions of the bountiful tropics (Leverhulme notwithstanding), the British business community showed scant interest in investing in the tropical colonies. Some investment in mining occurred but the number of new mining ventures was small and most colonies did not possess significant deposits (or they were not known about in the colonial period). Mining companies proposing new projects often demanded and received government assistance of various kinds before they would go ahead. Plantation industries such as rubber, tea, cocoa, sugar, fruit, sisal, copra, tobacco and coffee also received private capital for production but were discouraged by low prices and relative over-supply in the inter-war period and also turned to the state for support. The European plantation as a mode of production of tropical produce was often not competitive with small-holders who farmed more intensively and without the burden of overheads the expatriate firms struggled with. Thus the profits from private investment in agriculture by British capitalists, even under the favourable regime of colonial rule, were far from assured and often did not amount to the bonanza expected. After the Second World War high primary produce prices attracted foreign private investment again and undoubtedly export volumes and profits increased. Investment was hampered, however, by Britain’s balance of payments crisis and uncer tainty caused by decolonisation. Disinvestment of British private capital was experienced by some colonies upon becoming independent.<sup>18</sup> Other areas of the colonial economies received even less private British capital. The Ronaldshay Report in 1923 (Chapter 7) commented on the disinclination of British investors to develop transport and communications in the tropical colonies. Ocean shipping remained the only major activity of private expatriate investment for British colonies and these services frequently required government subsidy. Private investment in secondary industry was also minimal, particularly prior to the Second World War. Processing of primary export produce was the main sector where there was reasonable scope for local industry, but vested British interests ensured processing remained a metropolitan activity. Even when colonial governments did offer tax incentives to British investors in the 1950s these were nullified by the policy of the British taxation authorities.<sup>19</sup> Thus it was merchant trade which remained the first and last strong-hold of British capital’s interest in the ‘great estate’. Merchanting was a more attractive proposition than producing: investment was flexible, relatively little fixed capital was required, there were good opportunities for oligopoly profits and little opposition (which anyway could usually be crushed by the expatriate firms) from local traders. After the Second World War the continuation of statutory marketing in some colonies also opened opportunities to the large British trading firms to act as agents of the government. It was Britain as a nation of shopkeepers rather than as workshop or banker of the world which really responded to Chamberlain’s appeal. Had he lived to see it, he might well have been very disappointed with the lack of dynamism and commitment of the British business community. It was never part of the Chamberlain programme to strengthen the growth and development of a class of vigorous indigenous capitalists. Indeed, quite the opposite. Indigenous capitalism did emerge, slowly and inevitably, but its impact on capital accumulation and investment was muted by limitations imposed by colonial rule, for example, in the support given by government to the entrenched position of British trading firms and banks, and in the post–1945 fashion for experiments in ‘state capitalism’ as manifested by marketing boards and other bodies. The British colonial authorities were usually hostile to indigenous capitalism also on social policy grounds, being unwilling to accept or even acknowledge the social changes being wrought by the integration of the colonial economies into the world economy and preferring to regard the indigenous entrepreneur as a parasite or a scoundrel or, at best, an aberration. When colonial rule ended there was often an upsurge of indigenous enterprise in reaction.<sup>20</sup> Some of the reluctance which financiers felt about colonial investment may have arisen from continuing political uncertainty in the United Kingdom about the depth of commitment to imperial development, and this was so even before 1914. Despite the enthusiasm of Joseph Chamberlain, Alfred Milner, Lionel Curtis (and other members of ‘Milner’s kindergarten’) and Leo Amery, the imperial cause never succeeded in capturing even its most promising potential political ally, the Conservative Party. Chamberlain’s great campaign for imperial preference (1903–6) ended up by dividing the party and was a major contribu-tor to its humiliating defeat in the 1906 general election. Stanley Baldwin’s attempt to fight the same battle in 1923 led to a similar result. Ultimately imperialists of the Milner stamp were unable to make ‘constructive imperialism’ the centrepiece of Conservative Party political philosophy. The other political parties were even more ambivalent towards imperial development. Though Herbert Asquith, Sir Edward Grey and Richard Haldane were counted as Liberal imperialists, the Little Englander tradition was by no means dead in the party, and people on its radical wing opposed imperialist involvement for a variety of reasons, the belief that it was all being done for the benefit of financial specula-tors being prominent amongst them. Socialists and Labour politicians before the First World War were either hostile to the empire or else lukewarm supporters, like Ramsay MacDonald, whose two books, Labour and Empire (1907) and The Awakening of India (1910), while advocating colonial development also showed sympathy for nationalist aspirations. It must have been unclear to potential investors whether a future Labour government (admittedly something of a remote possibility in the years before 1914) would show much enthusiasm for the development or even the continuation of the empire. As it turned out, most of the important measures for promoting colonial economic development after the First World War were taken by Conservative governments; or by Labour administrations carrying out previously formulated Tory programmes. The only genuinely Labour initiative in this field was the creation of the Colonial Development Corporation and the Overseas Food Corporation in 1947, which represented the application of the Labour philosophy of ‘State Capitalism’ to colonial development. And, despite the CDC’s troubled early years it (like a number of Labour creations, though not, as we have seen, the OFC) was continued and supported by the Conservative governments of the 1950s. Developing the ‘Great Estate’ was not an area of significant conflict between the two main political parties in Britain, which no doubt contributed to the lack of general parliamentary and public interest in the matter.<sup>21</sup> Several important studies have shown that public opinion was aroused only by a few specific questions concerning the colonies, such as the future of white settlers in East and Central Africa, or the demand by Germany for the return of its former colonies in the 1930s, and by particular events such as the riots in the West Indies in 1938, the Malayan emergency (1948–60), rioting in the Gold Coast in 1949 and Mau Mau in Kenya in the 1950s.<sup>22</sup> Public ignorance of the colonial empire was deplored by Leo Amery in the 1920s, but there is no evidence that it was any less by the end of the colonial era, despite some attempts by the Colonial Office after the Second World War to publicise the colonies more.<sup>23</sup> Parliamentary debates on the colonies were infrequent and poorly attended. The establishment of a parliamentary standing committee on colonial affairs was mooted in the 1930s, but not acted upon and only four select committees on colonial matters were ever appointed.<sup>24</sup> In addition, there were relatively few Royal Commissions or commissions of inquiry established on colonial questions. The colonies, it would seem, were largely taken for granted, and even the question of decolonisation in the early 1960s received scant attention compared, say, to the debates over Britain’s entry into the European Community. The low profile of colonial development in British politics ensured that the ‘Treasury view’ prevailed and the flow of public funds to the colonies remained highly restricted. It also meant that important moves forward in colonial aid and development policy came only when either Britain faced particular economic crises (such as unemployment in the 1920s or shortages and balance of payments difficulties after the Second World War) or when resistance to colonial rule by nationalists reached a crescendo, or when British imperialism was the subject of foreign comment and criticism. This produced a pattern whereby assistance to colonial development was a hurriedly executed response to an immediate British problem or concern. Finally, the lack of interest in the tropical colonies reinforced the tendency for the political heads of the Colonial Office to remain for only short periods and for the colonial civil service to attract ‘caretakers’ rather than ‘builders’.<sup>25</sup> To what extent was the economic development of the colonies necessarily the central aim of British r ule as far as the colonial administrators were concerned? There was a pronounced dichotomy of views on this question. On the one hand, there were those who believed that economic development was desirable, even if it disrupted the traditional societies over which they ruled, whilst on the other hand there were those who believed that their ultimate purpose should be to exercise a ‘tr usteeship’ over the colonial peoples and that no development should be encouraged if it seemed likely to cause rapid disintegration of traditional society. Lord Lugard tried to integrate these two points of view in his work, The Dual Mandate in Tropical Africa (1922) which was widely read by colonial administrators and remained influential as a basis for British colonies policy into the 1950s.<sup>26</sup> He argued, as Benjamin Kidd had done twenty years before, that Britain had a responsibility to the other industrialised nations to ensure that valuable tropical resources were made available to them (and to Britain) in sufficient quantities and on equitable terms and that the inhabitants of the tropics had no right to prevent the exploitation of resources which the world market required.<sup>27</sup> At the same time, Britain had a duty to the indigenes to protect them from unfair practices and the social consequences of rapid economic growth. Thus British rule should ‘open up’ the colonies to expatriate enterprise while at the same time denying a major economic role to the indigenous population whose social position was to remain as unaltered as possible. Conveniently, this approach provided a justification for doing little in education or social welfare, since such initiatives might further exacerbate the adverse social effects of economic change. Colonial officials, whether in London or the colonies, often interpreted the ‘Dual Mandate’ in a way which placed preservation of the existing social structure ahead of more rapid economic change. In 1948 when Creech Jones assured the Cabinet that the Colonial Office and the colonial governments were indeed committed to a policy of ‘quick and vigorous’ economic development, he warned them: The rapid transfor mation of agricultural methods or the introduction of new industries must upset the existing social organisation, especially in Africa. Agricultural reform generally means some change in the systems of land holding, on which the whole social structure depends. It is our deeply rooted policy to preserve the social organisations we have inherited and modify them only gradually. That point is not merely wise in the best interests of Colonial peoples; it is practically wise in the sense that any more revolutionary policy, especially one which appeared to touch the African’s rights in his land, would cause serious political trouble. We must work, therefore, within the limits set by the tolerable pace of social change.<sup>28</sup> Of course, there was also a political dimension to the policy of preserving the existing social structure in the African and Asian colonies, for British rule depended on the active cooperation of traditional rulers to continue to be effective. If rapid economic change undermined the political power of these rulers, British control through ‘Indirect Rule’ would be threatened. These considerations may explain the marked lack of enthusiasm of British colonial officialdom towards the emergence of indigenous capitalism, especially if it competed with British enterprise and had nationalistic overtones. However applied, of course, trusteeship was never totally effective in suppressing indigenous enterprise: rural capitalism spread in West Africa; East Africans grew cash crops such as coffee and sisal; and Malays entered the forbidden world of smallholder rubber production. But the particular interpretation of ‘colonial trusteeship’ was undoubtedly part of the reason why the colonial regime did not press ahead with economic development as fast as it might have done.<sup>29</sup> Even if there had been a sustained effort to stimulate colonial economic development there remained the problem of framing long-term plans or programmes to achieve this aim. This arose partly from the short-term nature of the colonial experience of so many British businessmen and colonial administrators. Senior businessmen involved in colonial trade or production were usually resident in Britain and made only brief trips to the colonies, so that even if they had a genuine interest it was difficult for them to see the perspectives of the development picture in the same light as local residents. The idea for a large-scale groundnut scheme, for example, came to Frank Samuel, managing director of the United Africa Company, while making a plane trip across Tanganyika; perhaps he would have been less enthusiastic if he had been travelling by land.<sup>30</sup> Colonial administrators sometimes spent quite long periods in particular colonies when they were young (Sir Hugh Clifford, for instance, was in Malaya for 20 years between 1883 and 1903) but once they became more senior, periods of service shortened. Colonial governors seldom served for more than four years in any one colony, and thus found it difficult to initiate any but the most temporar y developments. They were often dogged by ill-health and even when they did propose specific projects they always had to overcome the suspicion of the Colonial Office. Even when it was not obsessed with short-term financial savings, the Colonial Office was always jealous of governors’ pretensions. During the 1930s some of the problems of the Colonial Office and the colonial service were recognised and the office was reorganised to include an economic department in 1934 and the service overhauled and unified by 1938. The need for better training of administrative staff was acknowledged and for more technical experts to be appointed, although financial constraints made implementation difficult.<sup>31</sup> The Second World War created a crisis in which long-term planning for colonial economic, political and social development was seen as vital. As discussed in Chapter 10 a more positive attitude towards economic questions was regarded by Lord Hailey as an essential area for reform in the training of colonial civil servants for the post-war period. And as shown in Chapter 11, planning became an essential part of the provision of British aid funds to the colonies under the 1945 Colonial Development and Welfare Act. The shortcomings of the ten-year plans drawn up by the colonies after the war have been noted. The Colonial Office in the post-war years was a much larger and more technically orientated body with a greater responsibility for the long-ter m development of the tropical colonies. There was more interchange between officials in London and in the field. There was even slightly greater continuity of its political heads.<sup>32</sup> By the end of the colonial epoch the administrative machinery for colonial development was undoubtedly far superior to that which had existed at earlier times, (although still lacking in economic expertise) and possibly this contributed to the more rapid economic change at the later stage; political independence from the late 1950s, however, cut short the full potential for long-term planning using this improved machinery and therefore it must be concluded that for much of the colonial period there was a marked absence of ‘forward vision’. Was economic development possible at all under British colonial rule or was the British colonial system inimical to economic progess? Perhaps the problem of colonial development was insoluble or at any rate too large for Britain to handle financially or in terms of the human resources it was prepared to devote to the task? It was sometimes suggested that one of the positive contributions which British colonial rule made was to provide political stability (‘law and order’) over much of the tropical world in contrast to the state of anarchy which allegedly preceded it.<sup>33</sup> This argument accepted without question the judgements of Europeans that what they witnessed was indeed ‘instability’ and also missed the point that much of what was taken to amount to inherent instability in the precolonial societies was itself the result of the invasion of European forces as they fought over the potential prizes available in the tropics. It implied that the various societies which came under European rule as a result of the ‘Scramble for Colonies’ were incapable of providing social stability themselves had they been allowed the opportunity to do so. That Britain was able to impose a pax on the tropics in the early twentieth century obscured consideration of the question as to what the sources of instability were, their real extent and whether these societies really required foreign invasion and conquest in order to achieve a peaceful existence. It was also sometimes argued that British colonial rule benefited the colonial economies in the tropics by the provision of transport and communications: railways, roads, airports, telegraph and telephones, ports and harbours. This is a stronger argument insofar as these facilities were provided to a significant extent and paid for by the British authorities. However, there are qualifications to be made in this regard. Much of the transport and communications system was built mainly to facilitate the export industries of the colonies and while this was important in stimulating the development of exports it left the colonies with a system which was lopsided in that transport links which served to integrate the domestic economy were generally assigned a lower order of priority or simply ignored. Just as colonial rule tended to build up strong trading links between the colony and the metropolitan centre, but to inhibit regional integration, so the export-oriented transport systems concentrated on the movement of goods between the export sectors and the ports, while failing to provide a network of communications which would serve the entire country and encourage diversification. Moreover, despite claims by the British to the contrary, the amount of investment in transport in the tropical colonies was extremely small compared with the size of the problem. Finally, much of it was financed in a way which placed the main burden for its construction and operation on the mass of the colonial inhabitants and on the export earnings of the colony in particular. Yet such investments usually exhibited a high capital equal output ratio and to be effective from the viewpoint of economic development in the interests of the colonial peoples should have been financed to a much greater extent by the British exchequer. Another alleged economic advantage of British colonial rule was the access it gave the colonies to Britain’s unsurpassed international trade and financial institutions. Britain was the world’s major market for tropical produce; it was a major exporter of manufactured goods; its capital market and commercial services were unrivalled. At least until Britain turned away from the Commonwealth and towards Europe in the later 1950s, this connection gave the British colonies access to significant markets for their exports and to British finance capital. However, while demand by Britain for tropical colonial produce was important, reliance on the British market represented a narrowing, not a widening, of export opportunities, and the limitations of access to finance capital for underdeveloped economies which could hardly afford ‘hard’ loans have been discussed already. It should also be borne in mind that the colonial monetary system was a rigid one which did not allow the local government any influence over the domestic money supply. The gold standard (and sterling exchange standard which replaced it after the First World War) of the colonial era may have encouraged investment by persuading foreign investors that British colonies were safe places to invest, and that colonial governments would not be permitted to print money or alter the foreign exchange rate, but at the same time it was a monetary mechanism which was brutal in its transmission of major fluctuations in the international economy to the local colonial one.<sup>34</sup> To return to our previous question. British colonial rule in the tropics was not so rapacious as to prevent any economic growth but, as we have pointed out, the major economic failing was structural imbalance which created colonial economies which were excessively dependent on the export of a narrow range of unprocessed primary commodities and which experienced deteriorating terms of trade as a result. British colonial rule was not able to do more to facilitate the development of secondary industries of various kinds because of its intertia, deference to British commercial interests and misguided ideas of ‘trusteeship’. At the more general level, British rule created nation states by redrawing the existing pre-colonial political boundaries. Whatever the economic benefits of this for economic growth, the new frontiers were drawn in a largely arbitrary manner, suiting the diplomatic imperatives of the European powers at the time but having little or no regard for ethnic, cultural or topographical factors and often cutting across existing regional economies. This process inhibited regional economic and political integration and left some small ex-colonies economically unviable as independent states.<sup>35</sup> This legacy of colonialism proved very difficult to reverse. On the social side, living standards in the tropical colonies rose only slowly (if at all) as increases in national income hardly exceeded those of population, yet colonial rule, at least in its later phases, was delivering rudimentary medical, public health and sanitation, education and other welfare services and aiming to do so on a mass basis. Had these problems been addressed at a much earlier stage the contribution of colonial rule could have been far more significant. However, it is difficult to imagine the British State providing health and welfare services to the inhabitants of its ‘tropical estate’ superior to those which were available at home, (even though health problems were far worse in the tropics), and prior to the Second World War Britain itself did not enjoy the benefits of a welfare state. Such an outcome would have hardly have fitted the nature of the colonial relationship. Economic development failed under colonial rule because the British government always wanted quick results from colonial economic expansion and expected to obtain these from unrealistically small financial outlays. Before the First World War the British government provided virtually no financial assistance to the tropical colonies and yet some at least expected the Chamberlain dream to become reality. In the 1920s the British government’s efforts increased somewhat as the unemployment situation worsened (or at least did not improve), culminating in the passing of the 1929 Colonial Development Act. With the advent of the slump and much higher levels of unemployment, the government tightened imperial preference and exhorted the Colonial Development Advisory Committee to do more for Britain’s economic plight yet cut its budget by 25 per cent. When these initiatives failed to alleviate unemployment, the government lost interest, and the colonial development fund drifted more and more into palliative welfare spending. The wartime measures of colonial development and welfare had a deal of political expediency about them—and nominally more money—but by 1943 the post-war shortages loomed and the colonial empire was now to be developed in order to feed a hungry world. Production of cash crops for export to Britain or the dollar area was given priority over production of foodstuffs for domestic consumption in the colonies. As the post-war crisis deepened, the colonies were once again urged to do more, and, since they were already doing all they could, new institutions to boost food and raw materials output were created in 1947, the Overseas Food Corporation and the Colonial Development Corporation. The quick results were not forthcoming: by the early 1950s expenditure under the ten-year plans was still going on but, owing to bottlenecks in supply of capital equipment and trained personnel, most plans were underspent. The OFC’s Tanganyika Groundnut Scheme was a disaster, the CDC was administratively in a mess and suffering from heavy project failure. The Colonial Development and Welfare Acts were renewed and five-year plans replaced the earlier ones, but after the Suez Crisis in 1956 the rising tide of colonial nationalism made formal independence an immediate reality and threw the whole future of British expenditure on colonial development into jeopardy. By the end of the 1950s the problems of economic development in the tropical colonies seemed more intractable and the costs higher while the supposed benefits of colonial rule to Britain’s economy appeared less tangible, especially as Britain moved closer to the economies of nearby Europe. Hanging on seemed less worthwhile and, the political initiative having been seized by the colonial nationalists, an increasingly unavailable option in any case. In the following five years nearly all of Britain’s tropical colonies attained independence.<sup>36</sup> Throughout this book we have shown that colonialism and development were largely contradictory and that this produced a gap between the dreams (or myths) of developing the ‘great estate’ and the economic realities. The structural imbalances in the economies of the British colonies which were apparent by the end of the colonial era were the direct result of the pursuit of the Chamberlain aim of buttressing the British economy with a ‘great estate’ in the tropics. In the end the Chamberlain dream was abandoned along with formal colonial rule but its persistence over the previous seventy years bequeathed the now excolonies a legacy which would continue to inhibit their economic development in the years to come.