## Bibliography Abbott, George C. ‘A Re-examination of the 1929 Colonial Development Act’, Economic History Review, 2nd ser., XXIV (1971), 68–81. Ady, P. ‘The Future of the Sterling Area: Ghana’, Bulletin of the Oxford University Institute of Statistics, 21, 4 (1959), 313–24. Ahmad, Jaleel. Import Substitution, Trade and Development (Greenwich, 1978). Allan, William. The African Husbandman (London, 1965). Allen, Richard B. ‘The Slender, Sweet Thread: Sugar, Capital and Dependency in Mauritius, 1860–1936’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XVI, 2 (1988), 177–200. Allridge, T.J. A Transformed Colony. Sierra Leone As It Was And Is (London, 1910). Alport, C.J.M. ‘Suggestions for a Reformed Colonial Development Corporation’, New Commonwealth, 14 Sept. 1953, 273–4. Alport, C.J.M. ‘The Colonial Investor and U.K. Taxation’, New Commonwealth, 24 Jan. 1955, 60–1. Ambler, Charles H. Kenyan Communities in the Age of Imperialism: The Central Region in the Late Nineteenth Century (New Haven, 1988). Amery, Julian and Garvin, J.L. Life of Joseph Chamberlain, vol. 4: At the Height of His Power (London, 1951). Amery, Leopold. My Political Life, vol. II. War and Peace, 1914–1929 (London, 1953). Anon. ‘A Service in Transition: Administrators for a Changing Empire’, Round Table, 26 (1946), 356–8. Anon. ‘What Marshall Aid Means to British Colonies’, Crown Colonist, Sept. 1950, 548–9. Asante, S.K.B. Pan-African Protest: West Africa and the Italo-Ethiopian Crisis, 1934– 1941 (London, 1977). Asiegbu, J.U.J. Nigeria and its British Invaders, 1851–1920: A Thematic Documentary History (New York, 1984). Austen, Ralph A. African Economic History: Internal Development and External Dependency (London, 1987). The Earl of Avon, The Eden Memoirs: Facing the Dictators (London, 1962). Ayearst, Morley. The British West Indies: The Search for Self-Government (London, 1960). Azikwe, Nnamdi. Renascent Africa (London, 1937, repr. 1969). Baer, George W. The Coming of the Italo-Ethiopian War (Cambridge Mass., 1967). Baker, Ray Stannard. Woodrow Wilson and World Settlement, vol. I (Gloucester, Mass., 1922). Baldwin, K.D.S. The Niger Agricultural Project (Cambridge, Mass., 1957). Baldwin, Robert E. ‘Patterns of Development in Newly Settled Regions’, The Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies, XXIV, 2 (May 1956), 161–79. Barnes, Leonard. Empire or Democracy? A Study of the Colonial Question (London, 1939). Barnett, Correlli. The Collapse of British Power (London, 1972). Bauer, P.T. ‘The Working of Rubber Regulation’, Economic Journal, 56 (1946), 391– 414. Bauer, P.T. The Rubber Industry: A Study in Competition and Monopoly (London, 1948). Bauer, P.T. West African Trade: A Study of Competition, Oligopoly and Monopoly in a Changing Economy (London, 1954). Bauer, P.T. ‘Marketing Monopoly in British Africa’, Kyklos, 9 (1956), 164–76. Beer, George Louis. African Questions at the Paris Peace Conference (New York, 1923). Belfield, H.C. (ed.). Handbook of the Federated Malay States (London, 2nd edn, 1904). Bell, Philip W. The Sterling Area in the Post-War World (Oxford, 1956). Benham, Frederic. Great Britain Under Protection (New York, 1941). Benham, Frederic. The National Income of Malaya, 1947–49 (Singapore, 1951). Benians, E.A., Butler, J., Carrington, C.E. (eds). The Cambridge History of the British Empire, vol. III. The Empire-Commonwealth 1870–1919 (Cambridge, 1959). Bennett, George ‘Settlers and Politics in Kenya, Up to 1945’, in Harlow, Chilver and Smith (eds), East Africa, II, pp.309–18. Benyon, John ‘Overlords of Empire? British “Proconsular Imperialism” in Comparative Perspective’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, 19, 2 (1991), 164–202. Beveridge, W.H. British Food Control (London, 1928). Biebuyck, Daniel (ed.), African Agrarian Systems (Oxford, 1963). Bigland, Alfred. ‘The Empire’s Assets and How to Use Them’, Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, LXV, 1917, 355–65. The Earl of Birkenhead, Halifax: The Life of Lord Halifax (London, 1965). Blakeley, Brian L. The Colonial Office, 1868–1892 (Durham, N.C., 1972). Blanshard, Paul. Democracy and Empire in the Caribbean (New York, 1947). Boahen Adu (ed.). Unesco General History of Africa, vol. 7. 1880–1935 (Paris, 1985). Bodelsen, C.A. Studies in Mid-Victorian Imperialism (Copenhagen, 1924). Bourne, K. and Watt D.C. (eds). Studies in International History (London, 1967). Bower, Penelope. ‘The Balance of Payments in 1936’ in M.Perham (ed.), Mining, Commerce and Finance in Nigeria (London, 1948) (Oxford, 1949). Bower, Penelope. The Balance of Payments of Nigeria in 1936 (Oxford, 1949). Boyle, Andrew. Only the Wind Will Listen: Reith of the BBC (London, 1972). Brailsford, Henry Noel. After the Peace (London, 1920). Braine, Bernard. ‘U.K. Income Tax and Colonial Industrial Development’, New Commonwealth (17 Mar. 1952), 256–7. Brett, E.A. Colonialism and Under development in East Africa: The Politics of Economic Change, 1919–1939 (London, 1973). Brodie, Fawn M. The Devil Drives: A Life of Sir Richard Burton (London, 1967). Brown, Ian (ed.). The Economies of Africa and Asia in the Inter-War Depression (London, 1989). Buchanan, Keith M. and Pugh, J.C. Land and People in Nigeria: The Human Geography of Nigeria and its Environmental Background (London, 1958). Buckley, Suzann. The Colonial Office and the Establishment of an Imperial Development Board: The Impact of World War I, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, II, 3 (1974), 308–15. Buell, Raymond Leslie. ‘“Backward” Peoples Under the Mandate System’, Current History, XX (June, 1924), 386–95. Buell, Raymond Leslie. International Relations, rev. edn (New York, 1929). Burghardt Du Bois, W.E. ‘Interracial Implications of the Ethiopian Crisis: A Negro View’, Foreign Affairs, 1–4, 1 ( Oct. 1935), 82–92. Burghardt Du Bois, W.E. ‘The Realities in Africa: European Profit or Negro Development’, Foreign Affairs, 21, 4, (1943), 720–32. Burnet, E. and Aykroyd, W.R. ‘Nutrition and Public Health:’, Quarterly Bulletin of the Health Organisation of the League of Nations, IV, 2 (June 1935). Sir Alan Burns, History of Nigeria (London, 1969). Burton, R.F. and Cameron, V.L. To the Gold Coast for Gold (London, 1883). Callahan, Raymond. ‘The Illusion of Security: Singapore 1919–42’, Journal of Contemporary History, 9, 2 (1974), 69–92. Cain, P.J. and Hopkins, A.G. ‘Gentlemanly Capitalism and British Expansion Overseas II: New Imperialism, 1850–1945’, Economic History Review, 2nd ser., XL, 1,40 (1987), 1–26. Cant, R.G. Historical Reasons for the Retarded Development of Pahang State, Eastern Malaya, New Zealand Geographer, 21 (1965). Carlton, David. ‘The Dominions and British Policy in the Abyssinian Crisis’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, I, 1 (1972), 59–77. Chamberlain, M.E. ‘Clement Hill’s Memoranda and the British Interest in East Africa’, English Historical Review, LXXXVII (1972), 533–47. Chapman, S.D. ‘British-based Investment Groups Before 1914’, Economic History Review, 2nd ser., XXXVIII, 2 (1985), 230–51. Cheng, Siok Hwa. ‘The Rice Industry of Malaya: A Historical Survey’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 42, 2 (1969), 130–44. Chowdhuri, R.N. International Mandates and Trusteeship Systems (The Hague, 1955). Clarke, J.I. (ed.). Sierra Leone in Maps (London, 1966). Clarke, W.M. Private Enterprise in Developing Countries (London, 1966). Clauson, Gerrard. ‘The British Colonial Currency System’, Economic Journal, LIV, 213 (1944), 1–25. Clifford, Hugh. ‘Life in the Malay Peninsular: As It Was And Is’, Proceedings of the Royal Colonial Institute, XXX (1898–99), 369–401. Clyde, Paul. Japan’s Pacific Mandate (Port Washington, 1935). Cocking, W.P. and Lord, R.F. ‘The Tanganyika Agricultural Corporation’s Farming Settlement Scheme’, Tropical Agriculture, 35, 2 (1958), 85–101. Conan, A.R. The Problem of Sterling (London, 1966). Conan, A.R. The Rationale of the Sterling Area (London, 1961). Constantine, Stephen. ‘“Bringing the Empire Alive”: The Empire Marketing Board and Imperial Propaganda, 1926–33’, in John M.Mackenzie (ed.), Imperialism and Popular Culture (Manchester, 1986). Constantine, Stephen. The Making of British Colonial Development Policy 1914 to 1940 (London, 1984). Cook, Elsie K. Ceylon, Its Geography, Its Resources and Its People (London, 1951). Cottrell, Philip L. British Overseas Investment in the Nineteenth Century (London, 1975). Cowan, C.D. Nineteenth Century Malaya (Oxford, 1961). Cowen, Michael. ‘Early Years of the Colonial Development Corporation: British State Enterprise Overseas During Late Colonialism’, African Affairs, 83, 330 (1984), 63–75. State Enterprise Overseas During Late Colonialism’, African Affairs, 83, 330 (1984), 63–75. Cowen, Michael and Westcott, Nicholas. ‘British Imperial Economic Policy During the War’, in David Killingray and Richard Rathbone (eds.), Africa and the Second World War (London, 1986). Cox-George, N.A. ‘Studies in Finance and Development—The Gold Coast (Ghana) Experience 1914–1918’, Public Finance, XIII, 1 (1958), 146–77. Crabtree, W.A. ‘The Conquest of Togoland’, Journal of the African Society, XIV (1914–15), 386–91. Cripps, Stafford. ‘“Colonies” Contribution to World Trade Stability’, Crown Colonist, (Jan. 1948), 7–8. Crisswell, Colin N. Rajah Charles Brooke. Monarch of All He Surveyed (Kuala Lumpur, 1978). Crooks, J.J. A History of the Colony of Sierra Leone, West Africa (Dublin, 1903). Crowder, Michael. Senegal (London, 1962). Crowder, Michael. The Story of Nigeria (2nd edn., London, 1966). Crowder, Michael. West Africa Under Colonial Rule (London, 1968). Curtin, Philip. The Atlantic Slave Trade: A Census (Madison, Wisconsin, 1969). Dane, Edmund. British Campaigns in Africa and the Pacific 1914–1918 (London, 1919). Darwin, John. Britain and Decolonization: The Retreat from Empire in the Post-War World (London, 1988). Davidson, Basil. Black Star : A View of the Life and Times of Kwame Nkrumah (London, 1973). Davies, Peter N. Trading in West Africa, 1840–1920 (London, 1976). Davis, Lance E. and Huttenback, Robert A. ‘The Export of British Finance, 1865–1914’, in A.N.Porter and R.F.Holland (eds), Money, Finance and Empire, 1790–1960 (London, 1985). Davis, Lance E. and Huttenback, Robert A. Mammon and the Pursuit of Empire: the Economics of Imperialism, 1869–1912 (Cambridge, 1986). Deane, Phyllis. The Measurement of Colonial National Incomes (Cambridge, 1948). Deane, Phyllis. Colonial Social Accounting (Cambridge, 1953). Dickson, Kwamina B. A Historical Geography of Ghana (Cambridge, 1969). Dilke, Charles. Greater Britain (London, 1868). Douglas, Roy. World Crisis and British Decline, 1929–1956 (New York, 1986). Downes, W.D. With the Nigerians in German East Africa (London, 1919). Drabble, John. ‘Investment in the Rubber Industry in Malaya c. 1900–1922’, Journal of South East Asian Studies, 3, 2 (1972), 247–61. Drabble, John H. Rubber in Malaya, 1876–1922, (Oxford, Kuala Lumpur, 1973). Drummond, Ian M. Imperial Economic Policy 1917 to 1939: Studies in Expansion and Protection (London, 1974). Dugdale, J. ‘Can the Colonial Development Corporation do Better?’, New Commonwealth (31 Oct. 1955) 412–13. Dugdale, J. ‘Should Britain Have a Bilateral Colonial Policy?’, New Commonwealth (5 Sept. 1955) 213–14. Dumett, Raymond. ‘Africa’s Strategic Minerals During the Second World War’, Journal of African History, 26, 4 (1985), 381–408. Earle, A.F. ‘Colonial Monetary Theory’, Social and Economic Studies, 3 (1954), 97–108. Eckstein, A.M. ‘Is There a “Hobson-Lenin Thesis” on Late Nineteenth Century Colonial Expansion?’, Economic History Review, 2nd ser., XLIV, 2 (1991), 297–318. Edelstein, Michael. Overseas Investment in the Age of High Imperialism: The United Kingdom, 1850–1914 (New York, 1982). Ehrlich, Cyril. ‘Building and Caretaking: Economic Policy in British Tropical Africa, 1890–1960’, Economic History Review, 2nd ser., XXVI, 4 (1973), 649–67. Ehrlich, Cyril. ‘The Uganda Economy, 1903–45’, in Harlow, Chilver and Smith (eds), East Africa, II (Oxford, 1965). Ekoko, A. Edho. ‘The British Attitude Towards Germany’s Colonial Irredentism in Africa in the Inter-War Years’, Journal of Contemporary History, 14 (1979), 287–307. Ekundare, R. Olufemi. An Economic History of Nigeria, 1860–1960 (London, 1973). Sir Charles Eliot, The East Africa Protectorate (London, 1905, Frank Cass, 1966). Emerson, Rupert. From Empire to Nation: The Rise to Self-Assertion of Asian and African Peoples (Boston, 1960). Fage, J.D. Ghana, A Historical Interpretation (Maddison, 1961). Fage, J.D. and Verity, Maureen. An Atlas of African History, 2nd edn (London, 1978). Fayle, C. Ernest. History of the Great War: Seaborne Trade, vol. II (London, 1923). Feiling, Keith. The Life of Neville Chamberlain (London, 1946). Fieldhouse, D.K. Black Africa, 1945–1980: Economic Decolonisation and Arrested Development (London, 1986). Fieldhouse, D.K. Unilever Overseas. The Anatomy of a Multinational, 1895–1965 (London and Stanford, USA 1978). Fiji, The Colony of, 1874–1924 (Suva, 1924). Fitzgerald, Walter. Africa, A Social, Economic and Political Geography (London, 2nd edn, 1936). Flint, John E. Sir George Goldie and the Making of Nigeria (Oxford, 1960). Fordham, Paul. The Geography of African Affairs (London, 1965). Fox, H.Wilson. ‘The Development of Imperial Resources’, Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, LXV (Dec. 1916), 78–91. Fox, H.Wilson. ‘The Development of the Empire’s Resources’, The Nineteenth Century and After (Oct. 1917), 835–58. Fox, H.Wilson. ‘Payment of War Debt by Development of Empire Resources’, United Empire, IX (Jan. 1918), 169–88. Frenkel, S.H. Capital Investment in Africa: Its Course and Effects (London, 1938). Frenkel, S.H. The Economic Impact on Under-Developed Societies (Oxford, 1953). Fyfe, Christopher. A Short History of Sierra Leone (London, 1962). Gailey, Harry A. A History of the Gambia (London, 1964). Galbraith, John S. ‘British War Aims in World War I: A Commentary on “Statesmanship”, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History’, XIII, 1 (1984), 25–45. Gallagher, John and Robinson, Ronald. ‘The Imperialism of Free Trade’, Economic History Review, 2nd ser., VI, I (1953), 1–15. Garside, W.R. British Unemployment 1919–1939 (Cambridge, 1990). Garvin, James L. The Life of Joseph Chamberlain, vol. 3. 1895–1900: Empire and World Policy (London, 1934). Geiss, Immanuel. The Pan-African Movement (London, 1974). George, David Lloyd. The Truth About the Peace Treaties, vol. II (London, 1938). Gerig, Benjamin. The Open Door and the Mandates System (London, 1930). Gifford, Prosser and Louis, Wm. Roger (eds). Britain and Germany in Africa, Imperial Rivalry and Colonial Rule (New Haven, 1967). Gilbert, Martin and Gott, Richard. The Appeasers (London, 1963). The Gold Coast Handbook, 1923 (Govt. Printer, Accra, 1923). Goldsworthy, David. Colonial Issues in British Politics 1945–1961 (Oxford, 1971). Greaves, Ida. ‘The Sterling Balances of the Colonial Territories’, Economic Journal, 61 (1951), 433–9. Greaves, Ida. Colonial Monetary Conditions (Colonial Research Studies, No. 10, 1953). Greaves, Ida. ‘Sterling Balances and the Colonial Currency System: A Comment’, Economic Journal, 63 (1953), 921–3. Greaves, Ida. The Colonial Sterling Balances, Essays in International Finance, No. 20 (Princeton, 1954). Green, R.H. ‘Ghana Cocoa Marketing Policy, 1938–60’, Nigerian Institute of Social and Economic Research, Conference Proceedings (Dec. 1960), 132–60. Grimble, Arthur. A Pattern of Islands (London, 1952). Guinn, Paul. British Strategy and Politics 1914 to 1918 (Oxford, 1965). Gungwu, Wang. A Short History of the Nanyang Chinese (Singapore, 1959). Gupta, P.S. Imperialism and the British Labour Movement (London, 1975). Haas, Ernst B. ‘The Reconciliation of Conflicting Colonial Policy Aims: Acceptance of the League of Nations Mandates System’, International Organisation, VI (1952), 521–36. Lord Hailey, An African Survey: A Study of the Problems Arising in Africa South of the Sahara (London, 1938). Hakam, A.N. ‘Impediments to the Growth of Indigenous Industrial Entrepreneurship in Ghana, 1946–1968’, Economic Bulletin of Ghana, 2, 2 (1972), 3–31. Hall, A.R. (ed.). The Export of Capital from Britain 1870–1914 (London, 1968). Hall, H. Duncan ‘The British Commonwealth and the Founding of the League Mandate System’, in K.Bourne and D.C.Watt (eds), Studies in International History (London, 1967). Hancock, W.K. Survey of British Commonwealth Affairs, vol. I. Problems of Nationality, 1918–1936 (London, 1937); vol. II. Problems of Economic Policy, 1918–1939; part 1 (London, 1940), part 2 (London, 1942). Hardie, Frank. The Abyssinian Crisis (London, 1974). Hargreaves, John D. Prelude to the Partition of West Africa (London, 1963). Hargreaves, John D. West Africa Partitioned, vol. II. The Elephants and the Grass (London, 1985). Harlow, V.T. A History of Barbados, 1625–1685 (Oxford, 1926). Harlow, Vincent, Chilver, E.M. and Smith, Alison (eds). History of East Africa, vol. II (Oxford, 1965). Harris Jr., Brice. The United States and the Italo-Ethiopian Crisis (Stanford, Calif., 1964). Harris, John H. ‘The Mandatory System After Five Years’ Working’, Contemporary Review, CXXVII (Feb. 1925), 171–8. Harrison, Desmond ‘Civil Engineering Problems of the East African Groundnuts Scheme’, Engineer (30 July 1948), 120–2. Hasib, A. ‘Money and Banking Problems in the British Colonies’, Indian Journal of Economics, 38 (1957), 73–81. Havinden, M.A. ‘The History of Crop Cultivation in West Africa: A Bibliographical Guide’, Economic History Review 2nd ser., XXIII (1970), 532– 55. Hawkins, E.K. ‘Marketing Boards and Economic Development in Nigeria and Ghana’, Review of Economic Studies, 26 (1958), 51–62. Hazlewood, Arthur. ‘Sterling Balances and the Colonial Currency System’, Economic Journal, 62 (1952), 942–5. Hazlewood, Arthur. ‘The Economics of Colonial Monetary Arrangements’, Social and Economic Studies, 3 (1954), 291–315. Hazlewood, Arthur. ‘Memorandum on the Sterling Assets of British Colonies: A Comment’, Review of Economic Studies, 22, 1 (1954), 72–4. Hazlewood, Arthur. ‘Sterling Balances and the Colonial Currency System: A Reply’, Economic Journal, 64 (1954), 616–17. Hazlewood, Arthur (ed.). African Integration and Disintegration (London, 1967). Hazlewood, Arthur. Economic Integration: The East African Experience (London, 1975). Headrick, Daniel R. The Tools of Imperialism (Oxford, 1982). Helleiner, G.K. ‘The Fiscal Role of the Marketing Boards in Nigerian Economic Development, 1947–61’, Economic Journal, 74 (1964), 582–610. Helleiner, G.K. Peasant Agriculture, Government and Economic Growth in Nigeria (Homewood, Illinois, 1966). Henderson, Ian. ‘Early African Leadership: The Copperbelt Disturbances of 1935 and 1940’, Journal of Southern African Studies, 2 1 (1975), 83–97. Henderson, Nevile. Failure of a Mission: Berlin 1937–1939 (London, 1940). Henderson, W.O. Studies in German Colonial History (London, 1962). Hennart, J.F. ‘Internationalisation in Practice: Early Foreign Direct Investments in Malayan Tin Mining’, Journal of International Business Studies, 17 (1986), 131–43. Herbertson A.J. and Howarth, O.J.R. (eds). The Oxford Survey of the British Empire, vol. II. Asia (Oxford, 1914). Hettiarachchy, Tilak. The Sinhala Peasant (Lake House Investments Ltd, Colombo, 1982). Hill, Polly. Migrant Cocoa Farmers of Southern Ghana, A Study in Rural-Capitalism (Cambridge, 1963). Hinden, Rita. Empire and After: A Study of British Imperial Attitudes (London, 1949). Hinds, Allister E. ‘Imperial Policy and Colonial Sterling Balances, 1943–56’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XIX, 1 (1991), 24–44. Hinds, Allister E. ‘Sterling and Imperial Policy, 1945–51’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XV, 2 (1987), 149–69. Hobley, C.W. Kenya, From Chartered Company to Crown Colony (London, 1929, 2nd edn, Frank Cass, 1970). Hobsbawm, E.J. The Age of Empire, 1875–1914 (London, 1987). Hobson, John A. Imperialism: A Study (3rd edn, London, 1988). Hodges, G.W.T. ‘African Manpower Statistics for the British Forces in East Africa, 1914 to 1918’, Journal of African History, XIX, 1, 1978, 101–16. Hon-Chan, Chai. The Development of British Malaya, 1896–1909 (Kuala Lumpur, 1964). Hopkins, A.G. An Economic History of West Africa (London, 1973). Hopkins, A.G. ‘The Victorians and Africa: A Reconsideration of the Occupation of Egypt, 1882’, Journal of African History, 27, 2 (1986), 363–91. Hopkins, A.G. ‘Accounting for the British Empire’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XVI, 2 (1988), 234–42. Hoskins, Halford L. ‘The Suez Canal in Time of War’, Foreign Affairs, 14, 1 (Oct. 1935), 93–101. Hudson, W.J. Billy Hughes in Paris: The Birth of Australian Diplomacy (Melbourne, 1978). Hyam, Ronald. Elgin and Churchill at the Colonial Office, 1905–1908, The Watershed of Empire—Commonwealth (London, 1968). Hyam, Ronald. ‘Empire and Sexual Opportunity’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XIV, 2 (1986), 34–90. Hynes, William G. The Economics of Empire Britain, Africa and the New Imperialism (London, 1979). Iliffe, John. A Modern History of Tanganyika (Cambridge, 1979). Iliffe, John. The Emergence of African Capitalism (London, 1983). Ingham, Kenneth. The Making of Modern Uganda (London, 1958). Isichei, Elizabeth. A History of Nigeria (Harlow, 1983). Jackson, James C. Planters and Speculators, Chinese and European Agricultural Enterprise in Malaya, 1786–1921 (Kuala Lumpur and Singapore, 1968). Jeffries, Charles The Colonial Empire and its Civil Service (Cambridge, 1938). Jessop, David ‘The Colonial Stock Act of 1900: A Symptom of the New Imperialism?’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, IV, 2 (1976), 155–63. Johnson, Howard ‘Oil, Imperial Policy and the Trinidad Disturbances, 1937’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, IV, 1 (1975), 29–54. Johnson, Marion ‘Cotton Imperialism in West Africa’, African Affairs, 73, 291 (1974), 178–87. Jones, Arthur Creech. ‘The Colonial Office’, Political Quarterly, XIV, 1 (1943), 19–32. Jones, Arthur Creech and Hinden, Rita. Plan for Africa (London, 1941) Kanya-Forster, A.S. ‘French Expansion in Africa: The Mythical Theory’ in Roger Owen and Bob Sutcliffe (eds), Studies in the Theory of Imperialism (London, 1972). Kay, G.B. (ed.). The Political Economy of Colonialism in Ghana (Cambridge, 1972). Kennedy, Paul. The Realities Behind Diplomacy: Background Influences on British External Policy, 1865–1980 (London, 1981). Kenyatta, J.M. ‘Hands Off Abyssinia!’, Labour Monthly, 17, 9 (Sept. 1935), 535–6. Kesner, Richard M. ‘Builders of Empire: The Role of the Crown Agents in Imperial Development, 1880–1914’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, V, 3 (1977), 310–30. Kesner, Richard M. Economic Control and Colonial Development. Crown Colony Financial Management in the Age of Joseph Chamberlain (London, 1981). Kidd, Benjamin Control of the Tropics (New York, 1898). Killick, A. ‘The Economics of Cocoa’ in W.Birmingham et al. (eds), A Study of Contemporary Ghana, I, The Economy of Ghana (London, 1967). Killingray, David. ‘The Empire Resources Development Committee and West Africa’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, 10, 2 (1982), 194–210. Killingray David and Rathbone Richard (eds), Africa and the Second World War (London, 1986). Kitching, Gavin. Class and Economic Change in Kenya (London, 1980). Kravis, Irving B. ‘Trade as a Handmaiden of Growth: Similarities Between the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries’, Economic Journal, 80 (Dec. 1970), 850– 72. Kubicek, Robert V. The Administration of Imperialism: Joseph Chamberlain at the Colonial Office (Durham, N.C., 1969). Kubicek, Robert V. ‘The Colonial Steamer and the Occupation of West Africa by the Victorian State, 1840–1900’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XVIII, 1 (1991), 9–32. La Guerre, John. ‘The Moyne Commission and the West Indian Intelligentsia, 1938–9’, Journal of Commonwealth Political Studies, IX, 2 (1971), 134–7. Langley, J. Ayodele Pan-Africanism and Nationalism in West Africa 1900–1945 (Oxford, 1973). Lanning, Greg. Africa Undermined: Mining Companies and the Under development of Africa (London, 1979). Laski, Harold. ‘The Colonial Civil Service’, Political Quarterly, IX, 4 (1938), 541–51. League of Nations, Report of the Committee for the Study of the Problem of Raw Materials, (No. A. 27, 1937, IIB (Geneva, 8 Sept. 1937). League of Nations, Industrialisation and Foreign Trade (Geneva, 1945). Lee, J.M. ‘“Forward Thinking” and War: The Colonial Office During the 1940s’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, VI, 1 (1977), 64–79. Lee, J.M. and Petter, M. The Colonial Office, War and Development Policy: Organisation and the Planning of a Metropolitan Initiative, 1939–45 (London, 1982). Leubuscher, Charlotte. Bulk Buying from the Colonies (London, 1956). Lever, William H. Viscount Leverhulme by his Son (London, 1927). Levi, John, and Havinden, Michael. The Economics of African Agriculture (Harlow, UK, 1982). Levi J., Havinden M., Johnson, O. and Karr, G.. African Agriculture: Economic Action and Reaction in Sierra Leone (London, 1976). Lewis, W.A. ‘Colonial Development’, Transactions of the Manchester Statistical Society, 116 (Jan. 1949), 1–30. Lewis, W.A. ‘Developing Colonial Agriculture’, Three Banks Review, 2 (1949), 3–21. Lewis, W.A. Report on Industrialisation and the Gold Coast (Accra, 1953). Lewis, W.A. ‘A Review of Economic Development’, American Economic Review, LV, 2 (May, 1965), 1–15. Lewis W.A. (ed.), Tropical Development 1880–1913 (London, 1970). Lewis, W.A. Growth and Fluctuations, 1870–1913 (London, 1978). Lewis, W.A. ‘The Slowing Down of the Engine of Growth’, American Economic Review, 70, 4 (Sept. 1980), 555–64. Lim, Teck Ghee. ‘Malayan Peasant Smallholders and the Stevenson Restriction Scheme, 1922–8’, Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 47, 2 (1974), 105–22. Lim, Teck Ghee. Peasants and Their Agricultural Economy in Colonial Malaya 1874–1941 (Kuala Lumpur and London, 1977). Lloyd, E.M.H. Experiments in State Control at the War Office and the Ministry of Food (Oxford, 1924). Lomax, K.S. ‘Colonial Demand for Cotton Goods’, Yorkshire Bulletin of Economic and Social Research, 4, 1 (1952), 67–71. Louis, Wm. Roger. ‘Great Britain and International Trusteeship: The Mandate System’, in R.W.Winks (ed.), The Historiography of the British Empire-Commonwealth (Durham, North Carolina, 1966). Louis, Wm. Roger. Great Britain and Germany’s Lost Colonies, 1914 to 1919 (Oxford, 1967). Louis, Wm. Roger. ‘The Origins of the “Sacred Trust”’, in Ronald Segal and Ruth First (eds), South West Africa: Travesty of Trust (London, 1967). Louis, Wm. Roger. Imperialism at Bay 1941–1945: The United States and the Decolonisation of the British Empire (Oxford, 1977). Lucas Charles (ed.), The Empire at War, vol IV (London, 1924). Lugard, Frederick. The Rise of Our East African Empire (London, 1893). Lugard, Frederick. ‘The Crown Colonies and the British War Debt’, Nineteenth Century and After, LXXXVII I (Aug. 1920), 239–55. Lugard, Frederick. The Dual Mandate in British Tropical Africa (London, 1922, repr. by Frank Cass, 1965). Lugard, Frederick. ‘The Mandate System and the British Mandates’, Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, LXXII (June, 1924). Lynn, Martin. ‘The “Imperialism of Free Trade” and the Case of West Africa, c. 1830–c. 1870’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XV, 1 (1986), 22–40. Lynn, Martin. ‘From Sail to Steam: The Impact of Steamship Services on the British Palm Oil Trade with West Africa, 1850–1890’, Journal of African History, 30, 2 (1989), 227–45. Lyttelton, Oliver. ‘Viscount Chandos’, The Memoirs of Lord Chandos (London, 1962). Maanen-Helmer, Elizabeth. The Mandates System in Relation to Africa and the Pacific Islands (London, 1929). Macdonald, Barrie. Cinderellas of the Empire: Towards a History of Kiribati and Tuvalu (Canberra, 1982). MacIntyre, W.D. The Imperial Frontier in the Tropics, 1865–1875 (London, 1967). Mackenzie, John M. (ed.), Imperialism and Popular Culture (Manchester, 1986). MacMillan, W.M. Warning from the West Indies: A Tract for the Empire (London, 1938). MacMillan, W.M. ‘The Real Colonial Question’, Fortnightly Review, CXLVIII (July-Dec. 1940, 548–57). McPhee, Allan. The Economic Revolution in British West Africa (London, 1926). Maddison, Angus. Phases of Capitalist Development (Oxford, 1982). Mair, L.P. Native Policies in Africa (London, 1936). Maizels, Alfred. Exports, and Economic Growth of Developing Countries (Cambridge, 1962). Malmsten, Neal R. ‘The British Labour Party and the West Indies, 1918–39’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, V, 2 (1977), 177–205. Martin, S.M. ‘The Long Depression: West African Export Producers and the World Economy, 1914–1945’, in Ian Brown (ed.), The Economies of Africa and Asia in the Inter-War Depression (London, 1989). Maxon, Robert M. ‘African Production and the Support of European Settlement in Kenya: The Uasin Gishu-Mimias Railway Scheme’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XIV, 1 (1985), 52–64. Maxon, Robert M. ‘The Kenya Currency Crisis 1919–21 and the Imperial Dilemma’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XVII, 34 (1989), 323– 48. Mazrui, Ali A. and Tidy, Michael. Nationalism and New States in Africa (London, 1984). Medlicott W.N. and Dakin Douglas (eds). Documents on British Foreign Policy, 1919– 1939, Second series, vol. XVIII, European Affairs, January 2-June 3, 1937 (London, 1980). Meek, C.K., MacMillan, W.M. and Hussey, E.R.J. Europe and West Africa: Some Problems and Adjustments (London, 1940). Meredith, David. ‘The British Government and Colonial Economic Policy 1919– 1939’, Economic History Review, 2nd ser., XXVIII, 3 (1975), 484–499. Meredith, David. ‘The Construction of Takoradi Harbour in the Gold Coast 1919 to 1930: A Case Study in Colonial Development and Administration’, Transafrican Journal of History, 5 (1976), 134–49. Meredith, David. ‘Government and the Decline of the Nigerian Oil-Palm Export Industry, 1919–1939’, Journal of African History, 25 (1984), 311–29. Meredith, David. ‘State Controlled Marketing and Economic Development: The Case of West African Produce During the Second World War’, Economic History Review, 2nd ser., XXXIX, 1 (1986), 77–91. Meredith, David. ‘Imperial Images: The Empire Marketing Board, 1926–32’, History Today, 37 (Jan. 1987), 30–6. Meredith, David. ‘The Colonial Office, British Business Interests and the Reform of Cocoa Marketing in West Africa, 1937–1945’, Journal of African History, 29 (1988), 285–300. Meredith, M. The Past is Another Country: Rhodesia, 1890–1979 (London, 1979). Meyer, Frederick V. Britain’s Colonies in World Trade (London, 1948). Middlemas, Keith. Diplomacy of Illusion: The British Government and Germany, 1937–39 (London, 1972). Viscount Milner, Questions of the Hour (London, 1923). Mitchell, B.R. International Historical Statistics, Africa and Asia (London, 1982). Mitchell, B.R. and Deane, Phyllis. Abstract of British Historical Statistics (Cambridge, 1962). Moggridge, D.E. ‘From War to Peace: The Sterling Balances’, Banker, 11 (1972), 1032–35. Moneypenny, W.F. and Buckle, G.E. The Life of Bejamin Disraeli, Earl of Beaconsfield, vol. III, 1846–1855 (London, 1914). Viscount Montgomery, The Memoirs of Field Marshal the Viscount Montgomery of Alamein, K.G. (London, 1958). Morel, E.D. Africa and the Peace of Europe (London, 1917). Morgan, D.J. The Official History of Colonial Development, vol. 1. The Origins of British Aid Policy, 1924–1945 (London, 1980). Morgan, D.J. The Official History of Colonial Development, vol. 2. Developing British Colonial Resources, 1945–1951 (London, 1980). Morgan, D.J. The Official History of Colonial Development, vol. 3. A Re-assessment of British Aid Policy, 1951–1965 (London, 1980). Morgan, D.J. The Official History of Colonial Development, vol. 4. Changes in British Aid Policy, 1951–1970 (London, 1980). Munro, J.Forbes. Africa and the International Economy 1800–1960 (London, 1976). Munro, J. Forbes. ‘Shipping Subsidies and Railway Guarantees; William Mackinnon, East Africa and the Indian Ocean’, Journal of African History, XXVIII, 2 (1987), 209–230. Musson, A.E. The Growth of British Industry (London, 1978). Nelson, W.Evan. ‘The Gold Standard in Mauritius and the Straits Settlements Between 1850 and 1914’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XVI, 1 (1987), 48–76. Newbury, Colin. ‘Spoils of War: Sub-imperial Collaboration in South West Africa and New Guinea, 1914–20’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XIV, 3 (1988), 88–106. Newlyn, W.T.. ‘The Colonial Empire’, in R.S.Sayers (ed.), Banking in the British Commonwealth (London, 1952). Newlyn, W.T. and Rowan, D.C. Money and Banking in British Colonial Africa (Oxford, 1954). Newton, Scott. ‘Britain, the Sterling Area and European Integration, 1945–50’, in A.N.Porter and R.F.Holland (eds), Money, Finance and Empire, 1790–1960 (London, 1985). Nigerian Handbook 2nd edn, London, 1954). Nworah, K.Dike. ‘The Politics of Lever’s West African Concessions, 1907–1913’, International Journal of African Historical Studies, V, 2 (1972), 248–64. Ochieng, William R. (ed.), A History of Modern Kenya (London, 1989). Okigbo, P.N.C. National Development Planning in Nigeria, 1900–1992 (London, 1989). Oliver, Roland and Mathews, Gervaise (eds). History of East Africa, vol. 1 (Oxford, 1963). Oliver, Roland and Sanderson, G.N. (eds). The Cambridge History of Africa, vol. 6. From 1870 to 1905 (Cambridge, 1985). Ormerod, Medwyn. ‘The Transport Problems of the East African Groundnut Scheme’, Journal of the Institute of Transport, 23, 11 (1950), 351–8. O’Neil, H.C. The War in Africa and the Far East (London, 1918). Owen, Roger, and Sutcliffe, Bob (eds). Studies in the Theory of Imperialism (London, 1972). Padmore, George. How Britain Rules Africa (New York, 1936, repr. 1969). Page, Melvin E. ‘The War of Thangata: Nyasaland and the East Africa Campaign, 1914–1918’, Journal of African History, XIX, 1 (1978), 87–100. Page, Melvin E. (ed.). Africa and the First World War (New York, 1987). Palmer, Robin and Parsons, Neil (eds). The Roots of Rural Poverty in Southern Africa (London, 1977). Parkinson, Cosmo The Colonial Office from Within, 1909–1945 (London, 1947). Peacock, Alan and Dosser, Douglas. The National Income of Tanganyika 1952–1954 (London, 1958). Pearce, R.D. The Turning Point in Africa, British Colonial Policy 1938–48 (London, 1982). Pearce, R.D. ‘Morale in the Colonial Service in Nigeria During the Second World War’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XI, 2 (1983), 175–96. Perham, Margery (ed.). The Native Economies of Nigeria vol. 1. The Economics of a Tropical Dependency by Daryll Forde and Richenda Scott (London, 1946); and vol 2, Mining, Commerce and Finance, by P.A.. Bower, A.J. Brown, C. Leubuscher, J. Mars and Sir Allan Pim (London, 1948). Perham, Margery. Lugard, The Years of Adventure, 1858–1898 (London, 1956). Perham, Margery. Lugard, The Years of Authority, 1898–1945 (London, 1960). Perrings, Charles. ‘Consciousness, Conflict and Proletarianisation: An Assessment of the 1935 Mineworkers’ Strike on the Northern Rhodesian Copperbelt’, Journal of Southern African Studies, 4, 1 (1977), 31–51. Peters, A.R. Anthony Eden at the Foreign Office 1931–1938 (New York, 1986). Peterson, John. Province of Freedom, A History of Sierra Leone, 1787–1870 (London, 1969). Pike, J.G. Malawi: A Political and Economic History (London, 1965). Polk, Judd. Sterling: Its Meaning in World Finance (New York, 1956). Pollard, Sidney. The Development of the British Economy, 1914–1967 (2nd edn London, 1969). Porter, Andrew. ‘In Memoriam Joseph Chamberlain: A Review of Periodical Literature, 1960–73’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, III (1975), 292–7. Porter, Andrew. ‘Joseph Chamberlain: A Radical Reappraisal?’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, VI, 3 (1978), 330–6. Porter, Andrew. ‘The Balance Sheet of Empire, 1850–1914’, Historical Journal, 31, 3 (1988), 685–99. Porter, Andrew. ‘“Gentlemanly Capitalism” and Empire: The British Experience Since 1750?’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XVIII, 3 (1990), 265–95. Porter, Andrew (ed.). Atlas of British Overseas Expansion (London, 1991). Porter, A.N. and Holland R.F. (eds). Money, Finance and Empire, 1790–1960 (London, 1985). Porter, A.N. and Stockwell, A.J. British Imperial Policy and Decolonisation, 1938–1964, vol. I. 1938–51 (London, 1987). Porter, A.N. and Stockwell A.J., British Imperial Policy and Decolonisation, 1938–64, vol. 2, 1951–64 (London, 1989). Porter, Bernard. The Lion’s Share. A Short History of British Imperialism, 1850–1970 (London, 1975). Porter, Bernard. ‘Imperialism and the Scramble’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, IX (1980), 76–80. Post, K.W.J. ‘The Politics of Protest in Jamaica, 1938: Some Problems of Analysis and Conceptualisation’, Social and Economic Studies, XVIII, 4 (1969), 374–90. Prebisch, R. The Economic Development of Latin America and its Principal Problems (New York, 1950). Pressnell, L.S. External Economic Policy Since the War, vol. 1. The Post-War Financial Settlement (London, 1987). Prest, A.R. War Economics of Primary Producing Countries (Cambridge, 1948). Prest, A.R. and Stewart, I.G. The National Income of Nigeria, 1950–51 (London, 1953). Pritt, D.N. The Labour Government 1945–51 (London, 1963). Raj, K.N. ‘Linkages in Industrialisation and Development Strategy: Some Basic Issues’, Journal of Development Planning, 8 (1975), 105–19. Rathbone, Richard. ‘World War I and Africa’, Journal of African History, XIX, 1 (1978), 1–9. Rendell, William. The History of the Commonwealth Development Corporation 1948– 1972 (London, 1976). Reynolds, Edward. Trade and Economic Change on the Gold Coast, 1807–1874 (London, 1974). Riedel, James. ‘Trade as the Engine of Growth in Developing Countries, Revisited’, Economic Journal, 94 (Mar. 1984), 56–73. Roberts, Andrew (ed). The Cambridge History of Africa, vol. 7, 1905–1914 (Cambridge, 1986). Robertson, Esmonde M. Mussolini as Empire-Builder (London, 1977). Robinson, Ronald and Gallagher, John with Denny Alice, Africa and the Victorians. The Official Mind of Imperialism (London, 1961). Rose, J. Holland, Newton A.P., Benians E.A. (eds). The Cambridge History of the British Empire, vol. II The Growth of the New Empire (Cambridge, 1940). Rotberg, R.L. The Rise of Nationalism in Central Africa: The Making of Malawi and Zambia, 1873–1964 (Cambridge, Mass, 1965). Rothwell, V.H. British War Aims and Peace Diplomacy 1914 to 1918 (Oxford, 1971). Royal Institute of International Affairs. The Colonial Problem (London, 1937). Royal Institute of International Affairs. Documents on International Affairs 1937 (London, 1939). Royal Institute of International Affairs, Germany’s Claims to Colonies (London, 1938, 2nd edn., 1939). Royal Institute of International Affairs, Raw Materials and Colonies (London, 1936). Rudner, Martin. ‘Financial Policies in Post-War Malaya: The Fiscal and Monetary Measures of Liberation and Reconstruction’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, III, 3 (1975), 323–46. Ryan, N.J. The Making of Modern Malaysia and Singapore (Kuala Lumpur, 1971). Ryan, Selwyn D. Race and Nationalism in Trinidad and Tobago: A Study of Decolonisation in a Multiracial Society (Toronto, 1972). Salter, J.Arthur., Allied Shipping Control an Experiment in International Administration (Oxford, 1921). Sayers, R.S. (ed.), Banking in the British Commonwealth (London, 1952). Sanderson, G.N. ‘The European Partition of Africa: Coincidence or Conjuncture?’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, III (1974), 1–54. Sardesai, D.R. British Trade and Expansion in Southeast Asia, 1830–1914 (New Delhi, 1977). Saul, S.B. ‘The Economic Significance of “Constructive Imperialism”, Journal of Economic History, XVII, 2 (1957), 173–92. Schacht, H. ‘Germany’s Colonial Demands’, Foreign Affairs, 15, 2 (Jan. 1937), 223–34. Schedvin, C.B. ‘Staples and Regions of Pax Britannica’, Economic History Review, 2nd ser., XLIII, 4 (1990), 533–50. Schmokel, Wolfe W. Dream of Empire: German Colonialism, 1919–1945 (Westport, Connecticut, 1964, repr. 1980). Schnee, Heinrich., German Colonisation Past and Future: The Truth About German Colonies (London, 1926). Scott, William R. ‘Black Nationalism and the Italo-Ethiopian Conflict 1934–36’, Journal of Negro History, 63 (1978). Segal Ronald, and First Ruth (eds). South West Africa: Travesty of Trust (London, 1967). Seymour, Charles. The Intimate Papers of Colonel House, vol. IV (New York, 1928). Shannon, H.A. ‘The Modern Colonial Sterling Exchange Standard’, IMF Staff Papers, 2 (1952), 318–62. Shannon, H.A. ‘The Sterling Balances of the Sterling Area 1939–49’, Economic Journal, 60 (1950), 531–51. Simon, Matthew ‘The Pattern of New British Portfolio Foreign Investment, 1865– 1914’, in A.R.Hall (ed.), The Export of Capital from Britain 1870–1914 (London, 1968). Singer, H.W. ‘The Distribution of Gains Between Investing and Borrowing Countries’, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 5, Supplement (May, 1950), 473–85. Skidelsky, Robert Politicians and the Slump: The Labour Government of 1929–1931 (London, 1967). Smith, Gaddis. ‘The British Government and the Disposition of the German Colonies in Africa, 1914 to 1918’, in Prosser Gifford and Wm. Roger Louis (eds), Britain and Germany in Africa, Imperial Rivalry and Colonial Rule (New Haven, 1967). Smuts, Jan., The British Commonwealth of Nations: A Speech Made by General Smuts, 15 May 1917 (London, 1917). Smyth, Rosaleen. ‘Britain’s African Colonies and British Propaganda During the Second World War’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XIV, 1 (1985), 65–82. Snelling, R.C. ‘Peacemaking, 1919: Australia, New Zealand and the British Empire Delegation at Versailles’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, IV, 2 (1975), 15–28. Sorrenson, M.P.K. Origins of European Settlement in Kenya (Nairobi and London, 1968). Spencer, Ian. ‘Settler Dominance, Agricultural Production and the Second World War in Kenya’, Journal of African History, 27, 4 (1980), 497–514. Stillson, R.T. ‘The Financing of Malayan Rubber’, Economic History Review, 2nd Ser., XXIV (1991), 589–98. Stockwell, A.J. ‘British Imperial Policy and Decolonisation in Malaya, 1942–52’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XIII, 1 (1984), 68–87. Stone, Julius. Colonial Trusteeship in Transition (Sydney, Australian Institute of International Affairs, 1944). Spraos John, ‘The Statistical Debate on the Net Barter Terms of Trade Between Primary Commodities and Manufactures’, Economic Journal, 90 (Mar. 1980), 107–128. Storry, Richard. Japan and the Decline of the West in Asia 1894–1943 (London, 1979). Strange, Susan. Sterling and British Policy (London, 1972). Supple, B.E. ‘Income and Demand, 1860–1914’, in Roderick Floud and Donald McCloskey (eds), The Economy History of Britain Since 1700, vol. 2, 1860 to the 1970s (Cambridge, 1981). Sir Frank Swettenham, British Malaya: An Account of the Origin and Progress of British Influence in Malaya (London, 1906). Synder, Rixford Kinney. The Tariff Problem in Great Britain, 1918–1923 (Stanford, 1944). Szereszewski, R. Structural Change in the Economy of Ghana 1891–1911 (London, 1965). Tawney, R.H. ‘The Abolition of Economic Control, 1918–1921’, Economic History Review, XIII (1943), 1–30. Temperley, H.M.V. (ed.), A History of the Peace Conference of Paris (London, 1920). Thoburn, John T. Primary Commodity Exports and Economic Development (London, 1977). Thomas, Ivor. ‘Dollar-Saving by Colonial Development’, Crown Colonist (Dec. 1949), 739–41. Thomas, Ivor. ‘Dollar-Earning by Colonial Development’, New Commonwealth (Apr. 1951), 482–83, 565–67. Thomas, Roger. ‘Military Recruitment in the Gold Coast During the First World War’, Cahiers D’Etudes Africaines, XV, 57 (1975), 57–84. Tibenderana, Peter K. Sokoto Province Under British Rule, 1903–1939: A Study of Institutional Adaption and Culturalisation of a Colonial Society in Northern Nigeria (Zaria, Nigeria, 1988). Tignor, Robert L. The Colonial Transformation of Kenya: The Kamba, Kikuyu and Maasai from 1900–1939 (Princeton, 1976). Tillman, Seth P. Anglo-American Relations at the Paris Peace Conference (Princeton, 1961). Tinbergen, J. Business Cycles in the United Kingdom 1870–1914 (London, 1956, 2nd edn). Todaro, Michael P. Economic Development in the Third World (4th edn, New York, 1989). Tomlinson, B.R. ‘Indo-British Relations in the Post-Colonial Era: The Sterling Balances Negotiations, 1947–9’, in A.N.Porter and R.F.Holland (eds), Money, Finance and Empire, 1790–1960 (London, 1985). Townsend, Mary E. The Rise and Fall of Germany’s Colonial Empire (New York, 1930). Trollope, Anthony. The West Indies and the Spanish Main (1859, repr. Alan Sutton, Gloucester, 1985). Turnbull, C.M. A History of Singapore 1819–1988 (2nd ser., Oxford, 1989). Turrell, R.V. and Van-Helten, J.J. ‘The Investment Group: The Missing Link in British Overseas Expansion Before 1914’, Economic History Review, 2nd Ser., XL, 2 (1987), 267–74. United Nations, Methods of Financing Economic Development in Under-Developed Countries (New York, 1949). United Nations, Special Study on Economic Conditions in Non-self-governing Territories (New York, 1960). United Nations, Yearbook of International Trade Statistics, 1952–1964. United Nations, Yearbook of International Trade Statistics, 1958–1964. United States, State Department, Foreign Relations: The Paris Peace Conference 1919 (Washington D.C., United States Government Printing Office, 1943). Van Zwanenberg, R.T. and King Anne. An Economic History of Kenya and Uganda, 1800–1970 (London, 1975). Viton, Alfred (pseud.). Great Britain, An Empire in Transition (New York, 1940). Viviani, Nancy. Nauru, Phosphate and Political Progress (Canberra, 1970). Waley, Daniel. British Public Opinion and the Abyssinian War 1935–36 (London, 1975). Wanner, Gustof A. The First Cocoa Trees in Ghana, 1858–1869 (Basle, 1962). Ward, J.R. Poverty and Progress in the Caribbean, 1800–1960 (London, 1985). Ward, William E.F. A History of Ghana (London, 1967). Watkins, Melville H. ‘A Staple Theory of Economic Growth’, Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, XXIX, 2 (May 1963), 141–77. Westcott, N.J. ‘Closer Union and the Future of East Africa, 1939–1948: A Case Study in the “Official Mind of Imperialism’”, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, X, 1 (1981), 67–88. Westcott, Nicholas. ‘The East African Sisal Industry, 1929–1949: The Marketing of a Colonial Commodity During Depression and War’, Journal of African History 25, 4 (1984), 445–461. Wicker, E.R. ‘Colonial Development and Welfare 1929–1957 The Evolution of a Policy’, Social and Economic Studies, 7, 4 (1958), 170–192. Williams, Eric. Capitalism and Slavery (London, 1944). Williams, Harry. Ceylon, Pearl of the East (2nd edn., London, 1863). Williamson, James. A Short History of British Expansion, The Modern Empire and Commonwealth (2nd edn, London, 1934). Wills, A.J. An Introduction to the History of Central Africa (Oxford, 1973), Winks, R.W. (ed.), The Historiography of the British Empire-Commonwealth (Durham, N.C., 1966). Witlam, P.E. ‘Change of Method Needed in Colonial Development’, New Commonwealth, (6 July 1953), 5–6. Wood, Alan. The Groundnut Affair (London, 1950). Woolf, Leonard. Growing, An Autobiography of the Years, 1904–1911 (London, 1961). Wraith, R.E. Guggisberg (London, 1967). Wright, Leigh R. The Origins of British Colonialism in Borneo (Hong Kong, 1970). Wright, Quincy. Mandates Under the League of Nations (Chicago, 1930). Wyse, Akintola. The Krio of Sierra Leone: An Interpretive History (London, 1989). Yates, P.Lamartine. Commodity Control: A Study of Primary Products (London, 1943). Yearwood, Peter J. ‘Great Britain and the Repartition of Africa, 1914–19’, Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, XVIII, 3 (1990), 316–41. ## OFFICIAL BRITISH PUBLICATIONS ## Reports of Committees, Commissions, etc. ‘Despatch from the Governor of British Guiana, May 1851’, Reports of Her Majesty’s Colonial Possessions, 1850, PP 1851, XXXIV (1421). ‘Despatch from the Governor of the Gold Coast, April 7, 1851’, XXXIV (1421). ‘Despatch from Governor John Higginson to Colonial Secretary’, 16 May 1851, XXXIV (1421). ‘Despatch from the Governor of Jamaica, December 31, 1851’, Reports of Her Majesty’s Colonial Possessions, 1851, PP 1852, XXXI (1539). A Return of the Area and Population of Each Division of Each Presidency of India from the Latest Inquiries. PP 1857, XXIX (215. Ser. 2), 83. Report from the Select Committee Appointed to Consider the State of the British Settlements on the Western Coast of Africa, PP 1865, 1 (412). ‘Report on the Straits Settlements Blue Book for the Year 1881’, Papers Relating to Her Majesty’s Colonial Possessions. Reports for 1880, 1881 and 1882, PP 1883, XLV (3642). Recommendations of the Economic Conference (Paris) of the Allies, PP 1916, XXXIV (Cmd 8271), 11. Copy of Resolutions Passed by the Committee on Commercial and Industrial Policy After the War on the Subject of Imperial Preference, PP 1917–18, XXIII (Cmd 8482), 315. Extracts from Proceedings and Papers Laid Before the Imperial War Conference, PP 1917–18, XXIII (Cmd 8566), 319. Final Report of the Committee on Commercial and Industrial Policy After the War, PP 1918, XIII (Cmd 9035), 239. Colonies’ War Contribution. Treasury Minute, PP 1918, XVII (Cmd 9183), 365. Correspondence Relating to the Wishes of the Natives of the German Colonies as to their Future Government, PP 1918, XVII (Cmd 9210), 379. Report of the Empire Cotton Growing Committee, PP 1920, XVI (Cmd 523), 13. Report of the Tropical Agricultural College Committee, PP 1920, XXV (Cmd 562), 521. Imperial Economic Conference 1923, Summary of Conclusions, PP 1923, XXI, Pt. 1 (Cmd 1990), 197. Report on the Imperial Institute Committee of Enquiry, PP 1923, Pt. 1 (Cmd 1997), 197. Imperial Economic Conference 1923, Record of Proceedings and Documents, PP 1924, X (Cmd 2009), 313. Private Enterprise in British Tropical Africa: Report of the Committee appointed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies, to consider and report whether, and if so, what measures could be taken to encourage Private Enterprise in the development of the, PP 1924, VIII (Cmd 2016), 195. Resolutions Relating to Imperial Preference at the Imperial War Conference, 1917 and the Imperial Economic Conference, 1923, with detailed Statements of the Proposals laid before the Conference of 1023, and of the Preference in force from 1919 to 1924 PP 1924, XVIII (Cmd 2084), 45. Statement of the Position of His Majesty’s Government in Regard to the Resolution of the Imperial Economic Conference 1923, and the Proposals laid before the Conference by His Majesty’s late Government, PP 1924, XVIII (Cmd 2115), 55. Report on the East Africa Protectorate 1924, 25, 1924–25, IX (Cmd 2387), 855. Memorandum, by the Committee on Trade and Industry, on Transport Development and Cotton Growing in East Africa, 1924–25, PP 1925, XXI (Cmd 2463), 39. Imperial Economic Committee, Report on Marketing and Preparing for Market of Foodstuffs Produced in the Overseas Parts of the Empire, PP 1924–5, XIII (Cmd 2493), 799. Imperial Conference 1926. Appendices to the Summary, PP 1926, xi (Cmd 2769), 607. Empire Marketing Board, Note on the Work of the Board and Statement of Research Grants Approved by the Secretary of State from July 1926 to May 1927, PP 1927, XVIII (Cmd 2898), 23. First and Second Reports from the Select Committee on Estimates, 30 April and 19 July 1928, PP 1928, VI (71, 114)[Empire Marketing Board]. Statement on Works Approved for Grants in Connection with Unemployment under the Development (Loan Guarantees and Grants) Act 1929, and the Colonial Development Act 1929, and from the Road Fund, PP 1929–30, XXV (Cmd 3449), 929. Report of the East Africa Guaranteed Loan Committee 1926–9, PP 1929–30, VIII (Cmd 3494), 589. Report of a Committee on the System of Appointment in the Colonial Office and the Colonial Services, PP 1929–30, VIII (Cmd 3554), 677. Statement on Works Approved for Government Financial Assistance in Connection with Unemployment, PP 1929–30, XXV (Cmd 3616), 947. Report of the Committee on National Expenditure, PP 1930–1, XVI (Cmd 3920), 1. First and Second Reports from the Select Committee on Estimates, 21 March and 20 June 1932, PP 1931–2, IV (55, 90)[Empire Marketing Board and Colonial Development Fund]. Report of the Commission Appointed to Enquire into the Disturbances in the Copperbelt of Northern Rhodesia, October 1935, PP 1934–5, VII (Cmd 5009), 587. Trinidad and Tobago Disturbances, 1937, Report of Commission, PP 1937–8, XV (Cmd 5641), 537. Report of the Commission on the Marketing of West African Cocoa, PP 1937–8, IX (Cmd. 5845), 191. Nutrition in the Colonial Empire, Report of the Economic Advisory Council, PP 1938–9, X (Cmd 6050), 55. Summary of Information Regarding Nutrition in the Colonial Empire Report of the Economic Advisory Council, Part II, PP 1938–9, X (Cmd 6051), 265. Report on Labour Conditions in the West Indies, PP 1938–9, XV (Cmd 6070), 721. Colonial Office, Labour Conditions in Northern Rhodesia (Colonial No. 150 HMSO, London, 1938). Statement of Policy on Colonial Development and Welfare, PP 1939–40, X (Cmd 6175), 25. Financial and Explanatory Memorandum of the Colonial Development and Welfare Bill, PP 1939–40 (40), I. Despatch from the Secretary of State for the Colonies to the Colonial Governments Regarding Certain Aspects of Colonial Policy in Wartime, PP 1940–1, VIII (Cmd 6299), 1. Colonial Research Committee Progress Report 1942–3, PP 1942–3, IX (Cmd 6486), 619. West India Royal Commission Report, PP 1944–5, VI (Cmd 6607), 245. Colonial Development and Welfare: Despatch Dated 12 November 1945, from the Secretary of State for the Colonies to Colonial Governments, PP 1945–6, XIX (Cmd 6713), 35. Colonial Office, Organisation of the Colonial Civil Service (Colonial No. 197, London, 1946). Colonial Office, Post-War Training for the Colonial Service (Colonial No. 198, London, 1946). Enquiry into the Cost of Living and Control of the Cost of Living in the Colony and Protectorate of Nigeria (1946, Colonial No. 204). Fifth Report from the Select Committee an Estimates, Colonial Development, June 1948, PP 1947–8, VIII (181–1), 1. British Dependencies in the Far East 1945–1949, PP 1948–9, XIII, (Cmd 7709), 371. A Plan for the Mechanised Production of Groundnuts in East and Central Africa, PP 1946– 7, X (Cmd 7030), 279. East African Groundnuts Scheme, Review of Progress to the End of November 1947, PP 1947–8, XI (Cmd 7314), 1. The Future of the Overseas Food Corporation, January 1951, PP 1950–1, XXVII (Cmd 8125), 925. Second Report from the Committee of Public Accounts, May 1950, PP 1950, III (70). Commonwealth Economic Conference, Final Communique, PP 1952–3, XXIII (Cmd 8717), 387. The Future of the Overseas Food Corporation, May 1954, PP 1953–4, XXVI (Cmd 9158). Colonial Office, Memorandum on the Sterling Assets of the British Colonies (Colonial No. 298, 1953). Report on the Use of Funds Provided Under the Colonial Development and Welfare Acts and Outline of the Proposal for Exchequer Loans the Colonial Territories, PP 1958–9, X (Cmd 672), 107. Report of the Committee of Enquiry into the Financial Structure of the Colonial Development Corporation, September 1959, PP 1958–9, X (Cmd 786), 77. Fourth Report from the Select Committee on Estimates, Colonial Office, PP 1959–60, VI (260). The British Colonial Ter ritories in 1950: A Regional Review of Progress (British Information Services, ID, 1050, New York, March 1951). ## Annual Reports ## Colonial Development First interim report of the Colonial Development Advisory Committee, Aug. 1929–Feb. 1930, PP 1929–30, VIII (Cmd 3540), 609. Second, 1930–31, PP 1930–31, X (Cmd 3876), 959. Third, 1931–32, PP 1931–32, VI (Cmd 4079), 485. Fourth, 1932–33, PP 1932–33, X (Cmd 4316), 481. Fifth, 1933–34, PP 1933–34, IX (Cmd 4634), 819. Sixth, 1934–35, PP 1934–35, VII (Cmd 4916), 681. Seventh, 1935–36, PP 1935–36, VII (Cmd 5202) 965. Eighth, 1936–37, PP 1936–37, IX (Cmd 5537) 509. Ninth, 1937–38, PP 1937–38, IX (Cmd 5789) 421. Tenth, 1938–39, PP 1938–39, X (Cmd 6062) 7. Eleventh and final report, 1 Apr. 1939 to 17 Jul. 1940, PP 1940–41, IV (Cmd 6298), 189. ## Colonial Development Fund Abstract Account of the Colonial Development Fund for the year ended 31st March, 1931, PP 1931–32, XVIII (24), 753. 31st March, 1932, PP 1932–33, XX (34), 657. 31st March, 1933, PP 1933–34, XX (29), 667. 31st March, 1934, PP 1934–35, XVI (36), 677. 31st March, 1935, PP 1935–36, XIX (29), 693. 31st March, 1936, PP 1936–37, XX (35), 721. 31st March, 1937, PP 1937–38, XX (31), 817. 31st March, 1938, PP 1938–39, XX (37), 939. 31st March, 1939, PP 1939–40, X (34), 1. 31st March, 1940, PP 1940–41, V (40), 125. 31st March, 1941, PP 1941–42, V (18), 131. ## Colonial Development and Welfare Report on the operation of the Act to 31st October, 1942, PP 1942–43, IX (Cmd 6422), 601. Return of schemes under the Act in the period 1st November, 1942 to 31st March, 1943, PP 1942–43, IX (Cmd 6457), 615. 1 Apr. 1943 to 31 Mar. 1944, PP 1943–44, VII (Cmd 6532), 601. 1 Apr. 1944 to 31 Mar. 1945, PP 1944–45, XIX (105), 597. 1 Apr. 1945 to 31 Mar. 1946, PP 1945–46, XIX (150), 1. 1 Apr. 1946 to 31 Mar. 1947, PP 1946–47, XIX (127), 73 1 Apr. 1947 to 31 Mar. 1948, PP 1947–48, XXI (166), 11. 1 Apr. 1948 to 31 Mar. 1949, PP 1948–49, XXIX (211), 1. 1 Apr. 1949 to 31 Mar. 1950, PP 1950, XIX (107), 9. 1 Apr. 1950 to 31 Mar. 1951, PP 1950–51, XXVI (189), 473. 1 Apr. 1951 to 31 Mar. 1952, PP 1951–52, XXIV (211). 267. 1 Apr. 1952 to 31 Mar. 1953, PP 1952–53, XXIII (189), 361. 1 Apr. 1953 to 31 Mar. 1954, PP 1953–54, XXV (181), 209. 1 Apr. 1954 to 31 Mar. 1955, PP 1955–56, XXXV (5), 1. 1 Apr. 1955 to 31 Mar. 1956, PP 1955–56, XXXV (309), 33. 1 Apr. 1956 to 31 Mar. 1957, PP 1956–57, XXVI (200), 1. 1 Apr. 1957 to 31 Mar. 1958, PP 1957–58, XXIV (223), 1. 1 Apr. 1958 to 31 Mar. 1959, PP 1958–59, XXV (240), 1. 1 Apr. 1959 to 31 Mar. 1960, PP 1959–60, XXVII (244) 1 Apr. 1960 to 31 Mar. 1961, PP 1960–61, XXVII (240) 1 Apr. 1961 to 31 Mar. 1962, PP 1961–62, XXX (232) 1 Apr. 1962 to 31 Mar. 1963, PP 1962–63, XXX (342) 1 Apr. 1963 to 31 Mar. 1964, PP 1963–64, XXV (313) 1 Apr. 1964 to 31 Mar. 1965, PP 1964–65, XXVIII (305) 1 Apr. 1965 to 31 Mar. 1966, PP 1966–67, LII (160) 1 Apr. 1966 to 31 Mar. 1967, PP 1966–67, LII (587) 1 Apr. 1967 to 31 Mar. 1968, PP 1967–68, XXXVIII (424) 1 Apr. 1968 to 31 Mar. 1969, PP 1968–69, LII (393) 1 Apr. 1969 to 31 Mar. 1970, PP 1970–71, VIII (92) Colonial Development and Welfare Acts 1929–70: A Brief Review. PP 1970–71, VIII (Cmd 4677), 575. ## Colonial Development Corporation Annual Report and Statement of Accounts for the year ended 31 December 1948, PP 1948– 49, XIII (188), 471. 31 December 1949, PP 1950, VIII (105) 171. 31 December 1950, PP 1950–51, X (161), 571. 31 December 1951, PP 1951–52, IX (167), 95. 31 December 1952, PP 1952–53, VIII (158), 685. 31 December 1953, PP 1953–54, X (148), 783. 31 December 1954, PP 1954–55, IV (113), 279. 31 December 1955, PP 1955–56, XII (260), 839. 31 December 1956, PP 1956–57, IX (151), 889. 31 December 1957, PP 1957–58, IX (164), 1. 31 December 1958, PP 1958–59, X (214), 1. 31 December 1959, PP 1959–60, X (211), 207. 31 December 1960, PP 1960–61, X (199), 1. 31 December 1961, PP 1961–62, IX (201), 1. 31 December 1962, PP 1962–63, X (226), 1. ## OVERSEAS FOOD CORPORATION Annual Report and Accounts for the period ended 31 March 1949, PP 1948–49, XIX (252), 1. 31 March 1950, PP 1950, XIII (147), 95. 31 March 1951, PP 1951–52, XVII (1), 697. 31 March 1952, PP 1952–53, XVI (51), 123. 31 March 1953, PP 1953–54, XVIII (30), 45. 31 March 1954, PP 1953–54, XVIII (296), 143. 31 March 1955, PP 1955–56, XXVI (195), 1. ## Colonial Territories Statement to Accompany the Estimates for Colonial and Middle Eastern Services, 1938, PP 1937–8, XX (Cmd 5760), 841. Statement to Accompany the Estimates for Colonial and Middle Eastern Services, 1939, PP 1938–9, XX (Cmd 6023), 965. Report on the Colonial Empire (1939–47), PP 1946–47, X (Cmd 7167), 403. Report on the Colonial Empire, 1947–8, PP 1947–48, XI (Cmd 7433), 47. Progress Report on the Colonial Territories, 1948–49, PP 1948–49, XIII (Cmd 7715), 641. 1949–50, PP 1950, VIII (Cmd 7958), 415. The Colonial Territories, 1950–1, PP 1950–1, XXVI (Cmd 8243), 1. 1951–52, PP 1951–2, XXIV (Cmd 8553), 1. 1952–53, PP 1952–3, XXIII (Cmd 8856), 1. 1953–54, PP 1953–4, XXV (Cmd 9169), 1. 1954–55, PP 1955–6, XIII (Cmd 9489), 1. 1955–56, PP 1955–6, XIII (Cmd 9769), 197. 1956–57, PP 1956–7, X (Cmd 195), 315. 1957–58, PP 1957–8, IX (Cmd 451), 393. 1958–59, PP 1958–9, X (Cmd 780), 475. (Trade and Commerce Section). Sixty-ninth Number, PP 1946–7, XV (Cmd 7224), 497 1959–60, PP 1959–60, X (Cmd 1065) 1960–61, PP 1960–1 (Cmd 1407) 1961–62, PP 1961–2 XI (Cmd 1751) ## Statistical Abstracts Statistical Abstract for the several British Colonies, Possessions, and Protectorates in Each year from 1896 to 1910, Forty-eighth Number, PP 1911, XCVIII (Cmd 6003), 711. 1897 to 1911, Forty-ninth Number, PP 1912–13, CIII (Cmd 6533), 599. 1898 to 1912, Fiftieth Number, PP 1914, XCVI (Cmd 7165), 313. 1899 to 1913, Fifty-first Number, PP 1914–16, LXXIX (Cmd 7786) 1. 1900 to 1914, Fifty-second Number, PP 1916, XXXII (Cmd 8329), 1. 1901 to 1915, Fifty-third Number, PP 1918, XXV (Cmd 9051), 131. Statistical Abstract for British Self-governing Dominions, Colonies, Possessions, and Protectorates in Each Year from 1903 to 1917. Fifty-fourth Number, PP XLIX (Cmd 664), 233. To 1919, Fifty-fifth Number, PP 1922, XXII (Cmd 1630), 463. To 1921, Fifty-sixth Number, PP 1924, XXIV (Cmd 2247), 365. To 1923, Fifty-seventh Number, PP 1926, XXVIII (Cmd 2738), 311. To 1925, Fifty-eighth Number, PP 1928–9, XXI (Cmd 3198), 395. Statistical Abstract for the several British Oversea Dominions and Protectorates in each of the years 1913 and from 1922 to 1927. Fifty-ninth Number, PP 1929–30, XXX (Cmd 3434), 1. 1913 and from 1924 to 1929, Sixtieth Number, PP 1930–1, XXIX (Cmd 3919), 419. 1924 to 1930, Sixty-first Number, PP 1931–2, XXIV (Cmd 4102), 421. 1925 to 1931, Sixty-second Number, PP 1932–3, XXV (Cmd 4393), 421. 1924 to 1933, Sixty-third Number, PP 1934–5, XXII (Cmd 4819), 433. 1925 to 1934, Sixty-fourth Number, PP 1935–6, XXVI (Cmd 5016) 1. 1926 to 1935, Sixty-fifth Number, PP 1936–7, XXVII (Cmd 5298), 1. 1927 to 1936, Sixty-sixth Number, PP 1937–8 XXVIII (Cmd 5582), 285. 1928 to 1937, Sixty-seventh Number, PP 1937–8, XXVIII (Cmd 5872), 529. 1929 to 1938, Sixty-eighth Number, PP 1939–40, xi (Cmd 6140), 1. Statistical Abstract for the British Commonwealth for each of the ten years 1936 to 1945 Statistical Abstract for the British Commonwealth for the years 1933 to 1939 and 1945 to 1947. Seventieth Number. PP 1950 (Cmd 8051) Statistical Abstract for the Commonwealth (Trade Statistics, with an appendix for the Sterling Area), Seventy-first Number, 1947, 1948, 1949 and the first half of 1950 (HMSO, London, 1951). Statistical Abstract for the Commonwealth (Trade Statistics), Seventy-second Number, 1948–51 (HMSO, London, 1952). The Commonwealth and the Sterling Area, 73rd Statistical Abstract, 1949–52 (HMSO, London, 1953). No. 74, 1950–1953 (HMSO, London, 1955). No. 75, 1951–1954 (HMSO, London, 1955). No. 76, 1952–1955 (HMSO, London, 1956). No. 77, 1956 (HMSO, London, 1957). No. 78, 1957 (HMSO, London, 1958). No. 79, 1958 (HMSO, London, 1959). No. 80, 1959 (HMSO, London, 1960). No. 81, 1960 (HMSO, London, 1961). No. 82, 1961 (HMSO, London, 1962). No. 83, 1962 (HMSO, London, 1963). No. 84, 1963 (HMSO, London, 1964). No. 85, 1964 (HMSO, London, 1965). No. 86, 1965 (HMSO, London, 1966). ## Economic Surveys Economic Surveys of the Colonial Empire, 1932 (Colonial No. 95, HMSO, London, 1934). Economic Survey of the Colonial Empire, 1933 (Colonial No. 109, HMSO, London, 1935). Economic Survey of the Colonial Empire, 1935 (Colonial No. 126, HMSO, London, 1937). Economic Survey of the Colonial Empire, 1936 (Colonial No. 149, HMSO, London, 1938). Economic Survey of the Colonial Empire, 1937 (Colonial No. 179, HMSO, London, 1940). 51, I: Northern Rhodesia, Nyasaland, Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland (281[1], HMSO, London, 1952). II: The East African Territories: Kenya, Tanganyika, Uganda, Zanzibar, Somaliland, Aden, Mauritius, Seychelles (Colonial No. 281[2], HMSO, London, 1954). III: West Africa: Gambia, Gold Coast, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, St Helena (Colonial No. 281[3], HMSO, London, 1952). IV: America and the West Indies: Barbados, British Guiana, British Honduras, Jamaica, Leeward Islands, Trinidad and Tobago, Windward Islands, Bahamas, Bermuda, Falkland Islands (Colonial No. 281[4], HMSO, London, 1953). V: Far East: Federation of Malaya, Singapore, Hong Kong, Brunei, North Borneo, Sarawak (Colonial No. 281[5], HMSO, London, 1955). VI: Mediterranean and Pacific: Malta, Cyprus, Gibraltar, Fiji, Tonga, British Solomon Islands, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, New Hebrides (Colonial No. 281[6], HMSO, London, 1953). VII: The Products of the Colonial Territories (Colonial No. 281[7], HMSO, London, 1952).