# Editors ’ Biograp hies

Richard Buchanan is Professor of Design, Management, and Information Systems in the Weatherhead School of Management, Case Western Reserve University. He has extended the application of design into new areas of theory and practice, writing and teaching, as well as practicing with the concepts and methods of Interaction Design. At the Weatherhead School, he has turned his work toward “collective interactions,” focusing on problems of organizational change and a reform of management education around the concept of “managing by design.” He served for two terms as President of the Design Research Society. His numerous publications include the edited volumes Discovering Design: Explorations in Design Studies, The Idea of Design, and Pluralism in Theory and Practice.

Dennis Doordan is a design educator, historian, critic, museum consultant, co-editor of Design Issues and a faculty member at the University of Notre Dame. He has published books and articles on a wide variety of topics dealing with twentieth-century architecture and design including political design, the impact of new materials, and the evolution of exhibition design techniques.

Victor Margolin is Professor Emeritus of Design History at the University of Illinois, Chicago. He is a founding editor of, and now co-editor of, Design Issues. Books which he has written, edited, or co-edited include Propaganda: The Art of Persuasion, World War II; The Struggle for Utopia: Rodchenko, Lissitzky, Moholy-Nagy, 1917–1946; Design Discourse; Discovering Design; The Idea of Design; and The Politics of the Artificial: Essays on Design and Design Studies. He is currently working on a world history of design.