# Aut hors ’ Biograp hies

Giovanni Anceschi is an artist and designer, design historian and theorist, organizer of design culture and design research. He is a Professor of Communication Design, of Information Design and of Basic Design, and he is coordinator of the doctoral research program in design sciences at the Università IUAV di Venezia, Italy. Recently: Inaugural lecture at the international congress (“Multiple Ways to Design Research”) at the SUPSI University of Lugano (February 11, 2009) and “Combinatoire et Somatique” at Umberto Eco’s Colloque “Oeuvres Ouverte/Vertige de la Liste,” Louvre Contemporain (February 14, 2009).

Paul Betts is Associate Professor of Modern German History at the University of Sussex in Brighton, UK. He is the author of The Authority of Everyday Objects: A Cultural History of West German Industrial Design (Berkeley, 2004), and is completing a book on the history of private life in the German Democratic Republic, to be published by Oxford University Press in 2010.

Albert Borgmann is Regents Professor of Philosophy at the University of Montana, where he has taught since 1970. His special area is philosophy of society and culture. His most recent book is Real American Ethics (2006).

Jerry Busby currently works in the Department of Management Science at Lancaster University, UK. His research interests are in risk analysis and risk management, systemic failure, human and organizational error, design organizations and design processes. He has formerly worked at Bath University, Cranfield University, and a number of engineering firms.

Medardo Chiapponi is Full Professor of Industrial Design, Dean of the Faculty of Design and Arts at the Università IUAV di Venezia. Previously, he was a professor at the Politecnico di Milano and Politecnico di Torino (Italy) and at the Hochschule für Gestaltung Schwäbisch Gmünd (Germany). He has published books, essays, and papers in diferent countries.

Alain Findeli is Honorary Professor of the School of Industrial Design of the University of Montreal and currently Full Professor at the University of Nîmes in France, where he co-founded Les Ateliers de la recherche en design, a French and Francophone design research community. His research interests and recent publications address general issues in the theory and practice of design (logics, aesthetics, ethics), and more specifically pedagogical aspects of design research education (Ph.D).

Dr. Tony Golsby-Smith is the founder and CEO of Second Road Pty Ltd., as well as the architect of the tools and methods at the heart of firm. A regular speaker on innovation in Australia and North America, he is among the world’s leading innovators in pioneering the power of visualization and conversation to solve complex organizational problems for business and government agencies. Primarily an advisor to senior leadership teams, he has worked with a wide range of clients including Suncorp, AMP, The ATO, Leighton Holdings, Customs, ADF, PwC and the CBA.

John Hirst graduated from the University of Sussex, UK with a master’s degree in philosophy. He taught design education in polytechnics in the UK, and then from 1976 in the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Returning to the United Kingdom in 1995, he set up a private practice in hypnotherapy and counseling. He continues teaching part-time with the East Sussex Flexible Learning Educational Support Service.

Wolfgang Jonas studied naval architecture and earned his Ph.D. on the computer-aided optimization of streamlined shapes. He worked as a consulting engineer for companies in the automobile industry and the German standardization institute. Since 1988, he has been teaching CAD and industrial design, and doing design research on system theory and design theory; 1994 lecturing qualification (Habilitation) in design theory. Since 1994, he has been professor at several German design schools, currently Professor of System Design at the School of Art and Design, University of Kassel. His focus of interest is design theory as meta-theory, design methods in a systemic perspective, and scenario planning.

Barry Katz is Professor of Design at the California College of the Arts, Consulting Professor of Design at Stanford University, and Fellow at IDEO, Inc., the global design and innovation consultancy. His most recent book, co-authored with Tim Brown, is Change by Design: How Design Thinking Can Transform Organizations and Inspire Innovation. A new book, Tectonic Shift: The Unstable History of Silicon Valley Design, will be published by MIT Press.

Peter Lloyd is Head of the Design Group at The Open University, UK and associate editor of Design Studies journal. His research is focused on the process and discourse of designing in all fields, with a recent emphasis on ethics in the design process. He has taught courses in design thinking, design methodology, and design ethics.

Petran Kockelkoren is Professor of Art and Technology at the University of Twente (The Netherlands). He also teaches philosophy at Artez Institue of the Arts. His work focuses on the relations between technology and art, and makes connections with cultural anthropology, industrial design, and media theory. He is the author of Technology: Art, Fairground and Theatre (Rotterdam: NAi, 2003) and Mediated Vision (Rotterdam: Veenman, 2007).

John V. Maciuika is an Associate Professor of Art and Architectural History at the City University of New York, Baruch College, and the CUNY Graduate Center Ph.D. program in art history. His research interests include modern architecture and cultural identity in Central Europe, notably Germany, Austria, and the Baltic states. He is the author of Before the Bauhaus: Architecture, Politics, and the German State, 1890–1920 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), and is currently completing a book entitled: Global Forces, Local Modernities: Modern Architecture in Cultural Context.

Pauline Madge has training and teaching in the history of modern architecture and design. In the late 1980s and 1990s, she specialized in the theory and history of ecodesign. Since 1996, she has been practicing modern homesteading in Wales.

Ezio Manzini is Professor of Design at the Politecnico di Milano, Honorary Doctor at The New School of New York (2006) and at Goldsmiths’ College, University of London (2008), and Honorary Professor at the Glasgow School of Art (2009). Presently, his main interests are toward design for social innovation, and he is promoter and coordinator of DESIS Network, an international network on Design for Social Innovation and Sustainability (www.desis-network.org). His recent publications include Collaborative Services: Social Innovation and Design for Sustainability (Milan: Polidesign, 2008), “Service Design in the Age of Networks and Sustainability” in S. Miettinen and M. Koivisto (eds.), Designing Services with Innovative Methods (Helsinki: University of Arts and Design, 2009), and “Small, Local, Open and Connected: Design Research Topics in the Age of Networks and Sustainability,” in Journal of Design Strategies, 4:1 (Spring 2010).

Massimo Negrotti has been Full Professor of Sociology of Knowledge and Methodology of Human Sciences at the Universities of Parma and Genoa since 1980, and is now with the LCA (Lab for the Culture of the Artificial) at the University of Urbino. His main areas of interest are methodology and the culture of the artificial. Since 1980, he has carried out theoretical and empirical studies related to AI in Europe and in the USA. He has reported on both of the above subjects at several conferences and lectures in Europe, the USA, and Japan, and in many Italian and international books and journals. He is now working on the sociocultural and techno-methodological premises and regularities of “naturoids,” conceived as a general area of research within which technology tries to reproduce natural exemplars.

Mika Pantzar, Ph.D., is acting as a Research Professor in the National Consumer Research Center, Helsinki, Finland. His current project, “Co-Production of Innovations – Toward an Integrative Theory of Practice,” is financed by the Academy of Finland and Aalto University (Helsinki). The final outcome of this project is a book, co-authored with Elizabeth Shove and Matt Watson, Everyday Life: The Dynamics of Social Practice (SAGE Publications), which will be published in 2011.

Michael Punt is Professor of Art and Technology in the Faculty of Technology at the University of Plymouth, UK and is editor-in-chief of Leonardo Reviews. He is the Director of Transtechnology Research, which conducts research in to how technologies acquire meaning in the public domain. A full list of his publications, films and exhibitions can be found at: www.trans-techresearch.net.

Raimonda Riccini is a Professor at the Faculty of Design and Arts of the Università IUAV di Venezia, Italy, where she is director of the graduate program in Industrial Design and is a member of the faculty board of Doctorate Studies in Design Sciences. Also, she is assistant director of the magazine DIID – Disegno Industriale, and a charter member of AIS.Design (Italian Association of Historians of Design), June 2009. Her most recent writings include “Diseño y teorías de los objectos,” in Historia del diseño en America Latina y el Caribe, eds. S. Fernandez and G. Bonsiepe (São Paulo: Editora Blucher, 2008), “Cultures for Teaching Design,” in Made in IUAV: From Research to Project at a Design University, eds. R. Riccini and M. Chiapponi (Tavagnacco: Graphic Linea, 2008) and “Cultura de la técnica y teoria del diseño,” in Tomás Maldonado: Un moderno en acción, ed. M. H. Gradowczyk (Buenos Aires: EDUNTREF, 2008).

Sara K. Schneider, Ph.D., is a Chicago-based performance anthropologist, National-Louis University professor, yoga teacher, and author of three books on the expressive body. She conducts workshops on comparative somatic-spiritual practices at the Esalen Institute and directs the Center for Bodylore and Learning, linking education about global cultures with the professional development of educators, healthcare professionals, and clergy. Her monthly e-zine, Skin in the Game, treats the role of the body in culture, learning, work, and spiritual practice. She can be reached at sks@thinkingdr.com.

David Stairs coordinates the Graphic Design program at Central Michigan University, where he has taught since 1994. He founded Designers Without Borders (www.designerswithoutborders.org) in 2001 and has worked extensively in Africa. Since the launch of his Design-Altruism-Project (http:// design-altruism-project.org) in 2006, Mr. Stairs has been actively involved in the expanding discussion about shifting paradigms of professional practice in design.

Loretta Staples has over twenty-five years of experience in visual literacy and communication, spanning traditional and digital technologies. She has worked as an art historian and design educator, as a designer of graphics, exhibits, and computer interfaces, and as a painter and cultural critic. Loretta lives and works in Connecticut, USA.

Tamiko Thiel (www.mission-base.com/tamiko) received her bachelor’s degree from Stanford Uni versity in Product Design Engineering and a master’s in Mechanical Engineering from Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Writing this article made her realize that the Connection Machines CM-1/ CM-2 were to be her last engineering job and her first work of fine art. Since then she has been developing the dramatic and narrative capabilities of interactive 3D virtual reality as an artistic medium for addressing social and cultural issues.

Ellen Mazur Thomson is an independent scholar. She is the author of The Origins of Graphic Design in America, 1880–1920 and has written on various subjects in design history.

Ann Tyler is Professor of Visual Communication at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. Her design work has received numerous national awards and is included in the Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Collection. Her artist books are in many private collections including that of the Getty, Los Angeles, and the Tate Library, London.

Peter-Paul Verbeek is Professor of Philosophy of Technology at the University of Twente (the Netherlands) and part-time Extraordinary Professor of Philosophy at Delft University of Technology (Socrates chair). His work focuses on the ethical and anthropological aspects of human-technology relations, with a focus on issues of design and human enhancement. He is the author of What Things Do: Philosophical Reflections on Technology, Agency, and Design (Penn State University Press, 2005).

Nigel Whiteley is Professor of Visual Arts in the Lancaster Institute for the Contemporary Arts at Lancaster University, UK. He is the author of, among others, Reyner Banham: Historian of the Immediate Future; Design For Society (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002); and Pop Design: From Modernism to Mod (London: Design Council, 1987).