# General Introduci

The question, “What will design be like in the future?” is frequently posed at design conferences, based on the premise that the world is moving in a certain direction and designers need to understand how they can respond to it. Experts on the future are frequently invited to such conferences to tell designers what the world will be like in the coming years, so the designers can then project their own practices forward to adapt to new sets of conditions and situations.

This is a problematic scenario. First, it assumes that the world is given, not only to designers but to most people, and not made by them. Second, it characterizes design as a reactive rather than a proactive practice and it denies designers the agency to participate in the primary world-making that determines how we live. Third, it does not take into account that design activity itself is embedded in a much larger web of discourse. Design is a professional practice, a topic of research, a subject of debate, and an object of evaluation. And fourth, it does not recognize that the conception and planning of projects is a complex process that is not always easy to manage, and consequently the products that result are often diferent from those that are conceived.

The essays selected for this anthology address some of the complicated questions that challenge the simplified scenarios about how design functions in world-making. They come from an important ten-year period of the journal Design Issues, a period that represents the beginnings of a new stage of maturity in the study and practice of design, a period when the seeds of a new way of thinking about design became evident.<sup>1</sup> Since the beginning of a design research culture in the early 1960s, theorists, historians, and others who comprise the design research community have become active participants in the discourse about design’s role in society and how the diverse participants in the design process might fulfill that role. Within design research, there are two major strands. One is research that is pragmatically directed to making a product. The other is research that is directed to reflecting on how products are made and used both in the present and in the past. This second strand is frequently referred to as design studies and includes design history, criticism, and theoretical inquiries as well as research that focuses more on the philosophical, anthropological, psychological, and social meanings and consequence of products.<sup>2</sup>

The first stage of design studies focused on the objects and artifacts created by designers. From early writers such as Adolf Loos, Walter Gropius, and Lázsló Moholy-Nagy, to rationalist writers of the 1950s and 1960s such as Tomás Maldonado and Gui Bonsiepe, to the reactions against formalist theories that emerged around new-wave typography and industrial design in the 1970s and early 1980s, the center of attention in design studies was on the exploration of the formal qualities of products – and reactions against such qualities if they hindered personal expression and aesthetic sensibility.

The second stage of design studies found writers who shifted attention toward the psychological, social, and cultural context of products and of the discipline of design itself. Writers did not entirely break with the earlier stage, but they broadened the scope of design to address problems that had seldom been developed in depth. This stage is marked by the ways that products are situated in human experience.

By the mid- and late 1990s and the beginning years of the twenty-first century, however, three new trends began to emerge, signaling a new stage of maturity in the design community and influencing the direction of design studies, the education of designers, and even the professional practice of design. The first trend is a blurring of the boundaries that have separated history, theory, and criticism in the study of design. This is reflected in the organization of the present volume. Instead of separate sections that treat the traditional branches of design studies, the book is organized around the process or the activity of designing: conceptualization, fabrication, and evaluation. Conceptualization focuses on the formation of ideas about design and the place of design in the world. This section is about the pluralism of approaches to design and ways of thinking about design, whether those ideas come from historical analysis, theoretical speculation, philosophy, critical analysis, or from other disciplines that in the past may have seemed remote from the central issues of designing. How we conceive of design has implications for how we study it, teach its discipline, and practice it in professional life. Only now are design educators starting to recognize that the earlier pedagogical models that focused primarily on the production of artifacts are no longer adequate and that the new direction in design education requires a much greater emphasis on the complexities of how designs are conceived, which means a much stronger preparation in the humanistic and social sciences, not as ancillary subjects but as integral parts of the design curriculum. The growing awareness that these new subjects are important to design is reflected in the proliferation, in recent years, of Ph.D. programs that concentrate on research which may become useful for understanding and charting new directions for designers.

In turn, fabrication focuses on the work of designing: the making of products of all kinds, ranging from graphic and information design to industrial design and engineering, to computers and software, to management and organizational change. Although designers and design commentators have long acknowledged the importance of the process of making in the translation of abstract ideas, personal visions, and communal goals into concrete and efective presences in lives, fabrication remains a fertile field for investigation. The division of labor characteristic of modern economic systems and the celebration of creative individualism that are characteristic of modern cultural criticism together have tended to privilege treatments of designers as form-givers delivering inspired concepts to be executed by others. Far less attention has been paid to their (the designer’s) role in form-making.

The articles collected in this section portray a more nuanced and complex picture of fabrication. In this portrait, designers promote dialogue with multiple stakeholders, integrate diverse skill sets and negotiate the resolution of competing demands. Rather than marking the simple and unavoidable interval between conceptualization and a product’s arrival in the marketplace, in this anthology fabrication emerges as a constituent part of the generative process. In situations where materials, tools, techniques, and vested interests impede the process of making, designers bring their distinctive abilities to bear to reconfigure problems as possibilities and extend the creative process deep into the life cycle of products, services, and environments.

This section points toward the blurring and repositioning of design problems among the “four orders” of design. The four orders ofer a conceptual framework for identifying the central problems of design and design thinking. First-order problems focus on issues of communication and the delivery of information through images and symbols. Second-order problems focus on the issues surrounding the construction of tangible artifacts of any scale. Third-order problems focus on the planning and implementation of actions, interactions, processes, and services. Finally, fourth-order problems focus on the issues of how we organize the complex wholes that surround us and provide the systems and environments of human culture.

Fabrication is about how design conceptions are brought forward in concrete expression, often blending diferent forms or disciplines of traditional professional practice. It includes case studies that demonstrate how older models of practice were revised to address the demands of new situations. As design problems change, so do the ways of fostering collaboration between teams of professionals. The growing complexity of design projects has called for cooperation among experts such as software designers, product designers, sociologists, anthropologists, psychologists, graphic designers, and engineers. Because these forms of working together are relatively new, they lack precedents for developing design protocols and consequently depend on intense and spontaneous conversations among the practitioners about how to develop the projects. Once again, history, theory, and criticism blur in the study and practice of design, and research makes use of schema and techniques that reflect the pluralism of design work. Case studies are of particular importance in providing examples of how the collaborative process works.

Finally, evaluation focuses on the values of practice, both in determining what might be designed as well as assessing the consequences of what has been done. Evaluation is about how we understand the human purposes that lie behind design and about how we bring forward a new discourse that draws out the values that are actually embodied in products, whether or not they correspond to the intended purpose and values of the designer and his or her client. John Dewey provides the direction for understanding what we mean by evaluation. Just as “ex-pression” is the pressing out of emotion from raw materials through form, so too is “e-valuation” the drawing out of values through the consequences of design. As one may expect, evaluation is more than an assessment of functionality. It is also a matter of ethics and politics, with the understanding that, as Aristotle observes, these do not address diferent subject matters but the same subject matter from diferent perspectives. Here too, however, criticism, theory, and history work together in the new discourse of evaluation.

Along with the blurring of design history, theory, and criticism, the reader will also find in these essays signs that some of the traditional categories for the study of design have reached a limit as conceptual tools. There is little attention given here to “ism’s” or “styles.” “Post-modernism” and “poststructuralism” do not figure decisively in the arguments, and if they do appear it is so that they may be put aside in favor of new issues and concerns. Artistic biography, the stock-in-trade of traditional art and design history, is little evident. Rather than focusing on aesthetics and idealist notions of design, products are discussed in terms of their social existence. All of these are signs of the first trend reflected in this volume – the blurring of boundaries and traditional concepts of design studies.

The second trend is the migration of new ideas and new writers into the design community from discourse communities that have, in the past, been considered outside the traditional domain of design. Of course, there are precursors of this trend throughout the past century as the study of design began to take on substantial shape, but the movement has become more pronounced in the first decade of the twenty-first century. The efect has been to confirm the significance and legitimacy of design and design studies as a serious area of research and inquiry. Philosophy, economics, the social and human sciences, technical communication and communication studies, management and organization studies, computer science, information systems, and the history and philosophy of technology: these are some of the areas where attention to design has emerged and where contributions to the study of design may now be found. The seeds of this trend are evident in many of the essays in this volume, including, for example, works by Albert Borgmann, Peter Paul Verbeek and Petran Kockelkoren, Mika Pantzar, Michael Punt, and Massimo Negrotti.

The third trend is only hinted at in the essays of this volume, but it is a trend that should be noted by students and design educators. It presents a challenge to the design community. This trend is the recent engagement with design in many other fields and disciplines without direct reference to the existing literature of design and design studies. For many fields, design has emerged as a topic of interest that ofers a new perspective on past research and practice. Design is a way of bringing knowledge into action. In philosophy, it addresses the relation between being as an internal state and as a way to engage with the artificial world. In psychology, attention to design recognizes that products such as cell phones, televisions, and computers are closely related with the human psyche and may have a bearing on how well that psyche is adjusted to manageable norms of social life. In anthropology, designed objects are part of human culture and play the same role in defining cultural values today as pottery and iron tools did in earlier times. As design becomes a greater tool for the creation of organizational structures, it has attracted interest from the discipline of management and is now beginning to play a role in the curricula of some management schools. Historians too are recognizing that the study of the designed world can make an important contribution to the broader understanding of how societies and civilizations have developed over time.

In essence, design is changing in significant and powerful ways and the individual essays in this volume herald some of those changes. Consolidated into a single collection, they enable us to recognize ways that design is now a far more pervasive practice than it once was. They also enable us to analyze specific instances of conception, fabrication, and evaluation that expand our understanding of how those three categories characterize the process of design as we know it and how they might help us to anticipate design in the future.

## Notes

1. See the three earlier Design Issues anthologies: Victor Margolin (ed.), Design Discourse: History, Theory, Criticism (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1989); Victor Margolin and Richard Buchanan (eds.), The Idea of Design (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995); and Dennis Doordan (ed.), Design History: An Anthology (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995).

2. On design studies, see Victor Margolin, “Design History and Design Studies,” (218–33) and “The Multiple Tasks of Design Studies,” (234–43) in Victor Margolin, The Politics of the Artificial: Essays on Design and Design Studies (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 2002). See also Hazel Clark and David Brody (eds.), Design Studies: A Reader (Oxford and New York: Berg, 2009).