# Introduci

The growing popularity of design in public consciousness belies many dificult, unanswered questions about the nature of design and its proper place in the world. There are, in fact, many writers who have recognized the growing interest in design and have quickly sought to capitalize on the surge by ofering books and articles that “slim down” the fundamental problems of design until they look simple and may be resolved into catchy, trendy terms such as “integration,” “innovation,” and “creativity.” Behind these enthusiastic but thin books, however, there is a growing literature of sophisticated discussions that explore the conceptual roots of the field and its diverse forms of practice. This literature introduces new concepts and arguments that help us to question and understand the direction of design as a field of study as well as a discipline of practice.

One feature of the new conceptualizations of design is the blurring of boundaries between history, theory, and criticism, revealing the deeper interconnections that explain the importance of design as a social and cultural influence. The guiding idea of such work is that design is the location of a new exploration of culture that combines theory (ideas about the nature of the world) with practice (the skills and purposes of practical action that have an impact on the lives of individuals and communities). The meeting ground of theory and practice in the twenty-first century is the designed world of images, objects, activities, and environments. In short, the meeting ground is the making and remaking of our world in products of the imagination. This is a new understanding of the nature of imagination, and design is one of the disciplines where this understanding takes concrete form. In the nineteenth century, imagination was considered a faculty of the mind, operating between reason and will. In the twenty-first century, the discussion of imagination and the productivity that follows from the power of imagination is placed not in the context of faculties of the mind but in the context of experience and expression – the context of productive action. Imagination is the ability of human beings to visualize and create images that interpret reality, shape our understanding of the world, and help us to act more fully as human beings. The ability to visualize and to bring visions into concrete experience is the ability of design. Despite much confusion and disagreement over the meaning of “design thinking,” our understanding of this phrase would benefit by considering this observation by the philosopher Richard McKeon: “The mind which is actively thinking is the objects which it thinks.” We understand the activity of thinking in design by understanding the objects that we create in the imagination and that we often bring to concrete form in the world around us. How else can one identify the mind of the actively thinking designer than by the visions and objects of thought that he or she creates through the activity of imagination?

The articles in this first section of the book ofer objects of thought for reflection and discussion. Instead of “honing down” the problems of design until they appear simple, the authors confront the dificulties of design and lead us down diferent pathways of exploration. They encourage the reader to begin actively thinking about design in new ways. In short, they help to reveal the unfinished work of understanding design.

This section begins with an article by Richard Buchanan on the problem of identity and moral purpose in design. Using an article by the designer Andrea Branzi as a point of departure, he discusses a dilemma faced by designers and by design itself in the turbulent times of cultural change that mark our historical period. Without a unifying ideology – such as provided in general terms by earlier forms of modernism – where is the designer to turn for new vision and values? He argues that in the emerging pluralism of contemporary culture we do not have to retreat into the tribalism of individual camps and sects, each guided by a powerful leader. Instead, we should recognize that vision and values are precisely the proper subjects for discussion, often reflected in the repositioning of design in new places of engagement such as strategic planning and organizational change – the new third and fourth orders of design. He argues that we may begin to think about the problem in a new way if we change our commonplace idea of culture as merely an ideology and think of it instead as a human activity of cultivation, with continual ordering, disordering, and reordering through responsible discussion, supported by new tools that are beginning to emerge in the work of design.

Massimo Negrotti reopens one of the fundamental problems of design that many writers have regarded as a settled matter: the relationship between the natural and the artificial. By introducing a new distinction in what we regard as the artificial, he takes design into a new sphere of work, seeking to clarify the complex relationship of design and natural science. He argues that earlier writers, including Herbert Simon, have neglected the teleological diference between artificial objects such as cathode tubes and artificial hearts. To explain this, he points toward two constructive ambitions that have characterized human culture and civilization from its earliest period. One he calls the Prometheus syndrome, focused on inventing objects that can dominate nature and that are adapted to natural laws. The other may be called the Icarus syndrome, focused on reproducing natural objects and processes through diferent strategies than those that nature, itself, employs. This is the diference, he argues, between “conventional technology” and what could be termed “the technology of the artificial.” By tracing out the implications of this distinction in areas such as biology and ecology, he introduces the idea of “exemplars” which are selected by designers to guide their work. What follows is an intriguing exploration that culminates in a proposed “third reality,” midway between natural reality and the reality of conventional technology.

Though more and more people recognize that design is a discipline in its own right, the issue is not settled. Wolfgang Jonas takes up the problem of explaining design as a discipline through an exploration of earlier eforts to move design toward adequate theory in the major design schools of the twentieth century, the Design Methods Movement, and contemporary issues of epistemology. Notably, he then turns toward Niklas Luhmann’s theory of social systems and the concepts of autonomous systems and autopoiesis – the concept of living systems. Jonas argues that design must become an autonomous system if it is to fulfill its proper function in society. “The guiding idea is that design, if it intends to act generatively, has to become an autonomous system itself (theory).” In essence, if design is reduced to other autonomous systems – i.e. other disciplines – it loses its identity and its functional purpose. What follows is a useful discussion of systems theory and its relevance to understanding design and the work of designing. However, a systems approach to the autonomy of design stands in need of an appropriate methodology that serves to characterize the design process. That methodology, for Jonas, lies in a scenario-based activity, addressing issues of Analysis, Synthesis, and Projection. Indeed, for Jonas, scenario-building is one of the central concepts of design, developed through a variety of types or kinds of scenarios that work together in the process of designing. The remainder of the article is a discussion of the various implications of scenarios for designing and, ultimately, for design research.

The scenario-guided design process ofered by Jonas stands in need of information, and information is the theme of the next essay by Albert Borgmann, known for his work in the philosophy of technology. His contribution to this volume is a clear, easily accessible discussion of one of the important ideas of the twentieth century, which has set the stage for the development of technology in the twenty-first century. After discussing the semiotic meaning of information as the interplay of messenger, recipient, and message, he proceeds to introduce a set of distinctions that bear on the pragmatic dimension of communication. The core meaning of information, he argues, is information about reality. However, information illuminates not only “what is distant in time and space, but also what is remote in conception and imagination; and what would remain a distant possibility without the aid of conventional signs.” The illumination of conception and imagination through all of the carriers of information in culture – all of the images, objects, and environments created by design – leads to another meaning of information: information for reality. While these two meanings of information serve to mediate the relationship between humanity and reality, Borgmann then argues that the development of this mediation through technology has led to a third meaning of information: information as reality. The remainder of the article develops the implications of this third meaning, leading to a brief and stark conclusion: information in the twenty-first century “tends to enfeeble people and attenuate things,” calling for a new counter-balance to bring us back to the relationship of people and things.

The problem with which Borgmann ends his article, a problem of the twenty-first century and its new forms of digital technologies, may be contrasted with benefit in the next article, Ellen Mazur Thomson’s study of Thorstein Veblen, the University of Chicago, and the socialization of aesthetics. Writing at the turn of the nineteenth century, Veblen produced a classic of economic and sociological thought, but also a key text in the unfolding story of material culture and design aesthetics. The Theory of the Leisure Class is one of a number of books that brought our understanding of the fine arts and design into the context of human experience, culminating perhaps in John Dewey’s Art As Experience, a key text used by Moholy-Nagy at the New Bauhaus in Chicago. Thomson’s study is an important guide to the importance of Veblen and other scholars at the University of Chicago for the development of design in the twentieth century and the gathering influence of technology on culture. “Veblen’s understanding of design and the industrial arts derives, in large measure, from his belief that history, by which he meant cultural evolution, is driven by technological advances. Technology remakes culture, but that does not necessarily mean that cultural institutions immediately change to accommodate it.” As Thomson explains, Veblen was interested in how aesthetic appreciation and issues of value and beauty were distorted by the monetary value of goods. However, she also shows how the sociologica and economic analysis of Veblen and others did not reduce aesthetic values to purely social concerns. The trend toward exploring the social dimension of design that emerged at the end of the twentieth century and continues in the twenty-first century was prefigured at the beginning of the twentieth century, and Thompson’s article makes clear the attitude at that time toward the “benign potential of technology” – a strong contrast to the closing concerns of Borgmann. More than this, however, one should note the conclusion that Thomson reaches: “By defining aesthetics within culture, as the University of Chicago scholars did, they were able to identify the politics underlying hierarchical schemes that relegates design to a lesser position within the artistic canon.”

The complex issue of design, technology, and human experience raised by Bergmann and Thomson continues in “The Things That Matter,” by Peter-Paul Verbeek and Petran Kockelkoren. They begin by observing the turn from ideas to things in the philosophy of technology, a turn that has brought discussions of science and technology into closer relationship with industrial design. (As Verbeek notes, this is a turn originally guided by philosopher Albert Borgmann and developed by Don Ihde.) The point of departure, then, is a discussion of Eternally Yours, the foundation and its subsequent books on sustainable design and product development. Verbeek and Kockelkoren ofer a provocative argument that will be controversial among designers and many others. They argue that while the ideas expressed in the book – notably the idea of extending the lifespan of products by focusing on the psychological bond between users and products – are important and illuminating, the reduction of products to something immaterial is not entirely adequate in addressing the problems of consumption. They argue that Eternally Yours, as well as industrial design, are Platonic in their orientation, primarily concerned with ideas rather than things:

In short, industrial design has always been a Platonic discipline, concerned primarily with ideas and only in the second instance with things. The same goes for Eternally Yours. Attempts to realize “du rable design” should not only focus on signs, shapes, surfaces, sales, and services. However important they are, all of these items – we deliberately did not mention “scripts,” which will become clear later – fail to take the materiality of products into account. They understand products as elements of all kinds of languages: languages of form, of product meaning, and of relationships between company and customer. But when we strip all nonmaterial aspects of products, something remains that is more than language; more than symbol, meaning, function, or icon. What remains is the thing as thing.

Whatever position one takes on these matters, the article serves a useful role in forcing the reader to think about the problem of sustainability in the context of design – and to question the nature of industrial design.

Whether design and technology are primarily concerned with ideas or things, the study of products would be incomplete without consideration of consumers and the social histories of products. This is what Mika Pantzar takes up in the next article. Pantzar is an economist who has focused on consumer research, and his article, “Domestication of Everyday Life Technologies,” focuses on the lack of general theories for the integration of technology, needs, and human beings. What makes this a problem, he argues, is that in the past, social development was seen in one or another of two simple perspectives. It was either a result of social determinism or the result of human needs and preferences. Neither is entirely adequate, and to help correct the deficiency he begins with an overview of some of the central ideas of consumption and consumer research, including “consumption rituals.” He then discusses four perspectives that are common in the literature of social science and technology studies and could provide the kind of general theory that is needed. The four perspectives are: the biography of things, the social shaping of technology, actor network theory, and the ecology of goods. In addition to characterizing each perspective in a concise review, he also identifies leading proponents, including figures such as Bruno Latour, Kenneth Boulding, Thomas Hughes, and John Law. The discussion is a useful introduction for designers, students of design, and the general reader who wants to better understand some of the reasons for the success or failure of products in the twenty-first century.

The final article in this section returns to the central practices of design, focused on how we may integrate environmental design and industrial design to address the urgent problem faced by twentyfirst-century social and cultural life. Medardo Chiapponi acknowledges that most people recognize that environmental and industrial design are now connected, but he argues that the connection requires refinement and elaboration if it is to be fruitful. This is needed precisely because of the diference of disciplinary practices in each branch of design. He begins with a characterization of industrial design and the changes that are taking place in that practice. He then discusses environmental design and some of the central concepts of that discipline, giving special emphasis to the idea of an environmental system. The main body of the article is a discussion of many of the central themes of the new form of practice that is emerging, including the process of design and the distributed agency that is now called for in the growing complexity of environmental system problems and the need to integrate the diferent forms of knowledge that must be in dialogue if we hope to reach acceptable solutions. Like the other articles in this section, Chiapponi presents another conceptualization of design that leads us to further questions and discussion.