# The Things That Mat er

# Peter-Paul Verbeek and Petran Kockelkoren

## 1 Intr od ucti on

Things have been rediscovered. Scholars who are studying the role of technology in our culture more and more come to the conclusion that it is not enough to look at ideas only. Philosophers of technology, who used to examine technology as a way of interpreting the world, and thus making technology a branch of philosophy, are increasingly interested in technological artifacts. And sociologists of technology, who used to study the social interaction out of which new technologies emerge, have come to the conclusion that this interaction cannot be studied without taking the role of things into account. This turn towards things brings science and technology studies closer to discussions within industrial design, where it is, after all, quite common to think about things.

In this article, we organize a confrontation between both. We will do this by discussing the way of “looking at things” of an interesting group of Dutch industrial designers, who joined under the name “Eternally Yours.” Eternally Yours develops ideas about “cultural sustainability” or, better, “durability.” It considers the currently most common approach to eco-design – Life Cycle Analysis – to be insuficient. Life Cycle Analysis may make it possible to design products that are friendlier to the environment, but leaves a fundamental problem unaddressed: the short lifetime of our products. We live in a throwaway culture. We discard products while they are still in good shape. It is not enough to make less polluting products, however important that may be, when they are replaced at high speed because people throw them away too soon. The environmental crisis is not only a technological problem, but a cultural problem as well. Therefore, according to Eternally Yours, we should not only strive for sustainability, but also for durability, by designing products in a way that stimulates longevity.

To be able to discuss the diagnosis and therapies of Eternally Yours, we will take a somewhat curious step backward. Something strange stands out when looking at the history of design. The discipline that consists of being occupied with matter, strangely enough seems to be trapped within a way of thinking that is the very counterpart of materialism. When designers discuss products, they almost always talk about them in terms of signs, functions, meanings, or styles. What they usually fail to do is to understand them as material entities that play a certain role in our lives and culture. Designers seem to be Platonists, considering objects to be only derivative “copies” of primordial ideas.

We believe this way of thinking cannot suficiently meet the challenge of durability, as we will explain later. Against the dominant Platonism, we will propose an approach to our material culture that takes matter more seriously. We take our inspiration from the phenomenological work of the American philosophers Albert Borgmann<sup>1</sup> and Don Ihde.<sup>2</sup> Phenomenology always has wanted to return to “the things themselves” until it was frustrated in that by the “linguistic turn” of philosophy. We will try to formulate a phenomenological design approach that takes this linguistic turn seriously, without giving up the idea that matter matters.

## 2 Eternal y Yours ?

“It’s time for a new generation of products that can age slowly and in a dignified way, become our partners in life, and support our memories.” These famous words of Italian designer Ezio Manzini are on the letterhead of Eternally Yours. Eternally Yours was founded in 1995. It arose from worries about the ongoing stream of superficial products, designed to be discarded after only a short time no matter how well-functioning. Those worries do not only concern obvious throwaway products such as disposable teaspoons and cups. Research for the Dutch Ministry of Environmental Afairs has shown that a large proportion of objects for everyday use including hi-fi equipment, stoves, razors, and computers is discarded while still functional.<sup>3</sup> Even worse, some products do not even reach the market. Eternally Yours actually witnessed, at a recycling company, new computer hard disk drives being destroyed because they were already outdated before they could be sold.

If we want to design in a sustainable way, according to Eternally Yours, the most important thing is to extend the lifetime of products. This is no obvious solution. Eternally Yours discerns four possible directions within sustainable design. The first is shifting from products to services as much as possible. Extensive services involving products such as repairing, upgrading, and renting can result in a more intensive use of products. This will reduce production and, thus, pollution. A second direction is eco-design, already mentioned, which tries to minimize pollution in all stages of the lifetime of products. A third direction is recycling. Reusing parts of discarded products can reduce energy and material use. The fourth and least common direction is that of Eternally Yours: trying to elongate the lifespan of products.

Why are so many products prematurely discarded – before they are worn out or broken? Eternally Yours discerns three dimensions in the lifespan of products: the technical, the economical, and the psychological lifespan. Products are discarded because they simply are broken and cannot be repaired; because they are economically outdated, e.g., because new models have appeared on the market; or because they do not fit our preferences and lifestyle anymore. Eternally Yours believes the psychological lifespan is the most important. Often, products are discarded because their psychological time is over. Therefore, the significant question for sustainable design is: how can the psychological lifetime of products be prolonged?

Eternally Yours ofers three answers to this question. First, under the header “Shape ’n’ Surface,” Eternally Yours searches for forms and materials that can create longevity. Materials are being tested that do not become unattractive while aging. Leather, for instance, may become more beautiful when it has been used for some time; whereas a shiny, polished chromium surface starts to look worn out with the first scratch. A second area of attention is “Sales ’n’ Services,” which examines how services connected with products can influence the length of their lifespans. Eternally Yours thinks it is important for companies to shift the focus of their attention from producing and sell ing products to maintaining relationships with customers. If these relationships have a durable character so will the products, because they are the focus of those relationships. Thirdly, under the header of “Signs ’n’ Scripts,” Eternally Yours investigates the way in which products function as symbols or icons for our lifestyles, and contain implicit prescriptions about how to use them (“scripts”). Stories involving products can give them more “character.” Their iconological character makes them “fit” our lifestyle or not. A favorite Eternally Yours example of this is an old advertisement for Nikon cameras. It showed a camera that had been lying on the bottom of the ocean for ten years, but nevertheless still worked.

The product is not portrayed as the latest model with the newest features, but as a reliable product the owner can be proud of.<sup>4</sup>

## 3 The Plat onism of Design

However important and illuminating those strategies of Eternally Yours may be, in our opinion, they show a certain one-sidedness. Whereas their aim is to extend the “psychological lifespan” of products by creating a bond between users and products, the products themselves, as material objects, are hardly relevant anymore. In all three strategies, products are reduced to something nonmaterial: to signs, to actors in a story, to “character.” Seemingly following Plato, the most primordial role is not given to matter but to ideas. In “Signs ’n’ Scripts,” the stories around products are central; and in “Sales ’n’ Services,” products are only relevant as conversation pieces. Only in “Shape ’n’ Surface” products are seen as objects, but here the physical characteristics of products seem to be immediately translated into terms of attractiveness.

This implies that the bond that may arise between the user and the product will mainly concern the nonmaterial that is represented by the product, and not the material thing itself. And such a product could be replaced by any other product with the same nonmaterial quality. The attachment these products evoke does not concern the products themselves, but only the ideas they embody. To be sure, we do not want to deny that the initiatives of Eternally Yours can influence the lifetime of products in a positive way. But we think important opportunities are lost because of this bias towards the nonmaterial.

## A Short Histor y of Ideas

This Platonism is not unique in Eternally Yours, but is part of a long tradition. The Platonic reduction of matter to ideas has been a characteristic of the discipline of industrial design since its very beginnings.<sup>5</sup> The discipline came into being with the rise of mass production during the second half of the nineteenth century, since mass production explicitly demands that design and production are separated. At first, a romantic countermovement arose: the Arts and Crafts movement of the second half of the nineteenth century. Standardization and mechanization were considered dangerous, both aesthetically and socially. The Arts and Crafts movement tried to cope with these dangers by returning to medieval handicraft techniques, and by producing objects that were both useful and beautiful, according to William Morris “a thing of beauty and a joy forever.” But, after the short transition period of Art Nouveau (Jugendstil) – which did not reject mass production but decorated products with organic forms, such as leaves and the female nude, which were supposed to refer to nature and thus to counterbalance the technological character of the production process – mechanization nevertheless took command.<sup>6</sup> Modernism got its way.

Instead of rejecting it, romantically, at the beginning of the twentieth century, the Modern Movement embraced the machine as a source of inspiration. Design should follow the rule of the machine in two respects. First, like a machine, products had to be functional. This functionalism can be considered the main characteristic of modernism. The slogan of modernist design clearly expresses this: Form Follows Function. Besides this, the machine ruled in a second way: the form of products was now dictated by the mechanical production process used to create them. The function that was followed was not only the function of the artifact produced, but also the functioning of the machine that produced the artifact. Modernism led to functional products with simple, geometric forms.

It should be noted that not all design of this period was of the “hard-core” modernist nature described above. In popular design, several “mild” variants of modernism developed, of which “streamlining” (“styling”) in the USA and

Art Deco in France are good examples. These styles can be seen as “shallow functionalism,” in that they applied the philosophy of modernism only to style and decoration. They did not really let form follow function, but developed forms that only looked functional because they reminded us of machines. Streamlined objects, e.g., those made to look like airplanes, and Art Deco used geometric shapes and electric flashes for decoration. Modernism thus was converted into a decorative style which is, of course, at odds with “hard-core” functionalism which eschewed decoration.

Modernism remained very influential until after World War II, although style gradually became more important. During the fifties, a new style emerged: Contemporary Style. New materials and production techniques were invented and used with great enthusiasm, which eventually led to the new style with its well-known hot-pink colors and its light furniture with thin, metal legs. The growing importance of style was the first indication that functionalism was gradually fading away. But it was only in the sixties that modernism was fundamentally challenged. Pop Design arose, which explicitly rejected the modernist obsession with functionality and durability. Opposed to this, it put the consumer at the center. Modernist design was considered not to fit the lifestyle of the rising youth culture. It was found that design had to be temporary instead of durable, and funny instead of functional. A new aesthetic arose: a throwaway aesthetic.<sup>7</sup> Design did not have to be functional anymore, but nice.

Pop Design paved the way for a definitive break with modernism. This break occurred in the seventies, when postmodern design was developed. Postmodern design explicitly rejects the modernist emphasis on functionality and durability. Products should not be conceived as machines. They are not only objects that fulfill functions, but also embodiments of meaning. People do not only use products as tools: products have become icons of their lifestyle and social status. And since culture had become pluralist, material culture should be as well. Therefore, postmodernism is not a name for a specific style, but for an explosion of styles. There are many subcultures and lifestyles in our culture, and all of these correspond to styles of products. The eclecticism of postmodern design turns away from the onedimensional philosophy of modernism that had been dominating design for such a long time. Form Follows Function has been replaced by Form Follows Fun.

## Ideas in Mas Productin

This short history shows that Platonism has been present in industrial design since its very beginnings. Modern as well as postmodern design considered products to be imprints in matter of something nonmaterial that was considered to be primordial.

The functionalist desire to design products that function well, are durable, and can be easily produced in large quantities reduced artifacts to the function they are supposed to fulfill. Of course, this functionality needs matter in which to be embodied but matter eventually is of secondary importance. It is not the object that counts, but the function it fulfills. Form follows function: it is necessary but derivative.

As the German philosopher Karl Jaspers already indicated in the early thirties, this stress on function results in a loss of attachment with products. When artifacts are designed mainly to fulfill a function, their individual characteristics become less important. Products, according to Jaspers, then develop toward ideal types that function well and can be produced easily but are not worth attention:

When [the ideal type] has been realized, attachment to one specific exemplar indeed has no relevance anymore; one only loves the form, not the specific object. Despite all artificiality, one has a strange, new nearness to the objects, … namely to them in their function.<sup>8</sup>

From this perspective, the meaningfulness of products in postmodern design seems to be a giant improvement. Not the functional, but the symbolic character of artifacts has now become central in design. Jaspers’s critique is outdated: his call for meaning has become irrelevant now that postmodern design has shown an explosion of meaning. Mass-produced objects can be obtained in so many styles that fear of a unification of material culture appears to be unnecessary.

But Jaspers’s critique is not as outdated as it may seem. Indeed, retrospectively, we have to conclude that his critique, in fact, concerned functionalism and not “design” as such. But this historical contextualization does not make his observation of a lack of attachment to products irrelevant. This, after all, is exactly the same thing that troubles Eternally Yours. Postmodern design is trapped within another form of Platonism. It does not reduce products to their function, but to meaning. Postmodern products have become icons, symbols, or signs. They do not even need to be durable anymore, as they did for modernist design. The attachment such products evoke concerns their meaning and not themselves as material objects. They could, after all, be replaced by any other object with the same sign-value.

## 4 Things as Things ?

In short, industrial design has always been a Platonic discipline, concerned primarily with ideas and only in the second instance with things. The same goes for Eternally Yours. Attempts to realize “durable design” should not only focus on signs, shapes, surfaces, sales, and services. However important they are, all of these items – we deliberately did not mention “scripts,” which will become clear later – fail to take the materiality of products into account. They understand products as elements of all kinds of languages: languages of form, of product meaning, and of relationships between company and customer. But when we strip all nonmaterial aspects of products, something remains that is more than language; more than symbol, meaning, function, or icon. What remains is the thing as thing. The deconstruction of the meaning of things hits something that is not reducible to language or meaning. But how can we do justice to this “thing as thing”?

The notion of a reality outside of language has become quite unpopular in philosophy, to say the least. The “linguistic turn” at the beginning of this century brought the insight that people never have access to reality immediately, but only mediated by language. Our interpretations determine what is “real” for us, and since interpretations take place within a language, the language in which we think determines what counts for us as “reality.” People who refer to a reality outside of language, are termed “naive realists.” What people call “reality” is, in fact, a construction of interpretations that could have been diferent. The task of the philosopher, therefore, is not to develop clarifying interpretations of the world, but to deconstruct the constructions we have come to see as “real.”

And now do we come to report about the things themselves, the solid bottom we hit when we deconstruct them? It looks more dangerous than it really is. The mediated character of our access to things does not have to be denied if we, nevertheless, want to say something about them. Certainly, artifacts always are situated in a context and can be understood as constructions. But that does not mean it is impossible to think about the role these constructions play, concretely, in our culture. But how can we do this?

## Scripts

A new concept recently has been added to the toolkit of science and technology studies that seems to be helpful here. In her article, “The Description of Technical Objects,”<sup>9</sup> Madeleine Akrich developed the notion of the “script” of technical objects. A script, according to her, is the deposit in an object of the world-view of designers. Designers define users in terms of their taste, competence, motives, aspirations, and political prejudices. Such definitions then are “inscribed” into the technical contents of the object. Designers anticipate the use people will make of the product they are designing and, because of that, products contain implicit “manuals.” Things co-shape the use that is made of them: they define relations between people, and distribute responsibilities between people and things. Technologies create a framework for action – even though it is never certain that they will be used in the way the designers intended.

This notion of “scripts” has become very popular in science and technology studies. Philosophers and sociologists have a warm interest in things. It is, by the way, quite remarkable that things got this attention only recently. In 1986, the American philosopher Langdon Winner wrote an article called “Do Artifacts Have Politics?”<sup>10</sup> – a question he answered, of course, afirmatively. Winner ofered the example of bridges over a road to a beach in New York. Those bridges had been built so low that only cars can pass below them while buses can’t. This implied that only people who could aford a car (read: white people) were able to reach the beach. But examples can be found closer to home as well. Most disabled people will not be amused by all this philosophical and sociological boast about “things” and their “scripts.” They know the script of thresholds, stairs, and revolving doors all too well – and knew them before philosophers even had found words for it.

In our opinion, however, the concept of “script” does not escape the Platonic tradition of reducing things to language and interpretation. The first reason for this is that Akrich puts so much emphasis on the origin of scripts: she sees them as “inscribed visions” of designers. This way of looking at objects shifts attention again from the things themselves to the ideas they embody. In the context of this article, however, we are not so much interested in the origin of scripts as in the ways in which artifacts themselves are able to give shape to the practices around them. And also those practices are relevant that were not intended beforehand. The disabled will, after all, be even less amused with the suggestion that the practices around thresholds and revolving doors were explicitly intended by industrial designers. Those thresholds and doors should not be seen as nonhuman substitutes for guards who keep disabled people outside. They perform in a way we did not ask them to. To keep out the draft is the task we delegated to them, not to keep disabled people outside as well. Things do more than we tell them to do.

There is a second way in which the concept of “script” leaves open the door for Plato. It also can be used to describe how objects shape their environment as signs and not as things. Nelly Oudshoorn indicates, e.g., that “gender scripts” for her are “materialized definitions of gender.” Part of such definitions is the technological competence of users. The script of certain technologies, according to her, defines women as technologically incompetent: “Razors, unlike ladyshavers, can be opened with a screwdriver, which ofers men the opportunity to not only use but also repair the device.”<sup>11</sup> The script that Oudshoorn reveals here is only partially the script of the razor as a thing. As a thing, it allows men to open and repair it, but Oudshoorn is not interested in this “reparabilityscript,” but in the “gender-script” of the device. And this gender-script does not originate from the razor as thing but as sign. A product that can be opened refers to the technological competence of users. Since razors are designed for men, they define men as technologically competent. The ladyshaver, contrarily, which cannot be opened, defines women as technologically not competent. However important and illuminating it is to reveal scripts such as this, they do not concern artifacts as things but only as signs.

## Technolgia Inteioal y

We thus need a new concept to clarify the relation between people and products if we want to take products seriously as things. Such a concept can be found in Don Ihde’s work Technology and the Lifeworld. He develops a perspective on technology that does justice to both the mediated character of people’s relation to reality and the “own weight” of technical artifacts. Since Ihde is a phenomenologist, his analysis starts from the fundamental relatedness of people and their world.<sup>12</sup> “The” world does not exist for us; we can only access “our” world, which is the world as it is disclosed by us. From this perspective, it is impossible to speak about technology without taking into account the relationship people have with it. An artifact without people relating to it would be no more than a “piece of junk lying around.” It becomes a technology only in relation to people. A technology is always a technology-to-…, and this “to-…” gives the artifact its identity. The telephone, e.g., originally was designed to assist the hearing impaired, but in the cultural context it entered it developed a much broader identity. What this technology “really” is cannot be determined. A technological artifact doesn’t have an “essence,” no identity “in itself.” It is, as Ihde calls it, “multistable.” It depends on the context in which a technology finds itself, what that technology “is.”

But Ihde does not stop at this contextualization of technology. There is more to say about things than that they receive their identity only in a context. “Once technologies have received a (relative) identity,” according to Ihde, “within that relation they nevertheless can have an own weight.” Ihde calls this “own weight” technological intentionality. With this concept, he wants to indicate that technologies-in-use are no neutral objects, but that they themselves co-shape the use that is being made of them. Practices around technologies cannot be entirely reduced to human intentions.

Ihde, for instance, describes the diference in writing style that occurs when writing with a pen, a typewriter, and a word processor. When using a pen, people usually write rather slowly, which invites them to write longer, well-thought-out sentences. The speed of writing that a typewriter allows makes possible a style that comes close to spoken language. A word processor, in turn, invites careful layout and editing, and can be held responsible for the giant growth in the use of footnotes because it makes it so easy to place them. In all of these instances, no obligation is involved, but rather inclination: technologies invite certain ways of dealing with them. The use that is being made of technologies cannot be completely understood by looking at the human half of the human-technology pairing.

The concept of “technological intentionality” thus makes visible nonlingual aspects of the relation between people and things. It does not reduce artifacts to “signs” or “intentions of designers,” but indicates the way in which they are present and help to shape their environment as things.

## Scripts Versu Inteioals

The best way to illustrate that Ihde’s phenomenological approach reveals other aspects of products than the “scripts” approach is to give an example. We take it from Cynthia Cockburn’s and Susan Ormrod’s book Gender and Technology in the Making.<sup>13</sup> In this book, the gender-loadedness of the microwave oven is analyzed as present in its design, production, sale, and use. We freely pick some elements from their story to illustrate our point.

Cockburn and Ormrod describe how the microwave oven originally was designed and marketed as a high-tech gadget. It entered a cooking practice which was not very hospitable to it, especially because it originally was not able to give our food the crispy crusts we like so much. Nevertheless, there was a market for it: it was sold in stores along with the hi-fi and TV sets as one of the “toys for the boys.” Cooking with it was a real adventure, because you had to pre-program the thing to be able to cook with it: the intensity and duration of the radiation had to be set with the help of a lot of displays, handles, and buttons. But soon this market became saturated, and a new definition of the microwave oven had to be launched. Now, it no longer was portrayed as a high-tech gadget, but as a simple cooking instrument. As such, it was supposed to enter the domain of women. It was not sold as a “browngood” anymore, but as “whitegood.” It found itself a place between the stoves and washing machines, and even got a white cover. The main change, however, was that it became much easier to operate. To operate a microwave, you do not even have to be able to read anymore: all handles have been replaced by buttons with pictograms on them. If you want to heat a cup of soup, you just push the button with a cup of soup on it. In this way, the supposed fear and incompetence of women concerning technology was met.

Although Cockburn and Ormrod do not speak about the microwave oven in terms of “scripts” we could say, in line with Oudshoorn, that the microwave oven clearly contains a gender script. Because of the places where it is sold, it is seen as a technology for women. And because of the way it now is operated, it stigmatizes those women as technologically incompetent. But, as was the case with Oudshoorn’s analysis of the ladyshaver, this “gender-script” stems from the oven as a sign and not as a thing<sup>.</sup> Operation by means of pictograms stands for technological incompetence.

As a thing, the microwave contains a quite diferent “script” or, better, intentionality. When looking at it as a thing, the question is relevant how it co-shapes the practices around it by its very functioning, instead of the qualities it refers to. Cockburn and Ormrod also ofer examples of this. They show that the microwave, contrary to what one would expect, does not facilitate cooking at all. Indeed, it makes possible a much faster preparation of meals, but precisely because of that, it invites eaters to make individual menu demands. Sometimes, four dinners are prepared with it instead of one. Besides this, the microwave has dramatically decreased the frequency with which people eat together. Microwave ovens are particularly suited for instant meals, and those are preferably consumed individually.

In the latter two examples, the microwave oven is present as a thing, not as a sign. The effects of the introduction of the microwave cannot be understood as resulting from the intentions of designers, nor from its sign-character. It is because of the way it functions as a thing, that it co-shapes the cooking and eating practice around it. What it “is” within those practices, of course, cannot be completely reduced to the oven itself – it remains “multistable,” – but it nevertheless has more “intentionality” than its designers gave it and its sign-character could accomplish.

It can be concluded that the concept of “intentionality” makes visible phenomena other than “scripts.” And we believe that it is precisely those intentionalities that are of utmost importance for the designing practice, and for Eternally Yours. We will elaborate on this.

## 5 Towards a Materils Apr oach

What does this turn towards the “things themselves” imply for the concrete practice of industrial design? What “materialist” alternative does it ofer for the dominant Platonic approach toward things? In order to answer this question, we will discuss two forms of technological intentionality, inspired by the early work of Heidegger and the American philosopher Albert Borgmann. The intentionalities we will discuss concern ways in which products invite us to have a relationship with them as things, and not as signs. Under the header “transparent objects,” we will take up Heidegger’s notion of “readiness-to-hand,” and under the header “engaging objects,” Borgmann’s concept of “engagement.”

## Transpet Objects

Suppose you are listening to music on your Walk man, and the wire that connects your Walkman with the adapter it receives its current from breaks. You want to repair the wire but, when you try to, you discover the adapter is sealed. Repair is impossible: opening the adapter will only make things worse. The only thing you can do is to buy a new one.

Already in the twenties, people thought about inconveniences like this. Heidegger then analyzed, in Sein und Zeit, the relation between people and tools.<sup>14</sup> He concluded that there are two modes of this relationship. Use objects can be present-athand or ready-to-hand. When everything is working properly, they are ready-to-hand, absorbed into our everyday dealing with the world around us. Our involvement with the world takes place, as it were, through the object. When hammering, our attention is not directed towards the hammer but towards the nail we want to get into the wall. The hammer, in a certain sense, withdraws from our relationship with the world. But when something goes wrong, for instance when the hammer breaks in two (or the wire on your adapter breaks), it suddenly is not ready-to-hand anymore, but becomes present-at-hand. Our relationship with the object is transformed into a distanced attention to it. The familiarity is broken. We cannot embody the object anymore: it draws all attention towards itself and has to be repaired for the readiness-tohand to be restored.

From this distinction between readiness-tohand and presence-at-hand, two forms of technological intentionality can be derived which are important for a “materialist” approach within design. First: products must allow for a return from presence-at-hand to readiness-to-hand, if a durable relationship with their users is desired. Precisely, this was the problem with the adapter: once the readiness-to-hand was broken, our relationship with the product had to be ended. In order to allow for a return to readiness-to-hand, products have to be transparent in the sense that they allow us to reintegrate them in our action. The importance of this transparency does not only lie in the repairability that it results in: that would only enhance physical lifetime. Transparency enables people to sustain their relationship with the product, even when something goes wrong. And that relationship is what determines what Eternally Yours calls the “psychological lifetime” of products.

The second implication of the distinction between readiness-to-hand and presence-athand has farther-reaching consequences. From Heidegger’s analysis also can be derived the fact that products must be transparent to be ready-tohand at all. If no familiarity with a product can come about, and if all of our attention directed to the product itself and not to what we can do with it, the product will not be used. This seems a trivial statement, but it has implications which are not trivial at all.

When products are ready-to-hand, they permit engagement with the world “through” themselves. Don Ihde calls this, following Merleau-Ponty, the “embodiment” of objects. Objects can be, as it were, parts of our body. When using a pair of glasses, we do not look at our glasses, but through them to the world. Embodied or ready-to-hand objects thus play a mediating role: they help to shape our relationship with the world. And it is precisely in this mediation that artifact intentionality is at work. The intentionality of technological objects, as it were, enters the relationship between people and their world. Within the framework of this article, we are especially interested in the role of the artifact within this process of mediation. A closer analysis of this role, in the following paragraph, shows that there are two ways in which artifacts can withdraw from our involvement with the world: in an engaging way and a disengaged way. The latter hinders a durable relationship with products, whereas the former enables it.

## Engai Objects

The example of the adapter again is a good starting point for an analysis of the diferent ways in which artifacts can “withdraw.” An adapter withdraws from the praxis of listening to music in the sense that it is not noticed when we are listening. It does not ask for our attention, and yet it enables a praxis. Nonetheless, the way in which the adapter is ready-to-hand does not evoke a durable relationship with it. Not only because it does not allow for a return to readiness-to-hand when it breaks down, as we saw, but because its readiness-to-hand is of a purely functional nature. An adapter withdraws from our involvement with the world in such a way that we, in fact, do not have a relationship with it as an object, but only as something fulfilling a function. It works, and that’s all.

Compare this to the way in which, e.g., a piano is ready-to-hand. A piano withdraws from our relationship with the world as well, in that it does not direct our attention towards itself but to the music we make with it. But the piano is not only functionally present here. Even though it’s not the focal point of our attention, it nevertheless does form the focus around which the praxis of making music takes place. It withdraws, in a certain sense, but without ending our involvement with it. The reason for this is that it embroils us in its functioning: we have to play it. From its withdrawn position, it still asks for involvement.

We could call this phenomenon the engaging capacity of objects. The concept of “engagement” was introduced by the American philosopher Albert Borgmann. Borgmann’s work concerns the role of technology in our everyday life. He developed a theory of technology which sheds more light on the mediating role of objects we are discussing here. According to Borgmann, the technological objects of our time difer from pretechnological ones in that they diminish people’s engagement with each other and with the world around them. Technological products – “devices,” as Borgmann calls them – can be seen as consisting of two elements. They are a “machinery” – the product as a physical object – which delivers a “commodity” when functioning. Our central heating system, for instance, is a device. Its tubes, radiators, thermostat, and heater are machinery and warmth the commodity. It is characteristic of modern technology that it shows an ever-growing commodification. Technology promises disburdenment and enrichment: we will get more for less. New products are being developed continuously with their major aim to deliver more commodities easily, quickly, ubiquitously, and safely.

In this process of increasing availability of commodities, the machinery of products necessarily withdraws to the background. Commodities, after all, can only be delivered easily, quickly, ubiquitously, and safely when the machinery demands as little attention as possible. The route towards commodities should be short, and preferably not even be noticeable. Devices only function satisfactorily if they do so with as little human involvement as possible – otherwise we would not need a device to do this for us. This withdrawal of the machinery of products diminishes our engagement with material culture. Devices are designed to leave us aside of their functioning: they do not ask for engagement, but for consumption.

This is not wrong per se. But the situation, according to Borgmann, would become problematic if all things that ask for engagement would be replaced by devices that procure their commodities instantaneously. That would reduce our existence to the immediate consumption of what is delivered to us whenever we wish, without any engagement with the world being required of us. To be clear, Borgmann does not reject technology – that would, after all, be a denial of the liberating and enriching character of technology. Borgmann only pleads for the preservation of spaces where engagement remains possible. This engagement, for him, has the form of “focal practices,” centered around “focal things.” Focal things, which also can be high-tech products, are things that ask for attention and involvement: they desire a practice that cannot be characterized by consumption but by “engagement.”

One could also draw a diferent therapy from Borgmann’s diagnosis – a therapy that is especially relevant for industrial design. Borgmann’s analysis of material culture can imply a solution for the diminishing attachment with products that fits our materialist orientation. If we want our ­attachment to be directed toward objects and not only toward their meaning and the lifestyle they represent, it would be wise to design products from the perspective of their engaging capacity. This could be done by healing the split between machinery and commodity, thus creating a revaluation of the machinery of products. Product machinery should be freed from its withdrawal and be visible, accessible, and understandable again. Where possible, dependent objects should be created instead of quasi-autonomous objects. Accessible machineries which allow participation in their functioning, or in their recovery when they malfunction, could create a bond between people and products as artifacts.

The emphasis we put upon the functioning of products might raise the suspicion that we are secretly promoting a kind of neo-functionalism here. Functionalism, however, is quite the opposite of what we want to promote. Functionalist design would, indeed, focus on the functioning of products but, in doing so, it does not pay attention to the involvement of people in this functioning, but mainly to the result of it. Functionalist design does not result, therefore, in focal things, but in devices that procure commodities. Indeed, Riètveld designed chairs as “objects for sitting in,” and Le Corbusier saw a house as “a machine for living in.” Functionalism creates devices, whereas we are looking for engaging objects.

Possibly the example of the piano as an engaging product sounds a little too easy. After all, pianos are intended to engage people: who could imagine a piano that is not engaging. What could the notion of “engagement” imply for the design of objects that do not ask for engagement by definition? For instance, for the design of a central heating system, which is Borgmann’s very example of a device that asks for consumption instead of engagement?

At Cranbrook Academy of the Arts, a heating device has been designed which is a fine example of an engaging object. It is a true thing, escaping the usual one-sided emphasis upon language and symbolism within contemporary industrial design. The heater consists of ceramic plates which have been bent to conic cylinders with diferent radii. The cylinders are placed concentrically, and can be adapted with the aid of an accessory, in order to radiate their heat in the correct direction. This heater is not only very beautiful, it is above all engaging. Users are involved in its functioning. It’s not a device you hide under the windowsill: its proper place is in the middle of the room. When in use, the ceramic plates have to be rearranged from time to time. The heater evokes playful engagement, instead of disengaged consumption of heat. In the meanwhile, of course, it also heats the room: the engagement it asks for does not make it unusable. It functions, but is more than functional; it engages but, nevertheless, it can be ready-to-hand. With products such as this, our relationship does not end when we insert the plug into the socket. They are present as things – ”eternally ours.”

## 6 Concl usi on

The “new generation of products” Manzini dreams of should be a generation of things, not only of ideas and signs. Durable products should be more than icons for our lifestyles, or “conversation pieces” between consumers and producers. A durable material culture is not only a matter of culture, but is first of all a matter of matter. All we wanted to say is: matter matters.

## Notes

First published in Design Issues 14 no. 3 (Autumn 1998): 28–42.

1. Albert Borgmann, Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life (London/Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984).

2. Don Ihde, Technology and the Lifeworld (Bloomington and Indianapolis: University of Indiana Press. 1990); Postphenomenology: Essays in the Postmodern Context (Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press, 1993); Philosophy of Technology: An Introduction (New York: Paragon, 1995).

3. Eternally Yours. Lectures given during the Eternally Yours Congress 1997.

4. More information about Eternally Yours can be found at: http://www.ecomarket.net/EternallyYours.

5. The following historical speech on industrial design is based on, Penny Sparke, Industriële vormgeving en cultuur in de 20e eeuw, Cantecleer, De Bilt, 1989, translation of An Introduction to Design & Culture in the Twentieth Century (London: Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1986) and Catherine McDermott, Essential Design (London: Bloomsbury, 1992).

6. Siegfried Giedion, Modernization Takes Command (New York: Oxford University Press, 1948).

7. Reyner Banham, Design by Choice (London: Academy Editions, 1981).

8. Karl Jaspers, Die Geistige Situation der Zeit (Berlin: Göschen, 1931), 42.

9. Madeleine Akrich, “The De-Scription of Technical Objects,” Shaping Technology/Building Society, W.E.

Bijker and J. Law, eds. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992).

10. Langdon Winner, “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” The Whale and the Reactor (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986).

11. Nelly Oudshoorn, Genderscripts in Technologie: Noodlot of Uitdaging?, lecture, Universiteit Twente, Faculteit Wijsbegeerte en Maatschappijwetenschappen, 1996.

12. Peter-Paul Verbeek, “Don Ihde: de relatie tussen mensen en techniek,” Van stoom-machine tot cyborg – denken over techniek in de nieuwe wereld, H.J. Achterhuis, eds. (Baarn: Ambo, 1997).

13. Cynthia Cockburn and Susan Ormrod, Gender and Technology in the Making (London: SAGE Publications, 1993).

14. Martin Heidegger, Sein und Zeit (Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1986). Original published in 1926.