# Envirom ental Design and Industrial Design : Int egratin Knowl edg e Around Urg ent Isu es

# Medardo Chiapponi

My sincere thanks to Karen Yurkovich for her translation. Her questions and remarks gave me many reasons to rethink some relevant points of the article.

The connection between environmental design and industrial design is, by now, generally accepted.<sup>1</sup> Yet, when one considers the merits of the relationship, it becomes clear that there are certain aspects which require refinement and elaboration. This is particularly evident if one considers how disciplinary practices are currently defined within the separate fields. Actually, it is environmental design which requires further reflection as well as development of its contents, tasks, and methodological tools, and important work in this direction is being undertaken. The position of industrial design is, instead, better defined, in that it builds from the following cornerstones:

• A definition of the discipline formulated in 1961 by Tomás Maldonado; adopted that same year by ICSID, the International Council of Societies of Industrial Design, and still valid in its principal tenets;<sup>2</sup>

• The presence at an international level of a specific university education; and

• The existence of a profession – that practiced by industrial designers – which has an operational structure, fields of intervention, and well-defined operational methods.

Currently, we are witnessing changes in the field of concern of industrial design, in that diverse peripheral topics are gaining more importance, particularly those connected to environmental design. Yet the recognition of these changes does not mean to assert, as some do, that almost everything now falls within the field of industrial design, because such changes mean an irreversible dissolution of those aspects peculiar to the discipline.

It would be more productive to transfer to industrial design, with due care, the model of scientific research programs elaborated by Imre Lakatos.<sup>3</sup> The Hungarian-born philosopher of science has proposed a model that bases scientific research programs on two fundamental concepts: those of a “hard core” and of a “protective belt.” The hard core consists of those stable elements which are essential to and characterize a program of research. The protective belt of a research program is, instead, more flexible and changeable in that its individual elements are subjected to experimental verification and must clarify their relationship to the hard core.

Remaining within this terminology, I would like to stress that, in examining the relationships between environmental design and industrial design, I will limit myself to considering only the hard core of industrial design. That is, I will concentrate on industrial design understood as the design of material products which are the result of industrial production and which are characterized by a plurality of features (formal, functional, performance-oriented, techno-economical, techno-productive, etc.).

Turning to environmental design, I believe it is necessary at this point to recall some of the essential characteristics of its subject – the concept of environment – and to mention some of their operational consequences.

## 1

The environment is a system. It is, therefore, characterized by the presence of diverse elements – physical, chemical, biological, sociocultural, techno-economic, etc. These elements are tied so closely together that they are very dificult to separate. This system is composed of both objective and measurable elements, such as the concentrations of various pollutants found in the atmosphere, as well as subjective and unmeasurable elements such as values, lifestyle choices, and individual and collective needs. Furthermore, an environment defined in this way can be structured upon the basis of four subsystems – the biosphere, the geosphere, the sociosphere, and the technosphere. Such a subdivision is, without doubt, conventional but its use has value in that it renders transparent the historical evolutionary process leading to the systemic notion of environment by making explicit the principal disciplines which have contributed to that process. Even more important is that such a subdivision stresses the basic character of environment, which is the indissoluble tie of anthropic (techno- and sociosphere) and nonanthropic (bio- and geosphere) elements. It then becomes superfluous, as well as improper, to qualify the term “environment” with such adjectives as natural or artificial, or to make a distinction between that which is noxious for human beings and that which is noxious for the environment. In fact, human needs, individual and social human behavior, the diverse forms of social organization, and technological production are constituent parts of the environment rather than independent and external variables. In some ways, the systemic notion of environment is in direct contrast to the notion of nature, notwithstanding the fact that they are considered synonymous, particularly in daily usage. This identification of one for the other is as much arbitrary as misleading. The concept of nature has, since ancient times, always been connected to the idea of a monolithic and immutable generative principle, which being outside and above human action has therefore determined it. Such a notion of nature has little cognitive value in that it refers to an uncontaminated and primordial world which in reality no longer exists, if it ever did.

Such an assumption is not at all lacking in actual consequences. Whether stated explicitly or not, it forms the ideological base of various movements such as Radical Environmentalism and Deep Ecology. These movements reject in concrete and even violent ways every and any intervention into “nature.” This rejection is born of the firm conviction that even the smallest change in the original state of nature cannot but produce irreparable damage. This, however, compromises the mobilization of tools which are indispensable to plan and guide the inevitable transformation of the environment. The extreme consequences of such thinking would be the renunciation of even those actions directed toward the saving of the living elements of the environment.

## 2

Another relevant characteristic of the environment is that every problem within the field involves diferent scales of intervention. Let us consider, for example, a global problem such as the hole in the ozone. By now it can be stated with reasonable scientific certainty that the problem is caused by CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons), and that the solution would be the quick substitution of other chemical products for CFCs. But the characteristics of CFCs have allowed their pervasive use. They are odorless, tasteless, nontoxic, and inert in the lower levels of the atmosphere. They have significant power of thermal insulation, and are highly efective for use in refrigeration, as a propellant, and as a cleaning agent for microchips and other fine mechanical components. Therefore, it is not enough to forbid the use of CFCs to stop the thinning of the protective ozone layer. It is essential to rethink and redesign those products having to do with refrigeration and conservation, such as those used in the transportation of wholesale foods as well as the heating and cooling systems in buildings. More generally, it is indispensable to rethink our existing lifestyles.

This example, however summary, clearly shows the abstractness and, therefore, the inadequacy of those positions which aspire to deal with global environmental problems solely through the building of complex scenarios, through the establishing of international standards, or through the making of laws and regulations. These are obviously useful and necessary, but the more important game is played out on a more concrete and complex level where design action has greater opportunities for intervention. At this level, the relationships between environmental design, industrial design, and other design disciplines are not at all forced or arbitrary but, rather, they find indisputable justification in the types of problems that must be confronted.

## 3

The environment is certainly a system characterized by high complexity as much in a mechanistic as a holistic sense. More explicitly, the environment is a highly complex system because:

• it is composed of many and diferent components;

• each component has diverse functions within the system;

• the individual components and functions are both connected and, at times, contradictory; and, • everything cannot be explained in terms of components, functional structures, and reciprocal relationships.

Moreover, that the environment would be characterized as a complex system is not only a statement of fact but also a value judgment. In many regards, complexity is a positive and even auspicious characteristic. This can be illustrated with a few examples. Biological diversity, a relevant part of the complexity of the biosphere, is a concept important enough to be protected by law. Concerning the sociosphere, we have learned from Emile Durkheim that complexity is a feature of an advanced society. In his doctoral thesis in 1893, he diferentiated between the forms of aggregation of a mechanic society and an organic one.<sup>4</sup> The first form, characteristic of primitive societies, possesses a low level of complexity, as the process of socialization presupposes a drastic limitation of the individual’s role in favor of cohesion to common, general principles. Emblematic of this are theocratic societies. On the contrary, the organic form of social aggregation typical of advanced societies, emphasizes the free interaction of individuals and groups, and therefore allows for a large increase in complexity.

Useful for a better determination of the objective of environmental design can also be the similarity between the characteristics of the environment and of Large Technical Systems (LTS). Large Technical Systems being the term used to designate, for example, systems of transportation, energy, and information. The concept, first introduced in the field of history of technology, has strongly influenced the more innovative trends of contemporary philosophy and sociology of technology. Significant contributions include those of Thomas P. Hughes of the University of Pennsylvania and Renate Mayntz of the Max-Planck-Institut in Köln.

The extension of the concept of LTS from the historical-analytical field to that of design seems particularly stimulating and promising. In fact, at the core of this theory is the thesis that technological innovations are not explainable in technocratic terms, but in systemic terms. Thomas P. Hughes states: Inventions such as the lightbulb, the radio, the airplane, and the gas-powered automobile are justified within the context of a technological system. Such systems, according to Hughes, are made up of much more than the so-called hardware, the equipment, machines, and networks of transportation, communication, and information individually connected. They also are made up of human beings and organizations. From our perspective, a conceptual and operational structure which consists of multiple factors (technical, scientific, organizational, and social, among others) and multiple scales (from technical products to networks) is very relevant.<sup>5</sup>

In the light of what has been said to this point, some questions become more significant.

1. Is it possible through design to confront environmental problems and, ultimately, legitimate and sensible to talk about environmental design, meaning the designing of the environment?

2. If the response to the first question is yes, what role can environmental design and industrial design play in this context?

3. How will industrial design change if, in the design of products environmental factors will have to be considered?

4. Does environmental design exist only as a more or less structured research sector, or rather as a real and legitimate discipline precisely located in the academic panorama, or does it also define a new profession?

5. If it is legitimate to recognize professional tasks for environmental design, what are its referents, and, finally but not less important, should new operational and design methods be developed specifically for this new profession or should those already codified be reconsidered.

In addition, the real meaning of the term “design” could be discussed at length, although this is not the point at which to develop such an important topic. We must be satisfied at this point with an extremely synthetic but workable definition in which the design process is seen as a two-way relationship between a reality to design (in our case the environment) and its model. The first phase of the process consists of the analysis, individuation, and delimiting of design problems. In this phase, one moves through a process of abstraction and formalization, from reality to a model which represents reality in a way coherent with the design objectives, methods, and techniques. The second phase consists of planning and implementation of design interventions. By working through simulations on the model and through directed actions built on specific, defined factors, this phase leads to a controlled modification of reality and to a solution to the problem.

In both these phases, simplicity plays a primary role. As every designer knows, the tools to formalize reality, the model, the simulation, and the interventions on reality must be as simple as possible. There exists an apparently unsolvable contradiction between the complexity of the environment regarded as system and the simplicity intrinsic to the design process. To confront this problem, the distinction between ontological and semiotic complexity introduced by Mario Bunge proves very interesting.<sup>6</sup> Seen in these terms, a distinction lies between the complexity of the environment and the complexity of the models, the theories, and the methodological tools used in the design of the environment. The reduction of the ontological complexity is as much impossible as illegitimate, and the simplification of the semiotic complexity is, instead, not only sensible but also indispensable.

Some disciplines already ofer, if only partially, useful contributions to this notion. For example, systems research has developed formal methods to simplify the so-called large-scale systems. Similar procedures can and must be initiated for the design of complex systems which cannot be completely formalized, such as the environment.

In fact, intrinsic to design action is the determination of the limits of individual design problems and the choosing of those aspects to analyze and design. Put in other words, the determination of priorities and hierarchies is a fundamental characteristic of the design process. In this sense, we can talk about the relative complexity of the environment, meaning by this that the real level of complexity depends on the individual environmental problem considered, on the objectives and on the design methods. Pertinent to this is the example adopted by Ross W. Ashby: The brain has a very high complexity for a neurophysiologist. The same brain can be described by a butcher, who has to distinguish it from about thirty other cuts of meat, with not more than five bits.

Furthermore, the determination of priorities and hierarchies is a characteristic common to the design of the environment and to the design of industrial products. It is, therefore, an essential element in the relationship product-environment considered in design terms. If we wish to design environmentally sustainable industrial products, we are faced with a conceptual and methodological objective dificulty very similar to that dealt with earlier. One tries to achieve a higher environmental quality, that is, one seeks a solution which is holistic in character, being able to rely only on mechanistic methods and procedures. In fact, through design, we can influence only certain aspects of the quality of the environment, such as the energy needed during the phases of construction and use of the product, the materials needed and their quantity, the number of components, the ease or dificulty of disassembly, the reusability, and the durability of the product as a whole and of its individual components. We must therefore decide, on a case-by-case basis, if and how much the savings of energy, material, and water resources, or the reduction of waste from the outset, etc., are relevant.

From this perspective, it is worthwhile to look at the panorama of methodologies which have been put forth to evaluate and promote the environmental quality of products. Some methodologies, to overcome the above-mentioned apparent contradiction between objectives and methods, enlarge as much as possible the set of parameters. Among these methodologies, the most important and widespread is LCA – Life Cycle Assessment. LCA examines all the phases of the life cycle of a product (encompassing extracting and processing raw materials, manufacturing, transportation and distribution, use, reuse, maintenance, recycling, and final disposal), and then assesses the environmental impact of each of these phases based on a plurality of parameters (among which are the consumption of energy and raw materials, and the quantity and type of air, water, and ground emissions).

Confronted with the obvious dificulty of commanding rather complex tools and of finding necessary information, an idea which has made legitimate and opportune headway is that of proposing simplified methodologies of analysis and evaluation to support environmentally conscious product design. Such simplifications, however, are not without delicate passages. Put more explicitly, in a situation of inadequate scientific knowledge, it is not admissible to resort to a simplification which delegates to automatic procedures – computerized or not – those choices which fall within the area of responsibility of the designer. Such an approach would be only a short-lived delusion, against every indication to the contrary, about the knowledge that the industrial designer should possess in order to engage eficiently with other specialists.

Furthermore, a perspective of these problems which is excessively and inappropriately reduced can produce, notwithstanding good intentions, results which are opposite to those expected and pursued. For example, one of the most dificult problems to solve which demands the eforts of both environmental and industrial design is the preventive reduction of waste through the design of products which are easily reusable and recyclable. Many times though, this topic is banalized and reduced to that of the use of recyclable material, that is, of material for which there already exists recycling technology suficiently tested and trustworthy, or at least presented as such. Certainly, the recycling technology is a necessary condition, but if we limit ourselves to this we go easily in the direction opposite to that desired. We cannot ignore the connections with the entire system of conditions which can ensure the reuse and recyclability of a product, such as the design of products easy to disassemble, a reduced number of components and materials used, the presence of an organization for the collection of recyclable material, the disassembly and reuse of the components of a product, and adequate norms or standards, etc. In fact, such misinformation leads to distorted buying behavior which, in turn, artificially increases the consumption of products which are recyclable only in the abstract, and which in reality are transformed only into garbage.

At this point, I would like to put forward some exploratory observations on the legitimacy and usefulness of interpreting design activity, in particular the areas of product and environmental design, as a collective decision-making process. In certain ways, it is self-evident that designing is a decision-making process. It is obvious that the design process involves a succession of decisions based on formal, technological, functional, performance-oriented, structural, and economic parameters. Already, we have recalled that the decisions concerning those aspects considered priorities fully belong to the design process. It is important now to note that such decisions are not undertaken individually or separately but, rather, collectively, that is, together with diverse social actors.

The complexity of the environmental system also means complexity of the system of actors involved in its design. The plurality of design aspects means that the designing of the environment is part of many and diferent discourses: from those of the discipline of design, to those of technology, social politics, economics, and still others. The design of the environment is, therefore, not a demiurgic intervention, in which a single designer with heroic gestures dispenses his or her own technocratic recipes. The plurality of social actors involved on each environmental subject makes environmental democracy almost ineluctable, in that no one is in a position, and not even wanting, to have his or her point of view prevail in any or whatever circumstances. Having said this, an issue of the first importance opens concerning which procedures and methods should be prepared to prevent a deadlock of democracy, where nothing is decided or done. In other words, it is necessary to avoid a situation of so-called nondecision-making and, on the contrary, to ensure that democracy also means eficiency.

A similar situation presents itself in industrial design. Not even the industrial designer lives and works in an ascetic ivory tower. He or she conducts his or her activity within a system of actors whose actual shape changes with each new situation. Belonging to this system are, among others, international industrial groups with their complex organizations, small and medium-size industries with their flexible structures; as well as government institutions, standard institutes, consultants for specialized topics, universities and research institutes, consumer associations, and environmental groups. Industrial designers must, therefore, construct on a case-by-case basis the most appropriate system of the actors and determine their own original contribution, without mimetic actions or role-playing. The designer should not, for example, assume the role of the industry marketing expert. Nor does this role-playing form part of industry’s expectations. Since industry’s job is the production of salable products, it is for that very reason that it has to cooperate with industrial designers who know how to present a true, autonomous vision of the problems, rather than conduct in a dilettante manner those operations which a business organization, with more professionalism and a complete knowledge of the field, know better how to face.

These topics could and certainly do require more development, which falls outside of the scope of this article. Nevertheless, it seems to me that the collective and social dimension of industrial design, particularly when it involves environmental aspects, is suficiently clear. The relationship between environmental design and industrial design can be faced productively from this perspective.

In the light of what has been said, there should be no doubt about the fact that environmental design designates a solid and demanding research sector. There are important and urgent problems which fall unequivocally within this field, and there are suficiently structured conceptual and methodological frames of reference. In my opinion, even more indisputable is the position of the discipline of environmental design in the academic context. In efect, the experience of the last few years has made the surpassing of the pioneer phase of the discipline incontestable. Environmental design, has in practice, demonstrated its capacity to integrate itself into many and diferent contexts of higher education. It should be stressed that inclusion into the university system has always represented an important step in the institutionalization of a discipline. It sufices to recall as an example the case of medicine, which took form as an autonomous discipline the moment it began to be taught at Salerno and Montpellier.

Certainly, we cannot ignore the dificulty that arises from the fact that environmental design is still in a formative phase. It can be described, to use an important distinction introduced by August Comte, in historical terms through the important events in its formative process, and not yet in dogmatic terms, that is, through its principles and methodology.<sup>7</sup> To make headway it would be fundamental to precisely delimit those subjects which belong to environmental design and underline its unique range of relevance, in other words, that which makes it autonomous from the other, more consolidated, disciplines to which it is related.

On the other hand, environmental design is only thinkable in relation to many other disciplines. In a certain sense, it could be addressed with considerations analogous to those which

Herbert A. Simon directed toward cognitive science. In a recent interview, Simon afirmed that cognitive science is not yet really a discipline, but rather a conversation place, where various disciplines meet and converse.<sup>8</sup>

This position attempts to overcome an organization of knowledge based upon disciplines which are properly labeled and sorted in a rigid, taxonomic system. Parallel to knowledge organized by discipline (which, surely in many circumstances, plays a real role and with great eficiency) is emerging a notion of knowledge organized by problem. In this way, questions such as interdisciplinarity (or transdisciplinarity), or the dialectic relationship between specialization and generalization, can be put forth in new terms. From this perspective, interdisciplinarity is not an a priori choice, but rather a direct consequence of the problem being confronted. Specialization and generalization are no longer antithetical. Instead, they are two faces of the same coin, both of which are necessary to confront specific problems. Similarly, it becomes indispensable to develop that which could be defined as a “specialization of connections,” which is the capacity to orchestrate diverse forms of knowledge, to make them meet and “converse” – to use Simon’s terms – to resolve problems.

After all, the symptoms of the phenomenon of the more general transformation just described are difuse and clearly perceptible. The “border” disciplines, which combine diferent thematic areas and examine them from diverse viewpoints, are always more numerous. Among these, environmental design certainly figures and, in this sense, its connections with other disciplines, particularly industrial design, must be recognized and dealt with.

Better articulated is the discourse concerning the existence of the specific professional profile of “environmental designer,” and his or her relationship to the skills and tools of other professionals in the design field. We are living in a transition phase, and it is probably still premature to talk about outcomes with any certainty. Given the current state of things, it seems inopportune and untimely to hypothesize about an environmental designer who operates with methodological tools which are entirely new and completely distinct from those already used in the existing design professions. Such a hypothesis would underestimate the persistence of those methods profoundly rooted in praxis (master plans, regulatory plans, architectural projects, industrial design projects, etc.) and underestimate the advantages that routine ofers from the point of view of procedure and from that of communication between social actors.

For the short term, we can envision an environmental designer who stands beside the more traditional figures of design and who, to a certain extent, renouncing the need to exert his or her autonomy, contributes to a revision of those methods already codified so that greater attention is paid to environmental topics. This apparently minor choice, though, already implies profound transformations in the modes of operation.

We have already touched upon some of the transformations in industrial design. Urban planning, to be able to be defined as environmentally sustainable, must occupy itself with themes such as the mobility of persons and goods, the reduction, management, and treatment of waste, clean technologies in the fields of production and of services, the organization of trade, the social equity in the distribution of risk, citizen’s information, scientific popularization, and many others. Themes, therefore, which transgress traditional land planning, which is oriented toward the determination of ground use. From this perspective, the more or less ideological emphasis of a single aspect such as the provision of green space – the so-called sacredness of the green belt – is no longer suficient.

We could continue with a similar analysis for every level of design, and it is easy to see that the results would be perfectly in line. That leaves us to foresee the direction which eforts should take in the near future, that being the predisposition toward tools and methods which are characterized primarily by their capacity to bring together diferent kinds of knowledge and to make these diverse kinds of knowledge dialogue, all of this working toward the solution of environmental problems.

## Notes

First published in Design Issues 14 no. 3 (Autumn 1998): 74–84.

1. Environmental design is in the English-speaking culture a concept with several diferent meanings depending on the disciplinary context in which it is used. There is, for example, an environmental design which is understood as the control of engineeringrelated aspects of the environment (air quality, thermal comfort, lighting, etc.) and an environmental design which is related to psychology and human behavior. To avoid possible misunderstandings, I would like to state from the beginning that I will use environmental design in the sense of a discipline concerned with designing a systemic environment as referred to later on in the article.

2. One aspect still valid in Maldonado’s 1961 definition of industrial design is the idea that designing a product does not mean assigning to it an a priori form, but coordinating and integrating all of the factors that participate in the constitutive process of the form of the product, among others, functional, symbolic, cultural, technical, and economic factors.

3. Imre Lakatos, The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978).

4. Emile Durkheim, De la division du travail social (Paris: F. Alcan, 1893).

5. Thomas P. Hughes, American Genesis. A Century of Invention and Technological Enthusiasm, 1870–1970 (New York: Viking Penguin, 1989).

6. Mario Bunge, The Myth of Simplicity (Englewood Clifs: Prentice Hall, 1963).

7. Auguste Comte, Philosophie première. Cours de philosophie positive, leçons 1 à 45 (Paris: Hermann, 1975).

8. Herbert A. Simon, “Technology Is Not the Problem” in Peter Baumgartner and Sabine Payr, eds., Speaking Minds (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995).