# Furt her Reading for Part I

There is a growing literature of design theory and reflection on the concepts that shape our understanding of design emerging within the design disciplines as well as a wide range of other disciplines. See, for example, Richard Buchanan, “Thinking About Design: A Historical Perspective,” in “The Philosophy of Engineering Design,” Philosophy of Technology and the Engineering Sciences, ed. Anthonie Meijers, Vol. 9 of the Handbook of the Philosophy of Science, eds. Dov Gabbay, Paul Thagard, and John Woods (New York: Elsevier, 2009). This provides an overview and analysis of the major concepts and strategies of design and design research in the twentieth century. For many of the original papers of the Design Methods Movement, see Nigel Cross (ed.), Developments in Design Methodology (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1984). One of the most important works of design theory is Herbert A. Simon, Sciences of the Artificial, 3<sup>rd</sup> Edition (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996). Research into product development has given important new ideas about design and user research. For example, Jonathan Cagan and Craig Vogel, Creating Breakthrough Products (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002). For a diferent perspective on concepts in design, see Donald A. Schön, The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action (New York: Basic Books, 1983). Works in the philosophy of technology have useful insight into the concepts of design. See, for example, Albert Borgmann, Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life: A Philosophical Inquiry (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984) and Carl Mitcham, Thinking Through Technology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994). See also, Albert Borgmann, Holding On To Reality: The Nature of Information at the Turn of the Millennium (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999). For a discussion of ethics in design, see Caroline Whitbeck, Ethics in Engineering Practice and Research (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998). For new concepts of design in the context of user research, management and organizational strategy, see Steve Diller, Nathan Shedrof, and Darrel Rhea, Making Meaning: How Successful Businesses Deliver Meaningful Customer Experiences (Berkeley: New Riders, 2006), Robert Verganti, Design-Driven Innovation (Boston: Harvard Business Press, 2009), and Richard J. Boland and Fred Collopy, Managing As Designing (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2004).