# Introduci to Section 2: The Design Proc es and t he Social Meanig of Things

Once they are manufactured, designed objects, whether appliances, furniture, or digital typefaces, take on a life of their own. Consumers seek out these objects for their own reasons and use them according to their own purposes. The domain of use thus widens the context in which the fabrication of objects can be understood.

Design critic Reyner Banham, as Nigel Whiteley describes him, was more interested in the symbolic expression of objects and their use than he was in their style. Banham extended the range of design that was worthy of critical attention by writing about banknotes, neckties, and ice cream vans as well as more conventional objects. Whiteley discusses Banham’s approach to design writing, noting that use for Banham was more about how design was consumed by diferent social groups than it was about the object’s intended function. Banham’s approach to design criticism departed from the strict modernist dictum that explained form in terms of its function, ofering instead a more eclectic and sociological basis for discussing the way objects conveyed social meaning.

Conversely, Sara Schneider’s article on the Day-Timer describes how the Day-Timers company sought to create a corporate culture that embedded one of its products in a system of ritualized use. The Day-Timer is a work organizer that fosters the eficient management of time. In its promotional material, Day-Timers featured accounts of how its own employees used the product, while it invited customers to provide comments on their experience with organizer. It then used the most positive of these in its future advertising.

In her article on the development of typography in the 1980s and 1990s, Loretta Staples looks at the fabrication of digital type, noting that: “The computer enabled designers to create and manipulate letters in new ways, ofering new options for crafting letterforms and ‘outputting’ them – whether in the medium of toner particles on paper, or pixels on a screen.” Similar to Michael Punt’s account of the community that created the personal computer, Staples shows that numerous people were involved in developing the technology and design of digital type. Of significance is the fact that new technologies, such as Apple’s LaserWriter, greatly enhanced opportunities for desktop publishing by individuals, while giving graphic designers more control over their final output. Digital technology also generated new aesthetic possibilities, beginning with fonts that exposed their bitmap construction and moving on to experiments with dimensional forms.

Giovanni Anceschi considers visibility to be an essential component of fabrication. He critiques the “excess of visual noise” that produces a “civilization of blindness” and looks to the graphic designer to reveal valuable information to the public. He likens the designer to a theater director or choreographer, who instead gives form, position, and behavior to graphic elements that are displayed as “representations of characters, graphics, and illustrations on the Flatland of the page.” Anceschi treats graphic elements like physical entities and characterizes the designer’s skill as knowing how to place them in relation to each other in order to produce meaning.

Raimonda Riccini addresses the issue of fabrication as a historian, by considering some of the diferent ways that designed objects can be interpreted. She claims persuasively that there is no single way to embed objects in historical narratives. One argument she makes is that the history of industrial design should be more closely related to the history of business, thus exposing the economic and manufacturing decisions and processes that generate objects. Wedgwood pottery, Thonet furniture, and Ford automobiles are products of distinct industrial cultures that need to be accounted for. At the same time, she recognizes that objects can be related to each other in a larger sense of forming typological chains that show the evolution of forms through multiple iterations. Besides the history of artifacts, Riccini is also concerned with history through artifacts, whereby objects contribute to the understanding of culture as a whole.