# Histor y From Things : Not es on t he Histor y of Industrial Design

Raimonda Riccini

A longer version of this essay was published in Archivi e Imprese 14 (July–December 1996): 231–58.

However paradoxical it may seem, the history of industrial design has, for a long time, been able to ignore business history, just as the history of enterprise has been able to avoid a real confrontation with the history of products. Far from being a sort of play on words, this opening statement deserves serious consideration and, at the same time, requires some explanation. For what reason, then, have the planes on which these two branches of history operate intersected so rarely? Why is it that two such closely interconnected worlds have generated two separate fields of study and of knowledge?

The history of enterprise is a recently formed discipline, and one which is trying to create its own identity, in part through the confrontation with other fields of study. At a congress on industrial design held at the Milan Politecnico,<sup>1</sup> Valerio Castronovo had addressed the question of the relationship between the history of industry and the history of industrial design. At the time, he had attributed the backward state of studies of the industrial system to the “low level of interest that business historians have shown so far in a subject like that of design.” But the scarce interest shown by business historians has been matched by that of historians of industrial design. We can attempt to come up with some further explanations in order to sound out the problem. At least two points of my argument are of decisive importance to the reliability of the reasoning. The first concerns strictly disciplinary motivations, closely bound up with the way in which the history of industrial design has developed; the second refers to the marginal role given to artifacts, when they are not entirely absent, in the process of historical reconstruction.

I would like to commence, however, on the positive side by recalling that there have been significant exceptions in the historiography of both sectors. Thus, it is possible to cite important cases in which the history of an enterprise has been reconstructed around problems of industrial design, or on the basis of motivations or questions that arise directly from the study and the history of industrial design. Although they are very well known even to non-specialists, I would like to mention by way of example the meticulous reconstructions of the history of the British pottery industry and Josiah Wedgwood’s factories at Etruria and of Thonet bentwood furniture and AEG, to stick to the phase of socalled proto-design.<sup>2</sup> The interest shown by historians in these enterprises stemmed largely from the fact that they were seen as the pioneers of a new industrial sector, bringing with them a high degree of innovation and representing a diferent way of manufacturing and marketing products. The entrepreneurs themselves are represented as emblematic figures, as in the case of Wedgwood.

In addition to his industrialization of the production of pottery, he is shown to have been capable of grasping that the manufacture of objects was part of a broader system comprising the phases of research, design, production, and, finally, marketing.<sup>3</sup> The same factors underpin the interest in figures such as Thomas Edison and, above all, the American automobile industry in the case of Ford and General Motors, as well as in the history of transportation in general. Moreover, the attention paid by scholars to some companies rather than others certainly is influenced by the presence of important designers, as in the well-known case of Peter Behrens and AEG.

However, while reconstructions of this kind provide a valid model, it is one that rarely has been taken up. Apart from a few emblematic cases, then, the attention given to economic and industrial factors in studies of the history of industrial design has all too often not extended beyond a few indispensable references to the context. The principal economic agents, though acknowledged to play a leading role in the fortunes of the company, have been characterized in an extremely vague fashion. And when it comes to systems of production, the relationship with the products, the role of design, and even quantitative analyses of the products themselves, little trace can be found.

As if to back up this attitude on the part of the vast majority of historical studies of industrial design, there has been – it seems to me – an underestimation of the problems connected with the final form of the product on the part of the companies themselves. In other words, historically, the enterprise as an economic entity has not always interpreted the role and function of design within its own organization in an appropriate manner. It is likely that things could have been otherwise, at least until such time as a model of organization based on the production process and its eficiency gave way to a model that concentrates more on the product and the market.<sup>4</sup> If to this we add the fact that, for many years, industrial design has been viewed as a “cosmetic” function,<sup>5</sup> then the fact that people have tended to think of the product as external or secondary to the production process becomes comprehensible.

If this is true, then we are dealing with a failing on two levels: on the one hand, the slowness of studies of the history of industrial design to realize that the enterprise ofers an ideal vantage point from which to understand the history of products and of the profession of the industrial designer; on the other, the reluctance of the enterprise to see the overall identity of its products as a decisive part of its own identity.<sup>6</sup> As John Walker has suggested, the history of industrial design has studied enterprise in much the same spirit as the art historian has looked at patronage:<sup>7</sup> merely as the client for works of particular significance in the world of industrial products. In contrast, companies have sought, for the most part, to project an image of themselves through their successful products, presented in a linear sequence.<sup>8</sup>

Nonetheless, it is possible to identify a series of enterprises for which the products have represented, right from the start, a resource, even in terms of memory, that is indissolubly bound up with the way that the company has developed. Siemens provides an example of this. Some of the publications on the history of the company show a strong propensity to describe the evolution of its technology and production in terms of innovation and the characteristics of its products.<sup>9</sup> In addition, of course, to sales catalogs, which represent an invaluable but quite distinct source for the history of industrial design,<sup>10</sup> these publications are particularly revealing as they examine the stages in the development of the company and show us the products associated with them. Backed up by numerous pictures, sometimes assembled in true synoptic tables of images, this approach permits a comparative analysis of the models and, at the same time, ofers a precise account of the stages in product innovation over the course of time.<sup>11</sup> The technological and functional characteristics of the products are clearly revealed (for instance, the appliances made in the twenties and thirties with systems for absorbing current at night), and sometimes even innovations in the production cycle are stressed (such as the rationalization of the plant for the assembly-line production of irons in 1924).<sup>12</sup>

In such a context, however, the contribution of design and the part played by the designer in the shaping of products are relegated to a secondary role, if not dismissed as totally irrelevant.<sup>13</sup> A simple comparison may serve to clarify this aspect. Anyone with even a nodding acquaintance with the history of German industry cannot fail to notice the diferent approach taken with a company such as AEG – contemporary with Siemens and operating in the same sector – and the diferent historical image that has grown up around this firm and Peter Behrens, as well as the famous electrical appliances that emerged from his work as a designer or which were produced under his supervision. In this case, one can even speak of an overexposure of Behrens’s activity, with the result that an excessively homogeneous and consistent image has crystallized around a diverse and complex reality.

In addition to this illustrious precursor, there have been numerous other companies that have made industrial design a central element in their approach to the planning of products and even to the image of the company itself. There are some good examples of this in Italy, too, though on a diferent scale. It seems superfluous to look at Olivetti again, since it is one of the most widely studied and appreciated cases even at an international level. Instead, it is worth recalling a number of examples proposed by Mario Bellini, a designer who has been directly involved in many of these experiences:

Another case that I would like to mention briefly is that of a smaller company, Brionvega, which, based in Milan, produces equipment for sound and music and television sets. Here, too, we see the involvement of design in the planning process. The technicians who are concerned with circuits and positions, with the innards of a television set, work with designers to produce a result that is, for example, a better television set; an object capable of entering into a relationship with our surroundings and with our sensibility. Here, too, the non-separation of function and ornament has, in my view, led to very interesting results, even though the product is aimed at an elite market … Briefly, another experience, with Cassina. Here we are in a diferent situation: the product is not machinery but furniture. A machine is always made up of something that stays inside, a sort of mechanical, electronic, functioning intestine, and something that is outside: the activity of the designer is aimed at resolving this dualism in a synthetic manner. The piece of furniture on the other hand, apart from a few exceptions, is a unitary product … in this youthful company we find a situation in which the moment of design is intrinsically essential to the very existence of a range of products and, therefore, to the industry that produces them.<sup>14</sup>

Bellini makes clear two of the questions that are central to our discussion. The first is the distinction between the design of machines and the design of other consumer goods such as furniture, to which I would like to add knickknacks, clothing, fashion accessories, and textiles. In other words, a distinction between the range of technical products that require the intervention of the designer to allow the user to operate and manipulate the object and that of products which establish a relationship of a functional type (sitting, wearing) that is, at the same time, perceptual, aesthetic, symbolic, and communicative. Which brings us to the second question, closely linked to the first: the theme of the relationship between the technical content of products and their covering, between the mechanism and the container.

From the early stages of the factory system, this point<sup>15</sup> has conditioned the role of design. Was the final form of the product a problem related to the entire process of production or could it be dealt with by the “external” intervention of a designer? Could the external form of the object be divorced from its mode of functioning? Just how great a degree of freedom could the designer have? These are questions that, in the end, bring us back to the old conflict, never completely resolved, between standardization and ornamentation, between creative freedom and technical constraints, around which the debate in Germany at the beginning of the twentieth century turned in particular.<sup>16</sup> But also to the idea that it is the production process that de facto determines the final form of the product and that it is, therefore, necessary to “incorporate” design into the process. Support for one or the other of these hypotheses has created a division between two ways of looking at industrial design, which go hand-inhand with diferent ways of thinking about its history. In Italy, where designers have been involved chiefly (but not exclusively)<sup>17</sup> in the area of noninstrumental consumer goods, with a marked and much vaunted craft component, historians seem to be biased toward an approach based on individual creativity, on which much of the image of Italian design is founded.

## Hist ories of Ind ustrial Design

The alternative, necessarily outlined here only briefly, also constitutes one of the theoretical foundations of the discipline of industrial design, as a body of knowledge and as a working practice. As Victor Margolin reminds us, “designers, unlike architects, have not operated by following a series of principles and rules that specify the purpose of their work. Rather, they have invented the contents of their profession as they went along.”<sup>18</sup> The relationship with architectural design (and even with technical design) is not just an abstract question, but also a powerful constraint on historiography. Perhaps precisely because of this relationship, industrial design was long relegated to the role of a younger brother, at least up until the time that it was recognized that the design of products for industry had broken architecture’s monopoly of the field. Faced with such a wide range of products to be designed, the statute of the elder discipline proved inadequate: as Manlio Brusatin has shown, the architectural “vision” was too rigid for the design of objects and technical drawing incompatible with the cage of perspective.<sup>19</sup>

Nonetheless, the debate over industrial design has been very slow to separate itself from that of architecture.<sup>20</sup>

Anyone who has been involved with the historiography of industrial design will agree that the activity can be traced back to at least two cultural sources. On one side stands Nikolaus Pevsner,<sup>21</sup> with his pioneers of modern design and his accentuation of creative and individual aspects, but little interest in machinery and anonymous objects. On the other, Siegfried Giedion, with his investigation of the efects of the mechanization of objects in everyday use and emphasis on anonymous design.<sup>22</sup> Or, as Baudrillard has described it, his epic of the technical object.<sup>23</sup> These are two extreme and even antithetical viewpoints, between which there lies a wide variety of diferent lines of study, ranging from those relating to the history of the decorative and applied arts to those that make the practice of design the center of their interest. It is easy to see that the position of the products undergoes significant shifts in relation to the approach adopted, which also determines where the focus of the analysis is placed: on the products themselves, on the organization of production, or on the ideology and culture of industrial design.<sup>24</sup>

From the viewpoint of historical reconstruction, placing chronological limits on the analysis of a product is a decisive factor, which can even afect the analytical approach to the problem: we know that the division into periods is, in general, a decisive element since it implies taking a stand on the origin, contents, and ideology of the phenomenon under investigation. So it is that those who, following in the footsteps of Pevsner, have seen the Modem Movement as the key to the history of design, have ended up placing more emphasis on the designers than the products, on the ideas than the modes of production. It is clear that the question of origins conditions not just historical and narrative aspects, but also more strictly theoretical ones.

Similarly, the position assigned to products in historical reconstruction has an influence on the perspective taken by the research. Those who have stressed the anonymous object and the idea of utility are, in fact, led to extend the scope of the inquiry much further back in time than the industrial revolution: “Some studies (such as Herbert Read’s old and classic work Art and Industry and Lindinger’s extensive essay on Designgeschichte) err in their identification of the presumed historical origins of industrial design, tracing it back to the utensil, the pot, the beaker of antiquity, for the sole reason that these objects had a utilitarian purpose as well as an aesthetic one.”<sup>25</sup> This line of analysis, which takes the functionality of artifacts as its key to interpretation, has played an important part in the history of industrial design. Hervin Schaefer has suggested that, in the nineteenth century, the functional form characterized both scientific and technical artifacts (means of transportation, sports equipment, musical instruments, machine tools, etc.) and anonymous, popular objects, especially for household use. Along the same lines, Schaefer himself and Clive Dilnot have pointed to the contributions made by Walter Dexel (Deutsches Handwerksgut, eine Kultur-und-Formgeschichte des Hausgeräts, 1939), by J. Kouwenhoven in the United States (Made in America, 1945, which investigates the contribution made by popular creativity in contrast to the cultured tradition) and by Herbert Lindinger (with a series of articles published in Form in 1963–64). For these authors, functionality is the point of equilibrium between technology and popular creativity.

Of course, as Gillo Dorfles had already pointed out, the risk of an approach based strongly on evolution is that it will find its legitimacy more in the history of technology than in that of industrial design: it is looking at the original archetypes, from which all the objects of our everyday life stem. “In their Storia illustrata delle invenzioni, Umberto Eco and Giovan Battista Zorzoli assert that ‘all the instruments that we use are based on objects made at the dawn of prehistory.’ And in his Evolution of Technology, George Basalla claims that ‘any new object that appears in the world of artifacts is based on some object that already existed.’ Such statements seem particularly true in the case of implements for eating.”<sup>26</sup> Today, it is not uncommon to find analyses of products that rely on this type of genetic or evolutionary interpretation.<sup>27</sup>

Taking this line, Henry Petroski has recently studied the evolution of some of the simplest and most common artifacts that we use today: small utilitarian objects such as pencils and paperclips are made the core of an important reflection aimed at bringing the creative process of invention and design out of the realms of the unknowable.<sup>28</sup> In the Evolution of Useful Things, for instance, the birth and development of the can opener are examined in relationship not only to the emergence of new methods of preserving food, but also to the objects from which the can opener is directly descended (in part the bayonet, in part the sickle), to the production of metal alloys and to the evolution of containers: in other words, the technical and social circumstances of its design, production, and use.

This is, as far as I know, one of the few examples of exhaustive application of the methodology first introduced by Siegfried Giedion: the study of the birth and development of particular types of objects in common use, often the fruit of anonymous contributions,<sup>29</sup> as the culmination of a multitude of factors. This approach, if used solely to seek out the original genetic aspects, may seem of little use to a history of industrial products. Yet it can, in fact, be highly efective insofar as it places products at the center of a web of relationships of various kinds, in which those of production are far from secondary.

Naturally, other interpretations exist, such as the ones that look at the world of products from the morphological point of view.

This approach probably is very fruitful on the plane of the theory of design, and yet it seems to me to be less so where history is concerned. Assigning a leading role to the theme of form may lead to a classification of objects on the basis of a predetermined stylistic feature. In this way, the objects of a certain period will have characteristics consonant with the stylistic traits of the time, with a resultant emphasis on those that adhere most closely to them. This explains the critical appeal, for instance, of art deco furniture or jewelry, which have little or nothing to do with industrial production but which are genuine objets d’art. They are treated as elements representative of a “canon,” the set of features that characterize a style. Siegfried Giedion tackled the problem as follows:

The history of style deals with a theme by dividing it into horizontal sections, while typology divides it vertically. Both are necessary in order to see things in historical space … The extent to which it is necessary to trace back the history of a type has to be decided case by case. There are no rules. It is the material that makes the decision, not the historian … He reserves the right to make a scrupulous study of individual aspects and concepts and to let others go by unobserved. This leads to a similar lack of proportions to those found in contemporary painting, where a hand can fill the entire canvas, while the body remains fragmented and sketchy. This disproportion is equally indispensable if we are going to give the right value to the signification of the historical exposition as a whole.<sup>30</sup>

The idea of focusing the attention on a particular technology or product could have interesting consequences from the historical perspective, as has now been recognized where studies of material culture are concerned.<sup>31</sup> From this specific viewpoint, the product-artifact makes it possible to reclassify the entire system on the basis of the interrelationships between the technological and the social plane. To put it another way, as technology permeates the whole of human activity (and vice versa) through artifacts, concentrating the analysis on the artifact makes it possible to take in most aspects of the entire system: design, manufacture, distribution and use; use, perception, social organization and interaction with the artifact and its functions. This, in my view, is a conception very close to the idea of the artifact as an “interface” between the internal environment (the material from which the artifact is made and the methods used to do so) and the external environment (conditions in which the artifact operates) put forward, from another perspective, by Herbert Simon.<sup>32</sup>

Yet here we also find a whole series of conflicts with an approach to industrial design and its history that might be called “pluralistic.” It is an approach that places other lines of investigation alongside that of the historical tradition of modern design, in order to take account of the multiplicity of factors that are involved in the “process of creating the form of the product.”<sup>33</sup>

In such a theoretical context, it seems to me that the diferent roles played by the various protagonists in the formation of the industrial product, for example – and above all – the enterprise, can be given their full weight.

## Tradit ons in Resarch and Artifacs

Nevertheless, to arrive at this type of proposition it has been necessary to draw on diferent traditions of research from those of industrial design: in the first place, material culture, in which the idea of artifact has been developed. Reference was made at the beginning to the fact that one of the reasons for the slowness of the historiography of industrial design to perceive and study objects in the guise of industrial products stems from the position of artifacts in historical research. A position that, at least up until just a few decades ago, was unquestionably marginal.

As is well known, artifacts have not had a good reputation in the history of our culture, as is perhaps testified by the pejorative meaning that the term has come to assume in several languages over the course of time. Simon has written: “It seems that our language reflects mankind’s profound distrust of its products.”<sup>34</sup> However, while the category of products immediately conjures up the mental image of a more or less broad range of physical objects, the category “artifact” needs more clarification, even from the linguistic viewpoint. In everyday language, the word artifact has a negative sense, not to mention the nuances of meaning attached to the term artificial, whose semantic range comprises the sense of contrived or afected.<sup>35</sup>

And so, while the production of artifacts has characterized human history from the outset, it is only in relatively recent times that the notion of artifact has entered the purview – and language – of certain disciplines. In anthropology, it was largely due to Bronislaw Malinowski that the notion of artifact became a systematic part of the fund of human culture. “Culture comprises the artifacts, goods, technical processes, ideas, habits, and values that are transmitted socially.” In this way, the simultaneous presence of elements belonging to the “complex of reactions and activities that characterize the behavior of individuals”<sup>36</sup> is sanctioned. So the decisive importance of artifacts in defining the functioning and organization of a society, the patterns of behavior and distribution of roles of its members, and even its problems – in other words, in defining culture – has begun to be acknowledged. Yet, there still is a reluctance to give due weight to the concrete role that artifacts have played in society. Notwithstanding the explicit recognition of the material aspects of human culture, anthropology “has continued, for its part, to attribute a secondary importance to material phenomena in the proper sense”<sup>37</sup> in the conduct of its own researches, preferring to concentrate on the symbolic aspects of the material conditions of the society under investigation.

An approach of this kind may be explained by the attitude of anthropology to the investigation of so-called primitive societies. A diferent attitude has in a sense been imposed on it today by the fact that, orienting itself “toward the study of the various cultural realities that make up that vast, composite aggregate known as ‘Western European culture’ … cultural anthropology has been unable to avoid looking at the world of industrial production which represents, when all is said and done, the supporting framework of our culture.”<sup>38</sup>

Even those who, like Mary Douglas, have made the objects of contemporary society the focus of their investigation, place the emphasis on their representative value, as a means of access to the intelligibility of the world, to its coherence and stability.<sup>39</sup> Moreover, as Douglas herself has pointed out, any attempt to speak sensibly of an anthropology of consumption cannot ignore the assumption on which ethnography is based: the fact that all material goods are endowed with social significance, without which it would not be possible to go beyond mere descriptive archeology. The application of this assumption to contemporary society is certainly risky, but “if we do not make the attempt there will never be an anthropology of consumption.”<sup>40</sup> As Raymond Eches reminds us, an ethnology of industrialized societies has emerged in the English-speaking countries and France.<sup>41</sup> Although still oriented chiefly toward patterns of social behavior, these studies have, in some cases, given rise to what has been called “ethnotechnology.”

The work of the Centre de Recherche sur la Culture Technique (1979) is of particular significance to the history of industrial design, especially through the articles published in Culture Technique,<sup>42</sup> where the study of the typology of objects and machines has been developed by investigating “the technical culture of the consumer.”<sup>43</sup> Despite its avowed concern with the social implications of technology, this magazine often contains typological investigations of great interest on such subjects as television and other means of communication or the washing machine, on which the author carries out a genuine “autopsy.”<sup>44</sup>

In similar fashion, the sociological approach to the great questions raised by the study of mass society is distinguished by the attention paid to the communicative elements of artifacts. In this connection, it is necessary to bring in the theory of objects developed on the basis of research carried out in the sixties and seventies, in particular by Abraham Moles and Jean Baudrillard. Their goal was to analyze the diferent aspects of the world of objects in order to construct an approach based primarily on the theory of the social function and significance of the objects themselves.<sup>45</sup>

Finally, we should not forget the dual role that artifacts have always played in the artistic field. On the one hand, the history of art has always been founded on the analysis and criticism of special artifacts: not just paintings and sculptures, but also objects of the so-called minor arts. On the other hand, artifacts as objects have been ignored by representation for centuries, until 1900, except in marginal episodes or as fragments where what counted was the sacred or symbolic intention: objects that iconological research has taught us to interpret more as artifact-symbols than as artifact-utensils. The artistic boycott of objects, and especially machines, has been analyzed on several occasions in the context of the general attitude of contempt for technical matters shown by ancient and medieval Western culture.<sup>46</sup> “The basic outlook has not changed at all. We still find in both historical and theoretical work that disdain for the “mechanical arts” that (as Diderot wrote more than two centuries ago) “has filled the towns with presumptuous thinkers and the countryside with ignorant little tyrants.”<sup>47</sup>

Moreover, in the past, artifacts have been interpreted in diferent ways even within the various disciplinary fields that are more or less directly concerned with the subject of industrial design: in particular, the history and theory of technology, the history and theory of architecture, and the history and theory of industrial design.

There certainly is no need to dwell on the importance that the history of technique and technology has assumed, even though only fairly recently. Technology as a means of production and its relationship with economic and industrial development has been examined by some eminent figures, and still is a subject of analysis by economists, historians, and historians of technology.

This can be explained by the fact that much of the history of technology has been built around the stages marked by the epoch-making inventions and discoveries of the last two centuries and their often devastating efects on economic and social life. This also is the reason behind the emergence and reinforcement of the positive image that our culture often still bestows on technology.<sup>48</sup> The dificulty which the very idea of technique and technology has had in gaining acceptance in Western culture has already been pointed out. It must be added, however, that, once established, it has quickly found some authoritative proponents. As has happened with many other types of history – history tout court, as well as the history of architecture, industrial design, etc. – the emphasis has been placed on “the pioneers of modern technology,” both in the shape of the inventors, innovators, and entrepreneurs and in that of the archetypal machines: the mechanical loom, the steam engine, and the locomotive, which often has been accompanied by a genuine (and positive) rhetoric of technology.

Both faith in technological progress and apocalyptic Luddism normally refer to the technological system as a whole, in other words to an all-embracing concept that takes in all the factors that help to characterize our society as a technological society. The image of technology, on the other hand, does not appear so dramatic when the attention is shifted from large-scale systems to the technology of everyday life, to its real expression in the form of machines, instruments, products, appliances, and objects. “Technology, in fact, does not represent a problem for the forms of the civilization in which it is developed: it only takes on a contradictory dimension in the forms of culture.”<sup>49</sup> So if the image of technology at closer quarters appears more blurred, the reason may lie in the fact that “the majority of classical sociologists make no careful description of techniques – except in the field of study concerned with the impact of technology on society – and too many economists treat them like a black box.”<sup>50</sup> Here, we are speaking of sociologists and economists but, paradoxically, some historians of technology could be added to their number. Indeed, they sometimes end up treating artifacts as little more than schematic abstractions of functional parts, or as complete individuals, natural products of the development of technology and manufacturing. A possible and plausible explanation for this may be found in the fact that the history of technology emerged within codified and accessible disciplines taught at schools of engineering.<sup>51</sup> It could even be said, as Mark Brutton has suggested, that mechanical engineering has become a great manufacturer of stereotypes.<sup>52</sup>

Starting from these premises, let us look at the position of artifacts in common use in some areas of the history, and the theory of technique and technology. Jean-Jacques Salomon has stated that the best treatments of the theory of technology come not from technologists, but from students of technology, historians, and ethnologists: the encyclopedists Beekman, Marx, d’Espinas, Reuleaux, Mumford and Gill, Usher and Bloch, Mauss and Leroi-Gourhan. This view can be shared but must be clarified by pointing out that each of these authors – and they are not the only ones – has introduced a hierarchy of artifacts stemming directly from the historical or theoretical model of interpretation adopted. “There are already (at least) two overlapping histories of technology …: the history of systems in which the relations between objects (and their invention) find their meaning; the history of objects that become complexes, that ‘develop’ into systems on the basis of a biological need and which is, in the end, guaranteed by the contribution of science.”<sup>53</sup>

Yet, if the interest in the problems raised by technology from the theoretical viewpoint can be traced a fairly long way back in time, its treatment from the perspective of historical evolution was only given a systematic disciplinary endorsement around the middle of this century, with the foundation of the Society for the History of Technology (1958). Over the following years, the society’s review published articles on the history of the family, ofice work, and household articles that are of great relevance to the history of industrial design.<sup>54</sup> One of the themes that stands out is that of the impact of technology on domestic life. Perhaps the most important study of this subject is the one Ruth Schwartz Cowan published in the magazine in 1976 (“The ‘Industrial Revolution’ in the Home”). This was followed by other weighty investigations of the “industrialization of domestic work,”<sup>55</sup> as well, more recently, as an analysis of products that in some ways comes close to the idea of a typological reconstruction of the history of artifacts and that falls within the recent tradition of studies of the social construction of technology.<sup>56</sup>

Among the disciplines that have made the greatest contribution to undermining the preeminence of written and visual documentation, a primary role undoubtedly must be given to industrial archeology: “manufactured articles of the ordinary kind, from toys to textile mills, which do not need to be ‘stripped’ of their symbolic attributes, may constitute the most authentic of all historical sources. In addition they, rather than written documents, bear witness to the life of the young, the old, women and the poor, in other words of those members of society who represent the mass of workers.”<sup>57</sup>

Yet it would be naive to think, as some have done, that industrial relics are “a unique series not bound by historical conditioning, through which it is possible to analyze and verify numerous phenomena of the past.”<sup>58</sup> And, therefore, in themselves, a privileged field of historical research, an area free of the ambiguities and uncertainties that all documents present to the observer. While hypothesizing that the product-document is “not bound by historical conditioning,” in this case it is the interpreter who is even more strongly bound by various kinds of conditioning. These stem not just, as is obvious, from his or her prejudices and values.

They also derive from the multiplicity of meanings that accumulate around objects and from the diferent nature – not only of language but also of content – of the information that can be obtained from the object. It has been known for some time that the attitude interpreters adopt toward an artifact (as well as an image) is very diferent from the one they adopt toward a written document. Archaeologists and anthropologists are well aware of this. But even more so are students of architecture who, while usually dealing with concrete structures that are relatively stable in time, also are continually having to tackle aspects of the representation (sketches, plans, and drawings) and description (reports and photographs) of those structures in order to fully grasp their significance and value. Those who are most aware of this problem are the people who organize collections and museums.

It is precisely with regard to this question of historical research in relation to museums that the case of the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, a historic “bastion of the decorative arts”(set up in 1897)<sup>59</sup> and repository of collections of objects of decorative art dating from the sixteenth to nineteenth centuries, is particularly significant of the change in attitude toward the composite nature of the phenomenon of industrial design. In 1991, under its new direction, the museum organized the exhibition The Cooper-Hewitt Collection: A Design Resource, drawing on the 250,000 objects in its collection and commencing a transformation that would lead it to its becoming the National Museum of Design. Under the guidance of Dianne H. Pilgrim, who rejected the old museological structure of a museum of art, the museum launched a series of initiatives that have served to draw attention to the idea of design in its pluralistic sense.<sup>60</sup>

Returning to the problem of artifacts and their role in historical research, it seems possible to identify two main approaches. The first is that of the history of artifacts in which, on the model of the history of art, technology, and architecture, products are seen as the subject of historical research, and as elements to be studied, analyzed, and observed. A second approach is that of history through artifacts in which, following the example set by ethnology, anthropology, and archeology, products become documents of historical research, intermediaries for something else. It is my hypothesis that the history of industrial design represents an opportunity for an integration of these two approaches, an integration in which artifacts would be treated as both subjects and as documents of research.

This way of looking at things becomes even more meaningful if one considers that the history of a product often is reconstructed with a view to redesigning it. This is a question that chiefly concerns the teaching of industrial design, but it certainly touches on a delicate point in the planning and design of products within the companies themselves.

In this connection, I would like to mention a number of questions that might be raised, in a mutual exchange between the history of enterprise and the history of industrial design, by an analysis of such a commonly used product as the sewing machine. A very important product for the history of industrial design and for that of domestic sociology, it is, perhaps, the household article that has attracted the most thorough investigation from the historical viewpoint.<sup>61</sup> The reason for this interest is fairly obvious, if one considers the fact that the production of sewing machines was one of the first industrial sectors in which the American system of manufacturing was applied, and that the sewing machine was the first industrially produced “machine” to enter the home on a massive scale.<sup>62</sup> From the viewpoint of most interest to us here, the sewing machine provides an excellent illustration of a central point of our discussion: the attainment of a particular appearance on the part of an artifact and its stabilization.

This is, in more general terms, the theme of the typology of objects being fixed by industrial production and their crystallization in this form. But we know that the artifact which gains the upper hand is not the only possible solution, nor even, perhaps, the best one: it depends entirely on the contingent circumstances, including the interpretation of other artifacts. Indeed, for some authors, the artifact derives from the reinterpretation of similar artifacts in the light of particular problems and conditions.<sup>63</sup> In fact, the sewing machine appears to lend itself very well to this type of interpretation: the “prehistoric” analysis of a type is capable of setting it within the real processes of production that determined the definitive choice.<sup>64</sup>

After a period of disorganized research and a wide variety of proposals documented in an exorbitant number of patents, the sewing machine found a precise form that, once stability had been achieved on the market, would undergo no further substantial modifications. By the time Barthélemy Thimmonier patented his sewing machine on April 13, 1830, attempts to achieve the goal of mechanical sewing had been under way for many years. Tackled by British and German inventors ever since the middle of the eighteenth century, no satisfactory solution to the problem had been achieved due to an error of approach that was as banal as it has been common in the history of technological inventions. Thimmonier’s predecessors had not been able to divorce the idea of mechanical sewing from that of sewing by hand, whose methods and techniques they strove to reproduce.

Thimmonier, the son of a tailor, had managed to overcome this impasse by resorting to another analogy, basing his insight on analysis of the chain stitch produced in crochet work, which made it possible, among other things, to use a continuous thread. Around the same time, a series of partial inventions and even brilliant attempts followed one another in both America and Europe, though without overcoming the stumbling blocks of continuous operation and industrial applicability on a large scale.

It is customary to identify the period between 1830 and 1845 as the one in which a series of results were achieved in the field of mechanical sewing, each of which made a contribution to the solution of a particular problem (continuity of stitching, transmission of movement and so on). Each of these results entailed a structural modification, and sometimes a major one. For this reason, there initially was a great deal of uncertainty over the appearance of the sewing machine. It sufices to look at the configuration of the model patented by Wheeler and Wilson in 1850, in which the position of the stitching mechanism is perpendicular to the operator. Even after the first Singer model appeared, inventors continued to patent machines with completely diferent characteristics to the prototype of 1851, which was the model adopted by industry and which already had all of the working parts, structure, and formal features of the modern sewing machine. The arm was horizontal, in a frontal position with respect to the operator, and parallel to the work surface; the needle was located on the left-hand side and in a vertical position; and on the opposite side was set the mechanism of cogs that transmitted the movement. This model was to remain more or less unchanged in spite of the continual improvements that progressively refined its performance and reduced the various drawbacks, such as breaking of the thread or the rigidity of the needle.

The appearance of sewing machines did not even change with the introduction of electricity. This brought a considerable improvement in the quality of the work, and the practicality and maneuverability of the machine. Ever since its birth, the sewing machine had had to cope with the problem of the transmission of movement to the needle. As early as 1852, Singer had introduced the pedal and belt drive which, with respect to the previous handwheel, ofered the enormous advantage of leaving both of the operator’s hands free. A second factor was the tension of the thread, and the precision and regularity of the stitches. As can easily be imagined, the introduction of electricity brought considerable advantages to both of these key elements of the mechanism. The first electric sewing machine was the 15K model brought out by Singer in 1889. The electric-powered motor was housed in the handwheel at the side, and was simply added to the existing body without altering its overall appearance. The handwheel was fairly large and had the air of a purely technological object, applied to a device that still retained, in the elegant softness of its lines and the gilded decorative patterns, the dignified tone typical of all early nineteenth-century exemplars. It made up for the impossibility of concealing all of the machine’s mechanisms.

Notwithstanding the application of electricity, the older machine made of black cast-iron resisted any change up until the 1940s, when the introduction of materials such as light alloys and plastics and of new functions,<sup>65</sup> and the updating of the systems of production permitted another leap forward in quality. The motor and the illumination of the work surface were inserted into the body of the machine, which made it bulkier and reduced the room for maneuver. At the same time, the first portable machines began to appear, with a casing that opened up to form a work surface.<sup>66</sup> These years also saw the first interventions by the industrial designers who were to give the sewing machine its modern look.<sup>67</sup>

In the mid-seventies, Singer brought out their Futura 1000 model, an electronically programmed sewing machine. This technological innovation supplemented the device’s already high level of performance with some new and extremely sophisticated functions (programming of complicated stitches, embroidery, and the ability to move the needle in many directions and to different degrees, etc.). Yet the potential of electronics has not been fully realized, not even with the biggest innovation of all: complete automation of all of the operations; this may signify that a technological object which has struggled to find its formal and functional equilibrium will, once this has been achieved, put up greater resistance to change, even in the face of major technological innovations. More reasonably however, the factor that seems to have determined this stasis is the reluctance of the industrial system to modify a device that has attained a high degree of stability and popularity.

When we speak of the origins of the numerous artifacts that have acquired the appearance of useful objects over the course of time, we inevitably come up against a series of far-reaching themes that have attracted the attention of historians of technology and all those interested in the nineteenth-century adventure of industrialization and mass production. These include the discussion of inventions and patents, the role of technological innovations, the relationship of science to technology and the economy, and so on. Against this complex background, it is possible to cut out a limited series of figures, perceived to have simpler silhouettes than the others and, above all, to be better suited to throwing light on the question of the relationship between the history of industrial design, technological and economic history, and the history of enterprise.

The first of these figures could be defined as the theme of the change of scale<sup>,</sup> which is, moreover, a highly topical one in view of the so-called miniaturization of objects brought about by electronic technology. Placed historically at the origins, this figure concerns the passage of a series of artifacts and devices from the realm of community services to that of the home.

The hypothesis – which can be advanced generically, but would certainly require a more targeted analysis of the historio-graphical type – is that the production of equipment for the home derives directly from the production of equipment for the community. That is to say, that a change of scale takes place that allows mass production of technologies and innovations that have already been tried out in the larger dimensions of the community. While this passage has not yet been empirically investigated by studies of individual companies, it is fairly evident, at least in the pioneering phase of inventions and patents. An example is provided by the cooking equipment developed for large welfare institutions during the eighteenth century, which was the organizational and typological forerunner of all subsequent kitchens. Or, again, by the history of refrigeration, which was first developed for the transportation of perishable foodstufs and only later, and very slowly, applied in the domestic environment. Another example is one of the prototypes of the air conditioner developed by an American doctor who, in 1844, invented a device for cooling the air in the rooms in the hospital where he worked.<sup>68</sup> Or, finally, the mechanization of laundries specializing in washing for institutions, firms, and restaurants, which anticipated that of washing in the home by quite a few years.<sup>69</sup>

The priority of research aimed at resolving problems at the community level is comprehensible not just on the level of technology and production. It also derives its social logic from the fact that the problem of housing (in all its implications) and of the mass consumption of household appliances did not emerge until a later date.<sup>70</sup> Finally, the passage from the large to the small scale is still occurring today. Some authors do not exclude the possibility that automation, already highly advanced in various sectors of industrial production as well as in those of technological and scientific research, will have direct repercussions on household appliances. In other words, that devices derived from research and experimentation into large-scale industrial machinery may eventually come onto the market for household appliances: from the robots of the automated factory to domestic robots.<sup>71</sup>

A second figure that is central to an understanding of origins is that of the role played by the reconversion of industry, for example the transformation of wartime production into that of civil engineering, in the development of some household appliances. It is a role that historians have always admitted in general terms, but rarely demonstrated by detailed studies.<sup>72</sup> At the root of this phenomenon lies not just the availability of inventions or innovations, but the tendency toward mass production and the commercialization of products on an ever more open market.<sup>73</sup> It is through these elements that the possibilities of the American System of Manufactures were able to unfold, with its model of production based on interchangeable parts and the standardization of the manufacturing process. This is what happened with sewing machines, a sector in which the rivalry between Ford and General Motors was played out again as far as strategies of production were concerned, though with diferent results. “Singer and McCormick – the first relying on the quality of the product, the second on the frequent introduction of new models – also commenced the mass production of standard goods under the impetus of demand.”<sup>74</sup>

Starting out from these presuppositions, people are beginning to carry out research into the history of industrial design that attempts to provide answers to the questions raised in this text.<sup>75</sup>

The road ahead is still a rocky one.

## Notes

First published in Design Issues 14 no. 3 (Autumn 1998): 43–64.

1. See V. Castronovo, “Storia dell’industria e storia del design,” in Design: storia e storiografia (Bologna: Progetto Leonardo, 1995), 113–20, and cit. on 117.

2. Just a few titles of general reference. For Wedgwood, the reader is referred to the bibliography given in J. Fleming and H. Honour, The Penguin Dictionary of Decorative Arts (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1977). For Thonet, see the catalogs of the exhibitions, Form From the Process. The Thonet Chair (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1967), and Bentwood Furniture. The Work of Michael Thonet (London: Bethnal Green Museum, 1968). In addition, see G. Massobrio and P. Portoghesi, Casa Thonet. Storia dei mobili in legno curvato (Roma-Bari: Laterza, 1980). For AEG, see the impressive reconstruction of the relationship between the designer and the company on the basis of materials from the historical archives edited by T. Buddensieg, Industriekultur. Peter Behrens und die Aeg. 1907–1914 (Berlin: Gebr. Mann Verlag, 1979).

3. I. Bignamini, “Gran Bretagna: primi passi verso il disegno industriale,” Storia del disegno industriale, 1: 1750–1850. L’età della rivoluzione industriale (Milan: Electa, 1989), 130–47.

4. This shift, described here in an extremely simplified and generalized form, is crucial to the culture of design as well. On this point see, for example, the contributions made by M. Bellini, “Il designer e

l’industria” and T. Maldonado, untitled, in Camera del lavoro territoriale di Milano – CGIL, Per chi lavora il designer. Il progetto, il prodotto, l’immagine e il mercato, proceedings of the congress, Milan, January 20–21, 1983 (Rome: Ediesse, 1983): 21–6 and 138–41, respectively.

5. For a recent critique of the notion of design as “cosmetics” of the product, see G. Bonsiepe, Dall’oggetto all’interfaccia. Mutazioni del design (Milan: Feltrinelli, 1995), in particular the chapter “Le sette colonne del design,” 17–27.

6. The idea that “corporate image” is created not just by a company’s system of communication but by its products as well is a fairly recent one. “It is a question of inducing in the public a comprehensive set of favorable attitudes; a general appreciation not just of the individual product, but also of the line of products, the brand and the company itself. The theory of the ‘brand image,’ which has its roots in motivational psychology, would be developed by David Ogilvy: to the functional characteristics of the products have to be added emotional values, which will constitute the unitary personality of the brand,” G. Anceschi, “Grafica, visual design, comunicazioni visive,” in Storia del disegno industriale, III: 1919–1990. Il dominio del design (Milan: Electa, 1991), 74.

7. J. Walker, Design History and the History of Design (London: Pluto Press, 1989), 55–6.

8. Ibid., especially the chapter “Entrepreneurial and Company Histories,” 55–8, on the limitations of company histories from the viewpoint of research into industrial design.

9. Among these, it is worth mentioning Elektrogeräte für den Haushalt. Ihre Entwicklung im Hause Siemens (Berlin-Munich: Siemens Elektrogeräte GmbH, 1966) and H. Warscho, Chronik der Entwicklung elektrischer Hausgeräte. Siemens Haushalttechnik. Eine Dokumentation der Siemens-Elektrogeräte GmbH (Munich: 1976). For the extensive docu mentation, including visual records, in the Hist orical Archives of the Siemens Museum in Munich, see W. Feldenkirchen. “L’Archivio storico Siemens,” in Archivi e Imprese 7 (1993): 3–19.

10. In reality sales catalogs (and, more generally, mass and small-scale distribution and mailorder sales, as represented by Sears, Roebuck; Harrods; Marks & Spencer; and La Rinascente) are a fundamental resource and one that has still been very little explored by the historiography of design, except as an inexhaustible source of visual material. The Siemens 1938 catalog (Siemens Elek trische Hausgeräte, Priesliste HK1 1938, Siemens-

Schuckertwerke Ag. October 1938) illustrates very well, from the technological detail to the domestic setting, the range of electric products available at that date. These are far more numerous than Werner von Siemens could have imagined in 1873, when he hoped to be able to distribute “the current, produced by imposing electric dynamos, to every house, just as gas and water are at present, to provide light and heat and to power other motor-driven appliances,” Elektrizität im Dienste der Industrie, Berlin, January 12, 1873, Siemens-Archiv, quoted in Elektrogeräte …, cit. 9. They included irons, kettles, lamps, radios, wall and table clocks, portable and ceilingmounted fans, radiators, boilers, refrigerators, ovens, cooking ranges, and vacuum cleaners with the whole range of accessories, accurately illustrated with photographs and described largely in terms of the technology involved.

11. Typological history is one of the most controversial and interesting of methods, which was first applied to the history of architecture and then to that of design as well, in particular by Siegfried Giedion in his Mechanization Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous Design (New York: Oxford University Press, 1948). See Walker, 110–18.

12. H. Warscho, Chronik der Entwicklung elektrischer Hausgeräte, 40.

13. This does not mean that the concern was absent. See C. Kuehnel, Chronik der Abteilung Elektromotorische, 1954. Typescript, Siemens-Archiv, Munich, in which lengthy consideration is given to color as one of the means of encouraging the difusion of electric appliances. It was, along with that of advertising and the name to be given to individual products, a central theme in the preoccupation of company executives.

14. M. Bellini, “Il designer e l’industria,” in Per chi lavora il designer…, 25–26. Another example of a company built around research and design is that of B&B Italia. It is distinguished above all by the existence of a research center and the contribution of numerous designers. See P. Vidari, “Tra design e industria,” in Un’industria per il design. La ricerca, i designers, l’immagine B&B Italia (Milan: Edizioni Lybra Immagine, n.d.), 35–41.

15. The relationship between container and mechanism once again has become highly topical due to the influence of microelectronics on the shape and size of products. For a historical view, see T. Maldonado, Disegno industriale: un riesame (Milan: Feltrinelli, 1991), 25–6 and 33, et seq.

16. For this debate, viewed in terms of a confrontation between the two souls of German culture during a

period in which the need for standardization and rationalization of products was emerging, see the collection of writings Tecnica e cultura. Il dibattito tedesco fra Bismarck e Weimar (Milan: Feltrinelli, 1979), edited by T. Maldonado, and in particular his introduction, 9–21.

17. T. Maldonado, Disegno industriale…, 81–6.

18. V. Margolin, “Design History or Design Studies: Subject Matter and Methods,” Design Issues 11 no. 1 (Spring 1995): 4–15, cit. on 12.

19. M. Brusatin, “Disegno/progetto,” in Enciclopedia (Turin: Einaudi, 1978).

20. V. Pasca, “Una terza via per il design,” in Op. cit., 63 (May 1985): 15–23, id., “Design: storia e storiografia,” Design: storia e storiografia, 17–50. In addition, Clive Dilnot, “The State of Design History. Part I: Mapping the Field,” Design Issues 1 no. 1 (Spring 1984): 10.

21. N. Pevsner, Pioneers of the Modern Movement. From William Morris to Walter Gropius (London: Faber and Faber, 1936).

22. S. Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command. See H. Schaefer, The Roots of Modern Design. Functional Tradition in the 19th Century (London: Studio Vista, 1970), page 1 of the “Introduction.” See also Clive Dilnot, The State of Design History. Part I, 4–23.

23. J. Baudrillard, Le système des objets (Paris: Denoël-Gontier, 1972), 6.

24. This lack of uniformity is clearly demonstrated by several Italian studies of the history of industrial design published in the eighties, and which still constitute the most substantial and significant discussion of this subject in that country: V. Gregotti, Il disegno del prodotto industriale. Italia 1860–1980 (Milan: Electa, 1982), reprinted by the same publisher in a cut-price edition in 1986; E. Frateili, Il disegno industriale italiano 1928–1981. (Quasi una storia ideologica) (Turin: Celid, 1983), an expanded edition of which was brought out in 1990; R. De Fusco, Storia del design (Barín: Laterza, 1985).

25. G. Dorfles, Introduzione al disegno industriale. Linguaggio e storia della produzione di serie (Turin: Einaudi, 1972), 13.

26. Henry Petroski, The Evolution of Useful Things (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1993), 3–4.

27. For the evolutionary approach to the analysis of industrial products, see S. Pizzocaro’s doctoral thesis Approccio evolutivo all’analisi dei prodotti industriali (Milan: Milan Politecnico, 1993). See also, M. Migliari, “Microscopi: da utensili a strumenti,” Area 15 (September 1993): 82–93;

“Radersi con la zappa: evoluzione del rasoio,” Stilelndustria 1 (1995); and M. Migliari and M. Millozza, “Macchine per il calcolo,” Area 18 (June 1994): 66–77.

28. H. Petroski, The Pencil. A History of Design and Circumstance (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1992) and, by the same author, The Evolution of Useful Things.

29. See, for instance, various authors in Sconosciuti e familiari. Oggetti di design “anonimo” prodotti in Svizzera dal 1920 (Milan: Hoepli, 1993).

30. S. Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command, 19–20.

31. See the essay by W.D. Kingery, “Technological Systems and Some Implications With Regard to Continuity and Change,” in S. Lubar and W. David Kingery, eds., History from Things (Washington and London: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1993), 215–30.

32. H.A. Simon, The Sciences of the Artificial (Cam bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981), 29.

33. T. Maldonado, Disegno industriale: un riesame, 12.

34. H.A. Simon, The Sciences of the Artificial, 24.

35. See G. Anceschi, Monogrammi e figure. Teoria e storie della progettazione di artefatti comunicativi (Florence and Milan: La Casa Usher, 1981), 13. See also J.D. Prown, “The Truth of Material Culture: History or Fiction?,” in S. Lubar and W.D. Kingery, eds., History from Things, 2.

36. P. Rossi, introduction to Il concetto di cultura, XII.

37. R. Bucaille and J.M. Pesez, “Cultura materiale,” in Enciclopedia (Turin: Einaudi, 1978), 277.

38. T. Maldonado, Il futuro della modernità (Milan: Feltrinelli, 1987), 111. See also the entry by R. Eches, “L’anthropologie cognitive hier et demain. Vers une anthropologie industrielle?,” in Encyclopedie de la Pléiade, Histoire des Moeurs, vol. II, Modes et Modèles (Paris: Gallimard, 1991), 1403–18.

39. See in particular the research that Douglas has carried out with B. Isherwood into The World of Things: Objects, Values, Consumption (New York, Basic Books, 1979).

40. Ibid., 63.

41. R. Eches, “L’anthropologie cognitive. Hier et demain. Vers une anthropologie industrielle?,” in Encyclopedie de la Pléiade, Histoire des Moeurs. Il Modes et modéles (Paris: Gallimard, 1991), 1403–18.

42. See the monographic issues of Machines au foyer 3 (1980), Design 5 (1981), and the recent Communications, Techniques et usages 24 (1992).

43. J. de Noblet, editorial in the monographic issue Machines au foyer 5.

44. Y. Stourdéz, “Autopsie d’une machine à laver,” Culture Technique 3 (1980): 29–42.

45. See the issue of Communications 13 (1969) devoted to Les objets, in particular the articles by Moles and Baudrillard. The latter had already put forward his arguments in Le système des objets. The tradition of interpretation of the representative value of artifacts and its relationship with the dynamics of consumption has of course many antecedents, among which one of the best known is that of Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class (New York: New American Library, 1963, c. 1899).

46. See among others M. Le Bot, Peinture et machinisme (Paris: Klincksieck, 1973).

47. P. Rossi, introduction to the monographic issue of Intersezioni devoted to La tecnica di fine millennio XIII:2 (August 1993): 217.

48. M. Nacci, “Strumenti di servitù. Immagini della tecnica nella discussione contemporanea,” 353–85.

49. F. Dal Co, Abitare nel moderno (Rome and Bari: Laterza 1982), 19.

50. B. Latour, “Dove sono le masse mancanti? Sociologia di alcuni oggetti quotidiani di uso comune,” Intersezioni 223, note 2 (my italics).

51. W. D. Kingery, “Technological Systems and Some Implications With Regard to Continuity and Change,” in S. Lubar and W. D. Kingery, eds., History from Things, 215–30.

52. M. Brutton, “Après le modernisme,” Culture Technique 5 (April 1981): 63–71.

53. J.-C. Beaune, La technologie introuvable (Paris: Vrin, 1980), 23–4.

54. For an examination of the space given by Technology and Culture to the relationship between women and technology, and to female studies in general, see J. Rothschild’s introduction “Why Machina ex Dea?” in Feminist Perspectives on Technology (New York: Pergamon Press, 1983), IX–XXIX. For a detailed analysis of the reviews of contributions to the history of technology, see J. Staudenmaier, Technology’s Storytellers (Cambridge. MA: MIT Press, 1985).

55. R. Schwartz Cowan, More Work for Mother. The Ironies of Household Technology From the Open Hearth to the Microwave (New York: Basic Books, 1983).

56. See R. Schwartz Cowan, “The Consumption Junction: A Proposal for Research Strategies in the Sociology of Technology,” in W.E. Bijker, T.P. Hughes and T.J. Pinch, The Social Construction of Technological Systems (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989), 261–280.

57. D. Newell, “Archeologia industriale e scienze umane,” in A. Castellano, ed., La macchina arrug-

ginita. Materiali per un’archeologia dell’industria (Milan: Feltrinelli, 1982), 18.

58. Ibid., 19.

59. S. Seller. “Mechanical Brides: The Exhibition.” Design Issues 10 no. 2 (Summer 1994): 69–79.

60. For examples of the museum’s activities, see E. Lupton and J. Abbott Miller, The Bathroom, the Kitchen and the Aesthetics of Waste (Cambridge, MA: MIT List Visual Center, 1992) and E. Lupton, Mechanical Brides. Women and Machines from Home to Ofice (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1993).

61. The historical and documentary data on this appliance are the fruit of intersecting lines of research deriving from diferent sources. See the chapter, “The Sewing Machine and the American System of Manufactures” in David A. Hounshell’s volume From the American System to Mass Production 1800–1930 (Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984). See also S. Piantanida ed., La macchina per cucire (Milan: Museo Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica, 1962), catalog of the exhibition of the same name; G. Cooper, The Invention of the Sewing Machine (Washington: Smithsonian Institution, 1968); and, with regard to aspects of product analysis related to design, H. Lindinger, “Näahmaschine 1962,” Form 18 (1962): 32–43.

62. By 1890, less than forty years after the first Singer model had been patented, world production had risen to about two million units.

63. See J.R. Moore. “Science and Technology: Problems of Interpretation.” in C. Chant, ed., Science, Technology and Everyday Life 1870–1950 (London and New York: Routledge-Open University, 1989), 58–67.

64. In particular, D.A. Hounshell in From the American System to Mass Production has looked at the origins of the principal American manufacturers of sewing machines, 67–123.

65. In 1947, Necchi introduced a system for making zigzag stitches on a model dating from 1936. See D. Yarwood, Five Hundred Years of Technology in the Home (London: Batsford, 1983), 147.

66. In 1940, the “Elna” was introduced as the first portable sewing machine with a work surface powered by an electric motor and having a builtin light. See L. Schilder, “La macchina per cucire ‘Elna’ ” in Sconosciuti e familiari. Oggetti di design “anonimo” prodotti in Svisera dal 1920, 56–63.

67. Some important results contributed to the success of Italian sewing machines on foreign markets.

Necchi, for example, turned to Marcello Nizzoli, Borletti to Marco Zanuso, and Salmoiraghi to Angelo Mangiarotti and Bruno Morassutti. Perhaps the most representative model remains Nizzoli’s Mirella (Compasso d’oro, 1957). See G. Bosoni, “La macchina per cucire,” in V. Gregotti, Il disegno del prodotto industriale, 306–7.

68. Cited in R. Thevenot, “La tecnologia del freddo compie 150 anni,” Il freddo 38: 1 (January–February 1984): 18. See also O.E. Anderson, Refrigeration in America. A History of New Technology and its Impacts (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1953), 74– 6.

69. On this subject, see the lavish volume by P.E. Malcolmson, English Laundresses. A Social History (Urbana and Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986).

70. The text cited in the previous note also provides food for thought on the relationship between the development of mechanization in industry and in the home as contrasted in the United States and Great Britain.

71. This means those more or less anthropomorphic devices that might wholly or partly substitute for humans in housework.

72. The direct connection between wartime industry and other metallurgical industries in the United States has been clearly demonstrated by con

sumer products. See David A. Hounshell’s From the American System to Mass Production. See also M. Roe Smith, “Social Processes and Technological Change: A View of the History of Technology in America,” Annali di storia dell’impresa 2 (1986): 549–60.

73. It is a question of understanding how “innovations that originated in the antebellum American fire arms industry spread to other technically related industries during the nineteenth century, and, with further elaborations and additions, eventually culminated in Henry Ford’s system of mass production in 1913,” ibidem 552–3.

74. See R. Giannetti, “Clio e la scatola nera: l’analisi del progresso tecnico tra storia e teoria economica,” Annali di storia dell’impresa 3 (1987): 40.

74. See F. Ceccon and D. Fontana, “Checucialei”. La macchina per cucire, research for the course Envir onment and Product, degree course in industrial design, acad. yr. 1995–96, Milan Politecnico. The authors have compared the technical, operative, and communicative aspects of domestic and industrial sewing machines manufactured by Rimoldi, a company founded in Milan in 1881, which makes special sewing machines for the garment industry. It may be possible to reconstruct the technical, functional and morphological relations between products on diferent scales.