# Visblt y in Prog es

# Giovanni Anceschi

This article was originally presented as the ICOGRADA inaugural lecture at the PIRA/RSA Design Conference, London, April 1, 1992.

Translated by John Cullars with the author’s assistance.

My theme is “visibility,” a topic that happens to be close to the professional activity of visual design and the disciplinary field of visual communications. I intend to develop this theme in two stages: first, I’ll try to consider how far visibility is present all over the world nowadays; then, I’ll try to analyze how visibility is produced. The period we live in sometimes has been defined as a “civilization of the image”; and at other times as a “civilization of the written word.” Some have spoken of a return to “the global village,” a return to a civilization of a “second-degree orality”<sup>1</sup> promoted by electronic technologies. In any case, a very visual civilization, even if it is now also audio-visual, or more precisely multisensoreal, as is promised by so-called virtual reality. The general tendency is to emphasize the importance of the visual in our daily lives and in the scenario of our technological future.

In opposition to this kind of interpretation, some speak of the visual in a very critical way; they talk about a civilization of blindness, a “blackout” civilization. Paul Virilio, for instance, a French urbanist who defines himself as a “dromologist,” which means a student of velocity, has become one of those critical voices by ofering close-up observations of a series of phenomena in our society and technology.<sup>2</sup>

According to Virilio, the dissemination of technological innovations into our culture has prompted an acceleration of every single process and of all processes at the same time. This speeding up process alters the normal process of communication, which has a relatively slow rhythm, with an instantaneous kind of process that is called “switching” or “transducing.” The time of transducing is governed by electronic devices; while the still, relatively slow, rhythm of communications is defined by the human organs and mind. Heavy stimulation can pass through the body of a person invaded by transducing processes, but it does not really interfere with the mind.

The surrounding world is then seen as a world of dysphoria – the contrary of euphoria – which means essentially the experience of a world of depression caused by a substantial impoverishment of communication and, even more, by a substantial deprivation of sensory pleasure. I recall, for instance, a very harsh indictment of the air travel industry by Virilio: velocity is achieved at the expense of treating passengers as bodies on stretchers, or even as corpses in the storage drawers of a morgue.

As to what more directly and specifically concerns images, it is increasingly less figures and more often stimuli that are activated to produce immediate reactions such as conditioned reflexes; “elements of diagrammatic eficiency” as Félix Guattari called it in a seminar held in Milan.<sup>3</sup> I feel that the act of piloting a warplane is becoming the model, the allegorical key of contemporary life, as in the new popular art of arcade games. With one’s body imprisoned in the cockpit, indissolubly connected to the instrument panel as though it were a prosthesis, the problem of our survival becomes dependent on how prompt our reactions are, and on our capacity for dodging and taking the ofensive. But, in fact, all the events already have been anticipated in the software.

Images appear to be losing their thickness, that is, the depth of their possible meanings. A single figure could be analyzed and interpreted for hours but, instead of that, images now are flattening out; becoming partially worked inert matter, refuse, and residue for a continuous superficial collage. Informatic devices and electronic technologies produce a global efect of unreality, generating the illusion of dematerialization<sup>.</sup> Everything appears to happen as if by magic, in a flat space, or even in the depths of a virtual space. In any case, it is a space lacking consistency and corporeality.

This could be the description of a civilization of blindness due to a defect, but this same civilization in which we live also can be defined as a civilization of blindness due to excess; the excess of visual noise (aside from sonorous bedazzlements). I am thinking of “loud” road signs along some European highways on which everything is indicated at the maximum level of alarm; even information concerning normal driving. In the case of a genuine emergency, there remains no expressive margin; no possibility of an even greater contrast. A heavier typographical size cannot be used; and a more exciting blinking warning light cannot be produced. I am also thinking of urban trafic signs that simply destroy the magic of the historical ambiance of some Tuscan cities with their disorder and garish colors. In general, I’m considering all collective environments – environments of transit; environments that increase urban, suburban, national and international mobility; and environments such as airports, railway stations, and subway stations. In all of these, in response to our anxiety or nausea for information, we must endure visual and – in spite of the theory of the “silent airport” – auditory directions, as we are assaulted by excessive and even contradictory marketing messages.

Or one may consider business environments – the department store, the supermarket, the hypermarket, the commercial center – in which our appetites are inundated by a tide of seductive signals. Then there are certain leisure or spare time environments, such as stadiums, sports arenas, and most emblematically, dance clubs, in which our search for pleasure and heightened emotion is overwhelmed by a mixture of sensory impressions (lights, sounds, etc.) that are powerful enough to cross the threshold of pain. Blindness and numbness are this time the result of a generalized excess, the efect of which I call the multisensory assault of our civilization. In reality, the two kinds of blindness are complementary, since we are caught in a vicious circle. “Flashes” of sensual hyperstimulation are followed by “downers” of depression that drive us to seek a new din that is even more acute – a cycle of hyperaesthesia and anaesthesia from which there is practically no exit.

Within the media, the ferocious temporal scansion, and certainly the astronomical costs of every second of transmission, result in a deprivation of another order, the symbolic order. The search for a necessary simplification, rather than producing an elegant efect of shorthand, produces a vulgar caricature, a puppet, a bufoon, or a gladiator. Our civilization also is blind to other excesses: that’s why there is too much information at our disposal. A glance at a palimpsest ends up serving as a substitute for direct experience. We no longer go to exhibitions, but read reviews of them instead. Rather than reading books, we rush through summaries, or even consult lists of “keywords.”

Ours also is a culture of blackout because information is concealed. It isn’t just intentional concealment. In fact, ours is a competitive culture of secrecy and of confidential knowledge. Information also is buried deep in those vast resting places known as libraries and archives. And it isn’t just a technological problem of “information retrieval.” It’s the fact that, even after processing the information, these institutions try to make everything available to everyone. The fact is, they lack the means of organizing knowledge adequately for the human mind. What is lacking is a book of etiquette; a code of politeness that would allow us to communicate with the hypertextual structures.

Information also is concealed because of the great frameworks of social organization. In formation is hidden behind and within the administrative structures of the state, region, and municipality. We’re blind because we’re denied access. Finally, information is concealed by the factual complexity of the totality of cultural structures – commercial, industrial, and social – and of their problematical administration. Consider science, which produces knowledge in secret, far from the public; and consider the fact that the same popularizing mise-en-scène of science often is accepted as an objective framework through its dissemination. For example, zoological documentation can become a particular kind of “fiction”; a kind of porno-ecological<sup>4</sup> entertainment, as the semiotician, Paolo Fabbri, calls it; a spectacle that satisfies our impulse to spy on animals, but has nothing to do with science. Here is the very excess that impoverishes what it seeks to elucidate. We live in an optical and visual world, but certainly not a visible one. Consider, in a very diferent sense, the phenomenon of technological miniaturization and the fact that, consequently, we can see ever more clearly that devices work but not how they work. Objects increasingly become “black boxes” – richer in functions but poorer in transparency.

Now I come to the designer’s perspective visà-vis this situation, and wish to say immediately that I don’t want design to take on the role of the Red Cross, arriving on the battlefield after the worst has taken place, as Wolfgang Fritz Haug said in the 1970s.<sup>5</sup> The professional field of communication design has been habitually defined by optical expressions such as “optical art” or “optical illusions.” When we use these terms, we are referring to physical or physiological phenomena of sight; obviously to the physical sense of sight. Or we use the term “visual” (in the exact sense of “visual design” or of the “visual world”), and are then referring to perception; not to the passive, receptive component of vision; but, instead, to the active, selective, psychological aspects of seeing. We all understand, for instance, what Rudolf Arnheim meant by the fertile expression “visual thinking,” or what Aldous Huxley meant by the “art of seeing.”

In graphic design and in a great deal of professional thought that has circled around this and the field of visual communication, a great emphasis is placed on these two aspects of matter: reception and perception. Consider that the leading expert on “basic design,” the American, William Huf, speaks on “geometrizing” and “perceptualizing” as the two principal operations that lead to configuration; “to the result of design.” Or, in typography, think of the opposition between, as we say, the ergonomic laws of “legibility” and the aesthetic and perceptual laws of Dan Friedman’s “readability.”

These are very important questions, but I don’t believe that the profession of visual design should limit itself to problems of how to “lubricate” the channel or, better yet, to guarantee the smooth passage of information. But we also should not confine ourselves solely to conferring “harmony” or gute Gestalt [good design] on the manner in which it is presented. In truth, another concept, that of the image, is floating around the discipline – in the sense, naturally, of “corporate image”; but especially of “imagery,” of the imaginaire, as the French put it. This is an expression that calls to mind the illusionistic idea of representation; and of the historical and artistic categories of “genre,” style, etc. In this regard, I don’t feel that graphic design is dealing with a banal question of the stylistic use of images. Think of the tedious idiosyncratic rift between postmodern eclecticism and “International Style” mannerism, a topic which could justify another essay.

For graphic design, I afirm, it is a question of “visibility.” It is curious that my attention to visibility has been reawakened by an encounter with the work of the Italian writer, Italo Calvino. I am speaking of his “American Lectures,”<sup>6</sup> in which he shows the subtlety of his experimental theories. In 1984, Calvino was invited to give the Charles Eliot Norton Poetry Lectures at Harvard University, a lecture series that would have been given in 1985/86 academic year, had he not died in the meantime. Calvino entitled the series “Six Memos for the Next Millennium”, and decided to dedicate it to the following six values: lightness, quickness, exactitude, multiplicity, consistency, and visibility.

In October of 1991, a club of students at the University of Reggio Calabria in Italy organized a series of six lectures to be delivered by six authors in the Great Hall of the Faculty of Architecture, and I was assigned the theme of visibility. Thus, in a certain sense, visibility came looking for me. I reached the conclusion that the idea of visibility is genuinely central for designers insofar as the idea “to feel with the eyes” contains the idea of doing. If I say, “I want to make a thing optical” or “I want to make a thing visual,” it doesn’t make much sense. Now I understand why I’ve never had much sympathy with the expressions “visualizer” and “to visualize.” When I say, “I am making a thing visible,” that has a concrete meaning. A very precise example of the kind of thing I’m getting at is the title of a book by Richard Saul Wurman, Making the City Observable, which illustrates the possibility of making the city and its problems visible.<sup>7</sup>

Moreover, it seems to me that the question of visibility can unify a large number of sectors of the profession, and define the limits of the discipline. The illustrators of Diderot’s and D’Alembert’s l’Encyclopédie made the technical culture of the bourgeoisie visible; the Arab calligrapher, Massoudy, made Allah’s word visible; any photographer makes what was latent in the photographic plate visible; a computer graphics artist generates, and thus makes, fractals visible;

and the visualizer makes the ideas of the art director visible.

It seems to me that the expression “visibility” indicates a very specific area that is only marginally implied in other scientific disciplines. Visibility is not the topic for research in them, aside from semiotics, which concerns itself with everything having to do with meaning and communication, and of which a hypothetical theory of visibility could be a branch. Visibility, for example is not a research topic for physiological optics, even though the ocular capacity of focusing does relate to visibility. Nor is visibility a theme for the science of perception; and even the perceptual phenomenon of “borders without gradients,” – as Gaetano Kanisza<sup>8</sup> states, is an extreme case of visibility; the visibility of something that is not physically present. Nor is it a topic for cognitive psychology, although visibility obviously is related to comprehension; nor to depth psychology, although there is current research stressing the importance of colors and other visible phenomena.<sup>9</sup> Nor is it studied in sociological aesthetics, although Walter Benjamin says that the multiple display of works of art – that is to say, visibility – causes the loss of their aesthetic aura;<sup>10</sup> nor in anthropology, in which it seems that the act of concealing and exhibiting is related to hierarchy and power. Visibility plays no part in technical and technological matters, although it is undeniable that research on resolution in video electronics or on anti-aliasing in computer graphics is connected to visibility.

In the past, the question of visibility was a question of art or skill; today, it is a question of design competencies. In a world such as I’ve described, a world of declining visibility, these competencies are acquiring a necessity and an urgency hitherto unknown. Designers cannot escape from this responsibility or, worse still, contribute merrily to this multisensory hubbub. It is clear that objective circumstances, so-called environmental conditions, are evolving with the speed of a viral culture. But design can’t accept the role of a pure catalyst; an inert element that is favorable to unleashing a reaction. The designer must not be a “negligible quantity,” as Gui Bonsiepe said a few years ago, but should behave as the representative of users at the project negotiators’ table.

Today, clients see designers in two ways. Some see them as the long arm of the manager; as a kind of artificial joint that, possibly in real-time, makes the manager’s visions tangible and visible; or commonly proposes a variety of versions from which to make their choice. Others, and not the least sagacious, see designers as critical consultants rather than as problem-solvers. This is the reason that a professional competence capable of predicting all possible solutions is the minimum requirement that should be ofered. Then, in this case, designers are particularly requested to concentrate on doing what they can to make problems visible. The designer can assume responsibility in the bargaining space that this scenario opens between the two partners; between the power to make decisions and the knowledge of what is proposed. (However the topic of the designer’s responsibility also would require an essay in itself.)

But why does the activity of realizing visibility, which is so important a value that it is worth entrusting to the next millennium, as Calvino said, seem to me to be the very heart of the discipline and profession? Visibility is definitely what the totality of capacity, skill, competencies, knowledge, tricks, artifices, and abilities that designers have at their disposal is moving toward. Visibility is the art of escape from the invisible. Basically, it is a magical art; the art of evocation; the art of conferring a particular form of existence on that which lacks it – not a factual existence, but the virtual existence of the simulation, of the conjecture, and of the prescription. It is an existence that allows for the manipulation of an object in absentia.

When we realize a sort of “close-copy at a distance” with a camera, through a field sketch, or with a monument drawing, we capture the object which we want to fix into memory, producing a second visibility beginning from an existing one. When using an instrument or prosthesis (a microscope, telescope, slow-motion camera, high-speed camera, Schlieren detector,<sup>11</sup> or X-ray apparatus), we transfer an object or phenomenon into the thickness of the perceptual present; we put the thing that interests us into the space and time available to our bodies. Then we are producing visibility, wresting it from the invisible. It’s always a matter of making the invisible visible when, for instance, the scientist (or scientific illustrator) produces a figurative and structural hypothesis of a reality that hasn’t yet seen the light of day; or generates a hypothesis that is altogether conceptual, such as the double helix of DNA, the planetary system, or the ecological cycle of a forest.<sup>12</sup>

On the other hand, this conjectural character of figures and plans, this behavior as a figurative hypothesis, is especially obvious with any design activity. Every single plan by an architect, every rendering by an industrial designer, and every rough sketch by a graphic designer is a document that puts forward a hypothesis, and makes a demand. In the first place, it says to designers, “This is how I’m made. Do I accurately describe reality? If yes, does the object that I represent solve all the inherent problems, etc.?” In the second place, it says to the client, “This is how I’m made. Is it worth the trouble to build, produce, promote, and market me?”

Basically, the designer’s work consists of making things visible, that is, to “put into figure,” as earlier painters such as Giotto did. But to “put into figure” also means to put significance into a system of notation, a code. A technical draft, for example, is a score which, instead of making strange gestures to gentlemen in evening clothes who are holding onto curious wood or brass objects, dictates precise gestures to other men in protective helmets and padded jackets, who clamber up ladders and scafoldings; or to still other men, dressed in blue overalls, who push buttons and pull knobs; or, finally, to others in white shifts who use cutters, handle keyboards, or mix ink. This prescriptive character, this behavior as a true and proper order, is perfectly readable in the informatic term “command,” particularly in computer-assisted manufacturing and robotics.

In the case of technical drafting methods, as with type design or pictogram design, we’re dealing with a way of making things visible that is oriented to the storing of relevant data in the memory, rather than to recognition and the immediacy of recognition. Think of what we expect from a page of music and of what we expect from a photograph of a landscape. The problem isn’t just that of acting on the world and manipulating it through the medium of a figure in the same way that our cave-dwelling hunting ancestors practiced propitiatory killing through efigies. It isn’t simply a matter of producing handles to maneuver a world underneath, or indices to find one’s bearings. It isn’t simply a technical problem of knowledge and information.

The problem also is a social problem of communications. Designers don’t just work for a receiver who must be put in a position to operate; they also work for an observer who can suddenly become a partner, or for a public whom they intend to (and must) persuade. This means that, once designers have made the invisible visible, their task consists of making a part still more visible in relation to the whole.

There is a general principle which unifies the infinite variations of the theme of rendering visible: Umberto Eco calls it “ostentation,” and places it among the mode of sign production.<sup>13</sup> This semiotic procedure defines the act of isolating an object or a sign, and of lifting it into a more visible realm. This begins with the banal gesture of raising a bottle of beer in the direction of the bartender to have him fetch another. It could conclude with the raising of a sculpture over the base of a column in an art gallery. Or, transferring the principle from the field of exhibition design to typography and layout, we could begin with the yellow Magic Marker underlining that emphasizes a word in a photocopy and finish with the sophisticated hierarchy of headlines, column tops, headings, captions, and copy that leads the reader through the text of a page of the daily newspaper. It is the sacred gesture of the monstrance at the altar in the Catholic rite in which the Eucharist stands out from everything else and is exposed to the sight of the faithful. It is the functional gesture of every sign – street posters, directional arrows, the hands on a clockface, etc. It is the color contrast between geographic locations and topographical information on a tourist map; and it is the size contrast between street names of different importance.

Actually, the principle of ostentation comes into play in every case of representation, since every type of representation is a reduction, as Sartre said. The drawing of a rose has no scent. It is not possible to show the entirety of the object meant for representation. Whether we know it or not, and whether we intend it or not, a view is selected, and an appearance isolated. Every representation, even the most faithful (which means the most illusionistic) is a schema. Any representation will always be the presentation of a particular facet that must be judiciously selected. Every design is a bit of a caricature in that it selects and emphasizes some features at the expense of others. Every recognition emphasizes some parts, and excludes others, as Rudolf Arnheim said.

These ostentative manipulations are the designer’s real tools. They tend to modify the behavior of the public and thus serve the interest of the client. Using the terminology of the art of discourse, these artifices could be called rhetorical figures.<sup>14</sup> In communication design, rhetorical figures are figures of visibility. Figures of visibility can be visible metaphors, the art of showing through resemblances and associations of ideas; whose ideal example can be indicated in the artistic movement, Surrealism, with its cutting and captivating possibilities of graphic humor and fantastic allusions. It also can be visible synecdoche, which is making the whole visible by showing only a part. This is a synthetic and concise art, pointing to clarity and economy of means. “Less is more,” as Mies van der Rohe said.

Figures that are determined by the static disposition or dynamic movements of their elements may be called figures of staging.<sup>15</sup> In fact, we can envision this environment of maneuvers and manipulations needed to accentuate visibility as being like that of a stage set – a traditional set which is arranged for the disposition and movements of an ensemble of actors, putting them in poses and fundamentally regulating them so as to produce patterns and actions. A “visibility set” is likewise arranged for the movement of machines and variable optics, so as to determine points of view and groupings that are more or less advantageous. Such a set not only determines the apparatus that lights the scene and objects, for example, but also colors them and, in general, determines their surface attributes, as they are called in computer graphics terminology, so as to create the efects of the necessary diferentiation.

We may particularly note that this model, which arises from the theatrical direction mise-enscène, also is valid for the two-dimensional layout, the mise-en-page.<sup>16</sup> As already pointed out, this can be extended through the idea of choreography, and the management of scenic movements, to the theater and to cinematography; and even farther removed from the stage itself, to the “happening.” In doing so, one may include, through the idea of programming, both the logic of the field of strategies that organize events and the field of communications.<sup>17</sup>

In other words, the profession of graphic design consists in giving form, position, and behavior to characters that could be persons as well as objects in the world of the designed, photographed, or kinetically represented. But the roles of the characters are played by graphs, illustrations, and typographical elements in the Flatland of the layout. Our characters can be either persons or objects in the world of designed, photographed, or cinematic representations. But, as previously pointed out, they are representations of characters, graphics, and illustrations on the Flatland of the page. The designer’s skill consists in knowing how to place them opportunely, one in respect to the other. Placing one above the other, one below the other, or one to the side of the other means three very distinct things. Placing them with a lot or only a little surrounding space produces two radically diferent impressions.

The activity of visual design consists not only in putting things into a particular order to indicate a hierarchy of values, but also in knowing how to assign each element its proper dimension with respect to its importance in the whole. It consists of assigning the proper color scheme in order to direct or persuade the public (the photorealism of a cover girl), or guide and fix public knowledge (the symbolic red and blue coloration of the two systems of the circulation of blood). It consists in causing our element-characters to move in a meaningful way. The designer’s work consists, finally, in knowing how to make things fall into place at the right moment; in not missing some significant appointments; in respecting certain successions of events; and in bringing about the convergence or condensation of other events. As with setting of fireworks, it consists in knowing when to set of the final explosion for maximum impact.

If rhetoric is the art of discourse, then visual communication is the art of composition, disposition, and modulation.<sup>18</sup> This art is a “sequential” one, as described by F. H. K. Henrion.<sup>19</sup> In other words, this art consists in orchestrating all the elements of form in space and time. The corporate image, or more precisely, the process of constructing a corporate identity, demonstrates this idea. Conferring significance to an institution or to a firm results from a planned sequence of figures of staging and events to produce a special kind of visibility; not only to be seen but to be remembered.

How we obtain this mode of being able to see will depend on a visibility that is really new or, better yet, fictitious in the case of those corporate images that are masks for faces which are completely diferent in reality. Or one may say that they bring to light or place in evidence authentic structural traits, even about the eficiency of the organization, that lie hidden. For each of the clients or partners, however, every encounter, every contact, every message received from the firm represents the addition of a characteristic; a subtle shading or a minute brush stroke to the sender’s interior portrait that they are building in their minds.

At the beginning of this article, I painted a truly millenarian scenario. It had the somewhat sulfurous characteristics of the predictions made by monks approaching the year AD 1000. Curiously, circumstances seem to favor finding pleasure in amassing certain types of expectations and, especially, of preoccupations concerning specified dates and the end of epochs. Just as it is true that the change in millennia is upon us, it is equally true that this date is dawning surrounded by the problems that we’ve described. Or rather, if the analyses of the situation that we’ve shown have any basis in fact, the coming years represent a challenge to the designer of visibility; a challenge not without an element of risk.

The challenge isn’t simply the need to counter the advance of opacity and blackout that, in the field of the production of visual messages, represents what is elsewhere known as pollution. It also is a pollution of impoverishment; a pollution producing asphyxia. The challenge is represented concretely in the requirements manifested in the manufacturing world. The challenge is represented by the great need for design in the new world of so-called immaterial production. It is evident enough that the information profession is currently linked to the communications industry, and is assuming a sustaining role in the industrial and commercial panorama.

Even material mobility, the physical transport of persons and things, is caught up in the competition for the transport of information. I don’t mean by this that we’re selling fewer automobiles because of the existence of faxes, and that the time of practical distribution by way of teleconferencing is approaching. The information industry intertwined with media systems represents the model for today’s industrial culture just as, for example, industry of the 1950s drew on aeronautics, which was imitated even in the form of electric irons.

The numerous messages originating every day and the number of systems of presentation which must be invented every month of every year to nourish the media system are monstrous. The design of communications, which is, itself, graphic design, requires of its operators a continuous state of invention which has never previously existed. At this point, I feel that I can quote a brief passage from the “Charter of Graphic Design,” a document born of the reflections of a group of Italian designers with whom I have the honor of collaborating. The charter says, “In the 1930s, architecture took the leading role in the design field. The shift in the ’60s toward a consumer society meant that industrial design became the conceptual coordinator. In the ’90s, however, it is graphic design that has taken on this strategic role.”<sup>20</sup> For reasons of responsibility that I’ve pointed out, today’s visual designer must grasp this opportunity. But I must add what we may call the maieutics of visibility, the unified field of knowledge and techniques to produce visibility;<sup>21</sup> as well as the knowledge accumulated by designers and by those who have preceded us working in communications and representations, needs a large program of research and theoretical foundations to face these problems.

## Notes

First published in Design Issues 12 no. 3 (Autumn 1996): 3–13.

1. First-degree and second-degree orality are terms used by Walter Ong in order to distinguish between the exclusively oral communication before the introduction of writing and the revival of orality induced by electronic technologies that is typical of today’s culture. See Walter Ong, Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word (New York: Methuen, 1982).

2. Paul Virilio, Speed and Politics: An Essay on Dromology (New York: Semiotext(e), 1986).

3. Félix Guattari, Lettere ecologie (Turin: Sonda, 1991). The seminar “La ricerca sin crocevia: contaminare/ tradurre” was held in Milan in 1990.

4. Paolo Fabbri, one of the best living semioticians; in the conference paper “Natura e comunicazione: i media farano male alia natura” (Milan, 1990), on

the question of scientific popularization; attacked the glossy, smart magazines that he claimed promote a hard pseudonaturalistic voyeurism, which he defined as pornoecological. Fabbri’s concept is very similar to Otto Neurath’s discussion of passéeist museums “die die Schaulust befriedigen und wenig auf den Willen einwirken” [that satisfy voyeurism and act very little on the will]. See Otto Neurath, Gesammelte pädagogische Schriften (Vienna: Verlag Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, 1991).

5. Wolfgang Fritz Haug, “Stellung und Indienstnahme des Asthetischen im Verwertungsprozess des Kapitals” (1969. unpublished). See also “Waren-Asthetik und Kunst” and “Die Rolle des Asthetischen bei der Scheinlösung von Grundwiedersprüchen der kapitalistischen Gesellschaft,” Das Argument 1 (October, 1970) and 3 (June, 1971), respectively.

6. Italo Calvino, Six Memos for the Next Millennium (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988).

7. Richard Saul Wurman, Making the City Observable (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971).

8. Gaetano Kanisza, Grammatica del Vedere (Bologna: II Mulino, 1980).

9. See, for instance, Sergio Finzi, “Un uomo a striscie epifanie tra memoria e rimozione,” II piccolo Hans 71 (autumn 1991).

10. Walter Benjamin, L’opera d’arte nell’epoca delta sua riproducibilità tecnica (Turin: Einaudi, 1966). In this work, Benjamin writes that the aura of a work of art comes up lacking in the epoch of technological reproductibility. For instance, he writes, “Certain images of the Madonna are kept invisible for almost the whole year” (p. 27) and “A portrait bust is more likely to be displayed, since it can be sent anywhere, than the statue of a god, which has a permanent place inside the temple” (p. 27).

11. The Schlieren apparatus is a very sensitive optical detector that can reveal refractions of a few millionths of a degree. It is used to determine changes in the very small layer of air that comes in contact with the skin and is modified by temperature, breathing, sweating, etc.

12. See Manfredo Massironi, Vedere con il disegno (Verona: Franco Muzzio, 1982), 119, et passim for the notion of ipotetigrafia. This is an area of increas ingly promising features in computer graphics. I personally had the good fortune to participate in a research program for the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), the committee for mathematical and information sciences, called “Knowledge through Images.” See Emilio Albino, Daniele Marini, Laura Moltedo, Conoscenza per immagini (Rome: II Rostro, 1989).

13. Umberto Eco, Trattato di semiotica generate (Milan: Bompiano, 1975). [American edition: A Theory of Semiotics (Bloomington IN: Indiana University, 1976).]

14. Studies of rhetoric in the field of communications virtually began with Roland Barthes, “Rhétorique de l’image,” Communications 4(7), 1964; Gui Bonsiepe, “Verbal visuelle Rhetorik,” Ulm, n. 14–16, 1965. Studies on visual rhetoric had begun in 1957 at the Hochschule für Gestaltung in Ulm with Tomás Maldonado. See Avangardia e razionalitá (Turin: Einaudi, 1974). See also Groupe M, Rhétorique générale (Paris: Larousse, 1979) and Trois fragments pour une rhétorique de l’image (Urbino: Centra Internazionale di Semiotica e Linguistica, 1979); René Lindekins, Semiotica della fotografia (Naples: il Laboratorio, 1980); Giovanni Anceschi, “Retorica verbo-figurale e registica visiva” in Umberto Eco et al., Le ragioni della retorica (Modena: Mucchi, 1986); Robin Kinross, “The Rhetoric of Neutrality” and Hanno E. Eshes, “Representing Macbeth: A Case Study in Visual Rhetoric” in Victor Margolin, ed., Design Discourse: History, Theory, Criticism (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1989).

15. See Anceschi, “Retorica verbo-figurale e registica visiva,” 1986.

16. See Gianfranco Bettetini’s pioneering work, Produzione di senso e messa in scena (Milan: Bompiani, 1975). For the relationship mise-en-page/mise-enscène, see Paul Fresnault-Deruelle, Récit et discours par la bande (Paris: Hachette, 1977), 98.

17. See Giovanni Anceschi, “Choreographia Univers alis,” in Anceschi’s L’oggetto della rafigurazione (Milan: Etas Libri, 1992).

18. The term “art” is used in the sense of the ancient Greeks, for whom the Kybernetes [pilot] practiced an “art.”

19. See Sequential Design, 14th ICOGRADA Student Seminar, February 8–9, 1988, London.

20. See “Charter of Graphic Design: Proposal for a Debate on Visual Communication Design,” Design Issues 8 no. 1 (Fall 1991): 67–73.

21. For the idea of a disciplinary unified field of the ostentative practices, touching on activities and competencies of visual design and comics, advertis ing and fashion, illustration and photography, product design and furniture design, exhibition design and window dressing, architectural design and urban planning, see Giovanni Anceschi’s “Scena eidomatica e basic design: il campo unificato della presentazione visiva,” Quaderni Dl n. 8, 1981.