# Furt her Reading for Part II, Section 2

Examples of Reyner Banham’s design criticism have been collected in two volumes: Penny Sparke (ed.), Design by Choice (New York: Rizzoli, 1981) and A Critic Writes: Essays by Reyner Banham, selected by Mary Banham (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996). Nigel Whiteley has written an extensive study of Banham as a critic: Reyner Banham: Historian of the Immediate Future (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002). On visibility, see Richard Saul Wurman, Making the City Observable (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971). On the history of objects, see John Walker: Design History and the History of Design (London: Pluto Press, 1989) and Siegfried Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous Design (New York: Oxford University Press, 1948). Louis Bucciarelli writes about engineers as designers in Designing Engineers (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994). See also Donald Schön, The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action (New York: Basic Books, 1983) and Janet McDonnell and Peter Lloyd, About Designing: Analysing Design Meetings (London: Routledge, 2009). As background material for Tony Golsby-Smith’s conception of fourth-order design, see Richard Buchanan, “Wicked Problems in Design Thinking,” in The Idea of Design, eds. Victor Margolin and Richard Buchanan (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995) and Richard Buchanan, “Branzi’s Dilemma: Design in Contemporary Culture,” in Design Pleasure or Responsibility? eds. Paivi Tahkokallio and Susan Vihma (Helsinki: University of Art and Design, 1995).