# Introduci

The theory of value has a long history in philosophy, and only in recent years has it been applied to design. Traditionally associated with ideas of what is good, value theory includes the study of ethics and aesthetics, which are included within the sub-field of philosophy known as axiology. In the 1960s, Bruce Archer, one of the early design theorists, included design axiology as one of the ten branches of investigation that he proposed for the emerging field of design research.<sup>1</sup> Within philosophy, value theory considers how humans make judgments about what is good and bad. Value is considered in several senses. Instrumental value is the value placed on things, activities, or anything that serves as a means of attaining or achieving something that is said to have intrinsic value or value in and of itself. We can also mention quantitative value, which assigns a measurable quantity such as money to goods or labor, for example, in order to maintain a system of exchange as in an economic system where both are exchanged for money. Qualitative value is less tangible. It is associated with the good in terms of benefits to humans as in “quality of life.” Recently, qualitative value has been central to definitions of design as a means to foster human well-being.

Value in design can be considered at diferent stages of the design process. Before designing begins, discussions of value can address questions of what should be designed and why. Current debates about sustainability may address specific products as in design for disassembly (DfD), but they are also concerned with broader questions of how design as a general practice fits into a sustainable world.

Other debates that precede actual designing relate to design education. Early programs in commercial art and industrial design were more concerned with the transmission of skills than with questions of design’s values. In the 1920s and 1930s, when such programs were inaugurated, especially in the United States, the value of design was instrumental. It was recognized as a means to enhance the qualitative value of products, which in turn would increase their quantitative value as objects for the market. In Europe, design education was more idealistic, particularly at the Bauhaus, where Walter Gropius characterized the aim of the Bauhaus metaphorically as contributing to the construction of a great cathedral of socialism. Discussions of value may also take place during the design process as designers assess and reassess the quality of what they are doing. Where graphic and product designers once moved directly from their concepts into production, today designing involves considerably more feedback during the design process, particularly in what is called user-centered design. Techniques of ethnography, focus groups, beta testing, and user trials all provide feedback to designers before completion of a final product, thus incorporating evaluation into the design process itself.

And finally, products – whether objects or graphic designs – can be evaluated after they are completed and introduced to the public. These evaluations are of diferent types. They may be done by social scientists who look at a product or product group in terms of its efect on large numbers of people; or evaluations may take the form of design criticism, whereby a critic exercises his or her personal judgment about a product’s quality, whether functional, esthetic, or social. In recent years, there has been a proliferation of design criticism, particularly on the Internet, where bloggers sustain a running commentary about new products, whether iPhones, posters, typefaces, or urban plans.

The articles in this section represent evaluation in two of the three possible locations – before designing begins and after it is completed. Four of the articles are concerned with the environment and the question of how design can fit into a sustainable world. Pauline Madge shows how the 1980s notion of “green design” expanded in the 1990s into “ecological design,” and subsequently deepened to become “sustainable design.” She describes how the media, notably in Great Britain, picked up the idea of “green” from the Green parties and how a general environmental concern emerged, although she demonstrates how so-called “green” products were easily incorporated into marketing strategies that promised modest environmental changes but did not address the larger issues related to the growing environmental problems. As Madge states in her conclusion, “It has become increasingly evident that the radical nature of an ecological approach to design implies a new design critique.”

One of the leaders in mounting such a critique is Ezio Manzini, a professor of industrial design at the Politecnico di Milano, who has been actively promoting a vision of sustainable design since the 1980s. Manzini’s books and articles have, in fact, been essential in stimulating debates within the design community about sustainability. At the beginning of the 1990s, Manzini was talking about an “ecology of the artificial” that needed to be studied in all its complexity in order to understand its diverse components. As one consequence of studying the artificial ecology systematically, Manzini concluded that: “We must now pass from a culture that considers itself to be part of a dynamics of unlimited development to a culture capable of thinking for itself of possible changes caused by limitations.”<sup>2</sup>

In the article included in this section, Manzini calls for a radical model of development to replace the “normalized” adoption of eco-design in the 1980s, which led to a new environmental quality in the market but did not challenge the fundamental global structure that was the cause of so many environmental problems. Among the specific changes he proposed was a shift from goods to services and the development of related scenarios that would induce large numbers of people to change their behavior.

John Hirst’s article is a direct response to Manzini’s call for a shift from “ ‘existenzminimum’ (minimum existence) to quality maximum.” Hirst is essentially in agreement with Manzini about the required changes, which he characterizes as “a vision of design that goes beyond the designing of artifacts, or even systems of artifacts, to the design of culture or at least aspects of culture.” He focuses, however, on the question of values. To achieve the results Manzini advocates, Hirst says, it will be necessary to adopt a new logic based on the idea of a qualitative balance that is derived from a biological model. He then calls for a widespread adoption of values that lead to a more convivial form of life. Designers, he says, have a special talent for “identifying the balances that achieve conviviality in the domain of material culture.”

Ideas that Manzini put forth in an early article, “Prometheus of the Everyday,” serve as a stimulus for the article by David Stairs, who addresses Manzini’s comparison of the natural and artificial environments. Stairs begins with a discussion of biologist Edward O. Wilson’s concept of “biophilia,” which Wilson believes establishes a genetic relation between humans and the natural world. Stairs rightly acknowledges that the relation between nature and culture has been insuficiently addressed by design theorists, and he seeks to define a balance between the two. He is highly critical of technological determinism, which he sees as casting “a two-century-long shadow across our society,” and believes that “the future role of design will be to create culture as a sustainable part of the natural world.” It is noteworthy that Manzini, Hirst, and Stairs each call for radical changes in the idea of culture. Manzini wants a new paradigm of development, which reduces the consumption of resources. Hirst desires a value system based on a more convivial style of life, while Stairs seeks to redress the balance between nature and culture. All relate to contemporary discussions of the need for new values to redirect the practice of design.

In his discussion of the intense debate within the Hochschule für Gestaltung, Ulm, Paul Betts takes us back to the early postwar years in Germany, when a desire to restore an acceptable material lifestyle after the devastation of the Second World War dominated German culture. The Hochschule für Gestaltung, Ulm, was originally conceived as an institute devoted to “contemporary and political education” but developed into a new design school when the Swiss designer and former Bauhaus student, Max Bill, was brought in as the director. Bill’s agenda to recreate the Bauhaus in a more contemporary form was hotly contested by others on the faculty, especially the Argentine art critic Tomás Maldonado, who wanted the curriculum to represent the new theoretical and technical tendencies of postwar industrial culture. The debate centered on the question of what should be designed and how design should be done in the postwar world. Eventually, the faction that opposed Bill won and he left the school. By emphasizing the intellectual claims of the protagonists, Betts forcefully demonstrates the impact that design theory can play in shaping the identity and role of design in modern life.

Findeli, too, is concerned with design theory and its relation to design education, but in his article he does not focus on a particular educational institution as Betts does. Instead, he proposes a multidimensional model of design’s impact on the spheres of nature and culture from which he deduces the principles of an ethical design practice. Findeli’s thinking is informed in part by the extensive research he did on the New Bauhaus in Chicago, which was the subject of his doctoral dissertation as well as a subsequent book and various journal articles. László Moholy-Nagy, in particular, was the model of an ethical designer and educator whose influence Findeli surely felt as he developed his argument. Like Stairs, he is concerned with the efects of technology, adopting the term “technoethics” to address the conflicts resulting from rapid technological developments. Findeli adopts an especially broad view of design although he then focuses on “those professionals who are called on to design material objects …” Ethics and aesthetics must also be more closely related to the design curriculum and not introduced through special courses that are not connected to the basic pedagogy of design education.

Ann Tyler’s article focuses on a magazine, Colors, that was launched by the Benetton Group in 1991 and is still published today. Colors is predominantly a pictorial magazine and the text is kept to a minimum. Tyler limits her critique to the first nine issues, which were published under the editorship of the late Tibor Kalman, who sought to make the magazine a vehicle for social change.

Tyler characterizes Kalman’s intent to “communicate a fundamental similarity between people, and then point out the interesting diferentiations that distinguish these groups and cultures.” As a critic, she employs the methodology of rhetoric whereby she considers Colors as the purveyor of an argument rather than as simply a formal arrangement of images and text. Kalman claimed to propound a “rhetoric of amelioration” that characterized diferences between the various represented groups or tribes as a positive force in a world where everyone can get along, but Tyler argues that the editorial strategy of Colors glosses over real diferences between the groups that might actually set them apart from each other. She claims that Colors seeks to minimize conflicts and reduce threats by normalizing diference and establishing a safe relationship between its imagined audience and the content. Tyler raises questions about the magazine’s authorial voice and reinforces the idea that graphic design is first and foremost about communication rather than form.

## Notes

1. Bruce Archer, “A View of the Nature of Design Research,” in Design: Science: Method, eds. Robin Jacques and James A. Powell (Guildford: Westbury House, 1981), 33.

2. Ezio Manzini, “Prometheus of the Everyday: The Ecology of the Artificial and the Designer’s Responsibility,” in Richard Buchanan and Victor Margolin, Discovering Design: Explorations in Design Studies (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 230. The essay was originally delivered in Canada in 1990, then published in Design Issues before it appeared in the book.