# Valu es in Design : Existe nzminimum, “Maximu Qualit y,” and “Optimal Balnc e”

John Hirst

This paper seeks to contribute to the discussion of values that design activity could begin to realize in the coming years. It takes as its inspiration and starting point the article “Design, Environment and Social Quality: From Existenzminimum to “Quality Maximum” by Ezio Manzini.<sup>1</sup> Manzini argues that current design is based on a model of consumption that is going to change in response to the crisis in the model of economic and social development that has spread worldwide since the Second World War. The threat of global disaster at the level of the environment is the most compelling of a series of severe dificulties that beset the modern and modernizing nations, and implicate design. Manzini contends that “design will have to reexamine the very basis of its culture.” He puts particular emphasis on the significance of the role of values in designing: “The problem is not so much one of evoking an ethical principle based on environmental necessity, as of proposing solutions that appear better than those presently in use.” He proposes that the concept of existenzminimum must come to be identified with the realization of a higher level of social quality. He asserts the need for an aesthetic to be based upon a value system, and emphasizes the important role that an aesthetic of sustainability would play in the transition to a new economic and social order. This, he envisages to involve design “… proposing consistent criteria of quality in a perspective of sustainability, and designing overall scenarios … proposing products and services that make possibilities concrete … for new types of behavior and new lifestyles in keeping with a new notion of social quality.”

We can see here a vision of design that goes beyond the designing of artifacts, or even systems of artifacts, to the design of culture or at least aspects of culture. It is arguable that design and the technological changes that it expresses have always been forces to reshape culture, even where this has taken place unconsciously or unintentionally. Hence, we may see the present time and the issues of environmentalism as ofering an opening for a deeper cultural consciousness. In this regard, I wish to raise some general points about values; how we construe and interpret them in respect of material culture; and how we might reconstrue them. The ways we think about and act on our values are of crucial importance, since they give shape to society. Our very notions of what is a “problem” and what counts as a “solution” are bound up inextricably with what is “best,” “right,” “important,” and “desirable.” The way values are construed has to be clear to give us intellectual freedom of movement. While I do not propose to outline here a system of values for design in a sustainable society, I do intend that the points raised will advance the development of such a system.

## Scalr Val ues and Materil Cult ure

The economic system of the market places a monetary value on every commodity that is exchanged in a contemporary society, at each point of transaction. The monetary value is expressed as a numerical value of a currency. Conceptually, this system of signs deploys the arithmetic properties of the natural numbers so that it is possible to think that a commodity may increase or decrease in value; that it may be more or less valuable than another commodity; and that it may be afordable or unafordable. This is one very clear instance of “scalar thinking” in relation to value. By “scalar thinking,” I mean conceptualization that embodies a system of signs which are commonly understood to form a scale (i.e., a system of graded steps wherein the grading generates a sense of direction – upwards or downwards – with respect to the qualities of something). Scalar thinking is a stage beyond, but draws upon semantics of comparison as embodied in the “normal,” “comparative” and “superlative” forms of adjectives (e.g., “large,” “larger,” “largest”).

Scalar thinking in relation to values prompts us to see value comparatively, and to seek it in the superlative. One of its expressions to emerge early in the industrial era was the “principle of utility.” This is the proposition that the “good” in any context is that which gives rise to the greatest happiness of the greatest number of people. In a more sophisticated form, it appears in cost/ benefit analysis, seeking within social planning to determine what course of action gives the greatest benefit for the least cost.

The idea that there is a minimum level of physical resources required to sustain the survival of a human being has arisen in many contexts in this century. It has been an underpinning for the specification of nutrition schedules and for the setting of welfare payments, as well as the provision of living space in housing schemes. For implementation, any such minimalist program relies upon measurements of relevant elements (grams of protein, costs of essential commodities). Presumably for existenzminimum design in the context of a program of environmentally sustainable development, we might be concerned with the quantities of energy and raw materials used to produce particular designs, or to sustain particular lifestyles. Thus, designers might systematically seek to innovate to reduce those requirements. In this case, perhaps some extensions of the principles of value engineering would be appropriate. It could certainly progress the search for lower resource usage.

Ezio Manzini also states, “The problem for designers can be summed up as follows: how to propose an existenzminimum which will appear attractive and will thus be freely chosen in the midst of a variety of alternative proposals. First of all, in order to be attractive, the proposal must not correspond to a scenario of deprivation.” Hence, there is the need for this version of existenzminimum design to be concerned not just with the notion of “adequacy” but, rather, with that of “maximum quality.” European culture has derived much of its concept of the quality of material things from the era of aristocracy, in which the conspicuous consumption of materials and energy marked out those with status and power. Hence, the best materials are, characteristically, the rarest; and suppliers will control supply to keep them rare; and the most valuable products embody the most labor (e.g., the relationship between the price of a carpet and the number of knots per square centimeter). These visions of quality are kept very much alive by advertising and the business system that supports it, even though it is at odds with the logic of mass production. Hence, we inhabit a prodigious and all-embracing material culture; most of which, in its own terms, is rendered relatively undesirable. Scalar thinking in respect to values comes in with equal force with regard to both existenzminimum and “quality maximum.” What seems clear is that Manzini leaves us with a paradox. If something is minimalist in its use of resources, it can’t be maximum quality, and vice versa. Our scalar ­conceptions of value set these concerns at opposite poles on just about any scales you can imagine.

## A Curvilnea Logic of Ned - Val ue

What I wish to suggest is that, in order to get anything like the results that Ezio Manzini quite rightly sees as necessary, we have to find a different logic of value to replace the scalar logic. We have to reinvent the ways we construe our “blessings.” As a first step, we might go back to how we relate “value” to the concept of “need.” If we start with a physiological need such as that of the maintenance of the body temperature, then we could, perhaps, agree that our physical circumstances, in principle, fall into one of three categories which we could designate as “too cold,” “comfortable” and “too hot.” If we take a range of air temperatures between 5°C and 55°C, and plot them against a subjective scale of sensed physical comfort for a naked human subject; then we would produce a curved graph with the high area, probably around 30°C, representing an optimal point, with the degree of sensed comfort declining as the physical temperature increases or decreases outside of a small range. The comfort zone falls around the peak of a curvilinear rather than a scalar form. The comfort zone constitutes a physiologically grounded value.

It is not at all surprising that our environmental temperature preferences should work in this fashion, since our body temperature is the outcome of a built-in homeostatic process that keeps us at an optimum operating temperature. Our need to maintain our body temperature is not usefully understood in terms of minima or maxima (i.e., in scalar terms) but, rather, in terms of “optimal” value thinking, which is what comes from viewing the situation according to a “curvilinear” logic of value.

In how many contexts can this logic be applied? The answer to this question is not altogether clear at present, but I suspect that it can be extended a good deal further than the maintenance of the temperature of the human body.

## Chines Medicn and “Optimal Balnce ” Val ues

Homeostatic processes in the human body are a familiar theme in the science of physiology. However, the theme of optimal balance value is much more evident in the theory of Chinese medicine. A contrast between the perspectives on health in scientific medicine and Chinese medicine brings this out clearly. Western scientific medicine construes the human body as a biochemical machine that is healthy so long as it does not malfunction. Its malfunctions are attributable to specific, naturally arising, organic disorders; tissue damage through accident; disruption through infection; genetically motivated deterioration or poisoning from the environment; or combinations of these.

Diagnosis relates to the categorization of symptoms and to the identification of the probable causes, whether internal or external. Treatment comprises the enactment of a sequence of steps to eliminate the cause of malfunction, or to remove or replace the malfunctioning element where restoration of the benign condition of the body tissue is no longer possible. Western medicine also has a concept of “fitness,” which means that a body is able to undertake sustained strenuous activity of some sort without undue fatigue or damage. Keeping fit is commonly believed to be a way to stay healthy, although fit people are known to have sufered heart attacks. Generally, though, concepts of preventive health care are weak except where some clear correlations have been established between behaviors and various morbid physical conditions (e.g., smoking and lung disease). Lastly, there is a fairly sharp distinction in the culture between food and medicine. These are sold in diferent shops, packaged very diferently, marketed on very diferent premises, and interpreted within very diferent conceptual frames. Food is multivalent; it should be tasty, attractive and nutritious. Its consumption is an essential component of daily life. It forms a major element in social life. It can be used to define self, status, gender, and culture. Medicine, on the other hand, is instrumental. It may be palatable if you are lucky. You shouldn’t take it unless there is something “wrong” with you. It may have “side efects” which may be unwanted, or, themselves, a “symptom” of ill health. The taking of medicine usually is discreet, if not private, and may be construed as a sign of invalidity and, therefore, of weakness. Other things being equal, a sick person does not have the standing of a well one.

Chinese medical theory conceives things differently. The healthy person is in a state of dynamic equilibrium between the various balancing and interdependent forces, and energies that course through, generate and maintain him or her.<sup>2</sup> If there is an imbalance or disharmony, then it may be detected by recognizing subtle changes in surface features of the body: the pulse, the eyes, the skin, the tongue, etc., and measures can be taken to correct it. The body has its own system to restore and maintain its balances, and the role of the corrective measures is to support this system’s eforts to restore itself. Everything that is ingested into the body can afect these balances, so that there is no sharp division between foods and medicines. All foods have medicinal impact, and all medicines have nutritive implications. Moreover, the benefit of any substance to the body is radically relativistic. Nothing is essentially poisonous nor essentially health-enhancing, in itself. Vitamin C, for example, seen as a universally beneficial item by westerners, is viewed as damaging for some conditions of chi-deficiency in Chinese medical theory. Seasonal changes, diet, lifestyle, and emotional conditions are seen as major factors in shaping health; and infectious diseases are given less prominence. The latter can get hold of a person’s body only if the systems of the body become imbalanced. Therefore, there is a premium on a preventive approach to disease. The doctor counsels diet and lifestyle changes as much as prescribing specific remedies. Thus, in the system of Chinese medical theory, the notion of “optimal balance” of the body is the basis for determining all action.

## Optimal Balnces in the Biospher

Environmental concern is based upon the insights of ecology and the systems sciences, such as meteorology and oceanography, that interpret the biosphere. These sciences also reveal the significance of optimal balances in the operation of the systems that support all life on earth, such as those regulating the proportion of oxygen against other gases in the atmosphere, the level of salinity in the oceans, and the balance between the assimilation and loss of heat between the earth’s surface and space. If life on the planet is to continue as we know it, then these and other balances must be preserved.<sup>3</sup>

The concept of “carrying capacity,” as applied to the biosphere or to an ecosystem within it, is very much a balance-related concept; as is the equation that within an ecosystem waste is equivalent to food.

Both the body and the biosphere have their own optimal balances. The world of human culture, of societies, organizations, and artifacts exists between the two. It incorporates the body and is lodged in the biosphere. If a culture that embodies an industrial ecology is to be possible, it must be able to situate itself in a balanced mediation of the microcosm of the body and the macrocosm of the biosphere. This requires a diferent vision of the role of culture than that which is common today; where it is seen as marking out a particular group on the basis of beliefs, values and customs. It calls for a critical approach to all practices and technologies supported by the diferent belief systems and modes of living that have evolved in human societies worldwide, with respect to their sustainability and their capability to promote balance in the physical bodies of members of those societies. It also calls for a search for the dynamics and optimal balances in the humanly designed and constructed world.

## Givng a Sens t o the Concept of Optimal Balnce in the Designd World

The anthropologist, E. T. Hall, has identified all elements of culture as being types of extensions of the human being.<sup>4</sup> This ability to develop bodily extensions and to change these rather than the physical body, itself, has given the human species an enormous evolutionary advantage, according to Hall. Humanity is not dependent on any particular environment or ecological niche, but can thrive in many contexts by modifying the immediate impacts of the environment. If it is a useful metaphor to see cultural products as extensions of the human being; then it may be an equally useful venture to explore whether the metaphor of “optimal balance” that occurs with respect to the physiological processes of the body does not also have its analogues in the cultural extensions of the body.

The idea that there may be balances that cultures either achieve or fail to achieve also is suggested in Laws of Media,<sup>5</sup> the last work of Marshall McLuhan with his son, Eric. Their vision is of a human culture as a dynamic field in which the change in a cultural element, be it a material artifact, a concept, a technology, or any other type of element, follows four law-like principles. These may be expressed as follows:

1. For every cultural artifact, there is something that it enhances or advances.

2. For every cultural artifact, there is something that it displaces, obsolesces, or pushes into the periphery.

3. For every cultural artifact, there is some aspect of a previously existing condition that it retrieves or brings out from the periphery.

4. For every cultural artifact, when it is pushed or extended to the limits of its potential, it will take on a form that reverses what had been its original characteristics.

This tetrad of efects is present simultaneously in all cultural elements.

If we take the private car as an example, then we can say that it enhances personal mobility and speed of travel. It has displaced rail travel (in Western societies). It retrieves the freedom of movement given to the individual traveler by the horse drawn carriage. As the number of cars multiplies, the characteristic of gridlock is approached and the reverse of enhanced mobility is produced.

This structure of change is a very close match to the process of change expressed in the Taoist symbol, where the contrary and complementary principles of yin and yang are shown as merging into each other, with each containing a part of the other. The contraries move in an eternal dialectic that constitutes the whole.

These ways of conceiving a situation invite the thought that there is a point or zone of balance before the process generates more contrary than intended efects, and that this zone is the ground to hold and around which to institute change. McLuhan’s model of change suggests a system which inevitably is swinging back and forth between extremes, and where innovation in cultural elements is motivated by the lurch of the activity into its reversed side. The vested interest that a business corporation has in its current technologies and their outputs, and the system of the market, can operate as an obstacle to restraints. Returning to the issues surrounding the private car, a current development illustrates this. In Hong Kong at the present time, the government has proposed limiting the number of new cars allowed on the roads by introducing a quota system. The reaction of the automobile retail business and the motoring associations has been very hostile. The government has been accused of proposing something that is an infringement of human rights. This is in a society that does not have an automobile industry.

In the case of the private car and its impacts on society, most of the expressed concerns are about a balance of one type or another. In the Hong Kong case, it is about the ratio of cars to available road space. There also are concerns about the speed at which cars go on motorways relative to the control the drivers have over them to stop them to prevent accidents. There are concerns about the fact that the fuel consumed by cars is nonrenewable and is, therefore, not being replaced. There is concern in many cities about the buildup of aerial pollution from motor vehicles at a rate that is faster than the natural air flows can disperse it. There is concern over the amount of space within a city given over the cars, and the road systems that they require.

It might be argued that each of the above concerns argues for our having an intuitive sense for there being a balance of benefits in one form or another. The balance between the number of cars and available road space is, perhaps, the most obvious; while the balance between the space for cars and the space for other things in the city may be more contestable. But most people’s commonsense probably would agree that a mode of transport should serve the interests of a city and its residents, and that there was a point at which redevelopment for urban expressways and multistorey car parks was reversing that relationship.

Clearly, here is the issue of means and ends. The quality of life in the city is the end and the transport system a means to its achievement. When the speed of the transport system is put before the quality of the urban environment, then a clear view of that relationship has been lost. It is equally obvious that, in many cities, this has happened.

For city councils, as for national governments, the concern to increase the wealth of the community as measured in scalar terms is perceived as the predominant value. Road networks create jobs in their building, and the “improved communications” make the city more commercially competitive. But because the need-based values of citizens are not reflected in any simple relationship to the scalar values of the community’s monetary income, life gets worse while the city gets richer. The “quality of life” seems to dissolve into a confusion of conflict between diferent constituencies and interest groups. The monetary measure of the city’s increased trade becomes the only yardstick for its quality.

There is, of course, a vicious circle here. People form conflicting interest groups because they see their values as diferently realized in the same situation. They see these values diferently realized because they see themselves as participating diferently in the situation. But this conflict is exacerbated if the people involved are seeing their potential benefits in terms of scalar values.

To take note of signs of deterioration in a dimension of urban life and to take preventive steps before the situation becomes a fully-fledged urban problem requires an orientation toward social and material culture that is analogous to the preventive approach of Chinese medicine to diseases of the body. If we sought to envisage such an orientation, then we might come to devise strategies to deal with urban problems and also reduce consumption; both of which would reduce environmental problems.

## “Convialt y” as an Optimal Balnce Val ue

In Tools for Conviviality,<sup>6</sup> Ivan Illich critiques industrial society on the grounds that industrial tools are too eficient at upsetting balances between the human being and the environment. He introduced the term “conviviality,” which he defined as the “… autonomous and creative intercourse among persons and the intercourse of persons with their environment: and this in contrast to the demands made upon them by others, and by a manmade environment.”<sup>7</sup> His argument is that both technologies and organizations in the modern industrial state have displaced human power and autonomy to such an extent that they bring disutilities to society as a whole, and that further extensions of industrial capability will only make things worse.

Conviviality is a quality of technologies and institutions that increase human power and autonomy in a total sense. A favorite example is the bicycle, which increases a person’s mobility without decreasing that of anyone else. The car, on the other hand, requires extensive roads which constrict the use of space by non-motorists and is, therefore, not convivial.

In Illich’s view, industrial tools per se are inherently damaging, and continued expansion of their use will lead to a major catastrophe in the industrial system, itself, perhaps along the lines outlined in The Limits to Growth.<sup>8</sup> The only alternative he envisions is some type of industrially managed ecologically oriented society that would be even more repressive than growth-driven capitalism. Therefore, it is necessary to give up industrial tools entirely, and to begin what he terms “convivial reconstruction.”

Illich’s analysis is penetrating and still very pertinent to understanding what we are experiencing at the present time. Nevertheless, it seems to make more sense to construe the notion of conviviality as a concept to mark the point at which a tool is operating in a zone of optimal balance of its benefits within a society, rather than as an inherent quality of some tools and not others. Albeit there may be some technologies that are just never convivial, given the nature of life on earth (e.g., nuclear power), in the same way that some substances never can be ingested to benefit the human body.

If this idea is acceptable, then we might seek to extend and further define Illich’s notion of conviviality in a range of contexts of human social life, and to establish scales and dimensions of interaction that could shape the constraints on the design of material culture.

## Gren Politcs and Ind ustrial Ec ol og y

A response to the environmental crisis from scientists in the early 1970s was Blueprint for Survival.<sup>9</sup> The direction for planning and design it outlined, and which has been followed in much green writing since, has been to take the constraints of the ecosystem and to work backwards from these to determine what is environmentally sustainable in terms of the structure of our material culture. Now, while an information-gathering program on the carrying capacities of diferent parts of the ecosystem in relation to diferent forms of technology and resource use would be an invaluable contribution to the setting of parameters, it might be seen as repressive if the concern with optimal human conditions were not central. In a similar way, industrial ecology orchestrates the operations of government and industry at the various levels, but does not deal with the relationship of these institutions to the individuals in the society. Unless there is a shift in values on the part of people, generally, there will not be widespread support for these changes, and politicians and legislators will continue to seek compromises with vested interests.

## Social Val ue Change and the Role of Designr

What is proposed in this paper is that, as an international community, we must reappraise the way we construe what is valuable in our use of the material world and ask what gives us the most convivial form of life, instead of seeking to stockpile or consume as much as we can of what we have been led to believe is good for us. This requires a widespread change of values. Such a widespread change can take place as opinion leaders change their views and influence others. Designers are in a special position in this context. On the basis of their experience, they can contribute to identifying the balances that achieve conviviality in the domain of material culture. On the basis of their role, they have access to those who make decisions about how resources are deployed and to a variety of other professionals who have more specialized concerns. They are well placed to influence professional opinion.

Popular opinion is less entrenched than professional opinion on matters of value, I suspect. Also, among people in Western societies, there is a growth of opinion in favor of things that manifest the kind of approach to value outlined here. There is the interest in alternative medical therapies; most of which advocate a preventive approach to disease and, therefore, a concern with the balances of inputs to the individual. Psychotherapy and counseling encourage an attitude of honesty with respect to the recognition of needs, and of what is satisfying. If the ethos of the pursuit of balanced satisfactions were taken up more widely in other professions and disseminated through the media in place of the present encouragement to consume, a value change could occur quite quickly.

I do not contend that a misconstrued notion of value in scalar terms (to the exclusion of recognizing the significance of optimal balance) is the only factor in the overgrowth of material culture in industrial societies. There also is the displacement of needs from emotional and spiritual contexts to material ones. This is more complex, and worthy of a separate paper. However, awareness of the logic of physiological need is a useful starting point. If it is true of the demand for a material product that “The more you have, the more you want,” then it is not meeting a physiological need or its extension in a functional need; but the need is construed materially from some other source. If there is not then a physiological or functional need, why try to satisfy it with a product of material culture?

Ezio Manzini calls for tools for new types of behavior. What is essential for innovations of all types now is that they do not initiate the global society into yet another form of material excess.

## Notes

First published in Design Issues 12 no. 1 (Spring 1996): 38–47.

1. Ezio Manzini, “Design, Environment and Social Quality: From Existenzminimum to ‘Quality Maxi mum,’ ” Design Issues 10 no. 1 (Spring 1994): 37– 43.

2. Ted J. Kaptchuk, The Web That Has No Weaver: Understanding Chinese Medicine (New York: Congdon & Weed, 1983).

3. James E. Lovelock, Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987).

4. Edward T. Hall, Beyond Culture, Chapter 2, “Man as Extension” (New York: Anchor Books, 1989).

5. Marshall McLuhan and Eric McLuhan, Laws of Media: The New Science (Toronto: Toronto University Press, 1988).

6. Ivan Illich, Tools for Conviviality (London: Fontana, 1973).

7. Op. cit., 24.

8. Donella H. Meadows, Dennis L. Meadows, Jorgen Randers, and William W. Behrens III, The Limits to Growth (London: Earth Island, 1972).

9. Editors of The Ecologist, A Blueprint for Survival (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1972).