# Sci enc e, Semiotcs , and Soci et y: The Ulm Hoc hsc hul e f ür Gestalung in Retrosp ect

Paul Betts

Perhaps nothing better reflects the contemporary crisis of architecture and design than its radical estrangement from science. For if nothing else, postmodernism has made us acutely aware of the extent to which the post-Renaissance theology of scientific rationality had furnished modernism with its guiding visual vocabulary, chiliastic visions and undeterred self-confidence. This is, of course, hardly new in itself, given the fact that the denunciation of right-angle messianism and its accompanying celebration of ornament and historicist pastiche (be it the Baroque, art deco, or Las Vegas pop) has itself become a vigorous transatlantic academic industry ever since the late 1960s. Less well known, however, is that the evident collapse of science as modernism’s master narrative has recently given rise to a new historical interest in the conceptual foundation (if less the specific forms) of this oft-maligned “Enlightenment project,” much of which pivoted upon the political desire to recast modern society in the image of scientific reason. Not to say that postmodernists have suddenly lost sight of the dark legacy of what Horkheimer and Adorno once called the “dialectic of Enlightenment.” But at a time when the fin-de-millénaire oracles about the “end of history” and the “death of the city” have thus far provoked precious little design daring and/or architectural imagination, many longcondemned modernist programs and Utopian projects have started to win renewed attention.

In this climate, it is no coincidence that designers and design critics have become more and more curious about lost “futures past” resting at the former intersection of architecture and science. The colorful story of the highly influential Ulm Institute of Design, which was founded in 1955 as West Germany’s “New Bauhaus” and later closed amid the upheaval of 1968, is a compelling case study of these not-so-long-ago modernist hopes and dreams. More than simply a story of Bauhaus redux, the school’s history effectively marked modernism’s last real attempt to unite industrial design and genuine social reform, to preserve in particular the redemptive pathos of the design object from the corrosive efects of Nazi irrationalism and American commercialism. The Ulm Institute thus occupies a special place in post-1945 cultural history in the way that it boldly tried to rehabilitate the damaged authority of science and rationality as the only true models of engaged design education and praxis. At issue here is to show how the school’s changing ideal of the industrial designer – as seen in the pedagogic theories of Max Bill, Tomás Maldonado and Max Bense – revealed Ulm’s ongoing efort to conjoin design, science, and cultural renewal.

From the very beginning, the Ulm project was shaped by a larger vision of post-fascist cultural regeneration and political reform. Leaving aside the complex history of the school’s early years,<sup>1</sup> it is worth recalling that the idea of the Ulm

Institute originally was inspired by Inge Scholl, who wanted to establish a new school of democratic education in honor of her brother and sister, Hans and Sophie Scholl, both of whom were killed in 1943 as members of the anti-Nazi “White Rose” resistance group.<sup>2</sup> Together with fellow Nazi resister and graphic artist Otl Aicher, Scholl founded a new community college in the small south German town of Ulm in 1946 in an efort to preserve the resistance spirit of her slain siblings. Aicher and Scholl envisioned the school as a center of “true democracy” intent on eradicating the legacy of German militant nationalism and to provide postwar youth with badly needed cultural ideals and moral direction.<sup>3</sup> Its primary pedagogic task, however, was not simply to resuscitate the humanities, but rather to reconcile what they perceived as the fateful historical antagonism of “technical civilization” and German Kultur. In the spring of 1949, Scholl and Aicher busied themselves with drafting proposals for a new “Scholl Siblings Institute” devoted to “contemporary and political reeducation.”<sup>4</sup> For this, they proposed a “universal education” that encompassed both general media studies (politics, sociology, journalism, radio, and film) and art instruction (photography, advertising, painting, and industrial design) as a tonic against the dangers of instrumental reason and cultural irresponsibility.<sup>5</sup> Above all, Scholl and Aicher hoped to create a new “crystallization point for a better Germany,” where the “spirit of peace and freedom” would help rehabilitate and cultivate antifascist European culture.<sup>6</sup>

Even so, the subsequent appointment of the well-known Swiss sculptor, painter, and designer, Max Bill, as school director radically changed the Institute’s tone and outlook. As a former Bauhaus student and acting president of the Swiss Werkbund, Bill set out to subordinate formal political education to the more practical teaching of architecture and design. For him, the guiding objective should be to produce design work in accordance with the “spiritual substance” of contemporary modern art,<sup>7</sup> one which privileged a more art-oriented design instruction over the studies of sociology, cultural theory, and politics. Like most Werkbund members, Bill believed that genuine social and cultural reform began not with forced political training, but rather with reconstituting the very forms of the social environment, i.e., city planning, architecture, and the design of everyday objects. Proper design practice, then, was a kind of political reform and moral reeducation for the simple reason that everyday spaces and objects presented an afective pathos to their users.<sup>8</sup> Bill, moreover, insisted that the school should drop the Scholl name on the grounds that it was both overly “sentimental” and too closely associated with a past devoid of any “positive impetus,”<sup>9</sup> suggesting instead that the school be renamed the Institute of Design (Hochschule für Gestaltung) in homage to the Dessau Bauhaus and its pioneering design program. After some deliberation, Scholl and Aicher reluctantly agreed, but only on the condition that painting and sculpture were removed from the school curriculum and that courses in sociology, politics, psychology, philosophy, and contemporary history would be included as a bufer against what they felt to be the Bauhaus’s anti-historical millenialism. They clearly wanted to make sure that the “social efects and cultural meaning” of even technical design work would be firmly grounded in social awareness and informed political practice.<sup>10</sup> The original curriculum reflected this compromise, as the school’s individual departments were arranged into the following four groups: “Information,” which included the study and analysis of literary media; “Architecture and City Planning;” “Visual Design,” which covered instruction in film, photography and graphics; and “Product Form,” which comprised the industrial design of everyday household objects, furniture, and industrial equipment.

It was with this vision of design education that the Ulm Institute of Design was christened the “New Bauhaus” in 1955. No doubt, the opening served as a key spectacle of West German modernism. Not only did the institute’s noble pedigree of both antifascist resistance and international style modernism assist West Germany’s larger campaign to establish the 1920s as its authentic (and admittedly sanitized) cultural heritage, it also underlined the extent to which rebaptizing the Bauhaus served as a valuable Cold War symbol of a newly minted transatlantic cultural partnership between the Federal Republic and the United States.<sup>11</sup> However, the importance of the small design institute exceeded this Cold War conversion of design into diplomacy. It also was infused with a grand vision of social reform, one based on the reconciliation of art and life, morality, and material culture. Consider, for example, Bill’s remarks at Ulm’s 1955 inauguration:

Nowhere in the world is there an institution dedicated to the same tasks as the Institute of Design. Above all, the school hopes to create simple useful everyday objects for a general everyday culture, especially since most designers and manufacturers neglect the importance of these commonplace things as cultural factors of great consequence … We are of the opinion that culture is not the special domain of “high art,” but rather must be present in everyday living and in all things of form; indeed, every form is an expression of function and purpose. Yet we are not interested in producing cheap arts and crafts (Kunstgewerbe), but rather genuine objects that people need … in short, practical things which should improve and beautify life …<sup>12</sup>

Here Bill captured the school’s original mission, not only to extend the domain of culture beyond the exclusive world of fine arts, but also to target industrial technology and mass-produced goods as the very site of cultural intervention and reform. To this end, the Ulm Institute was initially dedicated to bridging postwar art and industry, serving as what one observer called a new “mediator between Kultur and Zivilization.”<sup>13</sup>

At first, this cultural idealism may seem somewhat naive or simply a pale imitation of modernist ideology from the Weimar Republic. But it is crucial to recall that this Ulm project to forge a new post-fascist Industriekultur diverged markedly from the more widespread post-Nazi pessimism toward the potentially redemptive powers of science and industrial technology. It is not dificult to understand that much of this postwar sentiment was a response to the Nazi legacy of industrialized death and destruction, whereafter the West German right and left joined hands in disavowing Germany’s prewar liberation theology of technology as a central element of this so-called “German catastrophe.” After 1945, technology often was treated by West German and other intellectuals as the stigma of evil and danger. It was variably condemned as the instrument of cultural slavery (F.J. Jünger), the harbinger of violence and death (Giedion), the symbol of existential alienation (Heidegger), and/or the dialectical expression of instrumental reason and unfreedom (Horkheimer and Adorno).<sup>14</sup> Regardless of whether the Third Reich and/or Hiroshima functioned as the narrative resolution of these analyses, the point was that the historical faith in the benevolent marriage of technology and Kultur as well as science and society did not survive the war.<sup>15</sup> That technology no longer served as the central trope of (West) German liberation was nowhere more evident than in the fact that West German engineers never recouped their pre-1945 authority as anointed cultural heroes.<sup>16</sup>

In this light, the Ulm Institute was quite alone in designating industrial technology as the necessary locus of cultural reconstruction. Yet there was more at stake than simply confronting West Germany’s intellectual antipathy toward science and technology. The Ulmers worried that this antimodern aversion would only reinforce the prewar split between humanism and eficiency. Postwar cultural developments only confirmed this fear. On the one hand, West German art schools celebrated artistic individualism and creative freedom as post-fascist and anticommunist cultural therapy; on the other, postwar engineering schools jettisoned their former discourse/practice of social engineering (since this was supposedly a species of illiberalism) in the name of mechanical learning and technical achievement. The irony of this of course was that this sociological separation of culture and technology was largely a reaction to the former fusion of these spheres during the Third Reich. The Ulmers thereby were attempting to rescue the concept of Industriekultur from Nazi corruption by regrounding it within the humanist tradition of social responsibility and moral education. Advancing the cause of the “Ulm idea” was viewed as all the more urgent given that the West German cultural elite was turning its back on technology precisely at the moment when its country was undergoing febrile modernization. The widespread postwar enthusiasm for automobiles, kitchen appliances, cleaning machines, radios, and television only underscored the extent to which West German popular culture was completely smitten by consumer technology and its capacity to liberate and comfort.<sup>17</sup> So the Ulm project to help heal the rift between society and technology was inseparable from the desire not to abandon West German modernity to narrowminded technocrats, commercial designers, and advertising agents.

For a variety of reasons, science played a decisive role in the Ulm Institute’s larger conception of redemptive modernization. First, the recuperation of scientific rationality was regarded by the school’s founders as the best means of countering the dark patrimony of Nazi irrationalism. For them, Nazism was primarily characterized by an anti-intellectual emotionalism and monumentalist pathos. In part, this is why the Ulmers – perhaps best illustrated by the school’s hyper-rationalist architecture, which one observer at the time called a “Cartesian cloister”<sup>18</sup> – saw the rehabilitation of the so-called “Enlightenment tradition” of improving society through reason and science as badly needed post-Nazi reform.<sup>19</sup> Secondly, the primacy of scientific rationality also was embraced as a needed defense against the worrisome commercialization of postwar design. What is often overlooked is that the Ulmers expressed an evident aversion toward liberal capitalism and the commodity culture of the “economic miracle.”<sup>20</sup> In fact, the thorny issue of how to devise a scientifically based design education uncompromised by commercial motivations efectively accounted for the school’s sound and fury during the late 1950s and early 1960s.

To better understand this, it pays to recount the changing image of the industrial designer at Ulm. Significantly, the original image of the Ulm designer was one which combined art, science, and design. In the mid-1950s, Bill developed this new occupational model in response to what he perceived as the pernicious influence of American streamline styling. Like other European designers of his generation, Bill strongly protested the international popularity of American star designer Raymond Loewy and especially the 1951 publication of his how-to-succeed autobiography, Never Leave Well Enough Alone. Bill condemned Loewy and his “spurious surface simplification known as streamlining” for abandoning the ethical foundation of all design (e.g., the fulfillment of genuine human needs) in the interests of stimulating consumer sales. For him, it was bad enough that this “sweet but dishonest” commercial ornamentation denigrated the lofty moral ofice of industrial designer; worse, however, was that it augured the “collapse of culture” (Kulturverfall) by severing aesthetics from moral idealism and cultural reform. Bill, in turn, envisioned the new Ulm Institute as a renewed Bauhaus dedicated to fighting this sinister cultural “perversion” (Unsinn) in the name of “the good, the beautiful, and the practical.”<sup>21</sup> In his first public statement as director of the Institute, he elevated the importance of art this way:

The founders of the school believe art to be the highest expression of human life and, therefore, their aim is to help in turning life into a work of art. In the words of that memorable challenge thrown down by Henry van de Velde over 50 years ago, we mean “to wage war on ugliness,” and ugliness can only be combated with what is intrinsically good – good because at once beautiful and practical … If we intend to go further at Ulm than they did at Dessau, this is because postwar requirements clearly postulate the necessity for certain additions to the curriculum. For instance, we mean to give still greater prominence to the design of ordinary things in everyday use; to foster the widest possible development of town and regional planning; and to bring visual design up to the standard which the latest technical advances have now made possible.<sup>22</sup>

This passage makes it clear that Bill viewed the school as essentially dedicated to the task of reenchanting the forms of everyday life in a kind of grandiose Gesamtkunstwerk which recognized no diference between fine arts and regional planning. In his grand aestheticizing project to “turn life into a work of art,” Bill collapsed the distinction among moral renewal, aesthetic production, and social reform, gathering them all into the lofty idealism of “good form” design.

Yet Bill’s design philosophy also posited a certain reconciliation of art and science as the bedrock of engaged design praxis. To safeguard design from degenerating into Loewy-esque aesthetic fancy, Bill strove to develop the theoretical insights of his former Bauhaus teachers – Paul Klee and Wassily Kandinsky – in combining spiritual artistic creativity with scientific logic.<sup>23</sup> For him, grounding art and design in mathematics by no means excluded individual artistic expression; rather, it served as the necessary bridge linking artistic endeavor, logical principles and industrial production. On this, point he maintained a classic 1920s modernist stance in arguing that function must determine form, and not vice versa; that function is the ground of all aesthetics; and that the sole objective of design remained the liberation of human needs.<sup>24</sup> But while defending the necessity of unadorned, non-expressionist “neutral form” as the best remedy against “personality design” and commercial styling, Bill was certainly not willing to hand over the mantle of design to the technical engineer. Indeed, he never surrendered his faith in the elevated cultural role and authority of the “responsible, true artist” to redeem the industrial design object as something more than cheap commodity or technical instrument. In the end, Bill insisted that only the engaged artist as “true creator” could properly address the complex technical, cultural, and moral issues inherent in modern design, precisely because only “free art” (freie Kunst) could transcend fleeting fashion trends and technical engineering imperatives.<sup>25</sup>

Yet Bill’s elevation of the artist-designer as social engineer was more than simply residual popular front ideology. Rather, the reason that he valued the role of the artist in industrial design was because he believed that these everyday industrial design objects were first and foremost “cultural artifacts” (Kulturgüter). This is why he ultimately disqualified the commercial stylist and engineer as legitimate designers, for both in efect “de-cultured” these objects by reducing them to saleable commodities and/or technical equipment. The achievement of “good form” was reconstituting the industrial object as a “culture good.” Only the engaged noncommercial artistdesigner, so Bill reasoned, could thus be entrusted with re-enchanting the object with the “surplus value” of Kultur irrespective of strict commercial and/or technical import. In other words, the objective of industrial design education was not “to make square what yesterday was round,” but rather “to view these objects of human need as cultural factors which decisively influence our form of life. Spoon and machine, trafic sign, and housing have, in this respect, the same meaning.”<sup>26</sup> This was what Bill meant when he remarked that the design institute was primarily concerned with “bringing civilization and culture into harmony.”<sup>27</sup> Elevating the importance of artistic production in industrial design training was the best way of pursuing Scholl’s original 1949 task, namely to keep the dangerous forces of modern civilization and technology under cultural control.

With time, however, Bill’s lofty vision of the industrial designer faced mounting criticism from other faculty members who wanted to shift the focus of design education from art to science. Dissatisfaction was first leveled by Tomás Maldonado, an Argentine artist and art journal editor who joined the Ulm faculty in 1954. While sharing the desire to train socially responsible designers instead of commercial artists, Maldonado rejected Bill’s Werkbund-Bauhaus idealism in favor of a more scientific conception of industrial design. He first proposed a radically diferent model of modern design education during his well-known speech delivered at the 1958 Brussels World’s Fair. Whereas most of the international representatives at the fair’s design conference concurred with Bill that the cultural menace of kitsch and bad design could best be remedied through more design education and the popularization of “good form,” Maldonado boldly asserted that “aesthetic considerations have ceased to be a solid conceptual basis for indus trial design.”<sup>28</sup> To this, he added that the rise of modern design as a new profession was really a child of the Depression, where designers were recruited by business to help aestheticize everyday commodities in order to reinvigorate flagging consumption. He continued by saying that most contemporary design (e.g., American streamline and/or West German Nierentisch forms) was ultimately less Industrial Age folk art than shrewd marketing stratagem to exploit human needs and desires.<sup>29</sup> But Maldonado’s condemnation of thi “pathological cult of diferentiation” characterizing modern consumer capitalism did not promp him to embrace Bill’s idea of the uncorrupted artist-designer and his romantic “spoon to city” Gesamtkunstwerk project. On the contrary, he felt that Bill’s totalizing artistic program was useless for training designers as future partners of indus try. Maldonado criticized Bill for recasting the designer as a “Grand Inquisitor” who “graciously administers justice in the world of design according to the motto: ‘the designer commands, the engineer obeys,’ ” for it assumed and necessitated the artist-designer’s sociocultural removal from the processes of industrial society.<sup>30</sup> Maldonado regarded the artist-designer’s cultured distance from industry as completely untenable, not the least because Bill’s venerated “good form” itself become just another design style among many. To move beyond this danger, Maldonado insisted that “industrial design is not an art, nor is the designer necessarily an artist”<sup>31</sup> insofar as the cunning of capitalism had ironically transformed the moral idealism of “good form” into highbrow product advertising. As a result, Maldonado lumped together both commercial design and Bill’s notion of the artist-designer as twin symptoms of the same outdated misconception about the role and meaning of engaged industrial design.

But if industrial design was to be divorced from artistic production, then what served as its new basis? To answer this question, Maldonado contended that both industrial design and the designer were on the threshold of historical transformation. Whereas rationalized mass production (Fordism) foregrounded the designer as inventor-planner in the first stage of design history, followed in the second stage by the rise of the artist-designer as a function of the 1929 Crash, Maldonado characterized the third and final phase as the historical emergence of the designer as “coordinator” who must “coordinate, in close collaboration with a large number of specialists, the most varied requirements of product fabrication and usage” so as to ensure “maximum productivity, material eficiency, and the cultural satisfaction of the user.”<sup>32</sup> This new designer was no ordinary industrial technocrat, however. What had happened was that the engaged designer’s adversarial ethos had been transferred from object styling into the production process itself. Bill’s autonomous artist-designer had been replaced by the designer as active partner of industry. Unlike Bill’s distant designer, this new designer was “to operate at the nerve centers of our industrial civilization,” where “the most important decisions for our daily life are made,” and “where those interests meet which are most opposed and often most difficult to reconcile.” No longer a “mystical and indefinable apparition,” the new industrial designer would now be trained as a specialist in the laws of mass production and industrial automation in order to help demystify and coordinate “our objective and communicative world.”<sup>33</sup> The success of the new designer largely depended on “the breadth of his scientific and technical knowledge, as well as on his capacity of interpreting the most secret and most subtle processes of our culture.”<sup>34</sup> Consequently, this critical design praxis – what Maldonado called “scientific operationalism” – could only begin once design had been divorced from aesthetics, once the mysterious “cultural good” had been superseded by a new conception of the design object as nothing but material information and production coordination. Rather than a cultural category of moral idealism and artistic production, design had been reconfigured as a more scientifically based sociological operation of product management and systems analysis. By integrating the designer into the industrial process itself, Maldonado had secularized the designer by transferring his/her sphere of operation from the lofty heights of Kultur to the workaday world of industrial Zivilisation.

This rejection of the art-based heritage of design education inevitably forced the school to reevaluate its Bauhaus legacy. On this point, Maldonado asserted that the Bauhaus could no longer serve as the model of industrial design education, since its “learning by doing” pedagogy ignored new scientific research and ofered students very little preparation for the complicated world of postwar industrial relations. While acknowledging that it was an important break from the ossified academic culture of fin-de-siècle German art education, he maintained that the Bauhaus’s efort to cleanse students of any prior academic training so as to restore the “free personality” based on a “lost psycho-biological unity” ultimately hindered modern students from assuming important positions in industrial society.<sup>35</sup> However exaggerated this may at first appear, Maldonado’s critique that the Bauhaus heritage had never fully cast of its early expressionistic tendencies was not that outlandish. For example, Walter Gropius himself confirmed this image at the 1955 opening of the Ulm Institute. In his inauguration speech, Gropius completely ignored the fact that the Ulm Institute had efectively updated the Weimar Bauhaus program by means of removing the primacy of arts and crafts from its industrial design curriculum. Not only did Gropius underscore the Cold War importance of providing the “Bauhaus idea” with a “new German home” as a sign of “progressive democracy,” he intoned that genuine cultural reform first began with training “artistic people” as cultural engineers since the “spiritual direction of human development is always distinctively influenced by thinkers and artists whose works transcend logical functionalism.”<sup>36</sup> Like Bill, Gropius defended the unimpeachable authority of both art and artist as the primary means of cultural and political regeneration; he even concluded by saying that individual intuition, emotion and artistic sensibility – not scientific rationality – remained the mainsprings of authentic design work. The Ulmers could even find evidence of the expressionist Bauhaus within the school itself. The presence of Johannes Itten, the Mazdaznan guru who was largely responsible for shaping the famous Bauhaus Vorkurs in Weimar from 1919–1923, provided more grist for the mill. Even if Itten had long abandoned his monkish robes by the time he arrived in Ulm, he still tried to bring students closer to the mysteries of Eastern philosophy through collective meditation and even pre-class calisthenics. This is not to say that they were the only referents of the Bauhaus tradition after the war. The point, however, is that the Bauhaus legacy had been reworked after 1945 to suit the larger Cold War project to draw the Weimar Republic and the Federal Republic into the same elective liberal lineage, while at the same time conjoining West German and American cultural modernism. During the 1950s, the West German popular image of the Bauhaus – and Gropius and Itten contributed to this – had shifted from a hotbed of leftist architecture to a bold yet innocent school of fine arts, where it enjoyed a marked renaissance (as seen in decorative interiors, furniture styling, poster art, and graphic design) within mainstream West German culture.<sup>37</sup>

But rather than simply jettisoning Bauhaus history altogether, the young faculty at Ulm strove to resuscitate the one forgotten figure most responsible for radically shaping industrial design education at the Bauhaus, Hannes Meyer. As Gropius’s successor at the Dessau Bauhaus, Meyer supervised Bauhaus activities from 1927 to 1930, devoting his energies to changing the Bauhaus’s image and upper-crust clientele by instituting a more leftist program based on “the needs of the people instead of luxury needs” (Volksbedarf statt Luxusbedarf), as well as bringing the school’s workshops in closer contact with trade unions and the workers’ movement. Moreover, he transformed Bauhaus pedagogy by cleansing it of any lingering artisan ethos and/or expressionist mysticism in favor of a more “secularized” design philosophy grounded in the scientific principles of rational production.<sup>38</sup> For many at the Ulm Institute, Meyer’s tenure in Dessau represented the Bauhaus’s most fruitful period in terms of both work and design theory. In fact, Meyer’s dictum that “How many mysterious things one tries to explain through art, when in fact they are things which have to do with science” served as the guiding pedagogical principle among Ulm’s younger faculty members. Hence, Meyer enjoyed a preeminent status at Ulm as the original theorist of a scientifically based design education, whereby his tenure and not Gropius’s Weimar directorship was reclaimed as Ulm’s authentic Bauhaus heritage.

The fruitfulness of this new design philosophy was perhaps best illustrated in the Ulm Institute’s well-known collaboration with the West German consumer electronics firm of Braun. Founded as a radio electronics parts firm by Max Braun in 1921, Braun enjoyed international success through the 1930s as one of Germany’s leading manufacturers of radio consoles. Like most of its competitors, Braun console designs were initially conceived of as small furniture pieces wherein the radio equipment was housed in a dark wood encasing to complement the gemütlich petit bourgeois styling of 1930s homes. After the war, however, the firm sought to update its product forms and corporate image; Braun recruited Ulm design instructor Hans Gugelot to help the firm devise a new design aesthetic. Among the innovations was the highly acclaimed “SK-4” stereo console design by Gugelot and in-house Braun designer Dieter Rams, which immediately catapulted Braun into the public spotlight. What is most important is that the designers did not approach the consumer radio unit as a heavy piece of representational domestic furniture, but rather as a mobile machine engineered according to technical function. Not only was the stereo unit shorn of all conventional accessories such as big gold buttons and fine frontpanel texturing, the color palette was reduced to neutral gray and white in response to the postwar penchant toward flashy and inessential styling. The collaboration with Braun illustrated the extent to which Ulm designers strove to modernize the “housing” of consumer goods along new functional lines just as 1920s architects had radically redesigned the German home and interior along Neue Sachlichkeit principles.<sup>39</sup> It marked the school’s overarching interest in moving away from homey design styling to working closely with production teams to develop new hightech industrial wares and public design projects (e.g., placards, photography, film, transportation systems, and even software programs) based on rational analysis and technical knowledge.<sup>40</sup>

With time, however, the simmering feud between Bill and Maldonado intensified and eventually divided the school over the proper conception of design education. Leaving aside the rich courtlife of the school intrigue during this crisis, it is enough to say that Maldonado’s vision of the scientifically oriented designer eventually won out at Ulm. In fact, Bill soon thereafter resigned as school director in response to what he called the “technoid degeneration of its once good idea.”<sup>41</sup> His departure signaled the end of the school’s art-based design education, after which the Institute devoted its full attention to refining its bold conception of modern design and the modern designer freed from the historical baggage of aesthetics, Kultur, and artistic production. The increasing “scientization” of Ulm’s design program was especially noticeable in the 1958 revised curriculum. In it, the instruction in colors was completely dropped from the course list; Gugelot and Walter Zeischegg were encouraged to expand the place of the engineering sciences; and more courses on scientific theory were now introduced, including mathematical operations analysis, perception theory, ergonomics, and epistemology. The Building Department under Konrad Wachsmann and Herbert Ohl discarded its metaphysical baggage as well, shifting its emphasis from the poetics of architecture to the rationalization of prefabricated housing components. Even instruction in the “Cultural Integration” Department, whose program of philosophy, history, psychology, and political science had been formalized as a corrective against both the anti-historical thrust of the original Bauhaus program and the dangers of overspecialization, had given way to the larger task of more “specialized training.”

One particularly revealing aspect of the school’s ongoing scientization of its curriculum could be seen in the primacy of semiotics. This stemmed in large measure from the larger attempt to decouple design from the trappings of Kultur, namely, morality, taste, and aesthetics. Here, Maldonado again led the way, though he drew heavily from the work of Charles Sanders Peirce, Charles Morris, Anatol Rapoport,<sup>42</sup> and especially the long-forgotten West German philosopher and Ulm lecturer, Max Bense. Bense was a philosophy professor at the University of Stuttgart who had published numerous books on the philosophy of mathematics before 1945 and was recruited by Bill to help shore up Ulm’s “Cultural Integration” department, for which he ofered courses on mathematical theory and semiotic analysis from 1954–1958. Having published a range of Heideggerian texts during the thirties and forties devoted to exploring the metaphysical linkage of space and the phenomenology of being, Bense shifted his interest after 1945 to focus upon the relationship between aesthetics and technology. Much of his work pivoted upon the idea that the once critical hermeneutics of Kultur no longer existed, since both nature and culture had forfeited their relevance as interpretative models for understanding the emergence of what he called “technical civilization.” But rather than joining the chorus of West German critics who invariably greeted this “death of culture” as an irredeemable sociological scourge, Bense accepted this brave new world as simply modern reality. Indeed, his project to develop a philosophical system of “technical consciousness” was less some sort of engineer’s fantasy about the wonders of a fully technologized world than an attempt to emancipate the social sciences and especially aesthetics from their outworn humanist framework.

Bense’s efort to reconceptualize aesthetic production beyond the ken of Kultur carried profound implications for both design theory and the status of the aesthetic object. In one 1956 speech, for instance, Bense made the bold claim that in an age characterized by mass reproduction and the destruction of the precious cultural artifact, the age-old epistemological assumption that the art-object and by association the artist were the exclusive sites of aesthetic production was no longer historically valid. Certainly, Bense realized that the “end of aura” was in itself nothing new, having characterized modern life ever since the manufacture of imitation products.<sup>43</sup> The diference, however, lay in its totalizing efect in an era of unbridled postwar consumerism in which all culture goods could be and were immediately commodified, imitated, and reproduced. The historical disappearance of the autonomous cultural artifact therefore produced two decisive efects: first, it meant that the object’s cultural status as an ontological category had been altogether undermined insofar as its “unique” attributes could be easily copied and reproduced; secondly, aesthetics itself, had been liberated from the “denatured” precious object and difused throughout the social terrain, i.e., advertising, industrial design, and the advent of “lifestyle.” For Bense, this social development followed the logic of both modern science (e.g., quantum physics) and modern abstract art (above all, Kandinsky) which, long ago, had jettisoned its nineteenth-century grounding in the representational world of palpable objects, whether it be the concepts of substance, impulse, and regular circuits for the modern physicist, or painterly naturalism for the modernist artist.<sup>44</sup> The modern philosopher/sociologist, so Bense argued, should follow the lead of the modern physicist who studies the “objective world” not by analyzing its objects but rather its interactive semiotic efects.<sup>45</sup> Of particular relevance is that, from this, he claimed that industrial design enjoyed a privileged position in the modern world in that it emerged at the very crossroads of “technical civilization” and the industrialization of aesthetics. Industrial modernity had unwittingly liberated aesthetics from the object and from the domain of Kultur as well, which meant that aesthetics had now become the exclusive property of Zivilisation. So more than just a new union of art and technology, industrial design represented the first aesthetic practice of “technical civilization,” the first formalist strategy theoretically undetermined by the (elitist) rituals and reception strategies of Kultur.

During the late 1950s, Bense’s semiotic theory of aesthetics exerted considerable influence on the Institute’s younger faculty members. His highly analytical argumentation and untiring efort to demystify the social function of aesthetics in everyday life appealed to Maldonado’s own project to replace cultural judgment (taste, beauty, morality) with more scientific evaluative criteria. What is often forgotten, however, is that the Ulm Institute’s project to develop a new science of everyday objects was also motivated by a particular ethical compulsion. In fact, the efort to train new designers who – like natural scientists studying the behavior of physical objects in the natural world – could analyze social “communicative products” (consumer goods and media information) according to Weberian “value-free” scientific principles,<sup>46</sup> was less naive rationalism than an attempt to combat the postwar’s reigning science of material culture, namely market research. By the early 1960s, market research had become a highly developed business science in its own right, replacing industrial psychology as the guiding postwar epistemology dedicated to addressing the relationship between people and (consumable) things. Not only could this be seen in the post-1945 merger of commerce and culture, but also in the rise of a new academic industry surrounding the romance of sales and psychology. In response, the Ulmers hoped to stem the ongoing commercialization of social science by developing a more ethically based “critical semiotics.” The pioneering work of Ulmers’ Horst Rittel and Hanno Resting to mathematize aesthetics, together with the efort by French sociologist and Ulm docent Abraham Moles to establish a theory about the semiotic laws of motion determining consumer culture,<sup>47</sup> were good examples of this larger campaign to develop a critical theory of modern consumer culture untainted by Madison Avenue machinations.

To preserve the adversarial ethos of design in the face of its ever-increasing co-option by industrial capital, Maldonado insisted upon the connection between design studies and the liberation of human needs. What was now evident was that the school was finding it more and more dificult to conceptualize a design form – since even the supposedly anti-aesthetic ethos of functionalism had become just another supermarket style, as the Braun design story attested – that would not be immediately corrupted by market capitalism. In this atmosphere, the young docents at Ulm began to turn away from product design altogether, gravitating instead toward more rarefied design theory. Not to say that their eforts to devise a non-market-driven “theory of needs” based on a “more systematic study of the most subtle aspects of consumption” was only idle philosophizing. For them, the issue was nothing less than the preservation of freedom itself. As Maldonado remarked, the “aesthetics of manipulation” informing West Germany’s prosperous consumer culture was inextricably linked to (and even partly responsible for) the larger political problem in which the ideal of democratic freedom was ironically being undermined by the “limited real possibility of realizing this freedom.” Semiotics – and by association, scientific rationality – were then considered as needed remedies against consumer alienation and what Ulmer Gui Bonsiepe called uncritical “instrumental intelligence,” serving at once as intellectual and political liberation insomuch as it revealed the “conditions which make the manipulation possible and necessary.”<sup>48</sup> The ethical imperative to confront the “pseudoscience” of market research was, thus, the determining factor in the Institute’s “scientific operationalism,” where the designer (unlike the more passive natural scientist) was obliged to intervene and help protect modern industrial culture from the whims of technocrats and advertising agents.

Unfortunately the development of this new science of society soon ran into problems. For one thing, the regional government of Baden-Württemberg was less and less willing to subsidize Ulm’s theoretical experimentation and disinclination toward product design, thus throwing the school into perennial financial crisis. Worse, this new “scientization” of the curriculum encountered increasing resistance from faculty and students alike, many of whom felt that the school’s faith in science and rationality had become polemic and excessive. Closely connected with this development was the fact that design rationalism itself began to lose its cultural authority over the course of the 1960s. The period witnessed a pronounced “crisis of functionalism” within West German architecture and design circles. For many West Germans, the 1920s belief in the therapeutic powers of functionalist building and city planning was transformed into a post-1945 nightmare, as its once soaring social(ist) rhetoric had been emptied of any Utopian promise and/ or cultural redemption. And even if the banalization of functionalism had consistently served as a hated sign of a misguided West German culture for postwar conservatives, this new mid-1960s critique found its most prominent voices from those on the left who had formerly championed its cause during the Weimar Republic. Such notable figures as Theodor Adorno, Ernst Bloch, and Alexander Mitscherlich helped direct attention to the cultural dangers of “scientific” functionalism.<sup>49</sup> By 1968, the critique of functionalism had become synonymous with the critique of science, instrumental reason, and the perceived “uninhabitability” of West German cities, where the “tyranny of functionalism” was understood to symbolize the postwar loss of individual identity, the destruction of the environment, and the commodification of West German cultural life.<sup>50</sup> Once a passionate watchword of social democracy and the demystification of Kultur, functionalism was now demonized on all sides as the very expression of the miscarried dreams of postwar reform and renewal.

By this time, however, the school was in deep crisis. On the one hand, the regional government continued to exert more pressure on the school to behave like other design schools, even to the point of threatening to close the institute if a more practical design curriculum was not implemented. On the other, the Ulmers were more and more at a loss in how to reconcile industrial design and industrial capitalism, form, and freedom. They had realized that this was the inexorable paradox of industrial culture, insofar as aesthetics itself – once the liberation from the “constraints of necessity” – had been “pressed into the service of repression.”<sup>51</sup> So, unlike the other 1968ers, the Ulmers did not embrace more whimsical individualistic design as post-functionalist emotional compensation.<sup>52</sup> Their continued afirmation of functionalism as the last anti-capitalist industrial aesthetic now lacked any former optimism about the social promise of scientific design philosophy. This loss of faith in the enlightenment-inspired marriage of science and society was perhaps best expressed in the fact that the Ulmers turned all of their energies toward design theory as the last uncorrupted refuge of activity. The once ­passionate hope in reconstituting the design object as the site of social reform and political liberation had all but collapsed. It was in this 1968 crisis atmosphere that the much-divided Ulm faculty, unable to maintain the Institute’s cherished independence before the regional government’s directive to reorganize the design center as a state-run engineering college, ultimately voted to disband itself as a last gesture of solidarity and defiance.

The closing of the school did not signal the end of the postwar reign of scientific functionalism. No doubt, much of (West) German industrial design from the 1970s on owes a considerable debt to the Ulm legacy. Nevertheless, the former project of reuniting science and society in a grand vision of cultural engagement and political liberation never survived the upheavals of 1968. After that, the focus of design shifted from aestheticizing the relationship between people and objects/ machines (interior decoration, advertising, ergonomics, and cybernetics) to that between people and the environment (ecology movement, park design, and urban renewal), as space reemerged as a new politicized social category in the 1970s. Still, Ulm represented the postwar’s most sustained attempt to rethink the role of social science and political engagement in a post-Kultur world of overproduction, hyper-consumerism and instant commodification. Even if its enlightenment faith in the redemptive powers of reason and science may date the school as modernist, it nonetheless serves as a valuable case study in the cultural contradictions of material afluence. For nowhere else in West Germany were the problems associated with trying to combine industry and enlightenment, aesthetics and liberation, as well as technology and culture so passionately explored and debated. In the end, it marked West Germany’s last real efort to fight the historical elision of industrial culture and the culture industry. And in light of postmodernism’s notorious ideological impasse regarding exactly this issue, the “Ulm experiment” may perhaps deserve another hearing.

## Notes

First published in Design Issues 14 no. 2 (Summer 1998): 67–82.

1. A good discussion of the school’s early years can be found in Eva von Seckendorf, Die Hochschule für Gestaltung in Ulm (Marburg: Jonas, 1989).

2. Inge Scholl, The White Rose, trans. Arthur Schultz (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, [1952] 1983) and Die Weiße Rose und das Erbe des deutschen Widerstandes, no author attributed (Munich: Beck, 1993).

3. Otl Aicher, “Fangen wir an,” MS, June 16, 1948, Stadtarchiv, Ulm.

4. “Expose zur Gründung einer Geschwister-Scholl-Hochschule,” MS, undated and unpaginated, Stadtarchiv, Ulm.

5. “Vorbereitung zum Prospekt: Geschwister-Scholl Hochschule,” 1949, unpaginated, and “GSH-Programm,” 1949, 19. Stadtarchiv, Ulm.

6. “Expose über das Forschungsinstitut für Produktform und die Hochschule für Gestaltung,” undated and unpaginated, quoted in Hartmut Seeling, “Geschichte der HfG Ulm, 1953–1968,” Ph.D. Diss., Universität Köln, 1985, 20–21.

7. Max Bill, Form: A Balance-Sheet of Mid-Twentieth Century Trends in Design (Basel: Karl Werner, 1952), unpaginated.

8. Bill, Form, unpaginated.

9. Quoted in Seckendorf, 41.

10. “HfG-Programm,” 1951, unpaginated.

11. Walter Dirks, “Das Bauhaus und die Weiße Rose,” Frankfurter Hefte 10:11 (November, 1955): 769– 773.

12. Quoted in Wend Fischer, “Tägliche Kultur, nicht Extrakultur,” Werk und Zeit 4:10 (October, 1955): 4.

13. Paula Andersen, “Vermittler zwischen Zivilisation und Kultur,” Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Oct ober 4, 1955.

14. Friedrich Georg Jünger, Die Perfektion der Technik (Frankfurt: V. Klostermann, 1947); Sigfried Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command (New York: Oxford University Press, 1948); Martin Heidegger, Die Technik und die Kehre (Pfullingen: Neske, 1962); Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, trans. John Cummings (New York: Seabury Press, 1972 [1944]). See also William Kuhns, The Post-Industrial Prophets: Interpretations of Technology (New York: Weybright & Talley, 1973).

15. Andreas Schüler, Erfindergeist und Technikkritik: Der Beitrag Amerikas zur Modernisierung und die Technikdebatte seit 1900 (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1990), esp. 138–177. Even the social sciences – including history, sociology. and psychology – were badly damaged by Nazi association. Wissenschaft in geteilten Deutschland, eds. Walter Pehle and Peter Sillem (Frankfurt: Fischer, 1992).

16. Joachim Radkau, “ ‘Wirtschaftswunder’ ohne technologische Innovation? Technische Modernität in den 50er Jahren” in Modernisierung im Wiederaufbau, ed. Axel Schildt (Bonn: JHW Dietz, 1993), 129–153. For a discussion of the elevated cultural status of the German engineer during the 1920s and 1930s, see Jefrey Herf, Reactionary Modernism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984), 152–188.

17. Hans-Peter Schwarz, Die Ära Adenauer (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1981–83), 383–388.

18. Bernhard Rübenbach, Der Rechte Winkel von Ulm (Darmstadt: G. Buechner, 1987), 33.

19. Ulm Design: The Morality of Objects, ed. Herbert Lindinger (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990), 77.

21. Bill, Form, unpaginated.

20. Inge Scholl, “Eine neue Gründerzeit und ihre Gebrauchskunst” in Der Bestandsaufnahme, ed. Hans Werner Richter (Munich: Kurt Desch, 1962), 421–427.

22. “The Bauhaus Idea from Weimar to Ulm,” Architects’ Yearbook 5, ed. Morton Shand (London: Elek Books, 1953), 29–32 [translation modified]. The turn-of-the-century educational ideas are addressed in Kunstschulreform, 1900–1930, ed. Hans Wingler (Berlin: Gebr. Mann, 1977).

23. Bill, “Die mathematische Denkweise in der Kunst unserer Zeit,” Das Werk 36:3 (March, 1949): 86– 90.

24. Bill, “Grundlage und Ziel der Aesthetik im Maschinenzeitalter,” Baukunst und Werkform 9 (1955), 558–561.

25. Bill, “Grundlage,” 560.

26. “HfG-Prospekt,” 1956, quoted in Seckendorf, 48. 27. “HfG-Programm,” 1956, unpaginated.

28. Tomás Maldonado, “New Developments in Industry and the Training of Designers,” Architects’ Yearbook 9 (1960): 174–180.

29. Ulm 2 (October, 1958), 30.

30. Maldonado, “Two Views on Architectural Edu cation,” Architectural Education 29:4 (April, 1959): 153–154.

31. Maldonado, “New Developments,” 176.

32. Maldonado, “New Developments,” 33–34.

33. Maldonado. “Two Views,” 154.

34. Maldonado, “New Developments,” 180.

35. Maldonado, “Is the Bauhaus Relevant Today?” Ulm 8/9 (September, 1963): 5–13.

36. Walter Gropius, “Eröfnung der neuen Gebäude der HfG,” Ulm, September 1955, Bauhaus-Archiv, Berlin.

37. Paul Betts, “The Bauhaus as Cold War Legend: West German Modernism Revisited,” German Politics and Society 14:12 (Summer 1996): 75–100.

38. K. Michael Hays, Modernism and the Posthumanist Subject: The Architecture of Hannes Meyer and Ludwig Hilberseimer (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992) and Hannes Meyer: Bauten, Projekte und Schriften, ed. Claude Schnaidt (Teufen: A. Niggli, 1965).

39. The connection between Le Corbusier’s architectural work and Braun design is suggestively explored by Rüdiger Joppien, “Weniger ist Mehr: oder die Leere ist Fülle” in Mehr oder Weniger: Braun im Vergleich, no author attributed (Hamburg: Museum für Kunst und Gewerbe, 1990), 9–17.

40. A good discussion of how the school’s photography department worked to expunge product photos of any subjectivistic pathos and emotionalism can be found in Objekt + Objektiv = Objektivität? Fotographie an der HfG Ulm, 1953–1968, ed. Christiane Wachsmann (Ulm: Stadtarchiv, 1991).

41. Max Bill, “Der Modelfall Ulm,” Form 6 (1959): 32–33. The long and, at times, ugly infighting among the faculty on the eve of Bill’s departure is recounted in Seckendorf, 162–166.

42. Kenneth Frampton, “Apropos Ulm: Curriculum and Critical Theory,” Oppositions 3 (May, 1974): 17–37.

43. Oddly enough, Bense never mentioned the pioneering essay by Walter Benjamin, “Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction,” in Illuminations, ed. Hannah Arendt (New York: Schocken, 1968), 217–252.

44. Bense, “Kunst in der künstlichen Welt,” Werk und Zeit 5:11 (November, 1956): 3–4.

45. Bense, Aesthetica II (Baden-Baden: Agis, 1956), 14. Hence, it was no surprise that Bense identified Hegel as the prophet of this kind of semiotic analysis of aesthetics, since he was the first theoretician to divorce aesthetic judgment from the substance of the object, approaching aesthetic understanding instead as a series of afects or attributes in the world. Aesthetics, 196–203.

46. Maldonado, Beiträge zur Terminologie der Semiotik (Ulm: J. Ebner, 1961). Note as well his earlier “Communication and Semiotics,” Ulm 5 (July, 1959): 70–75.

47. Abraham Moles, “Products: Their Functional and Structural Complexity,” Ulm 6 (1962): 4–12.

48. Maldonado, “Notes on Communication,” in Uppercase 5, ed. Theo Crosby (London: Whitefriar Press, 1963), 5–10.

49. Both Adorno and Bloch were invited guest lecturers at the German Werkbund’s 1965 “Bildung durch Gestalt” Conference, where they delivered their famous “Funktionalismus Heute” and “Bildung, Ingenieurform, Ornament” speeches, respectively. See the special issue of Werk und Zeit 14: 11/12 (November–December, 1965). Mitscherlich’s

Die Unwirtlichkeit unserer Städte: Anstiftung zum Unfrieden (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1965) served as the key text on the deleterious efects of functionalism.

50. Heide Berndt et al., Architektur als Ideologie (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1968) and Umwelt aus Beton oder Unsere unmenschliche Städte, ed. Uwe Schultz (Hamburg: Rowohlt, 1971).

51. Gui Bonsiepe, “Comunication und Power,” Ulm 21 (1968): 16.

52. Abraham Moles, “Functionalism in Crisis,” Ulm 19/20 (August, 1967): 24.