# Furt her Reading for Part III

There is considerable literature on the analysis of images. See, for example, Roland Barthes, Image, Music, Text, edited and translated by Stephen Heath (New York: Hill and Wang, 1977); and Gunther Kress and Theo van Leeuwen, Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual Design (New York: Routledge, 1996). On design criticism, see the special issue, “A Critical Condition: Design and Its Criticism” Design Issues 13 no. 2 (Summer 1997). Among the many books on sustainability and its relation to design, see Victor Papanek, The Green Imperative: Natural Design for the Real World (New York: Thames and Hudson, 1995); Janis Birkeland, Design for Sustainability: A Sourcebook of Integrated Ecological Solutions (London: Earthscan, 2002); Jonathan Chapman, Emotionally Durable Design: Objects, Experiences and Empathy (London: Earthscan, 2005); Tony Fry, Design Futuring: Sustainability, Ethics and New Practice (Oxford and New York: Berg, 2009); and Barbara Predan and Cvetka Požar (eds.), Sustainable Alternatives in Design: It’s High Time We Start Losing Time (Ljubljana: The Architectural Museum of Ljubljana, 2009). See also Carlo Vezzoli and Ezio Manzini, Design for Environmental Sustainability (London: Springer Verlag, 2008); and Ezio Manzini and François Jegou, Sustainable Everyday: Scenarios of Urban Life (Milan: Ambiente, 2003). On the Hochschule für Gestaltung, Ulm, see Herbert Lindinger, Ulm Design: The Morality of Objects, Hochschule für Gestaltung, Ulm, 1953–1968 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991); and René Spitz, hfg Ulm: The View Behind the Foreground: The Political History of the Ulm School of Design, 1953–1968 (Stuttgart: Edition Axel Menges, 2002). On design ethics, see Clive Dilnot, Ethics? Design?, The Archeworks Papers 1:2 (Chicago: Archeworks, 2005).