Business exists to serve people, a point that successful businesses understand and practice. But so too must the products of business be designed and manufactured to serve the needs and capabilities of the people who are its clients and customers. Since the original publication of the book, I have found considerable interest in the business and industrial community. Companies have ordered copies for their staffs. I have been asked to speak at conferences, to business executives, and to research and development organizations in the United States, Europe, and Japan, along with innumerable radio talk shows. Hurrah! Not for me, but for the positive signs of increased concern for the customer-user. The problems illustrated in this book result from a lack of concern and knowledge about how design affects the users of products. Moreover, in this day of increased legal liability for the way products are used, it is in everyone's best interest to make designs simple to use, simple to understand, yet still powerful enough for the job. Bad design cannot be patched up with labels, instruction manuals, or training courses. Business and industry have learned that their products ought to be aesthetically pleasing. A large community of designers exists to help improve appearances. But appearances are only part of the story: usability and understandability are more important, for if a product can't be used easily and safely, how vaulable is its attractiveness? Usable design and aesthetics should go hand in hand: aesthetics need not be sacrificed for usability, which can be designed in from the first conceptualization of the product. ## Usable Design: The Next Competitive Frontier Modern industry must distinguish itself through its consideration of the needs of its customers. This message has already been stated—and heard—in regard to interaction with the customer, service, and quality. Industry has learned that quality has to be designed into a product: insisting on proper design and manufacturing techniques from the very beginning is far more effective than attempts to discover and repair illmade goods on the production line. The same story applies to the usability and understandability of prod-