ucts. Human error is the leading cause of industrial accident and a major cost factor in the office. Humans do make mistakes, but with proper design, the incidence of error and its effects can be minimized. Warning labels and large instruction manuals are signs of failures, attempts to patch up problems that should have been avoided by proper design in the first place. As companies design more for usability and understanding, they will discover a competitive edge, for these principles save customers time and money while increasing morale. As this message spreads, more and more customers will reject the products that are unusable or that lead to frequent error and frustration. ## The Book Title: A Lesson in Design In this book I urge designers to study people, to take their needs and interests into account. I also examine the failures of design and show why even the best-trained and best-motivated designers can go wrong when they listen to their instincts instead of testing their ideas on actual users. Designers know too much about their product to be objective judges: the features they have come to love and prefer may not be understood or preferred by the future customers. The title of this book is a case history of design. A writer is also a designer, a designer of words rather than of things. I liked the original title, The Psychology of Everyday Things, both for the cleverness with which it suggested that inanimate objects had a psychology and for the clever acronym created by the first letters of the words: POET. Rule of thumb: if you think something is clever and sophisticated, beware—it is probably self-indulgence. When Doubleday/Currency approached me about publishing the paperback version of this book, the editors also said, "But of course the title will have to be changed." Title changed? I was horrified. But I decided to follow my own advice and do some research on readers. I discovered that while the academic community liked the title and its cleverness, the business community did not. In fact, business often ignored the book because the title sent the wrong message. Bookstores placed the book in their psychology sections (along with books on sex, love, and self-help). The final nail in the title's coffin came when I was asked to talk to a group of senior executives of a leading manufacturing company. The person who introduced me to the audience praised the book, damned the title, and asked his colleagues to read the book despite the title. Clearly the title had to be redone. Alas, the so-called "installed base