background or supports. What things change? What has changed over the previous state? Where should we be watching or listening to detect any changes? The important things to watch should be visible and clearly marked; the results of any action should be immediately apparent. ## MAKING VISIBLE THE INVISIBLE The principle of visibility is violated over and over again in everyday things. In numerous designs crucial parts are carefully hidden away. Handles on cabinets distract from some design aesthetics, and so they are deliberately made invisible or left out. The cracks that signify the existence of a door can also distract from the pure lines of the design, so these significant cues are also minimized or eliminated. The result can be a smooth expanse of gleaming material, with no sign of doors or drawers, let alone of how those doors and drawers might be operated. Electric switches are often hidden: many electric typewriters have the on/off switch hidden underneath; many computers and computer terminals have the on/off switch in the rear, difficult to find and awkward to use;⁵ and the switches that control kitchen garbage disposal units are often hidden away, sometimes nearly impossible to find. Many systems are vastly improved by the act of making visible what was invisible before. Consider the VCR. "UMPTEEN-DAY-UMPTEEN-EVENT PROGRAMMING. Because time-shifting is so popular, manufacturers and retailers play up a VCR's ability to record automatically. The typical VCR can record four events (video jargon for programs) over a 4-day span. . . . "It's one thing to know that a VCR can record eight events in 14 days. It's quite another to make the machine behave. You have to go through a tedious series of steps to tell the VCR when to start recording, what channel to record, how long to run the tape, and so on. "Some VCR's are much easier to program than others. . . . Best of all, we think, is a feature called on-sçreen programming. Commands that appear on the TV screen help you enter the time, date, and channel of the program you want to tape."6 As the quotation from Consumer Reports indicates, the act of setting up these units to do the recording is horribly complex and difficult. The same article later warns that if you are not careful in your selection,