switch, instead flip a similar-looking one. It happens in industrial plants, aircraft, homes, anywhere. When different actions have similar descriptions, there is a good chance of mishap, especially whenthe operator is experienced and well practiced and therefore not paying full attention, and if there are more important things to do. ## DATA-DRIVEN ERRORS "I was assigning a visitor a room to use. I decided to call the department secretary to tell her the room number. I used the telephone in the alcove outside the room, with the room number in sight. Instead of dialing the secretary's phone number—which I use frequently and know very well—I dialed the room number." Much human behavior is automatic, for example, brushing away an insect. Automatic actions are data driven—triggered by the arrival of the sensory data. But sometimes data-driven activities can intrude into an ongoing action sequence, causing behavior that was not intended. ## ASSOCIATIVE ACTIVATION ERRORS "My office phone rang. I picked up the receiver and bellowed 'Come in' at it."5 prayini pledge avegance., 11 If external data can sometimes trigger actions, so, too, can internal thoughts and associations. The ringing of the telephone and knocking on the door both signal the need to greet someone. Other errors occur from associations among thoughts and ideas. Associative activation errors are the slips studied by Freud; you think something that ought not to be said and then, to your embarrassment, you say it. ## LOSS-OF-ACTIVATION ERRORS '"I have to go to the bedroom before I start working in the dining room. I start going there and realize as I am walking that I have no idea why I am going there. Knowing myself, I keep going, hoping that something in the bedroom will remind me. . . . I get there but still cannot recall what I wanted . . . so I go back to the dining room. There I realize that my glasses are dirty. With great relief I go back to the bedroom, get my handkerchief, and wipe my glasses clean."