there is feedback. If the result of the action is not visible, how can a misaction be detected? Even when a mismatch is noted, the person may not believe that the error occurred. Some trail of the sequence of actions that was performed is valuable. Even when an error has been detected, it may not be clear what the error was. "Alice" was driving a van and noticed that the rearview mirror on the passenger side was not adjusted properly. Alice meant to say to the passenger on the right, "Please adjust the mirror," but instead said "Please adjust the window." The passenger, "Sally," was confused and asked, "What should I do? What do you want?" Alice repeated the request: "Adjust the window for me." The situation continued through several frustrating cycles of conversation and attempts by the passenger to understand just what adjustments should be made to the window. The error-correction mechanism adopted by the driver was to repeat the erroneous sentence more and more loudly. In this example, it was easy to detect that something was wrong but hard to discover what. Alice believed the problem was that she couldn't be understood or heard. She was monitoring the wrong part of the action sequence—she had a problem of level. Actions can be specified at many different levels. Suppose I were driving my car to the bank. At any given moment, the action being performed could be described at many different levels: • Driving to the bank : Turning into the parking lot • Making a right turn · Rotating the steering wheel clockwise : Moving my left hand upward and to the right and my right hand downward : Increasing the tension on the sternocostal portion of the pectoralis major muscle All these levels are active at the same time. The most global description (the one at the top of the list), is called the high-level specification. The more detailed descriptions, the ones at the bottom of the list, are called the low-level specifications. Any one of them might be in error.