It is often possible to detect that the result of an action is not as planned, but then not to know at which level of specification the error has taken place. Problems of level commonly thwart the correction of error. My collection of slips includes several examples in which a person detects a problem but attempts to correct it at the wrong level. One frequent example is the nonworking key, reported to me both for cars and homes. Someone goes to his or her car and the key won't work. The first response is to try again, perhaps holding the key more level or straight. Then the key is reversed, tried upside down. When that fails, the key is examined and perhaps another tried in its stead. Then the door is wiggled, shaken, hit. Finally, the person decides that the lock has broken, and walks around the car to try the other door, at which point it is suddenly clear that this is the wrong car. In all the situations I have examined the error correction mechanism seems to start at the lowest possible level and slowly works its way higher. Whether this is universally true I do not know, but the hypothesis warrants further examination. ## DESIGN LESSONS FROM THE STUDY OF SLIPS Two different kinds of design lessons can be drawn, one for preventing slips before they occur and one for detecting and correcting them when they do occur. In general, the solutions follow directly from the preceding analyses. For example, mode errors are minimized by minimizing modes, or at least by making modes visible. Cars provide a number of examples of how design relates to error. A variety of fluids are required in the engine compartment of an automobile: engine oil, transmission oil, brake fluid, windshield washer solution, radiator coolant, battery water. Putting the wrong fluid into a reservoir could lead to serious damage or even an accident. Automobile manufaçturers try to minimize these errors (a combination of description and mode errors) by making the different compartments look different—using different shapes and different-size openings—and by adding color to the fluids so that they can be distinguished. Here design by and large prevents errors. But, unfortunately, designers seem to prefer to encourage them.