I was in a taxi in Austin, Texas, admiring the large number of new devices in front of the driver. No more simple radio. In its place was a computer display, so that messages from the dispatcher were now printed on the screen. The driver took great delight in demonstrating all the features to me. On the radio transmitter I saw four identicallooking buttons laid out in a row. "Oh," I said, "you have four different radio channels." "Nope," he replied, "three. The fourth button resets all the settings. Then it takes me thirty minutes to get everything all set up properly again." "Hmm,"I said, "I bet you hit that every now and then by accident." "I certainly do," he replied (in his own unprintable words). In computer systems, it is common to prevent errors by requiring confirmation before a command will be executed, especially when the action will destroy a file. But the request is ill timed; it comes just after the person has initiated the action and is still fully content with the choice. The standard interaction goes something like this: usER: Remove file "My-most-important-work." computER: Are you certain you wish to remove the file "My-mostimportant-work"? USER: Yes. cOmPUTER: Are you certain? USER: Yes, of course. comPuter: The file "My-most-important-work" has been removed. USER: Oops, damn. The user has requested deletion of the wrong file but the computer's request for confirmation is unlikely to catch the error; the user is confirming the action, not the file name. Thus asking for confirmation cannot catch all slips. It would be more appropriate to eliminate irreversible actions: in this example, the request to remove à file would be handled by the computer's moving the file to some temporary holding place. Then the user would have time for reconsideration and recovery. At a research laboratory I once directed, we discovered that people would frequently throw away their records and notes, only to discover the next day that they needed them again. We solved the problem by getting seven trash cans and labeling them with the days of the week.