Then the trash can labeled Wednesday would be used only on Wednesdays. At the end of the day it was safely stored away and not emptied until the next Tuesday, just before it was to be used again. People discovered that they kept neater records and books because they no longer hesitated to throw away things that they thought would probably never be used again; they figured it was safe to throw something away, for they still had a week in which to change their minds. But design is often a tradeoff. We had to make room for the six reserve wastebaskets, and we had a never-ending struggle with the janitorial staff, who kept trying to empty all of the wastebaskets every evening. The users of the computer center came to depend upon the "soft" nature of the wastebaskets and would discard things that they otherwise might have kept for a while longer. When there was an error—sometimes on the part of the janitorial staff, sometimes on our part in cycling the wastebaskets properly—then it was a calamity. When you build an error-tolerant mechanism, people come to rely upon it, so it had better be reliable. Mistakes as Errors of Thought Mistakes result from the choice of inappropriate goals. A person makes a poor decision, misclassifies a situation, or fails to take all the relevant factors into account. Many mistakes arise from the vagaries of human thought, often because people tend to rely upon remembered experiences rather than on more systematic analysis. We make decisions based upon what is in our memory; memory is biased toward overgeneralization and overregularization of the commonplace and overemphasis on the discrepant. ## SOME MODELS OF HUMAN THOUGHT Psychologists have chronicled the failures of thought, the nonrationality of real behavior. Even simple tasks can sometimes throw otherwise clever people into disarray. Even though principles of rationality seem as often violated as followed, we still cling to the notion that human thought should be rational, logical, and orderly. Much of law is based upon the concept of rational thought and behavior. Much of economic theory is based upon the model of the rational human who attempts