components (thus the term "network"); and (3) that much of our power for deductive thought comes from using the information in one schema to deduce the properties of another (thus the term "propositional encoding.6 To illustrate the third concept: once I learn that all living animals breathe, I know that any live animal I will ever meet will breathe. I don't have to learn this separately for all animals. We call this the"default value."Unless told otherwise, anything I learn for a general concept applies to all of its instances by default. Default values do not have to apply to everything—I can learn exceptions, such as that all birds fly except for penguins and ostriches. But defaults hold true unless an exception shows otherwise. Deduction is a most useful and powerful property of human memory. ## THE CONNECTIONIST APPROACH We still are a long way from understanding human memory and cognition. Today, in the developing field of cognitive science, two different views are emerging. The traditional view considers thought to be rational, logical, and orderly; this approach uses mathematical logic as the scientific means to explain thought. Adherents of this approach have pioneered the development of schemas as the mechanism of human memory. A newer approach is rooted in the working of the brain itself. Those of us who follow this new approach call it "connectionism,"but it also goes under the names of "neural nets," "neufal models," and "parallel distributed processing." It is an attempt to model the way in which the brain itself is structured, with billions of brain cells connected into groups, many cells connected to tens of thousands of others, many all working at the same time. This approach follows the rules of thermodynamics more than it does the rules of logic. Connectionism is still tentative, still unproven. I believe that it has the potential to explain much of what puzzled us before, but part of the scientific community thinks that it is fundamentally flawed." The brain consists of billions of nerve cells—neurons—each connected to thousands of other cells. Each neuron sends simple signals to the neurons to which it is connected, each signal attempting to increase or decrease the activity of its recipient. The connectionist approach to the study of thought mimics these connections. Each connectionist unit is connected to many other units. The signals are either positive in value (called"activation" signals) or negative in value (called "inhibi-