them, and bias behavior toward them in wholly inappropriate ways. What has this to do with everyday thought? A lot. Everyday thought seems to be based upon past experiences, upon our ability to retrieve an event from the past and use it to model the present. This eventbased reasoning is powerful, yet fundamentally flawed. Because thought is based on what can be recalled, the rare event can predominate. Think about it. Think of your experiences with computers, or VCRs, or home appliances; what probably come to mind are the unusual experiences, things that are discrepant. It doesn't matter that you may have used the device a hundred times successfully—it is the one time you got embarrassed that will come to mind.8 The limitations of human thought processes have important implications for everyday activities, and in fact can be called in to distinguish everyday activities from others. The Structure of Tasks Everyday activities are conceptually simple. We should be able to do most things without having to think about what we're doing. The simplicity lies in the nature of the structure of the tasks. ## WIDE AND DEEP STRUCTURES Consider the game of chess, an activity that is neither everyday nor simple, at least, not for most of us. When it is my turn to play, I have a number of possible moves. For each of my moves, my opponent has a number of possible responses. And for each of my opponent's responses, I have a number of possible counterresponses. The sequences can be represented on a decision tree, a diagram that in this case takes the current board position as a starting point and shows each of my possible moves, each of the possible countermoves, each possible counter-counter move, each possible counter-counter-counter move, and so on, as deep as time and energy permit. The size of the tree for chess is immense, for the number of choices increases exponentially. Suppose that at each spot there are 8 possible moves. At that spot I must consider 8 initial moves for me, 8 × 8 = 64 replies of my opponent, 64 × 8 = 512 replies I can make, 512 × 8 = 4,096 possible replies by my opponent, and then 4,096 × 8 = 32,768 more possibili-