ties for me. As you can see, the decision tree gets large rapidly: looking ahead five moves means considering over 30,ooo possibilities. The tree is characterized by a vast, spreading network of possibilities. There isn't space here for the decision tree for chess. But even a simple game like tic-tac-toe (or naughts and crosses) has a similar structure, shown in figure 5.1. That decision tree for chess is even wider and deeper—wide in the sense that at each point in the tree there are many alternatives, so that the tree spreads out over a considerable area; deep in the sense that most branches of the tree go on for a considerable distance. Everyday activities don't require the kind of complex analyses required for something like chess. In most everyday activities, we need only examine the alternatives and act. Everyday structures are either shallow or narrow.9 ## SHALLOW STRUCTURES The menu of an ice cream store provides a good example of a shallow structure (figure 5.2). There are many alternative actions, but each is simple; there are few decisions to make after the single top-level choice. The major problem is to decide which action to do. Difficulties arise from competing alternatives, not from any prolonged search, problem solving, or trial and error. In shallow structures, there's no problem of planning or depth of analysis. $$
\sin \alpha + \mu _ { 1 } = \tan \alpha + \beta + \gamma
$$ ## NARROW STRUCTURES A cookbook recipe is a good example of a narrow structure (figure 5.3). A narrow structure arises when there are only a small number of alternatives, perhaps one or two. If each possibility leads to only one or two further choices, then the resulting tree structure can be said to be narrow and deep. Just as the ice cream store menu is an example of a shallow structure, the multicourse, fixed menu meal can serve as an example of a deep structure. Although there may be many courses, for each course the diner is either automatically served the relevant dish or offered the choice of one or two dishes. The only action required is to accept one or to refuse: no deep thought is required.