<table><tr><td>jnd Cabrillo Sea Bass</td><td>jnd Jalepeño Sauce</td></tr><tr><td>Saute onion and garlic. Heat 2 bottles of beer to boiling.</td><td>Chop 1 large onion.</td></tr><tr><td>Place sea bass in pan.</td><td>Peel and chop 6 tomatillos. Slice 2 Jalapeño chiles lengthwise.</td></tr><tr><td>Pour beer over fish.</td><td>Peel and quarter 2 tomatoes.</td></tr><tr><td>Add onion, garlic, and mushrooms. Add 4 whole garlic cloves, unpeeled.</td><td>Place onion, tomatillos, chile, and</td></tr><tr><td>Add cilantro.</td><td>tomatoes in sauce pan. Cover with 1 cup red wine.</td></tr><tr><td>Poach for 10 minutes (approx.)</td><td>Simmer for 15 minutes to 2 hours (the</td></tr><tr><td>Remove fish from pan.</td><td>longer the milder).</td></tr><tr><td>Reduce stock over high heat.</td><td>Add cilantro.</td></tr><tr><td>Put brown rice on serving plate.</td><td>Serve.</td></tr><tr><td>Place fish over rice.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Cover fish with stock and</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>jndJalepeño sauce.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table> 5.3 Deep and Narrow Decision Tree. Few decisions need be made at any level, but to complete the task, many steps (levels) must be followed. This decision structure is characteristic of any task that has a large number of steps, each of which is relatively straightforward. An example is the steps required to follow a recipe, such as my favorite fish recipe. the car is not in gear, start the engine, and so on. This is a deep structure, but it is narrow. There is a long series of steps, but at each point, there are few, if any, alternatives to consider. Any task that involves a sequence of activities where the action to be done at any point is determined by its place in the sequence is an example of a narrow structure. The modern superhighway offers the driver a series of exits. The driver either starts on the road with a predetermined exit in mind or else must decide at each exit whether to stay on the road or not. In fact, road designers attempt to linearize and simplify the decision-making tasks of the driver: the relevant information is fed slowly and sequentially to the driver to minimize the mental workload and the need for overlapping processing. Freeway design is by now a science, with a well-defined set of procedures and with societies, books, and journals devoted to it. Different countries of the world have reached different solutions to the problem of guiding the driver. A rather complete analysis was done in Britain for the design of the M series motorways. Each motorway exit has a carefully programmed sequence of six signs. The first precedes the exit by one mile and is