intended to serve an alerting function, as well as to present route number information. The second precedes the exit by a half mile and gives the major towns reached by the exit (but no route number information). The third precedes the exit by a quarter mile and adds the "forward destination"(where you eventually get to if you don't exit). The fourth sign is at the exit and provides major route numbers and a few town names. The fifth sign is on the motorway beyond the exit; it is intended to play a "confirmatory" role: it displays the forward destinations and their distances. The sixth sign is on the exit ramp, in colors the reverse of all the preceding signs; it shows all the local destinations, usually on a map of the roundabout (traffic circle) found at most exits.10 ## THE NATURE OF EVERYDAY TASKS Most tasks of daily life are routine, requiring little thought or planning—things like bathing and dressing, brushing teeth, eating at the table, getting to work, meeting with friends, going to the theater. These are the daily activities that occupy most of our time, and there are many of them. Yet each, by itself, is relatively simple: either shallow or narrow. What are not everyday activities? Those with wide and deep structures, the ones that require considerable conscious planning and thought, deliberate trial and error: trying first this approach, then that—backtracking. Unusual tasks include writing a long document or letter, making a major or complex purchase, computing income tax, planning a special meal, arranging a vacation trip. And don't forget intellectual games: bridge, chess, poker, crossword puzzles, and so on. The tasks most frequently studied by psychologists are not everyday tasks. They are things like chess or algebraic puzzles, which require much thought and effort; but indeed, these pursuits have just the sort of wide and deep structures that do not characterize everyday activities. In general, we find wide and deep structures in games and leisure activities, where the strúcture is devised so as to occupy the mind or to make the task deliberately (and artificially) difficult. After all, what challenge would there be if games such as chess or bridge were conceptually simple? How would interest in a mystery novel—or any novel for that matter—be sustained if the plot were straightforward and the