8 1 6 3 5 7 4 9 2 that—comparing, rationalizing, finding explanations. Formal logic, mathematics, decision theory: these are the tools of conscious thought. Both conscious and subconscious modes of thought are powerful and essential aspects of human life. Both can provide insightful leaps and creative moments. And both are subject to errors, misconceptions, and failures. Conscious thought tends to be slow and serial. Conscious processing seems to involve short-term memory and is thereby limited in the amount that can be readily available. Try consciously to solve the children's game called tic-tac-toe or naughts and crosses and you will discover that you can't, not if you try to explore all the alternatives. How can I claim that a trivial children's game cannot be done in the head? Because you don't really play by thinking it through; you play by memorizing the patterns,-by transforming the game into something simpler. Try playing the following game: Start with the nine numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. You and your opponent alternate turns, each time taking a number. Each number can be taken only once, so if your opponent has selected a number, you cannot also take it. The first person to have any three numbers that total 15 wins the game. This is a difficult game. You will find it is very hard to play without writing it down. But this game is identical to tic-tac-toe. Why should it be hard if tic-tac-toe is easy? To see the relationship between the game of 15 and tic-tac-toe, simply arrange the nine digits into the following pattern: Now you can see the connection: any three numbers that solve the 15 problem also solve tic-tac-toe. And any tic-tac-toe solution is also a solution to 15. So why is one easy and the other hard? Because tic-tactoe takes advantage of perceptual abilities, and because you simplify tic-tac-toe by changing it in several ways, by taking advantage of symmetries, and by memorizing ("learning") the basic opening moves and their appropriäte responses. In the end, unless someone makes a slip, two players will always draw, neither one winning. The transformations of tic-tac-toe have made a complex task into an