everyday one. The everyday version doesn't require much mental effort, it does not require planning and thinking, and it is boring. Which is exactly what everyday tasks ought to be—boring, so that we can put our conscious attention on the important things of life, not the routine. Conscious thought is severely limited by the small capacity of shortterm memory. Five or six items is all that can be kept available at any one moment. But subconscious thought is one of the tools of the conscious mind, and the memory limitation can be overcome if only an appropriate organizational structure can be found. Take fifteen unrelated things and it is not possible to keep them in conscious memory at once. Organize them into a structure and it is easy, for only that one structure has to be kept in conscious memory. As a result of this power of organization to overcome the limits of working memory, explanation and understanding become essential components of conscious thought: with understanding and explanation, the number of things that can be kept consciously in mind expands enormously. Now consider how mistakes might be made: by mismatch; by taking the current situation and falsely matching it with something in the past. Although we are really good at finding examples from the past to match the present, these examples are biased in one of two ways: toward the regularities of the past—the prototypical situation—or toward the unique, discrepant event. But suppose the current event is different from all that has been experienced before: it is neither common nor unique, it is simply rare. We won't deal well with it: we are apt to classify the rare with either the common or the unique, and either of these choices is wrong. The same powers that make us so good at dealing with the common and the unique lead to severe error with the rare. ## EXPLAINING AWAY ERRORS A reformed thief, telling of his success, put it this way: "I'm telling you . . . if I had a hundred dollars for every time I heard a dog owner tell their dog to 'shut up . . . go lie down,'while I was right outside their window, I'd be a millionaire."11 Mistakes, especially when they involve misinterpreting the situation, can take a very long time to be discovered. For one thing, the interpretation is quite reasonable at the time. This is a special problem