Fischhoff presented people with a number of situations and asked them to predict what would happen: they were correct only at the chance level. He then presented the same situation along with the actual outcome to another group of people, asking them to state how likely the outcome was: when the actual outcome was known, it appeared to be plausible and likely, whereas the others appeared unlikely. When the actual outcome was not known, the various alternatives had quite different plausibility. It is a lot easier to determine what is obvious after it has happened. ## SOCIAL PRESSURE AND MISTAKES A subtle issue that seems to figure in many accidents is social pressure. Although it may not at first seem to be relevant in design, it has strong influence on everyday behavior. In industrial settings social pressures can lead to misinterpretation, mistakes, and accidents. For understanding mistakes, social structure is every bit as essential as physical structure. Look at airline accidents, not everyday activities for most of us, but subject to the same principles. In 1983, Korean Air flight o07 strayed over the Soviet Union and got shot down, probably because of an error in programming the flight path into the inertial navigation system (INS). Although each checkpoint was discrepant, apparently the deviations were easily explained away if the crew substituted for each point the checkpoint reading for the previous INS point. But there were significant social pressures operating as well. The crew of flight oo7 probably misprogrammed the INS, but the INS couldn't be reprogrammed in flight: if an error were detected the aircraft would have to go back to the original airport, land (jettisoning fuel to get to a safe landing weight), and then reset the INS and take off again—an expensive proposition. Three Korean Air flights had returned to their airport in the six months preceding the flight oo7 incident, and the airline had told its pilots that the next pilot who returned would be punished, Was this a factor in the accident? It's hard to know, but the design of the INS sounds badly deficient. The social pressures on the crew not to find (or admit to) an error in the INS were clearly strong. But punishment for following a safety procedure is never wise. The proper approach would be to redesign either the INS's or the procedures for using them.14 The real culprit, almost always, is the design. Design that makes it