Error is often thought of as something to be avoided or something done by unskilled or unmotivated people. But everyone makes errors. Designers make the mistake of not taking error into account. Inadvertently, they can make it easy to err and difficult or impossible to discover error or to recover from it. Consider the London stock market story that opened this chapter. The system was poorly designed. It should not be possible for one person, with one simple error, to cause such widespread damage. Here is what designers should do: 1 1. Understand the causes of error and design to minimize those causes. 2. Make it possible to reverse actions—to "undo" them—or make it harder to do what cannot be reversed. 3. Make it easier to discover the errors that do occur, and make them easier to correct. 4. Change the attitude toward errors. Think of an object's user as attempting to do a task, getting there by imperfect approximations. Don't think of the user as making errors; think of the actions as, approximations of what is desired. When someone makes an error, there usually is good reason for it. If it was a mistake, the information available was probably incomplete or misleading. The decision was probably sensible at the time. If it was a slip, it was probably due to poor design or distraction. Errors are usually understandable and logical, once you think through their causes. Don't punish the person for making errors. Don't take offense. But most of all, don't ignore it. Try to design the system to allow for errors. Realize that normal behavior isn't always accurate. Design so that errors are easy to discover and corrections are possible. ## HOW TO DEAL WITH ERROR—AND HOW NOT TO Consider the error of locking your keys into your car. Some cars have made this error much less likely. You simply can't lock the doors (not easily, anyway) except by using the key. So you're pretty much forced