time ago, the button that activated the starter motor was separate from the ignition key, so that it was possible to attempt to start the car without the keys; the error was made frequently. In most modern automobiles, the starter switch is activated by turning the key—an effective forcing function that makes you use the key to do the operation. There is no analogous forcing function for removing the key upon leaving the automobile. As we have already seen, those automobiles that have door locks that can be operated only by a key (from outside the vehicle) do introduce a forcing function: if you want to lock the door you can't leave the key in the car. If a forcing function is really desired, it is usually possible to find one, although at some cost for normal behavior. It is important to think through the implications of that cost—to decide whether people will deliberately disable the forcing function. The history of seatbelts in autos provides a good example. Despite all the evidence that seatbelts are an effective means of saving lives, some people dislike them enough that they refuse to wear them, probably because the perceived risk is so much less than the actual, statistical risk. For a short period, the United States tried a forcing function on seatbelts: a special interlock was installed on each new car. If the driver's and passengers' belts were not fastened, the car would not start (and a buzzer would sound). This forcing function was so disliked that most drivers had their mechanics disconnect it. The law was quickly changed. There seemed to be three problems. First, many people did not want to wear seatbelts, and they resented the mechanical forcing function. Second, the forcing function couldn't distinguish legitimate cases in which the seatbelt should not be buckled from illegitimate ones. Thus, if you wanted to carry a package in the passenger's seat, the weightsensing element in the seat registered a person, so the car wouldn't start unless the passenger seat's buckle was fastened. Third, the mechanisms were not reliable, so they often failed—buzzing, stopping the engine, and being an overall nuisance. Those people who couldn't figure out how to disconnect the forcing function simply buckled the belts permanently, fastening the buckle when the seat was unoccupied and stuffing it under the seat. So if a passenger really wanted to use the belt, it couldn't be done. Moral: it isn't easy to force unwanted behavior upon people. And if you are going to use a forcing function, make sure