door. So to, get out of the cubicle, you have to remove whatever is on the shelf and raise it out of the way. And that forces you to remember your packages. Clever design. It is common to forget items. Examples spring readily to mind: : Making copies of a document, but leaving the original inside the machine and walking off with only the copy. . Using a bank or credit card to withdraw money from an automatic teller machine, then walking off without the card. This was a frequent enough error that many machines now have a forcing function: you must remove the card before the money will be delivered. Of course, you then can walk off without your money, but this is less likely than forgetting the card because money is the goal of using the machine. The possibility exists so the forcing function isn't perfect. • Leaving a child behind at a rest stop during a car trip. I also heard about a new mother who left her infant in the dressing room of a department store. • Losing a pen because it was taken out to write a note or a check in some public location, then put down for a moment while doing some other task—such as giving the check to the salesperson. The pen is forgotten in the activities of putting away the checkbook, picking up the goods, talking to the salesperson or friends, and so on. Or the reverse: borrowing a pen, using it, and then putting it away in pocket or purse, even though it is someone else's; this slip is an example of a capture error. Forcing functions don't always show up where they should. Sometimes their absence causes all sorts of unnecessary confusion. Read the caution statement from the game instructions shown in figure 5.6. All those exclamation marks! And the caution is repeated throughout the instruction manual. It won't do any good. The Nintendo Entertainment System is meant to be used by children. The instruction manual probably won't be around. Even if it is, a group of active children, anxious to try a different game, won't bother with it. I watched my own child follow the instruction faithfully for several days, then fail when asked to stop playing and come to dinner. I forgot on the few attempts I made to master the game. The only possible virtue of the warning is to protect the manufacturer: when the children repeatedly burn out the electronic circuits, the company can disclaim liability, asserting that the children violated the instructions.