Proper design calls for a forcing function here. There are several viable schemes. The cover over the game pack compartment could control an interlock, so that it automatically turned off the power whenever it was opened. Or the power switch could move a lever blocking the top of the game pack compartment, so that the packs could not be removed or inserted unless the lever were out of the way, turning off the power. There are other possibilities. My point is, of course, that the design should have included one; without the forcing function, failure to heed the warning is almost guaranteed. A Design Philosophy There are lots of ways for a designer to deal with errors.17 The critical thing, however, is to approach the topic with the proper philosophy. The designer shouldn't think of a simple dichotomy between errors and correct behavior; rather, the entire interaction should be treated as a cooperative endeavor between person and machine, one in which misconceptions can arise on either side. This philosophy is much easier to implement on something like a computer which has the ability to make decisions on its own than on things like doors and power plants, which do not have such intelligence. But the philosophy of user-centered system design still holds. Think of the user's point of view. Assume that every possible mishap will happen, so protect against it. Make actions reversible. Try to make them less costly. All the required principles have been thoroughly discussed in this book. : Put the required knowledge in the world. Don't require all the knowledge to be in the head. Yet do allow for more efficient operation when the user has learned the operations, has gotten the knowledge in the head. • Use the power of natural and artificial constraints: physical, logical, semantic, and cultural. Use forcing functions and natural mappings. • Narrow the gulfs of execution and evaluation. Make things visible, both for executión and evaluation. On the execution side, make the options readily available. On the evaluation side, make the results of each action apparent. Make it possible to determine the system state readily, easily, and accurately, and in a form consistent with the person's goals, intentions, and expectations.