figure 6.1: see that on the one telephone the buttons cannot reach the ground and so are not depressed. A small feature, but an important one. Economic pressures have made the newer telephones lighter, less expensive, and less sturdy—throwaway phones, they are often called. And the protective shield? Often as not, there is none—in this case not because of cost, but because the new designers probably never thought of it, probably never realized its function. The result? This scenario, repeated in office over office. Mark is sitting at his desk when the phone rings. "Hello," he answers. "Yeah, I can help you—let me get out the manual." He reaches, pulling the telephone with him. Bang! Crash! The phone falls on the floor, hanging itself up. "Damn," mutters Mark, "I don't even know who that was." ## THE TYPEWRITER: A CASE HISTORY IN THE EVOLUTION OF DESIGN "Among all the mechanical inventions for which the age is noted, none, perhaps, has more rapidly come into general use than the typewriter. . . . The time is coming when it will almost, or quite as much, supersede the steel pen as that has the good, gray goose quill."3 The history of the typewriter is the story of dedicated inventors in many countries, each striving to develop a machine for rapid writing. They tried many versions in their struggle to get the one that fit all the constraints—that worked, could be manufactured at reasonable cost, and could be used. Consider the typewriter keyboard, with its arbitrary, diagonally sloping arrangement of keys and its even more arbitrary arrangement of letters on the keys. The current standard keyboard was designed by Charles Latham Sholes in the 1870s. The design is called the "qwerty" keyboard (because in the American version the top row of letters begins with "qwerty"), or sometimes the Sholes keyboard. The Sholes typewriter was not the first, but it was the most successful of the early versions; it eventually became the Remington typewriter, the model upon which most manual typewriters were constructed. Why such a weird keyboard?