The design of the keyboard has a long and peculiar history. Early typewriters experimented with a wide variety of layouts, using three basic themes. One was circular, with the letters laid out alphabetically; the operator would find the proper spot and depress a lever, lift a rod, or do whatever other mechanical operation the device required. Another popular layout was like the piano keyboard, with the letters laid out in a long row; some of the early keyboatds, including an early version by Sholes, even had black and white keys. Both the circular layout and the piano keyboard proved awkward. In the end, a third arrangement was adopted by all: a rectangular arrangement of keys, still in alphabetical order. The levers manipulated by the keys were large and ungainly, and the size, spacing, and arrangement of the keys were dictated by these mechanical considerations, not by the characteristics of the human hand. Why did the alphabetical ordering change? To overcome a mechanical problem. When the typist went too quickly the typebars would collide,jamming the mechanism. The solution was to change the locations of the keys: letters such as i and e that were often typed in succession were placed on opposite sides of the machine so that their bars would not collide.4 Other typewriting technologies did not follow the qwerty arrangement. Typesetting machines (such as the Linotype machine) use a completely different layout; the Linotype keyboard is called "shrdlu," after the pattern of keys it follows, and is modeled after the relative frequency of letters in English. This was how hand printers arranged the letters that they would remove from bins and insert manually into the printing forms. Ah, yes, the natural evolution of design. Not all early keyboards had a backspace, and the "tabulation" key ("tab" on modern keyboards) was a revolutionary breakthrough. The first typewriters could print only upper case letters. The àddition of lower case letters was, at first, accomplished by adding a new key for each lower case letter, so in effect there were two separate keyboards. Some early typewriters organized the keys for upper case differently than for lower case. Imagine how difficult it would be to learn that keyboard! It took years to develop the shift key so that both upper and lower case letters could share the same key. This was a nontrivial invention, combining mechanical ingenuity with a dual-faced typebar. In the end, the keyboard was designed through an evolutionary process, but the main driving forces were mechanical. Modern keyboards do not have the same problems; jamming isn't a possibility with