tip). The cap is made of two kinds of plastic and one kind of metal. The inside of the cap has a number of subtle indentations and internal structures that clearly match up with corresponding parts of the pen body, both to hold the cap on firmly and to prevent the felt tip from drying out. There are more parts and variables than I would ever have imagined. The pen's designer must be aware of hundreds of requirements. Make the pen too thin, and it will not be strong enough to stand up to the hard use of schoolchildren. Make the middle section too thick, and it can neither be grasped properly by the fingers nor controlled with enough precision. Yet people with arthritic hands may need a thick body because they can't close their fingers entirely. Leave out the tiny hole near the tip, and pressure changes in the atmosphere will cause the ink to leak out. And what of those who use the pen as a measuring device or as a mechanical implement to pry, poke, stab, and twist? For example, the instructions for the clock in my automobile say to set it by depressing the recessed button with the tip of a ball-point pen. How could the pen designer have known about this? What obligation does the designer have to consider varied and obscure uses? ## DESIGNING FOR SPECIAL PEOPLE There is no such thing as the average person. This poses a particular problem for the designer, who usually must come up with a single design for everyone; the task is difficult when all sorts of people are expected to use the item. The designer can consult handbooks with tables that show average arm reach and seated height, how far the average person can stretch backward while seated, and how much room is needed for average hips, knees, and elbows. Physical anthropometry the field is called. With the data the designer can try to meet the size requirements for almost everyone, say for the 9oth, 95th, or even the 99th percentile. Suppose you design a product for the 95th percentile, that is, for everyone except the 5 percent of people who are smaller or larger. You're leaving out a lot of people. If the United States has 250 million people, 5 percent is 12.5 million. Even if you design for the 99th percentile you'll leave out 1 percent of the population—2.5 million. Consider typists. Typists need to have their hands comfortably poised above the keyboard. Because of the thickness of typewriters,