and our ability to attend to several things at once or to switch rapidly among competing events decreases. High-speed highways pose special problems for the aged. An automobile traveling at high speed on a crowded highway at dusk is already pushing the limit of the driver's capabilities. The elderly are pushed beyond their limit. The solution adopted by many elderly drivers is to travel very slowly, to adjust their speed to what their processing can handle comfortably. Unfortunately, the slow driver poses a hazard to other drivers: on high-speed highways, things are considerably safer if everyone travels at approximately the same speed. I see no simple solution to this problem. In many cities, especially in the United States, there is no easy way to get from one place to another except by private automobile. Yet the elderly can't be expected to stay home. The solution has got to be either increased public transportation, or supplied drivers, or perhaps special streets or highway lanes with slower speed limits. Automated cars, the dream of science fiction writers and city planners, may still one day come about; they would take care of this problem. Those of you who are young, do not smirk. Our abilities begin to deteriorate relatively early, starting in our mid-twenties. By our midforties our eyes can no longer adjust sufficiently to focus over the entire range of distances, so most of us need reading glasses or bifocals. Bifocals make it harder to do fine work, harder to use computer terminals (whose screens seem to be designed for twenty-year-olds). I type these words seated in front of my computer terminal, head tilted upward at an uncomfortable angle so that I can see the screen out of the bottom half of my eyeglasses. I can't figure out how to get comfortable. Lower the screen and it gets in the way of my typing. Use special "computer" glasses adjusted for screen size and distance, and I can't read all the notes and outlines scattered about me at various distances. Fortunately, I can change the size of the type that appears on the screen. I use a twelve-point font, one whose letters are comfortably large. Alas, this is a tradeoff, for the larger the letters on the screen, the less material can fit. Change to nine-point font and I can see 78 percent more material (33 percent more lines, each with 33 percent more words): a non-trivial difference when I'm trying to write long sections. But the letters are 33 percent smaller, making it harder both to read and to correct them. At least my computer allows flexibility in type size; most do not.