By the time we're sixty, enough stray material has scattered about in our eyes that visual contrast is diminished, enough to be one of the major reasons that airline pilots are forced to retire at this age. At the age of sixty a person is still in good mental and physical shape, and the accumulated wisdom of the years leads to superior performance in many tasks. But physical strength is lessened, the agility of the body decreased, and the speed of some operations lessened. In a world where the average age is increasing, sixty is still relatively young: most sixtyyear-olds have another twenty years to live, many have forty. We need to design with these people in mind—think of it as designing with our future selves in mind. There is no simple solution, no one size fits all. But designing for flexibility helps. Flexibility in the size of the images on computer screens, in the sizes, heights, and angles of tables and chairs. Flexibility on our highways, perhaps making sure there are alternative routes with different speed limits. Fixed solutions will invariably fail with some people; flexible solutions at least offer a chance for those with special needs. ## SELECTIVE ATTENTION: THE PROBLEM OF FOCUS The ability of conscious attention is limited: focus on one thing and you reduce your attention to others. Psychologists call the phenomenon "selective attention."Excessive focus leads to a kind of tunnel vision, where peripheral items are ignored. I watched a consumer show on British television on toasters that caught fire when the bread was too dry. The consumer representatives pointed out that people often inserted their fingers, a fork, or a knife into the toaster to extract the toast. This was very dangerous (even more dangerous in Britain than in the United States because the voltage is 24o volts, not the 12o of the United States). Yet some toasters had exposed wires very close to the top, quite reachable by the finger or the metal utensil. The consumer representatives argued that manufacturers should not have placed the wires so close to the opening. The manufacturers denied that their toasters were dangerous. "Why," they asked, "would someone stick their fingers or a knife into a toaster?" Certainly the instructions warned them not to. Certainly they must know it is dangerous. To the designer, such an action is so unthinkable that prevention did not enter into the design considerations.