Consider the matter from the user's point of view. The person sees a problem—stuck or burning toast—and focuses on the solution—to extract it. The danger does not come to mind. To my own surprise, I did the same thing the very next day. I inserted two crumpets into the toaster; a few minutes later, smoke was pouring out. Quick, I ran over to the toaster, popped up the crumpets as far as they would go, and then quickly (but carefully?) inserted a knife blade into the toaster, down the side, to lift them out. What was I doing? Selective attention: attend to the immediate problem, forget the rest. Sure I was being careful, but that is probably what the people who electrocuted themselves also believed. It just didn't seem dangerous, that's all. The same story is repeated over and over again. Underwater divers focus so much on struggling to the surface that they fail to release the lead weights (on a special easy-to-release belt) that are keeping them underwater. People who are fleeing a fire push hard against a door, harder and harder, failing to recognize that the door opens by pulling. Someone is trapped behind a door, pushing against the left side when it opens from the right. Motorcyclists have their helmets strapped to their bike, not their head. People don't use seatbelts, or they drive too fast, because it is inconvenient to do otherwise and because they don't see the danger. When there is a problem, people are apt to focus on it to the exclusion of other factors. The designer must design for the problem case, making other factors more salient, or easier to get to, or perhaps less necessary. That's what the forcing functions of chapter 5 were all about. Make the power cutoff switch of the toaster a forcing function, so that a person can't stick something into the toaster without flipping a power cutoff switch (which should be easy to get to and use). Or change the design of the wiring and heating elements so that lethal elements cannot be reached from outside, no matter what flesh or metal gets put into the toaster. A corollary principle is that designers must guard against the problems of focus in their own design. Did their attention to one set of variables cause them to neglect another? Did safety suffer for usability? Usability for aesthetics? Aesthetics for manufacturability?