It may be hard to believe that an everyday water faucet could need an instruction manual. I saw one, this time at the meeting of the British Psychological Society in Sheffield, England. The participants stayed in dormitories. Upon checking into one of these, the Ranmoor House, a guest was given a pamphlet that gave useful information: where the churches were, the times of meals, the location of the post office, and how to work the taps (faucets). "The taps on the washhand basin are operated by pushing down gently." When it was my turn to speak at the conference, I asked the audience about those taps. How many had trouble using it? Polite, restrained titterings from the audience. How many tried to turn the handle? A large show of hands. How many had to seek help? A few honest folks raised their hands. Afterward, one woman came up to me and said that she had given up and had to walk up and down the halls until she found someone who could explain the taps to her. A simple sink, a simple-looking faucet. But it looks like it should be turned, not pushed (figure 6.6 A). If you want the faucet to be pushed, make it look like it should be pushed. It can be done: the airlines do it right (figure 6.6 B). Pity the poor house porters, always getting calls for help about the faucets. So instructions were put in the orientation sheet. Who would ever think of having to read instructions before using a faucet? At least put them on the faucets, where they can't be missed. But when simple things need instructions, it is a certain sign of poor design. Why are faucets so hard to get right? Let us take a closer look at the two major variables (they will give us quite enough to do). The person who uses the faucets cares about two things: the water temperature and volume. Two things to control. We should be able to do that with two controls, one for each. Except that water comes in two pipes, hot and cold, and so the two things that are easiest to controlvolume of hot water and volume of cold water—are not the two things we want to have controlled. Hence the designer's dilemma. There are three problems; two relate to the mapping of intentions to actions, and the third is the problem of evaluation: