Sometimes a designer messes with the convention on purpose. The human body has a mirror-image symmetry, says this pseudopsychologist. So if the left hand moves clockwise, why, the right hand should move counterclockwise. Watch out, your plumber or architect may install a bathroom fixture where clockwise rotation turns the hot water off and the cold water on. Or is it the other way around? No matter, as you try to control the water temperature, soap running down over your eyes, groping to change the water control with one hand, soap or shampoo clutched in the other, you are guaranteed to get it wrong. The water is freezing, so you try to increase the amount of hot. You will probably turn on the shower, or the bath, or open the drain (or shut it), or turn off the hot water completely, or scald yourself. Whoever invented that mirror-image nonsense should be forced to take a shower. Yes, there is some logic to it. To be a bit fair to the inventor of the scheme, it does work reasonably well as long as you always use the faucets by placing both hands on them at the same time, adjusting both controls simultaneously. It fails miserably, however, when one hand is used to alternate between the two controls. Then you cannot remember which direction does what. What about the evaluation problem? Feedback in the use of most faucets is rapid and direct, so turning them the wrong way is easy to discover and correct—the evaluate-action cycle is easy to traverse. As a result, the discrepancy from normal rules is often not noticed. Unless you are in the shower and the feedback occurs when you scald yourself. Older sinks have two separate spouts. Here evaluation is difficult. You can wave your hand rapidly back and forth between the spouts, hoping thereby to get a good mix of temperatures, or you can fill up the basin, adjusting the amount of hot and cold water so that the accumulating mixture' reaches the desired temperature. Usually you settle for anything in the neighborhood. Each problem alone isn't a big deal. But the total sum of all the trivial mal-design unnecessarily adds to the trauma of everyday life. Now consider the modern single-spout, single-control faucet. Technology to the rescue. Move the control one way, it adjusts temperature. Move it another, it adjusts volume. Hurrah! We control exactly the variables of interest, and the mixing spout solves the evaluation problem. Yes, these new faucets are beautiful. Sleek, elegant, prize winning.