Unusable. They solved one set of problems only to create yet another. The mapping problems now predominate. : Which control is associated with which action? : What operations do you apply to the controls? The problem is that it is very difficult to figure out which part of the sleek faucet is the control. And even if you figure that out, it is hard to figure out in which direction it moves. And once you figure that out, it is hard to figure out which direction controls which action. And when these fancy, multipurpose, sleek designs also control the basin plug and the diversion of water to shower or bath, disaster awaits. There are two problems here. First, in the name of elegance, the moving parts sometimes meld invisibly into the faucet structure, making it nearly impossible even to find the controls, let alone figure out which way they move or what they control. Second, in the name of novelty, the new designs have forfeited the power of cultural constancy. Users don't want each new design to use a different method for controlling the water. Users need standardization. If all makers of faucets could agree on a standard set of motions to control amount and temperature (how about up and down to control amount—up meaning increase—and left and right to control temperature—left meaning hot?), then we could all learn the standards once, and forever afterward use the knowledge for every new. faucet we encountered. If you can't put the knowledge on the device, then develop a cultural constraint: standardize what has to be kept in the head. There could be small variations in the standard. Suppose a designer wanted temperature to be controlled by a knob that turned rather than a lever that moved left and right. Fortunately, there is a natural mapping that relates turning to direction: a clockwise turning is the same as moving to the right—getting colder—and a counterclockwise turning is the same as moving to the left—hotter. Technological development never ceases. There is yet another solution to the control problem, one that has a slight virtue over the others: it is cheaper. One control turns the water on or off and lets you adjust either temperature or volume, but not both (figure 6.8). All you have to do is to locate the control and operate it. Think of all the mental energy and confusion you have been saved. We finally have a control that is truly easy to use. Success.