Wait, we really do want to control both amount and temperature independently. This solution gives us only one control. So we can adjust temperature, but we get out whatever amount of water the designer thought was good for us. Or we can adjust the amount while getting an arbitrary temperature. The story of progress. Some variants on this faucet control only on or off: you have control over neither volume nor temperature. Sometimes there is no visible means to turn on the water. How does the novice user realize that one is supposed to wave the hands under the faucet? There is no sign of the required operation, no relevant information in the world. Perhaps you have a big sign: "Do not adjust controls, simply place hand under spout."The sign ruins the elegance, doesn't it? Interesting choice—understandability or elegance. Of course, if such faucets became common, then people would know how to use them and the signs could come down. Someday. Two Deadly Temptations for the Designer Let's return to the designer's problems. I've mentioned the time and economic pressures on them. Now let me tell you of two deadly temptations that await the unwary, temptations that lead toward products that are overly complex, products that drive users to distraction—I call these creeping featurism and the worshipping of false images. ## CREEPING FEATURISM I recently attended a demonstration of a new word processing pro-/gram, held in a large, crowded auditorium. A representative from the company sat in front of the computer, a video projector putting a large image of the computer screen onto the movie screen. The audience was skeptical: they were experts and knew the limitations of such programs. The demonstrator was smooth and convincing, composing an outline, expanding it into text, indenting the paragraphs, numbering them, changing their styles, flipping into a drawing program, drawing a figure, inserting the drawing into the text with the text flowing neatly around the drawing."You want two columns?" asked the demonstra-