abstract language, one that specifies the internal flow of control and movement of information, but one that is not particularly suited for the needs of the user. Specialized programmers work in these languages to instruct the system to perform its operations. The task is complex, and programmers must have a variety of skills and talents. The design of a program requires a combination of expertise, including technical skills, knowledge of the task, and knowledge of the needs and abilities of the users. Programmers should not be responsible for the computer's interaction with the user; that is not their expertise, nor should it be. Many existing programs for user applications are too abstract, requiring actions that make sense for the demands of the computer and to the computer professional but that are not cohesive, sensible, necessary, or understandable to the everyday user. To make the system easier to use and to understand requires a large amount of extra work. I sympathize with the problems of the programmer, but I cannot excuse the general lack of concern for the users. ## HOW TO DO THINGS WRONG Ever sit down to a typical computer? If so, you have encountered "the tyranny of the blank screen." The person sits in front of the computer screen, ready to begin. Begin what? How? The screen is either completely blank or contains noninformative symbols or words that give no hint of what is expected. There is a typewriterlike keyboard, but there is no reason to suppose that one key is preferable to any other. Anyway, isn't it true that one wrong keystroke can blow up the machine? Or destroy valuable data? Or accidentally get connected to some top-secret data bank and then be investigated by the Secret Service? Who knows what danger lurks in the keypress? It is almost as frightening as being taken to a party filled with strange people, being led to the center of the room and let go. Your host disappears, saying: "Make yourself at home. I'm sure there are lots of people you can talk to."Not me. I retreat to the fringes and try to find something to read. What is the problem? Nothing special, just more of everything. The special powers of the computer can amplify all the usual problems to new levels of difficulty. If you set out to make something difficult to use, you could probably do no better than to copy the designers of