modern computer systems. Do you want to do things wrong? Here is what to do: • Make things invisible. Widen the Gulf of Execution: give no hints to the operations expected. Establish a Gulf of Evaluation: give no feedback, no visible results of the actions just taken. Exploit the tyranny of the blank screen. • Be arbitrary. Computers make this easy. Use nonobvious command names or actions. Use arbitrary mappings between the intended action and what must actually be done. : Be inconsistent: change the rules. Let something be done one way in one mode and another way in another mode. This is especially effective where it is necessary to go back and forth between the two modes. : Make operations unintelligible. Use idiosyncratic language or abbreviations. Use uninformative error messages. • Be impolite. Treat erroneous actions by the user as breaches of contract. Snarl. Insult. Mumble unintelligible verbiage. • Make operations dangerous. Allow a single erroneous action to destroy invaluable work. Make it easy to do disastrous things. But put warnings in the manual; then, when people complain, you can ask, "But didn't you read the manual?" This list is getting depressing, so let us turn to the good side. The computer has vast potential, more than enough to overcome all its problems. Because it has unlimited power, because it can accept almost any kind of control, and because it can create almost any kind of picture or sound, it has the potential to bridge the gulfs, to make life easier. If designed properly, systems can be tailored for (and by) each of us. But we must insist that the computer developers work for us—not for the technology, not for themselves. Programs and systems do exist that have shown us the potential; they take the user into account, and they make it easier for us to do our tasks—pleasurable, even. This is how it ought to be. Computers have the power not only to make everyday tasks easier, but to make them enjoyable as well. ## IT'S NOT TOO LATE TO DO THINGS RIGHT Computer technology is still young, still exploring its potential. The notion lingers that if you have not passed the secret rites of initiation