into programming skills, you should not be allowed into the society of computer users. It is like the early days of the automobile: only the brave, the adventurous, and the mechanically sophisticated need apply. Computer scientists have so far worked on developing powerful programming languages that make it possible to solve the technical problems of computation. Little effort has gone toward devising the languages of interaction. Every student programmer takes courses on the computational aspect of computers. But there are very few courses on the problems faced by the user; such courses are usually not required, and they are not easy to fit into the already crowded schedule of the fledgling computer scientist. As a result, most programmers fluently write computer programs that do wonderful things but that are unusable by the non-professional. Most programmers have never thought of the problems faced by the users. They are surprised to discover that their creations tyrannize the user. There is no longer any excuse for this. It is not that difficult to develop programs that make visible their actions, that allow the user to see what is going on, that make the set of possible actions visible, that display the current state of the system in a meaningful and clear way.18 Let me give some examples of excellent work, systems that do take into account the needs of the user. First, there is the spreadsheet, an accounting program that has changed the face of office bookkeeping. The first spreadsheet program, Visicalc, was so impressive that people bought computers just so they could use this one program. That is a strong argument for its usability. Spreadsheets have their problems; but on the whole, they allow people to work with numbers in a convenient way, with immediately visible results. What did people like about the spreadsheet? The way it looked. You didn't seem to be using a computer—you were working on your problem. You organized the problem just the way you always would, except now it was easy to make changes, easy to see the results. Change one number and everything that depended on that number changed along with it, in just the proper way. What a painless way to do budget projections. All the benefits of the computer, without the technical impediments. In fact, the best computer programs are the ones in which the computer itself "disappears,"in which you work directly on the problem without having to be aware of the computer. Actually, Visicalc had numerous problems. The concept was brilliant, but the execution was flawed. I'm not complaining about the