designers, for they were limited by the power of an earlier generation of personal computers. Today's personal computers are much more powerful, and the spreadsheet programs are much easier to use. But the program established the model: it felt as if you were working directly on the problem, not on a computer. It is not easy to develop effective and usable computer systems. For one thing, it is expensive. Consider the principles described in this book: visibility, constraints, affordances, natural mappings, feedback. Applied to computer systems, these mean that, among other things, the computer must be capable of making things visible (or audible), which requires large and high quality visual displays, a variety of input devices, and plenty of computer memory. These require faster, more powerful computer circuits. And all this adds up to more expensive systems: more cost to manufacture, most cost to the consumer. It may not be immediately clear that the everyday users of computer systems are the ones who require the most powerful systems, with the most memory and the best displays. Professional programmers can get by with less, for they know how to deal with more complex interactions and less effective displays. The first proper attempt to build an effective system was not a commercial success. This was the Xerox Star, a brainchild of the Xerox Corporation's Palo Alto Research Center. The developers recognized the importance of large, highly detailed display screens with plenty of graphics; they gave the machine the ability to have several different documents on the screen at the same time; and they introduced a pointing device——in this case, the "mouse"—for the user to specify a work area on the screen. The Xerox Star computer was a breakthrough in usable design.19 But the system was too expensive and too slow. Users liked the power and the ease of operation, but they needed better performance. The benefits of easy to use commands were completely outweighed by the slow response speed. The display could not always keep up with typing, and requests for explanation (the "help" system) sometimes took so long that a user could go for a cup of coffee while waiting for an answer to even the simplest question. Xerox showed the way but suffered a common fate of pioneers: the spirit was willing but the implementation weak. Fortunately for the consumer, the Apple Computer Company has followed through on Xerox's ideas, using the philosophy developed for