the Xerox Star (and hiring away some of Xerox's people) to produce first the Apple Lisa (also too slow and expensive and a failure in the marketplace) and then the Macintosh, a success story. The approach followed by Xerox has been well documented. 2º The major goal was consistency of operations, to make things visible so that the available options could always be determined, and to test each idea with users at every step of the development process. These are all the important characteristics of good system design. Apple's Macintosh computer makes extensive use of visual displays. These eliminate the blank screen: the user can see what alternative actions are possible. The computer also makes the actions relatively easy to do, and it standardizes procedures so that methods learned for one program apply to most other programs. There is good feedback. Many actions are done by moving a mousea small, hand-held pointing device that causes a marker to move to the appropriate location on the screen. The mouse provides good mapping of action to result, and the use of menus—choices spelled out on the screen—makes the operations easy to perform. The Gulf of Execution and the Gulf of Evaluation are both securely bridged. The Macintosh fails badly at many things, especially those for which it uses obscure combinations of keypresses to accomplish some task. Many of the problems arise from the use of the mouse. The mouse has one button, which simplifies its use but means that some actions must be specified by clicking the button several times or by simultaneously holding down various combinations of keys on the keyboard and clicking the mouse button. These actions violate the basic design philosophy. They are difficult to learn, difficult to remember, and difficult to do. Ah, the buttons-on-the-mouse problem. How many buttons should the mouse have? Various models use one, two, or three, three being the most common number. Actually, some mice have more buttons; one design even has a chord keyboard on it. Fierce arguments rage over the correct number. The answer, of course, is that there is no correct answer. It is a tradeoff. Increase the number of buttons and you simplify some operations, but you also increase the complexity of the mapping problem. Even two buttons lead to an inconsistent mapping of functions to buttons. Reduce to one button and the mapping problem goes away, but so, too, does some of the functionality.