The Macintosh provides an example of what computer systems could be like. The design emphasizes visibility and feedback. Its 'human interface guidelines" and its internal "toolbox" provide standards for the many programmers who design for it. It has emphasized consideration for the user. Yes, there are several serious drawbacks to the Macintosh: it is far from perfect. And it isn't unique. Still, for its relative success in making usability and understanding into primary design objectives, I'd give the Apple Macintosh a prize. If only I thought more of prizes. ## COMPUTER AS CHAMELEON The computer is unusual among machines in that its shape, form, and appearance are not fixed: they can be anything the designer wishes them to be. The computer can be like a chameleon, changing shape and outward appearance to match the situation. The operations of the computer can be soft, being done in appearance rather than substance. And the appearance can be reversed with a change of mind by the user. As users, we can create explorable systems that can be learned through experimentation, without fear of failure or damage. Furthermore, the computer can take on the appearance of the task; it can disappear behind a facade (its system image). ## EXPLORABLE SYSTEMS: INVITING EXPERIMENTATION One important method of making systems easier to learn and to use is to make them explorable, to encourage the user to experiment and learn the possibilities through active exploration. This is how many people learn about home appliances, or about a new stereo system, television set, or video game. Work the buttons while listening and looking to see what happens. The same can be true with computer systems. There are three requirements for a system to be explorable. 1. In each state of the system, the user must readily see and be able to do the allowable actions. The visibility acts as a suggestion, reminding the user of possibilities and inviting the exploration of new ideas and methods. 2. The effect of each action must be both visible and easy to interpret. This property allows users to learn the effects of each action, to