develop a good mental model of the system, and to learn the causal relationships between actions and outcomes. The system image plays a critical role in making such learning possible. 3. Actions should be without cost. When an action has an undesirable result, it must be readily reversible. This is especially important with computer systems. In the case of an irreversible action, the system should make clear what effect the contemplated action will have prior to its execution; there should be enough time to cancel the plan. Or the action should be difficult to do, nonexplorable. Most actions should be cost-free, explorable, discoverable. ## TWO MODES OF COMPUTER USAGE Compare two different ways of getting a task done. One way is to issue commands to someone else who does the actual work: call this "command mode" or "third-person" interaction. The other way is to do the operations yourself: call this "direct manipulation mode" or "firstperson" interaction. The difference between these two is like the difference between being driven by a chauffeur and driving an automobile yourself. These two different modes exist with computers.21 Most computer systems offer command mode, third-person interactions. To use the computer, you type commands to it, using a special "command language" that you have to learn. Some computer systems offer direct manipulation, first-person interactions, good examples being the driving, flying, and sports games that are commonplace in arcades and on home machines. In these games, the feeling of direct control over the actions is an essential part of the task. This feeling of directness is also possible with everyday computer tasks, such as writing or bookkeeping. Spreadsheet programs and many text editors and word processing programs are good examples of direct manipulation systems used in business. Both forms of interaction are needed. Third-person interaction is well suited for situations in which the job is laborious or repetitive, as well as those in which you can trust the system (or other person) to do the job for you properly. Sometimes it is nice to have a chauffeur. But if the job is critical, novel, or ill-specified, or if you do not yet know exactly what is to be done, then you need direct, first-person interaction. Now direct control is essential; an intermediary gets in the way. But direct manipulation, first-person systems have their drawbacks. Although they are often easy to use, fun, and entertaining, it is often