difficult to do a really good job with them. They require the user to do the task directly, and the user may not be very good at it. Colored pencils and musical instruments are good examples of direct manipulation systems. But I, for one, am not a good artist or musician. When I want good art or good music, I need professional assistance. So, too, with many direct manipulation computer systems. I find that I often need first-person systems for which there is a backup intermediary, ready to take over when asked, available for advice when needed. When I use a direct manipulation system——whether for text editing, drawing pictures, or creating and playing games—I do think of myself not as using a computer but as doing the particular task. The computer is, in effect, invisible. The point cannot be overstressed: make the computer system invisible. This principle can be applied with any form of system interaction, direct or indirect. ## THE INVISIBLE COMPUTER OF THE FUTURE Consider what the computer of the future might look like. Suppose I told you it wouldn't even be visible, that you wouldn't even know you were using one? What do I mean? Well, this is already true: you use computers when you use many modern automobiles, microwave ovens, and games. Or CD players and calculators. You don't notice the computer because you think of yourself as doing the task, not as using the computer.22 In the same sense, you don't go to the kitchen to use an electric motor; you go to use the refrigerator, or the blender, or the dishwasher. The motors are part of the task, even in the case of the blender, mixer, or food processor, which are essentially pure motors and the specialized attachments they drive. The computer of the future is perhaps best illustrated by my imaginary perfect calendar. Suppose I am home one evening, deciding whether to accept an invitation to attend a conference next May. I pick up my appointment calendar and turn to the appropriate page. I tentatively decide that I can attend and pencil in the topic. The calendar flashes at me and displays a note reminding me that the university will still be in session during that period and that the trip overlaps my wife's birthday. I decide that the conference is important, so I make a note to check whether I can get someone to take over my classes and to see whether I can leave the conference early for the birthday. I close the