The point of POET is to advocate a user-centered design, a philosophy based on the needs and interests of the user, with an emphasis on making products usable and understandable. In this chapter I summarize the main principles, discuss some implications, and offer suggestions for the design of everyday things. Design should: • Make it easy to determine what actions are possible at any moment (make use of constraints). • Make things visible, including the conceptual model of the system, the alternative actions, and the results of actions. : Make it easy to evaluate the current state of the system. • Follow natural mappings between intentions and the required actions; between actions and the resulting effect; and between the information that is visible and the interpretation of the system state. In other words, make sure that (1) the user can figure out what to do, and (2) the user can tell what is going on. Design should make use of the natural properties of people and of the world: it should exploit natural relationships and natural constraints. As much as possible, it should operate without instructions or labels. Any necessary instruction or training should be needed only once; with each explanation the person should be able to say, "Of course," or "Yes, I see." A simple explanation will suffice if there is reason to the design, if everything has its place and its function, and if the outcomes of actions are visible. If the explanation leads the person to think or say, "How am I going to remember that?" the design has failed. ## Seven Principles for Transforming Difficult Tasks into Simple Ones How does the designer go about the task? As I've argued in POET, the principles of design are straightforward. 1. Use both knowledge in the world and knowledge in the head. 2. Simplify the structure of tasks. 3. Make things visible: bridge the gulfs of Execution and Evaluation. 4. Get the mappings right.