Exploit natural mappings. Make sure that the user can determine the relationships: • Between intentions and possible actions • Between actions and their effects on the system • Between actual system state and what is perceivable by sight, sound, or feel : Between the perceived system state and the needs, intentions, and expectations of the user Natural mappings are the basis of what has been called "response compatibility" within the fields of human factors and ergonomics. The major requirement of response compatibility is that the spatial relationship between the positioning of controls and the system or objects upon which they operate should be as direct as possible, with the controls either on the objects themselves or arranged to have an analogical relationship to them. In similar fashion, the movement of the controls should be similar or analogous to the expected operation of the system. Difficulties arise wherever the positioning and movements of the controls deviate from strict proximity, mimicry, or analogy to the things being controlled. The same arguments apply to the relationship of system output to expectations. A critical part of an action is the evaluation of its effects. This requires timely feedback of the results. The feedback must provide information that matches the user's intentions and must be in a form that is easy to understand. Many systems omit the relevant visible outcomes of actions; even when information about the system state is provided, it may not be easy to interpret. The easiest way to make things understandable is to use graphics or pictures. Modern systems (especially computer systems) are quite capable of this, but the need seems not to have been recognized by designers. ## EXPLOIT THE POWER OF CONSTRAINTS, BOTH NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL Use constraints so that the user feels as if there is only one possible thing to do—the right thing, of course. In chapter 4 I used the example