val, built by IBM for the 1984 Olympics. Here was a rather complex telephone system, designed to record messages being sent to athletes by friends and colleagues from all over the world. The users spoke a variety of languages, and some were quite unfamiliar with the American telephone system and with high technology in general. But by careful application of psychological principles and continual testing with the user population during the design stage, the system was usable, understandable, and functional. Good design is possible to achieve, but it has to be one of the goals from the beginning. (See the description of the phone system by Gould, Boies, Levy, Richards, & Schoonard, 1987.) ## CHAPTER TwO: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 1. Unfortunately, blaming the user is imbedded in the legal system. When major accidents occur, official courts of inquiry are set up to assess the blame. More and more often the blame is attributed to "human error."The person involved can be fined, punished, or fired. Maybe training procedures are revised. The law rests comfortably. But in my experience, human error usually is a result of poor design: it should be called system error. Humans err continually; it is an intrinsic part of our nature. System design should take this into account. Pinning the blame on the person may be a comfortable way to proceed, but why was the system ever designed so that a single act by a single person could cause calamity? An important book on this topic is Charles Perrow's Normal accidents (1984). I cover human error in detail in chapter 5. 2. This example is taken from White & Horwitz's (1987) technical report on "ThinkerTools," their system for teaching children physics, in part to overcome the beliefs in naive physics which are otherwise so strong. 3. The subject of naive views is treated at length in many reviews. The relationship between Aristotle's physics and modern naive physics is developed in McCloskey's (1983) Scientific American article, "Intuitive physics." 4. The valve theory of the thermostat is taken from Kempton (1986), a study published in the journal Cognitive Science. 5. Some thermostats are designed to anticipate the need to turn on or off. They avoid a common problem: the temperature in a cooling house continues to drop after the thermostat has turned on the furnace, and the temperature of a heating house continues to rise after the thermostat has turned off the furnace, due to the heat already in the system. The "intelligent" thermostat turns off or on a little before the desired temperature is reached. 6. National Transportation Safety Board (1984), Aircraft accident report Eastern Air Lines, Inc., Lockheed L-1011, N334EA, Miami International Airport, Miami, Florida, May 5, 1983.