11. The quote comes from Winograd & Soloway's interesting study (1986), On forgetting the locations of things stored in special places, Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 366–372. 12. The description is taken from an earlier book, Learning and memory (Norman, 1982). 13. Landauer (1986) provides the most sophisticated attempt I have yet seen to estimate the amount of material people might know in his Cognitive Science article "How much do people remember? Some estimates of the quantity of learned information in long-term memory." 14. This story is taken from Hutchins, Hollan, & Norman (1986, p. 113), slightly reworded. I am of course indebted to our renamed colleague for allowing his thought processes to be aired in public. 15. Surprisingly little is known about the properties of mental models. There are two books with Mental models as their title, one the report of a conference, edited by Gentner and Stevens (1983), the other, by Johnson-Laird (1983), an examination of a particular form of mental model that might be used in problem solving and reasoning. The first is closer in spirit to the types being discussed here. The role mental models might play in the understanding of complex systems in general and computer systems in particular is discussed in our book on the design of computer systems (Norman & Draper, 1986). An excellent review is provided by Rouse and Morris (1986). 16. Readers conversant with information theory might consider how the various mappings reduce the information load on the user. The standard measure of information is the "bit,"the amount of information required to distinguish between two items. With the completely arbitrary mapping of figure 3.3, each control could work any of four burners, so it takes 2 bits of information to specify which burner each control operates. If you wish to be able to look at any of the four controls and know immediately which burner it operates, 8 bits must be learned. Eight bits is a lot. (Technically, all four controls can be specified with a total of only 4.6 bits, but this makes use of the fact that once the first control is known [2 bits], the second one has to be selected from only three possibilities [1.5 bits], the third from the two remaining possibilities [1 bit], and then the last control becomes fully determined [o bits]. This strategy requires less information to specify all four controls, but at the cost of more computation: you can't look directly at a control and know which burner it works—you have to figure it out.) The partial mapping of arrangement figure 3.4 reduces the information load. Now, selection of each proper control is selection from two alternatives, or 1 bit. So a total of only 4 bits are required to let the person go to each control and know immediately which burner it operates. The full natural mappings of figure 3.5 have only one interpretation, so nothing has to be learned: o bits.