work, I relied heavily on the electrical and mechanical ingenuity of Dave Wargo, who actually did the design, construction, and installation of the switches. 5. The reason for the awkward location of the switch is cost. One designer wrote me: "I fought the good battle to get the on/off switch to the front of the terminal. I lost the argument both times. The hardware engineers costed the front mounted switch at about \$1o (about \$3o to the consumer), plus the potential for the power to contaminate some nearby circuits." Those prices seem high to me, but this designer was speaking of professional equipment, where the terminal probably costs in the thousands of dollars. Here is the standard tradeoff of cost versus usability. What price are you willing to pay for usability? Does the cost really have to be that high? What if the switch had been designed to be on the front from the very beginning, as opposed to having to be moved after the rest of the layout had been completed? 6. Copyright 1987 by Consumers Union of United States, Inc., Mount Vernon, NY 10553. Excerpted by permission from Consumer Reports, Jan. 1987. 7. See Gaver (1986). ## CHAPTER FIVE: To Err Is Human 1. InfoWorld, Dec. 22, 1986. Reprinted by permission. 2. See Sherry Turkle's (1984) analysis in her book The second self. The book is mostly about the impact of computers on people's lives, especially on the children who have grown up with daily, continual contact with machines—the "hackers" of the world. Turkle also presents an analysis of the changes that information-processing views of the human mind have made to our interpretation of Freud. All around, it is an intriguing and important book. 3. Unless otherwise noted, all the examples in this section wefe collected by me, primarily from the errors of myself, my research associates, my colleagues, and my students. Everyone diligently recorded their slips, with the requirement that only the ones that had been immediately recorded would be added to the collection. Many were first published in Norman (1980 and 1981). 4. The term "capture error" was invented by Jim Reason of Manchester, England (Reason, 1979). Reason has written widely on slips and other mishaps. I recommend as a good review of his work the book Absent minded? The psychology of mental lapses and everyday errors (Reason & Mycielska, 1982). 5. Reason (1979). 6. A simple introduction to schema theory can be found in my book Learning and memory (Norman, 1982).