7. The best source of information about the connectionist approach is the two-book series Parallel Distributed Processing (Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986; McClelland & Rumelhart, 1986). 8. An important set of studies has been performed by Danny Kahneman and Amos Tversky (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). Kahneman and Miller's (1986) "Norm theory"applies a related set of ideas. 9. A standard objection to my claim that everyday tasks are conceptually simple—that they do not require extensive search and backtracking—is that perception and language are certainly everyday tasks, yet they violate these rules. I disagree. Yes, perception and language are certainly everyday tasks. But I do not believe they violate my argument. I argue that the key to conceptual complexity is whether or not backtracking is required: Is there trial and error? Are multiple paths investigated? I want to argue that none of these are required for everyday tasks, including perception and language. The study of perception is a difficult topic: we still do not know how it gets done. Clearly it involves a lot of computation. But I suspect that the computation is less complex than might be supposed. Perceptual systems are parallel structures, they use parallel algorithms. I believe they reach their solutions by pattern matching, by relaxation, by minimum energy constraints. With the proper hardware (the hardware of the brain), I believe these tasks are done without backtracking, without following false leads. The rule I wish to invoke is that everyday language and perception are mostly conceptually simple. They are done without backtracking, without conscious involvement or even awareness. Both language and perception have situations that violate these assumptions, but they are relatively infrequent. When they occur, they require conscious involvement. And they provide patterns that are difficult to perceive or understand. In fact, a majority of these structures are created deliberately, as illusions, or puzzles, or brainteasers, or as the counterexamples and problems that linguists spend so many hours inventing and discussing. 1o. There is a whole field devoted to the design and analysis of highway systems. These particular points are discussed in chapters by Alexander & Lunenfeld (1984) and by Kinner (1984). My own experience is that while signs on the major national motorways may be well done, with considerable thought and planning, signs on the smaller roads are not. The signs on the local roads require more local knowledge, which visitors usually lack. In England, when I am offered a choice between Buxton and Whittlesford while I am trying to get to Oxford, what do I do? Or suppose I am home in San Diego trying to get to Mission Bay, when I am offered a choice between El Centro and Los Angeles, neither of which I wish to visit. When making long journeys on the secondary roads of England, I learned to go around each roundabout two or three times, each time eliminating a different exit until I finally