could select what appeared to be the best. In this way I got lost only one in five times instead of every time. Fortunately, the good manners of British motorists made my circling possible, even safe. I have tried the same thing in the United States, but I was risking my life. 11. J. Maclean (1983), Secrets of a superthief (New York: Berkley Books), 108. 12. Although the nuclear power industry has done a good job of analyzing the situation, it has not been so responsive in actually changing anything, especially the design of the control rooms. It's almost impossible to redo an existing control room, a process that can cost millions of dollars and disrupt the plant for several years. We now know how to build much better control rooms, but there aren't any new plants being built in the United States. And, of course, management would have to take responsibility and recognize that human error results primarily from deficient design; I see few signs that this message is understood. The new control rooms of other countries' plants that I read about appear to have the same old misguided, inferior philosophy about how control rooms should be desiged. The designs will definitely lead to error (which will be blamed on the operators, who will then be retrained and retrained, or, more likely, simply fired). The aviation industry has been more responsive. But its costs are lower, and new cockpit designs and aircraft are continually being produced. Other industries seem quite unaware of these problems, even though the documented accident and death rates to workers and innocent bystanders may be higher than for either nuclear power or commercial aviation. Human error, they call it, allowing them to fire the people involved and ignore the misdesign of the plant that led to the problem in the first place. The chemical, petroleum, and shipping industries seem particularly at fault, blaming training or operator incompetence when, in fact, the problems are inherent in the system. For an excellent analysis of these issues, read Charles Perrow's (1984) book, Normal accidents. 13. Fischhoff's (1975) study is called "Hindsight ≠ foresight: The effect of outcome knowledge on judgment under uncertainty."And while you are at it, see the very impressive book of readings entitled Acceptable risk (Fischhoff, Lichtenstein, Slovic, Derby, & Keeney, 1981). 14. The Korean Air flight oo7 has been analyzed by Hersh (1986), who gives a plausible, detailed account of what might have gone wrong with the flight. Because the aircraft flight recorders were not recovered, we will never know with certainty what did happen. It appears that the actions on the Soviet side were probably equally confused, with pilots and the military under various social pressures to act. The information available about the Soviets'actions is insufficient to reach any reliable conclusions. 15. My source for information about the Tenerife crash is Roitsch, Babcock, & Edmunds (undated), the report issued by the American Airline