computer systems and suggest system design principles that might minimize those errors (Norman, 1983). This philosophy also pervades the book that our research team put together: User centered system design (Norman & Draper, 1986). Here we discuss how to build systems for users. Two chapters are especially relevant to the discussions here: my "Cognitive engineering" and the one I wrote with Clayton Lewis, called "Designing for error." ## CHAPTER sIx: The Design Challenge 1. Mares writes about the process used in the development of the first successful typewriter (1909, pp. 42-43). Mares said he was quoting "from an old catalog issued by the Remington Company, many years back." 2. There are very good descriptions of the hill-climbing process in Alexander's (1964) book Notes on the synthesis of form and Jones's book Design methods; also see Jones's (1984) Essays in design. Jones (1981) has a particularly good description of the evolution of the wheels of farm wagons: did you know they are "dished" or "cupped" outward, so that the rims bulge out more than the center? Did you know that the wagon will not function as well if the wheels are not cupped? This improvement resulted from a natural, hill-climbing design process. All of Alexander's works describe this process of evolution, and his books on architectural design are influential. In addition to the one already mentioned, see The timeless way of building (Alexander, 1979) and A pattern language: Towns, buildings, construction, by Alexander, Ishikawa, and Silverstein (1977). I find the works fascinating to skim, frustrating to read, and difficult to put into practice, but his descriptions of the structure of homes and villages are very good. While you're tracking down these classic books on design, by all means look at Simon's (1981) The sciences of the artificial. 3. New York Daily Tribune editorial from about 189o, quoted in G. C. Mares (19o9), The history of the typewriter, successor to the pen: An illustrated account of the origin, rise, and development of the writing machine frontispiece. 4. The story makes sense, but the arrangement of the keys doesn't completely fit the story. Yes, i and e form a frequent pair and are far apart, but what about other frequent pairs, such as e and r, or i, n, g? And it seemș suspicious that the letters of the word typewriter all appear on the top row; some other constraints seem to have been operating. Almost every country in the world uses a keyboard similar to qwerty. There are differences—the French, for example, replaced q and w with a and z, for "azerty"—but the changes are remarkably minor. Yet different languages have very different patterns of letter use, so an English-based keyboard would not be expected to work well for other languages.