5. The account of the "duel" is presented in Beeching's (1974) book, Century of the typewriter (pp. 40-41). 6. Fisher and I studied a variety of keyboard layouts. We thought that alphabetically organized keys would be superior for beginners. No, they weren't: we discovered that knowledge of the alphabet was not useful in finding the keys. Our studies of alphabetical and Dvorak keyboards were published in the journal Human Factors (Norman & Fisher, 1982). 7. Admirers of the Dvorak keyboard claim much more than a 10 percent improvement, as well as faster learning rates and less fatigue. But I will stick by my studies and my statements. If you want to read more, including a worthwhile treatment of the history of the typewriter, see the book Cognitive aspects of skilled typewriting, edited by Cooper (1983), which includes several chapters of research from my laboratory. 8. The Israeli psychologist Daniel Gopher has developed a clever singlehand chord keyboard for both the roman and Hebrew alphabets. He claims great success with the use of the Hebrew chord keyboard by pilots who have to enter data into their flight computer with one hand while flying the plane with the other (Gopher, Karis, & Koenig, 1985; Gopher & Raij, in press). 9. Wall Street Journal, Dec. 9, 1986. Reprinted by permission of the Wall Street Journal. © Dow Jones & Co., Inc., 1986. All rights reserved. 10. Sommer (1983), Social design: Creating buildings with people in mind (p. 126). 11. Sommer (1983, pp. 128–129). 12. "Wait a minute," you might say, "what has the design of the cafeteria got to do with the Design Centre? That isn't the purpose of the Centre. You are missing the whole point."I don't think so. The lack of concern for the user of the Centre reflects the attitude of the Centre as a whole. The exhibits are tasteful, pleasing to the eye. They emphasize artistic qualities and ease of manufacture. Those qualities are indeed important, but they aren't sufficient. The cafeteria was aesthetically pleasing but functionally inadequate. How many of the designs on display had the same characteristics? It isn't unreasonable to expect the Centre to show how design can be applied to all the relevant dimensions. 13. Los Angeles Times, June 1, 1987. 14. Most designers today work in teams. Nonetheless, the comments I make about "the designer" apply. In fact, the better the teamwork, the more apt members are to share common modes of thinking and common sets of approaches, and thereby to fall prey simultaneously to the same problems. 15. Mike King, a telephone company designer, commenting on an early draft of POET. 16. Dan Rosenberg, a design engineer, commenting on an early draft of POET.