manufacturer. Computer games provide a modern form of dramatic experience. There are many varieties of games, from those that concentrate on emotions and motor skills to those that focus on the intellect. Most games, whether on the computer or not, present this feeling of direct engagement, of a first-person interaction with the environment. Similar feelings of being captured, of working directly at the task, are possible for other activities as well. See Laurel's (1986) chapter, "Interface as mimesis."Also see the chapter on direct manipulation interfaces by Hutchins, Hollan, and Norman (1986). 22. The ideas in this section were developed jointly with Jim Miller of the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation (MCC), of Austin, Texas, the American research consortium for the development of future technologies for computers. ## CHAPTER SEVEN: User-Centered Design 1. Lynch (1972), What time is this place? (pp. 66–67). 2. An excellent treatment of overautomation is Weiner and Curry's (198o) paper, "Flight-deck automation: Promises and problems." 3. I have enough friends on national and international standards committees for me to realize that the process of determining an internationally accepted standard is laborious. Even when all parties agree on the merits of standardization, the task of selecting standards becomes a lengthy and political issue. A small company or a single designer can standardize products without too much difficulty, but it is much more difficult for an industrial, national, or international body to agree to standards. There even exists a standardized procedure for establishing national and international standards. A set of national and international organizations works on standards; when a new standard is proposed, it must work its way up through the organizational hierarchy. Each step is complex, for if there are three ways of doing something, then there are sure to be strong proponents of each of the three ways, plus people who will argue that it is too early to standardize. Each proposal is debated at the meeting where it is presented, then taken back to the sponsoring organization—which is sometimes a company, sometimes a professional society—where objections and counterobjections are collected. Then the standards committee meets again to discuss the objections. And again and again and again. Any company that is already marketing a product that meets the proposed standard will have a huge economic advantage, and the debates are therefore often affected by the economics and politics of the issues as much as by real technological substance. The process is almost guaranteed to take five years, and quite often longer. The resulting standard is usually a compromise among the various com-