peting positions, oftentimes an inferior compromise. Sometimes the answer is to agree on several incompatible standards. Witness the existence of both metric and English units; of left-hand and right-hand drive automobiles; of three different kinds of color television, all incompatible. There are several international standards for the voltages and frequency of electricity and several different kinds of electrical plugs and sockets which cannot be interchanged. Actually, my description of how standards are achieved is more hope than reality. One of my colleagues, Jonathan Grudin, who has worked on national and international standards for the design of computer work stations, commented on my paragraphs this way: You said standards development "must work its way up through the organizational hierarchy" but in fact with the international standard increasingly the goal, it is a vastly more iterative procedure, at least in the ANSI-ISO arena [ANSI is American National Standards Institute: the standards are labeled things like ANSC X3V1, where the I for Institute is replaced with a C for Committee. ISO is International Standards Organization]. What happens is that someone draws up a proposal or parts of one, and it is quickly hashed up a bit at the national meeting then carried to the next international meeting. There it gets hashed up a lot more, often rewritten or extended, and brought back to all of the national meetings. They chew it over, and at the next international meeting it typically gets a real working over, this being the first input from various national working groups. Then it goes back to the national groups again, who really sink their teeth in it, the original sponsor moaning with pain at what they've done to its song, often. Then this process goes through many more iterations; in the case of a major standard, it could go through a dozen or more over several years. A compromise among existing approaches is generally not the result of the standards process, but an initial aim of the developers. Your tactful phrasing makes the process sound slightly more scientific and less political than it is, though I don't object to it. On the other hand, the standards developers are surely always utterly convinced that they are producing a compromise that is superior, not inferior, to any of the contributions to it, and they are well aware of the camel-is-ahorse-designed-by-committee problem. I have not studied enough cases to know that they are wrong. I would have guessed that they might often be right. 4. One reason the Apple Macintosh computer is such a usable machine is because Apple enforced a set of standard procedures for all the people who wrote programs for the Macintosh. The procedures governed the look and style of the interface, most especially the way that information could be