note, but that isn't allowed, my publisher tells me. So, into contrasting text.) I am not going to tell you whether I am for or against it. Actually, that is because I am both. It is a really exciting concept. But I don't believe it can work for most material. For an encyclopaedia, yes; or a dictionary; or an instruction manual. But not for a text, or a novel. Imagine a mystery novel in hypertext. Hmm, it might be very interesting. 11. But what a pain these notes are. If positioned at the bottom of the page, they distract. If at the end of the text, as in this book, they are awkward to use. How much nicer if one could just touch the footnoted word and have it instantly expand into a noteon the side of the page, of course, where it wouldn't get in the way. Ah yes, hypertext. 12. D. Bulkeley (1987), The 'smartest house in America,' Design News, 43, 56-61. 13. The small compact disk now used for audio recordings is capable of holding ¿ gigabyte of information, where a gigabyte is the technical term for one billion characters (1o). This number is sure to increase in the coming years, and larger size disks already hold considerably more information. 14. An excellent treatment of how design affects and is affected by society is given in Adrian Forty's Objects of desire (1986). The full assessment of the emptiness of the architectural revolution is provided most effectively by Tom Wolfe (1981), in his From Bauhaus to our house, and in a more scholarly way by Peter Blake (1977) in Form follows fasco: Why modern architecture hasn't worked.