ism. Highly recommended as a masterful treatment, for those who are interested in such things.) The other book, Panati's (1987) Extraordinary origins of everyday things, discusses the origins of many of our popular objects, habits, and customs. Panati includes excellent sections of references and suggested readings. Braudel's book is a scholarly (but well written), systematic, cohesive treatment of the rise of modern civilization by a noted French historian. Panati's book is a popular treatment consisting of hundreds of unrelated, short essays, each treating a different topic, including the development of tableware, table manners, toilets, and everyday superstitions and customs. ## Architectural Design Architecture plays a major role in design, in part because its many schools provide a natural home for the study of design, in part because architects so deliberately use the construction of homes and buildings as design statements. The Bauhaus in Germany was probably the origin of the modern extremes, but the emphasis started long before then. The most engaging discussion of the excesses of modern architecture is that of Tom Wolfe (1981), From Bauhaus to our house. Blake's (1977) Form follows fasco: Why modern architecture hasn't worked, is a bit more scholarly, but especially readable. There is, of course, a huge literature on architecture and it is not kind simply to cite two critiques. Nonetheless, that is what I shall do, especially as mine is not a book about architecture. The other architects whose work has influenced me are not builders; they are thinkers and designers, in particular, Alexander and his colleagues at the University of California, Berkeley (see Alexander, 1964, 1979; Alexander, Ishikawa, & Silverstein, 1977.) ## Industrial Design The classic books on industrial design are Dreyfuss's Designing for people (1951) and Loewy's Never leave well enough alone (1951), although I cannot state that they had much impact on me. Much more important books were Caplan (1982), By design: Why there are no locks on the bathroom doors in Hotel Louis XIV and other object lessons; Lynch (196o), The image of the city; and Lynch (1972), What time is this place? Several good histories of design exist. I have found Forty's (1986) Objects of desire: Design and society from Wedgewood to IBM especially useful. Rybczynski's (1986) Home: A short history of an idea provides an excellent