and engaging summary of the design of homes and furnishings. If you thought that comfort might be relevant to the design of furniture, you are naive; read Rybczynski's book and be informed. Comfort, like usability, won't be a design factor unless and until the purchasers demand it. In the text I comment on the usefulness of Jones's several books on design philosophy and methods, especially the problem of going from original specification to realization (Jones, 197o, 1981, 1984). Papanek has been a major critic of modern industrial design, especially scornful of the emphasis on frivolous excesses that make products expensive, ill-conceived, and ill-operating. His own designs emphasize low cost, durability, and ease of construction (especially for third-world economies), all useful and important attributes, but not necessarily relevant to the usability of the designs (see Papanek, 1971, and Papanek & Hennessey, 1977). Illich's cogent arguments for "convivial tools" help define the philosophy aimed for in POET (see his book Tools for conviviality [1973]). A good way to find out what the design world cares about is to read the magazines of industrial design. In the United States, this is ID, a "magazine of International Design."\* It's a fascinating magazine with clever innovative design. But I detect little interest in making designs usable, functional, or understandable. The professionals read Innovation, the journal of the Industrial Designers Society of America. ## General Issues in Design Petroski's (1985) To engineer is human: The role of failure in successful design provides an excellent analysis of the role of failures in the advancement of industrial and civil design, showing how, for example, each collapse of a bridge advances the design profession (but only if detailed study of the reasons for the collapse is made and the lessons propagated to the other designers); it's a truly excellent book. Perrow (1984) has written an extremely important book, Normal accidents, in which he looks at the structure of large systems (things such as oil drilling platforms, nuclear power plants, and ocean-going ships) and demonstrates that the combination of complexity and "tight-coupling"makes such systems highly susceptible to catastrophic failure. This book is essential