Gaver, W. W. (in press). Listening to computers. Paper presented at the ACM SIGCHI Workshop on Mixed Modes of Interaction, Dec. 15-17, 1986, Key West, Florida. To be published in a book of collected papers from that conference. Gentner, D., & Stevens, A. (1983). Mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. E. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, acting, and knowing. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Goffman, E. (1974). Frame analysis. New York: Harper & Row. Gopher, D., Karis, D., & Koenig, W. (1985). The representation of movement schemas in long-term memory: Lessons from the acquisition of a transcription skill. Acta Psychologica, 60, 105–134. Gopher, D., & Raij, D. (in press). Typing with a two hand chord keyboard: Will the QWERTY become obsolete? IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics. Gould, J. D., Boies, S. J., Leyy, S., Richards, J. T., & Schoonard, J. (1987). The 1984 Olympic message system: A test of behavioral principles of system design. Communications of the ACM, 30, 758–769. Hersh, S. M. (1986). The target is destroyed. New York: Random House. Hooper, K. (1986). Architectural design: An analogy. In D. A. Norman & S. W. Draper (Eds.), User centered system design: New perspectives on humancomputer interaction. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. Hurst, R. (Ed.). (1976). Pilot error: A professional study of contributory factors. London: Granada. Hurst, R., & Hurst, L. (Eds.). (1982). Pilot error: The human factors. London: Granada. (Also New York: Jason Aronson.) Hutchins, E., Hollan, J. D., & Norman, D. A. (1986). Direct manipulation interfaces. In D. A. Norman & S. W. Draper (Eds.), User centered system design: New perspectives on human-computer interaction. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. Illich, I. (1973). Tools for conviviality. New York: Harper & Row. Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. (Also Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.) Jones, J. C. (1970). Design methods: Seeds of human futures. New York: Wiley. Jones, J. C. (1981). Design methods: Seeds of human futures (1980 ed., with a review of new topics). New York: Wiley. Jones, J. C. (1984). Essays in design. New York: Wiley. Kahneman, D., & Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm theory: Comparing reality to its alternatives. Psychological Review, 93, 136–153.