Kempton, W. (1986). Two theories of home heat control. Cognitive Science, 10, 75–90. Kinner, J. (1984). The practical and graphic problem of road sign design. In R. Easterby & H. Zwaga (Eds.), Information design: The design and evaluation of signs and printed material. Chichester, England: Wiley. Landauer, T. K. (1986). How much do people remember? Some estimates of the quantity of learned information in long-term memory. Cognitive Science, 10, 477–493. Laurel, B. (1986). Interface as mimesis. In D. A. Norman & S. W. Draper (Eds.), User centered system design: New perspectives on human-computer interaction. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. Lewis, C., & Norman, D. A. (1986). Designing for error. In D. A. Norman & S. W. Draper (Eds.), User centered system design: New perspectives on humancomputer interaction. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. Lindsay, P. H., & Norman, D. A. (1977). Human information processing (2nd ed.). New York: Academic Press. (Now San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.) Loewy, R. (1950). Never leave well enough alone. New York: Simon & Schuster. Lord, A. B. (196o). The singer of tales. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Lynch, K. (196o). The image of the city. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Lynch, K. (1972). What time is this place? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Malone, T. (1981). Toward a theory of intrinsically motivating instruction. Cognitive Science, 4, 333-369. Malone, T. W. (1983). How do people organize their desks: Implications for designing office automation systems. ACM Transactions on Office Automation Systems, 1, 99-112. Mares, G. C. (19o9). The history of the typewriter, successor to the pen: An illustrated account of the origin, rise, and development of the writing machine. London: Guilbert Putnam. Reprinted by Post-era Books, Arcadia, CA, 1985. Mayall, W. H. (1979). Principles in design. London: Design Council. McClelland, J. L., Rumelhart, D. E., & the PDP Research Group. (1986). Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Vol. 2: Psychological and biological models. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. McCloskey, M. (1983). Intuitive physics. Scientific American, 248(4), 122– 130. Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K. (196o). Plans and the structure of behavior. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. Miyake, N. (1986). Constructive interaction. Cognitive Science, 10, 151–177. Miyata, Y., & Norman, D. A. (1986). Psychological issues in support of multiple activities. In D. A. Norman & S. W. Draper (Eds.), User centered