The book What's What: A Visual Glossary of the Physical World has more than fifteen hundred drawings and pictures and illustrates twentythree thousand items or parts of items.4 Irving Biederman, a psychologist who studies visual perception, estimates that there are probably 30,ooo readily discriminable objects for the adult."5 Whatever the exact number, it is clear that the difficulties of everyday life are amplified by the sheer profusion of items. Suppose that each everyday thing takes only one minute to learn; learning 2o,ooo of them occupies 20,ooo minutes—333 hours or about 8 forty-hour work weeks. Furthermore, we often encounter new objects unexpectedly, when we are really concerned with something else. We are confused and distracted, and what ought to be a simple, effortless, everyday thing interferes with the important task of the moment. How do people cope? Part of the answer lies in the way the mind works—in the psychology of human thought and cognition. Part lies in the information available from the appearance of the objects—the psychology of everyday things. And part comes from the ability of the designer to make the operation clear, to project a good image of the operation, and to take advantage of other things people might be expected to know. Here is where the designer's knowledge of the psychology of people coupled with knowledge of how things work becomes crucial. ## CONCEPTUAL MODELS Consider the rather strange bicycle illustrated in figure 1.7. You know it won't work because you form a conceptual model of the device and mentally simulate its operation. You can do the simulation because the parts are visible and the implications clear. Other clues to how things work come from their visible structure in particular from affordances, constraints, and mappings. Consider a pair of scissors: even if you have never seen or used them before, you can see that the number of possible actions is limited. The holes are clearly there to put something into, and the only logical things that will fit are fingers. The holes are affordances: they allow the the fingers to be inserted. The sizes of the holes provide constraints to limit the possible fingers: the big hole suggests several fingers, the small hole only one. The mapping between holes and fingers—the set of possible operations—is suggested and constrained by the holes. Moreover, the operation is not sensitive to finger placement: if you use the wrong fingers,