Perrow, C. (1984). Normal accidents. New York: Basic Books. Petroski, Henry. (1985). To engineer is human: The role of failure in successful design. New York: St. Martin's Press. Reason, J. T. (1979). Actions not as planned. In G. Underwood & R. Stevens (Eds.), Aspects of consciousness. London: Academic Press. Reason, J. T., & Mycieslka, K. (1982). Absent minded? The psychology of mental lapses and everyday errors. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Roitsch, P. A., Babcock, G. L., & Edmunds W. W. (Undated). Human factors report on the Tenerife accident. Washington, D.C.: Air Line Pilots Association. Rouse, W. B., & Morris, N. M. (1986). On looking into the black box: Prospects and limits in the search for mental models. Psychological Bulletin, 100, 349–363. Rubin, D. C., & Kontis, T. C. (1983). A schema for common cents. Memory and Cognition, 11, 333–341. Rubin, D. C., & Wallace, W. T. (1987). Rhyme and reason: Integral properties of words. Unpublished manuscript. Rumelhart, D. E., McClelland, J. L., & the PDP Research Group. (1986). Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Vol. 1: Foundations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Rybczynski, W. (1986). Home: A short history of an idea. New York: Viking. Sanders, A. F. (198o). Stage analysis of reaction processes. In G. E. Stelmach & J. Requin (Eds.), Tutorials in motor behavior. Amsterdam: North-Holland. Schank, R. C. (1982). Dynamic memory. New York: Cambridge University Press. Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Helplessness: On depression, development, and death. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman. Seminara, J. L., Gonzales, W. R., & Parsons, S. O. (1977, March). Human factors review of nuclear power plant control room design (Technical report EPRI NP-309 [Research project 501]). Prepared by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Inc. (Sunnyvale, CA) for the Electric Power Research Institute (Palo Alto, CA). Shneiderman, B. (1974, February). A computer graphics system for polynomials. The Mathematics Teacher, pp. 111-113. Shneiderman, B. (1983). Direct manipulation: A step beyond programming languages. IEEE Computer, 16(8), 57–69. Shneiderman, B. (1987). Designing the user interface: Strategies for effective humancomputer interaction. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Simon, H. A. (1981). The sciences of the artificial (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.