Smith, D. C., Irby, C., Kimball, R., Verplank, W., & Harslem, E. (1982). Designing the Star user interface. Byte, 7(4), 242–282. Sommer, R. (1983). Social design: Creating buildings with people in mind. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Spanish Ministry of Transport and Communications. (1978). Report of collision between PAA B-747 and KLM B-7747 at Tenerife, March 27, 1977. Translation published in Aviation Week and Space Technology, November 20 and 27, 1978. Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and situated actions: The problem of human-machine communication. New York: Cambridge University Press. Turkle, S. (1984). The second self: Computers and the human spirit. New York: Simon & Schuster. Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 207–232. Reprinted in K. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.). (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. Weiner, E. L. (198o). Mid-air collisions: The accidents, the systems and the realpolitik. Human Factors, 22, 521-533. Reprinted in R. Hurst & L. R. Hurst (Eds.). (1982). Pilot error: The human factor. New York: Jason Aronson. Weiner, E. L. (1986). Fallible humans and vulnerable systems: Lessons learned from aviation. Unpublished manuscript. (To be published in Information Systems: Failure Analysis. Proceedings of a NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Failure Analysis of Information Systems.) Weiner, E. L., & Curry, R. E. (198o). Flight-deck automation: Promises and problems. Ergonomics, 23, 995–1011. Reprinted in R. Hurst & L. R. Hurst (Eds.). (1982). Pilot error: The human factor. New York: Jason Aronson. White, B. Y., & Horwitz, P. (1987). ThinkerTools: Enabling children to understand physical laws (Report No. 647o). Cambridge, MA: BBN Laboratories. Winograd, E., & Soloway, R. M. (1986). On forgetting the locations of things stored in special places. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 366–372. Winograd, T., & Flores, F. (1986). Understanding computers and cognition: A new foundation for design. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. Wolfe, T. (1981). From Bauhaus to our house. New York: Washington Square Press (Pocket Books).