watch: the watch can give the day of the week, the month, and the year; it can act as a stop watch (which itself has several functions), a countdown timer, and an alarm clock (or two); it has the ability to show the time for different time zones; it can act as a counter and even as a calculator. But the added functions cause problems: How do you design a watch that has so many functions while trying to limit the size, cost, and complexity of the device? How many buttons does it take to make the watch workable and learnable, yet not too expensive? There are no easy answers. Whenever the number of functions and required operations exceeds the number of controls, the design becomes arbitrary, unnatural, and complicated. The same technology that simplifies life by providing more functions in each device also complicates life by making the device harder to learn, harder to use. This is the paradox of technology. The paradox of technology should never be used as an excuse for poor design. It is true that as the number of options and capabilities of any device increases, so too must the number and complexity of the controls. But the principles of good design can make complexity manageable. In one of my courses I gave as homework the assignment to design a multiple-function clock radio: You have been employed by a manufacturing company to design their new product. The company is considering combining the following into one item: · AM-FM radio • Cassette player · CD player · Telephone : Telephone answering machine · Clock • Alarm clock (the alarm can turn on a tone, radio, cassette, or CD) : Desk or bed lamp The company is trying to decide whether to include a small (twoinch screen) TV set and a switched electric outlet that can turn on a coffee maker or toaster. Your job is (A) to recommend what to build, then (B) to design the control panel, and finally (C) to certify that it is actually both what customers want and easy to use.