impossible to write down and difficult to teach. It is best taught by demonstration and best learned through practice. Even the best teachers cannot usually describe what they are doing. Procedural knowledge is largely subconscious. Knowledge from the world is usually easy to come by. Designers provide a large number of memory aids. The letters on the typewriter keyboard are one example. The lights and labels on controls act as external memory aids, reminding the user of the purpose and state of the control. Industrial equipment is replete with signal lights, indicators, and other reminders. We make extensive use of written notes. We place items in specific locations as reminders. In general, people structure the environment to provide a considerable amount of the information required for something to be remembered. Many people organize their lives in the world, creating a pile here, a pile there, each indicating some activity to be done, some event in progress. Probably everybody uses such a strategy to some extent. Look around you at the variety of ways people structure their rooms and desks. Many styles of organization are possible, but the physical arrangement and visibility of the items frequently convey information about relative importance. Want to do your friends a nasty turn? Do them a favor—clean up their desks or rooms. Do this to some people and you can completely destroy their ability to function.² ## GREAT PRECISION IS NOT REQUIRED Normally, people do not need precise memory information. People can remember enough to distinguish one familiar coin from another although they may be unable to remember the faces, pictures, and words on the coins.³ But make more precise memory necessary and vou get havoc. Three countries have rediscovered this fact in recent years: the United States, when it introduced the Susan B. Anthony one-dollar coin; Great Britain, when it introduced the one-pound coin; and France, when it introduced a new ten-franc coin. The new U.S. dollar coin was confused with the existing twenty-five-cent piece (the quarter), and the British pound coin was confused with the existing five-pence piece. (The one-pound coin has the same diameter as the five-pence piece, but is considerably thicker and heavier.) Here is what happened in France: