: Access numbers for telephone budget cards, so that when I make a long distance call from my university, I can cause the correct account to pay the bill: a five-digit number for each account (and I have four of them). Don't show these to anyone, I am warned. Keep them hidden in a secret place. • Access numbers for telephone credit cards, so when I travel I can have the bill automatically put on my home telephone number. The codes consist of my home telephone number plus four secret digits. The secret digits aren't even printed on the card: memorize and destroy. But I have six of them (two home phone accounts and four different university phone accounts). If I want to dial a long distance number from a hotel using one of my telephone credit cards, I must dial as many as thirty-six digits. • Passwords or numbers for bank automatic teller machines, those clever machines that let you put in a card, type in your secret password, and get money. Two bank accounts, two secret passwords. Don't write them down, a thief might see them. Memorize. Memorize. • Secret passwords for my computer accounts: can't let people steal my valuable data, or perhaps change their course grades, or peek at the examination questions. Make the password at least six characters long, we are told. And no words—words are too easy for someone to discover—make it nonsense. (I cheat and make all my computer accounts use the same password.) • Driver's license number. When I lived briefly in Texas I couldn't do anything without my driver's license number: not pay for food at the supermarket, not pay the telephone bill, not even open up a bank account. That was one letter, seven digits. Other states have longer numbers. • Social security numbers for me, my wife, and my children. Nine digits each. : Passport numbers, again for my whole family. : My employee number. • License plate numbers for our cars. · Birthdays. • Ages. : Clothing sizes. • Addresses.