personal relationships with the supplier, and perhaps reliability: usability is seldom considered. Finally, even when the purchaser is the end user, it is sometimes necessary to trade one desirable feature for an undesirable one. In the case of my family's stove, we did not like the arrangement of controls, but we bought the stove anyway: we traded off layout of the burner controls for another feature that was more important to us and available only from one manufacturer. (I return to these issues in chapter 6.) ## The Tradeoff between Knowledge in the World and in the Head Knowledge (or information) in the world and in the head are both essential in our daily functioning. But to some extent we can choose to lean more heavily on one or the other. That choice requires a trade- ## 3.6 Tradeoffs <table><tr><td>PROPERTY</td><td>KNOWLEDGE IN THE WORLD</td><td>KNOWLEDGE IN THE HEAD</td></tr><tr><td>Retrievability</td><td>Retrievable whenever visible or audible.</td><td>Not readily retrievable. Requires memory search ór reminding.</td></tr><tr><td>Learning</td><td>Learning not required. Interpretation substitutes for learning. How easy it is to interpret information in the world depends upon how well it exploits natural mappings and constraints.</td><td>Requires learning, which can be considerable. Learning is made easier if there is meaning of structure to the material (or if there is a good mental model).</td></tr><tr><td>Efficiency of use</td><td>Tends to be slowed up by the need to find and interpret the external information.</td><td>Can be very efficient.</td></tr><tr><td>Ease of use at first encounter</td><td>High.</td><td>Low.</td></tr><tr><td>Aesthetics</td><td>Can be unaesthetic and inelegant, especially if there is a need to maintain a lot of information. This can lead to clutter. In the end, aesthetic appeal depends upon the skill of the designer.</td><td>Nothing need be visible, which gives more freedom to the designer, which in turn can lead to better aesthetics.</td></tr></table>