# DIRECTOR'S FOREWORD

In presenting China Design Now the V&A is taking notice of a great change in today's world. Building on four years of research, visits and interviews in the cities of the China coast, curators Zhang Hongxing and Lauren Parker have uncovered an untold story. They have benefited from numerous people's and institutions' wisdom and experience. I take this opportunity to extend warm thanks to all who have contributed in different ways to this pioneering exhibition. Difficult as it is to single out one institution from those that have worked with us, we do want to mention the Central Academy of Fine Art, Beijing, which has offered invaluable cooperation. Above all, we are enormously grateful to our sponsor, HSBC, for so generously supporting the project and sharing in our commitment to enhance the cultural understanding of China in the UK.

We believe it is fitting that the V&A should be first in the UK to explore the impact of economic expansion on design in China today. As an international museum with a long-standing interest in design history and world trade, the V&A is uniquely qualified to look at China Design Now. I believe that this exhibition will reveal to UK and international audiences something of the astonishing vitality of China's twenty-first-century design culture. The exhibition will guide them through an astonishing period of reform and growth, starting with Deng Xiaoping's determination to develop the economy.

The stirrings of change started in the far south of the country, when graphic artists and designers in Shenzhen began to explore new directions in the 1980s. This was the early period of economic reform, when export-led expansion in production got under way. Next we move up the coast towards Shanghai focusing on the period from the mid-1990s. Here, consumerism and a phenomenally vital urban culture came together with surprising results. With its iconic waterfront, its historic place as China's first industrial city and its confident, fashionable

image, Shanghai emerged once more as a great international metropolis. When Expo opens there in 2010, 70 million visitors will experience the transformed, consumer-driven excitement of new Shanghai. From Shanghai, the China Design Now journey moves towards its ultimate destination, Beijing, the national capital. The Olympic Games of 2008, the impetus for this exhibition and for so much monumental architecture that is changing the Beijing cityscape, marks China's arrival on the world stage in spectacular fashion. Beijing is a historic city, with a uniquely significant layout that has been profoundly altered by twentieth-century urban planners. In the twenty-first century, buildings by Herzog & de Meuron, Foster + Partners and Chinese designers like Zhu Pei are heralding another new era for China's capital.

In the exhibition, and in this book, curators and commentators discuss the surprising choices facing and shaping Chinese design today. Designers are working in ways that grow out of the social realities of Chinese life. Their impact is seen in the print industry, advertising, white goods, transport, architecture and more. A recurring theme is the growing middle class and its appetite for consumer goods. Even more striking, perhaps, is the explosive growth of design as a professional discipline. Today students are enrolled in more than 500 design colleges operating across the country. They will form part of the continuing story of China's growing economic strength. Through them, many of the important questions posed in this exhibition will be answered. After the rapid changes of the past two decades, there is yet more growth and change to come. Design in twenty-first-century China will certainly affect consumers across the global economy.

Mark Jones Director, Victoria and Albert Museum