# RODUCTIOIDESIGNCHANGINGHONGXINYARRER

The last 20 years have witnessed a spectacular series of changes in the world. The disintegration of the Soviet Union, the growth of free-market economies in Eastern Europe and the concurrent redrawing of Europe's economic and political boundaries, alongside the rise of new emerging economies – from Brazil to India – have begun to reconfigure the global landscape of international development, economics and society. China sits at the very heart of these global shifts. To the degree that its development is changing China itself, these are important, but as political and economic analyst Joshua Cooper Ramo states:

What is far more important is that China's new ideas are having a gigantic effect outside of China. China is marking a path for other nations around the world who are trying to figure out not simply how to develop their countries, but also ... in a way that allows them to be truly independent, to protect their way of life and political choices.[1]

As recently as 1999, Foreign Affairs magazine could publish an article called ‘Does China Matter?'; today China's rise is an unarguable fact of life. The scale and speed of its transformation, as well as its emergence as a global power, are remaking the international order.

China's statistics dazzle the rest of the world with this massive scale. China has 1.3 billion people, representing more than one-fifth of the world's population. Between 1978 and today it has witnessed one of the most sustained and rapid economic transformations seen in the world economy in the past 50 years, averaging a growth rate of over 9 per cent a year. Since 2000 China's contribution to global GDP growth (in purchasing-power-parity terms) has been greater than America's, and more than half as big as the combined contributions of India, Brazil and Russia, the three next-largest transitional economies. Its low-priced manufactured goods are propping up western consumer spending. In 2001 alone, China produced 96 million electric fans, 41 million colour television sets and 25 million mobile phones.[2] At the same time, since China's 'Reform and Opening Up' process began in the late 1970s, the World Bank estimates that China has lifted 300 million people out of poverty, a historical accomplishment.[3]

This reform process has seen two main thrusts. The first has been a move towards a free-market economy in China, and the second has been an opening up to the global economic and political community – a so-called globalization with Chinese characteristics'. The changing status of Chína from the periphery to the centre of the world stage has provoked different reactions. Peter Nolan, a Chína economic and business analyst, has described the nation as being at a ‘crossroads’ in this process of transition.[4] Traditional views of China, from Washington hawks and others, have seen the country either as a market to be exploited or as a ‘threat' – whether economic or military – to be contained.[5] Some commentators (for example, journalist and editor of China Dialogue, Isabel Hilton) are critical of China's record on environmental issues and human rights.[6] For others, however, China represents an opportunity that we cannot afford to miss. Tony Blair, the former British prime minister, in his speech to the European Parliament in June 2005, claimed that the European Union's choice was either to regain competitiveness through reform or fall behind the rising powers of China and India.[7] Amsterdam-based cultural and architectural historian Ole Bouman has written more recently that China is not only a land of change, but also a land of ideas: ... rather than the best [Chinese] minds and talents flocking to the West, now the best minds of the West have become consultants in China'.[8]

China's economic transformations have had a profound impact on China itself – its social structures, urban environments and creative pioneers, from designers and architects to artists and film-makers who are charting a course through China's new cultural landscapes. Architects, graphic designers, photographers, publishers, bloggers and style trendsetters are responding with vigour to this moment of intense transformation – acting both as chroniclers of China's changes in all its intensity, energy and uncertainty, revealing what design in a Chinese context means today, and providing a first glimpse of what Chinese design may offer to the wider world in the future.

This book and the V&A exhibition that it accompanies are a critical survey of the development of a new design culture in post-reform China – that is, China after 1978 when economic reform began. They showcase a range of major design and architecture projects, and present the pioneering generations of creative practitioners who are shaping China's contemporary cultural landscape alongside major international contributors. Focusing on China's hopes and dreams – from the entrepreneurial spirit of individual designers, to society's aspirations at a moment of tremendous change, and the global ambitions of a nation – China Design Now explores how China's new design culture began, how it is developing, what its driving forces are and, above all, where it is going.

Before introducing the narratives of the book, what follows is a summary of our thoughts on some key issues with regard to the characteristics of the new design culture in China. These issues have interested us throughout the preparation of the book and the exhibition, and have undoubtedly influenced the way we approach the subject. How can we describe the state of design in an emerging economy like China? Given the diverse nature of design development in China, can we provide any kind of coherent picture? Is it possible to expect China's trajectory to fall into the pattern we have seen in the West since the Industrial Revolution? Or is a new path emerging?

## Design in developing China

The ‘added value’ of design is increasingly being recognized as an essential tool for economic competitiveness for both developed and developing countries in the global market. Dominant commentaries about the development of Chinese design have tended to view it in the light of the country's place in the global economy.[9] To some design commentators, what is most crucial about the origins of contemporary Chinese design has been China's strategic decision to follow a number of its Asian neighbours (from Japan and South Korea to Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore) in the adoption of an export-oriented development path. Part of Deng Xiaoping's 'Reform and Opening Up’ policies from the early 1980s, this development strategy focused on China's competitive advantage at that time, producing low-cost manufactured goods principally for export and using one of the country's greatest resources, its reserves of cheap labour.

For design commentators including Clive Dilnot and John Heskett, this pragmatic approach has had strong implications for the development of a Chinese design culture. Within an increasingly globalized system of design, production and consumption, China found itself in a situation where the research, design and engineering of products were essentially determined by outside forces, and for outside markets. Product design for the domestic market, in the Pearl River delta for example, has been largely a matter of the low-value adaptation of existing product types. In this context, local design could only play an imitative role. The end result was not innovation in design, but a culture of the copy.[10]

Heskett has recently highlighted some of the challenges presented in the development of a strong design culture in China.[11] A major issue facing Chinese designers has been the understanding of the nature and function of design. In large Chinese manufacturing companies, design has operated at best at a middle level, buried in large marketing and engineering departments. In this context design is a styling tool, shaping the appearance of a product, not influencing the engineering, function or use of an object, and certainly not engaging in research into user needs. In general, although the notion of design in a manufacturing context is moving away from the notion of cosmetic design alone, designers often still have little role to play in wider corporate decisionmaking or in new product concepts. Designers working in these companies tend to have high visualization skills, but, with little encouragement to use their initiative, they may get into a habit of looking to the rule book for guidance. More experienced designers are often promoted quickly into management roles, leaving new graduates and young designers to take on most of the practical design delivery.

In the area of design education, there are an estimated 550 institutions across China providing a range of design courses. Many courses and institutions have an international reputation, but across China some problems still remain. A shortage of good teachers is one of them. Because design is a relatively new field, teachers can be drawn from many different backgrounds, often with little design training. Students learn to use computers, but the provision of workshop facilities can be poor. Teaching may be theoretical, with few on-the-job training or internship possibilities, and it is still fairly unusual for practising designers to be invited to teach or lecture at design colleges. Perhaps most symptomatic of all is the fact that the Chinese government has few initiatives to promote or support design, and no coherent national design policy. However, as John Heskett has argued, what has occurred historically in the development of design in China is not atypical of many other newly industrializing countries, from Germany and the United States in the late nineteenth century to Japan following the Second World War. In all these cases, copying the production practices and manufacturing models of other successful nations enabled a dynamic manufacturing economy to develop, leading to later innovations.[12]

However, Heskett also points out that China has seen plenty of signs of change, particularly in the past few years. In 2006 the Chinese government set up the goal of becoming an innovation-driven country – to achieve the transition from 'Made in China’ to Innovated in China'. The consequences for not doing so are serious. 'We are doomed,’wrote state councillor Chen Zhili in the Party intellectual journal, Qiu Shi, unless China's society is able to find a way to innovate; and he argued that the two pillars of China's future are, on one hand, the development of science and cutting-edge technology, and on the other, the resources available from China's greatest natural resource, its people.[13]

Design centres are being established in cities such as Beijing and Shanghai. The State Development and Reform Commission of the State Council is preparing a document on design policy, covering a wide range of areas, from technology and design management to international collaboration and intellectual property. The Cox Review, a review of creativity in British business, has noted that between 2003 and 2005 China had the most rapid global increase in research and development, now estimated to have reached 1.5 per cent of GDP. China is building a capability based on strong investment, high-level skills and a low cost base.[14]

The need to develop and promote an innovation-led approach to design is something that is being acknowledged both at state level and by manufacturers. A small but growing number of Chinese companies are aware that the future of design in China hinges on gaining a deeper understanding of the way Chinese people live, designing for the patterns of daily life in China to create winning innovations. Spearheading investment in design, research and development are companies like computing and electronics giant Lenovo, Philips China, mobile-phone manufacturer Ningbo Bird and China's largest white-goods brand Haier. New areas of design and manufacture are also growing – over the next decade China will enter the global market as a key provider of cars, mobile phones, gaming, Internet services and digital communication and entertainment.

Observations such as the above are a useful starting point for understanding the development of design and manufacturing in transitional China, but they should be read with some caution. The emergence of in-house design in manufacturing, and of design schools, design publications and promotional bodies represent important indicators of an emerging culture of design, but they account for only part of a bigger picture. The institutional story of design development is one part; others include the vital role that individual designers have played in promoting and pursuing creativity in a number of design fields, from graphics to fashion. If we can uncover some of these other stories, we can perhaps look beyond the notion that China is simply catching up' with more-developed creative economies, and instead appreciate the complexity of the extraordinary changes that are taking place.

## Design in informal China

China's transition from a command economy to an open market-oriented economy has taken a different route from the ‘shock therapy' of the former Soviet Bloc countries, adopting a series of incremental measures and allowing ideas to be implemented locally or in a particular economic sector. Most recent research by Chinese leading economist Hu Angang has demonstrated that China's sustained strong economic performance has had as much to do with the informal economy that the reform process facilitated as with directly state-controlled initiatives.[15] In Mao's era, any work carried on outside the state structure was illegal. However, from the early 1980s when reforms began, an informal sphere of activities was encouraged to solve the increasing problems of goods shortages, unemployment, system inertia and to meet the increasingly diversified demands of a growing consumer market. An entrepreneurial spirit – of ‘jumping into the commercial ocean' – started to develop. This informal economy in China includes both the self-employed and private sectors, as well as unregistered rural migrant workers in the cities. The informal economy has a loose organizational structure. Working relationships may be based on kinship and other forms of guanxi or traditional quid pro quo social networking. The reasons driving people to enter this sector vary hugely depending on the context, ranging from the sheer necessity of surviving, to getting additional work, to maximizing income. Despite being subject to increasing government regulation, the informal economy remains a potent force in

China because of the continual and fast-paced development of new industries and new customer demands.

In the context of design, China has in its cities a thriving creative informal economy – creative professionals engaged in informal networks, deregulated activities and, on the whole, small-scale entrepreneurial work. As Saskia Sassen suggests, these cultural pioneers are able to:

## function in the interstices of urban and organizational spaces often dominated by large corporate actors and to escape the corporatization of creative work. In this process they contribute to a very specific feature of the new urban economy: its innovation and a certain type of frontier spirit.[16]

For many designers in China, the informal sector has provided a major source of employment throughout the postreform period. In the 1980s and early '90s, most designers worked for state-owned institutions, such as art and design schools or design institutes affiliated to various government ministries, but because salaries at the schools and institutes were low and the demand for commercial design work was high, it was popular among such state-employed designers to take ‘second employment' from outside the official system, an activity known as di’er zhiye or chaogeng. Ma Qingyun, a leading Chinese architect, gives an engaging explanation of how second employment worked for architects in Shenzhen during that period: