## Bibliography Primary sources Manuscript Archives of the Royal Society of Arts Guard Book Number 3. Bolton Central Library, Bolton Samuel Crompton Papers, ZCR/6/4, ZCR/15/18, ZCR/19/5, ZCR/43/3. British Library, London Asia, Pacific and Africa Collections Board's Collections, F/4/384, F/4/511, F/4/825, F/4/1079, F/4/1464, F/4/1734, F/4/1821. Home Miscellaneous Series, H/258, H/401. The Paterson Diaries, MSS Eur E379. Roxburgh Papers, MSS Eur D809. “Observations of Major James Franklin on Iron,” c.1825, MSS Eur D154.155. Department of Manuscripts Liverpool Papers, Add MS 38342, 38376. John Rylands Library, Manchester Samuel Oldknow Papers, Eng MSS 751 and Eng MSS 839. Wadsworth Manuscripts, Eng MSS 1206. Manchester Central Library T. Hawkes, “Observations on the Cotton Trade of Manchester, in a Series of Essays,” c.1793, Manuscript B.R.338.1 H3. National Archives of the United Kingdom: Public Record Office, Kew Papers of the Board of Trade, BT/1, BT/6. Papers of the English African Companies, T/70, C/107. Printed Aikin, John. A Description of the Country from Thirty to Forty Miles Round Manchester (London, 1795). Bell, Andrew. The Madras School or, Elements of Tuition (London, 1808, repr. London, 1993). Bernier, François. The History of the Late Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogol, trans. Henry Oldenburg (2nd edn., London, 1676). Bowrey, Thomas. A Geographical Account of Countries Round the Bay of Bengal, 1669 to 1679, ed. Sir Richard Carnac Temple (London, 1905, repr. Nendeln, Liechtenstein, 1967). British Parliamentary Papers, 1813–14, vol. VIII.I (115), Minutes of the Evidence taken before the Select Committee of the House of Commons on petitions relating to East-India-built shipping. Buchanan, Francis. A Journey from Madras through the Countries of Mysore, Canara and Malabar, 3 vols. (London, 1807). The Case of the Joyners Company Against the Importation of Manufactured Cabinet Work from the East Indies, Shelfmark 816.m.13 (2), BL. The Case of Mr. Richard Arkwright and Co. In Relation to Mr. Arkwright's Invention of an Engine for Spinning Cotton, etc. into Yarn (London, 1782). Cleghorn, Hugh. The Forests and Gardens of South India (London, 1861). Considerations on the East India Trade (London, 1701), in A Select Collection of Early English Tracts on Commerce, ed. J. R. McCulloch (London, 1856, repr. Cambridge, 1954). Cunningham, A.B. (ed.). “The Journal of Christophe Aubin: A Report on the Levant Trade in 1812,” Archivum Ottomanicum, 7 (1983), pp. 5–127. Defoe, Daniel. A Plan of the English Commerce (London, 1728, repr. Oxford, 1928). Dossie, Robert. Memoirs of Agriculture and Other Oeconomical Arts, 3 vols. (London, 1768–82). The Fann-Makers Grievance by the Importation of Fanns from the East-Indies, Shelfmark 816.m.12 (97), BL. The Gentleman's Magazine, 24 (1754). Guest, Richard. A Compendious History of the Cotton Manufacture (Manchester, 1823). Hunter, William. “Some Account of the Astronomical Labours of Jayasinha, Rajah of Ambhere, or Jayanagar,” Asiatic Researches, 5 (1799), pp. 177–211. Irish University Press Series of British Parliamentary Papers. Colonies: East India, 22 vols. (Shannon, 1968–71). Journal of the House of Commons, vol. 34 (1774). Kennedy, John. Miscellaneous Papers, On Subjects Connected with the Manufactures of Lancashire (Manchester, 1849). Khan, Gholam Hossein. A Translation of Seir Mutaqherin, or, Views of Modern Times: Being an History of India, from the Year 1118, to the Year 1194, of the Hedjrah (Calcutta, 1902, repr. Lahore, 2005). The Late Measures of the Ship-Owners in the Coal Trade Fully Examined, in a Letter to the Right Honourable William Pitt (London, 1786). Letters Addressed to the Right Honourable William Pitt, Chancellor of the Exchequer of Great Britain (London, 1793). Marx, Karl. “The British Rule in India,” in Robert C. Tucker (ed.), The Marx-Engels Reader (2nd edn., New York, 1978), pp. 653–8. Marx, Karl. “The Future Results of British Rule in India,” in Robert C. Tucker (ed.), The Marx-Engels Reader (2nd. edn., New York, 1978), pp. 659–64. Mercator. A Second Letter to the Inhabitants of Manchester on the Exportation of Twist (Manchester, 1800). Mill, James. The History of British India, 10 vols. (5th edn., London, 1858, repr. London, 1997). N.C., a Weaver of London. The Great Necessity and Advantage of Preserving Our Own Manufactures (London, 1697). Naidu, Bundla Ramaswamy. Memoirs on the Internal Revenue System of the Madras Presidency (Madras, 1820, repr. 1870). Ogden, James. A Description of Manchester: Giving an Historical Account of those Limits in which the Town was Formerly Included (Manchester, 1783). Pelsaert, Francisco. Jahangir's India, trans. W. H. Moreland and P. Geyl (Cambridge, 1925). Peyssonnel, M. de (Charles). Traité sur le commerce de la mer Noire, 2 vols. (Paris, 1787). Premiums Offered by the Society Instituted at London for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce (London, 1760). Reasons Humbly offer'd to the Honourable House of Commons, against a Duty intended to be laid upon Silks, Manufactured, Printed, or Stained, as far as it concerns Handkerchiefs (London, 1711). Rey, Claudius. The Weavers True Case; or, the Wearing of Printed Callicoes and Linnen Destructive to the Woollen and Silk Manufacturies (London, 1719). Smith, Adam. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1976). Smith, John. Chronicon Rusticum-Comerciale, 2 vols. (London, 1747). Smith, Thomas. A Discourse of the Common Weal of this Realm of England, ed. Elizabeth Lamond (Cambridge, 1954). Stewart, Charles. A Descriptive Catalogue of the Oriental Library of the Late Tippoo Sultan of Mysore. To which are Prefixed, Memoirs of Hyder Aly Khan, and His Son Tippoo Sultan (London, 1809). Tavernier, Jean-Baptiste. Travels in India, trans. V. Ball, 2 vols. (New York, 1889). Thoughts on the Use of Machines in the Cotton Manufacture: Addressed to the Working People in that Manufacture, and the Poor in General. By a Friend of the Poor (Manchester, 1780). von Richthofen, Ferdinand, Freiherr. Baron Richthofen's Letters, 1870–1872 (Shanghai, 1872?) Walker, George. Observations, Founded on Facts, upon the Propriety or Impropriety of Exporting Cotton Twist, for the Purpose of Being Manufactured into Cloth by Foreigners (London, 1803). Walrond, Theodore (ed.). Letters and Journals of James, Eighth Earl of Elgin (London, 1872). Wilkinson, Henry. “On the Cause of the External Pattern: or, Watering of the Damascus Sword-Blades,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 4 (1837), pp. 187–93. Wright, M.D., John. An Address to the Members of Both Houses of Parliament on the Late Tax Laid on Fustian and Other Cotton Goods (Warrington, 1785). Ying-hsing, Sung. T'ien Kung K'ai Wu: Chinese Technology in the Seventeenth Century, trans. E-tu Zen Sun and Shiou-chuan Sun (University Park, Penn., 1966). ## Secondary works Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91 (2001), pp. 1369–1401. Agoston, Gabor. Guns for the Sultan: Military Power and the Weapons Industry in the Ottoman Empire (Cambridge, 2005). Alam, Muzaffar. “Aspects of Agrarian Uprisings in North India in the Early Eighteenth Century,” in Sabyasachi Bhattacharya and Romila Thapar (eds.), Situating Indian History for Sarvepalli Gopal (Delhi, 1986), pp. 146–70. Alam, Muzaffar. The Crisis of Empire in Mughal North India (Delhi, 1986). Alam, Muzaffar and Sanjay Subrahmanyam. Indo-Persian Travels in the Age of Discoveries, 1400–1800 (Cambridge, 2007). Alam, Muzaffar and Sanjay Subrahmanyam (eds.). The Mughal State, 1526–1750 (Delhi, 1998). Allen, Robert C. “Agriculture During the Industrial Revolution, 1700–1850,” in Roderick Floud and Paul Johnson (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain, vol. I, Industrialisation, 1700–1860 (Cambridge, 2004), pp. 96–116. Allen, Robert C. The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective (Cambridge, 2009). Allen, Robert C. “India in the Great Divergence,” in Timothy J. Hatton, Kevin H. O'Rourke and Alan M. Taylor (eds.), The New Comparative Economic History: Essays in Honor of Jeffrey G. Williamson (Cambridge, Mass., 2007), pp. 9–32. Allen, Robert C. “The Industrial Revolution in Miniature: The Spinning Jenny in Britain, France, and India,” JEH, 69 (2009), pp. 901–27. Anderson, Perry. Lineages of the Absolutist State (London, 1974). Anstey, Vera. The Economic Development of India (3rd edn., London, 1936). Arasaratnam, S. “The Rice Trade in Eastern India 1650–1740,” MAS, 22 (1988), pp. 531– 49. Ashton, T.S. An Economic History of England: The 18th Century (London, 1955). Ashton, T.S. Iron and Steel in the Industrial Revolution (2nd edn., Manchester, 1951). Ashton, T.S. and Joseph Sykes. The Coal Industry of the Eighteenth Century (Manchester, 1929). Ashworth, William J. Customs and Excise: Trade, Production, and Consumption in England, 1640–1845 (Oxford, 2003). Ashworth, William J. “The Ghost of Rostow: Science, Culture and the British Industrial Revolution,” History of Science, 46 (2008), pp. 249–74. Attman, Artur. American Bullion in the European World Trade, 1600–1800, trans. Eva and Allan Green (Göteborg, 1986). Atwell, William S. “International Bullion Flows and the Chinese Economy circa 1530– 1650,” P&P, 95 (1982), pp. 68–90. Bagchi, Amiya Kumar. “De-industrialization in India in the Nineteenth Century: Some Theoretical Implications,” Journal of Development Studies, 12 (1976), pp. 135–64. Bagchi, Amiya Kumar. Private Investment in India, 1900–1939 (Cambridge, 1972). Baines, Edward. History of the Cotton Manufacture in Great Britain (London, 1835). Baker, George P. Calico Painting and Printing in the East Indies in the XVIIth and XVIIIth Centuries (London, 1921). Barkey, Karen. Bandits and Bureaucrats: The Ottoman Route to State Centralization (Ithaca, N.Y., 1994). Barrett, Ward. “World Bullion Flows, 1450–1850,” in James D. Tracy (ed.), The Rise of Merchant Empires: Long-Distance Trade in the Early Modern World, 1350–1750 (Cambridge, 1990), pp. 224–54. Basu, Bhaskar Jyoti. “Trading World of Coromandel and the Crisis of the 1730s,” Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, 42nd Session, Bodh-Gaya (1981), pp. 333–9. Bayly, C.A. Empire and Information: Intelligence Gathering and Social Communication in India, 1780–1870 (Cambridge, 1996). Bayly, C.A. “Indian Merchants in a ‘Traditional’ Setting: Benares, 1780–1830,” in Clive Dewey and A. G. Hopkins (eds.), The Imperial Impact: Studies in the Economic History of Africa and India (London, 1978), pp. 171–93. Bayly, C.A. Indian Society and the Making of the British Empire (Cambridge, 1988). Bayly, C.A. “Pre-Colonial Indian Merchants and Rationality,” in Mushirul Hasan and Narayani Gupta (eds.), India's Colonial Encounter: Essays in Memory of Eric Stokes (New Delhi, 1993), pp. 3–24. Bayly, C.A. Rulers, Townsmen and Bazaars: North Indian Society in the Age of British Expansion, 1770–1870 (Cambridge, 1983). Bayly, Susan. Caste, Society and Politics in India from the Eighteenth Century to the Modern Age (Cambridge, 1999). Berg, Maxine. Luxury and Pleasure in Eighteenth-Century Britain (Oxford, 2005). Berg, Maxine. “In Pursuit of Luxury: Global Origins of British Consumer Goods in the Eighteenth Century,” P&P, 182 (2004), pp. 85–142. Berg, Maxine. “Quality, Cotton and the Global Luxury Trade,” in Riello and Roy, How India Clothed the World, pp. 391–414. Bhardwaj, H.C. “Development of Iron and Steel Technology in India during 18th and 19th Centuries,” Indian Journal of History of Science, 17 (1982), pp. 223–33. Bhattacharya, Durgaprasad (ed.). Census of India 1961: Report on the Population Estimates of India, vol. III, 1811–1820, part A, “Eastern Region” (1963). Bhattacharya, Durgaprasad and Bibhavati Bhattacharya (eds.). Census of India 1961: Report on the Population Estimates of India (1820–1830) (1963). Bhattacharya, S. “Regional Economy (1757–1857): Eastern India I,” in Dharma Kumar (ed.), The Cambridge Economic History of India, vol. II, c.1757–c.1970 (Cambridge, 1982), pp. 270–95. Biswas, Arun Kumar. Minerals and Metals in Pre-Modern India (New Delhi, 2001). Borpujari, Jitendra G. “The Impact of the Transit Duty System in British India,” in Asiya Siddiqi (ed.), Trade and Finance in Colonial India, 1750–1860 (Delhi, 1995), pp. 321– 44. Boulle, Pierre H. “Slave Trade, Commercial Organization and Industrial Growth in Eighteenth-Century Nantes,” Revue francaise d'histoire d'outre-mer, 59 (1972), pp. 70– 112. Bowen, Huw. The Business of Empire: The East India Company and Imperial Britain, 1756–1833 (Cambridge, 2006). Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis. “Walrasian Economics in Retrospect,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (2000), pp. 1411–39. Brenner, Robert. “Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe,” in T. H. Aston and C. H. E. Philpin (eds.), The Brenner Debate: Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe (Cambridge, 1985), pp. 10–63. Brenner, Robert and Christopher Isett. “England's Divergence from China's Yangzi Delta: Property Relations, Microeconomics, and Patterns of Development,” JAS, 61 (2002), pp. 609–62. Broadberry, Stephen and Bishnupriya Gupta. “The Early Modern Great Divergence: Wages, Prices and Economic Development in Europe and Asia, 1500–1800,” Economic History Review, n.s., 59 (2006), pp. 2–31. Brose, Eric Dorn. The Politics of Technological Change in Prussia: Out of the Shadow of Antiquity, 1809–1848 (Princeton, 1993). Bruland, Kristine. “Industrialization and Technological Change,” in Roderick Floud and Paul Johnson (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain, vol. I, Industrialization, 1700–1860 (Cambridge, 2004), pp. 117–46. Buringh, Eltjo and Jan Luiten van Zanden. “Charting the ‘Rise of the West’: Manuscripts and Printed Books in Europe, A Long-Term Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth Centuries,” JEH, 69 (2009), pp. 409–45. Butel, Paul. The Atlantic, trans. Iain Hamilton Grant (London, 1999). Cameron, Rondo E. “Some French Contributions to the Industrial Development of Germany, 1840–1870,” JEH, 16 (1956), pp. 281–321. Cardwell, D.S.L. From Watt to Clausius: The Rise of Thermodynamics in the Early Industrial Age (Ithaca, N.Y., 1971). Carey, W.H. The Good Old Days of Honorable John Company, 2 vols. (Calcutta, 1906–7). Casale, Giancarlo. The Ottoman Age of Exploration (Oxford, 2010). Caspard, Pierre. “Manufacture and Trade in Calico Printing at Neuch tel,” Textile History, 8 (1977), pp. 149–62. Chandavarkar, Rajnarayan. “Industrialization in India before 1947: Conventional Approaches and Alternative Perspectives,” MAS, 19 (1985), pp. 623–68. Chandavarkar, Rajnarayan. The Origins of Industrial Capitalism in India: Business Strategies and the Working Classes in Bombay, 1900–1940 (Cambridge, 1994). Chang, Ha-Joon. “Breaking the Mould: An Institutionalist Political Economy Alternative to the Neo-Liberal Theory of the Market and the State,” Cambridge Journal of Economics, 26 (2002), pp. 539–59. Chapman, S.D. and S. Chassagne. European Textile Printers in the Eighteenth Century: A Study of Peel and Oberkampf (London, 1981). Chassagne, Serge. Le coton et ses patrons: France, 1760–1840 (Paris, 1991). Chaudhuri, K.N. Asia Before Europe: Economy and Civilisation of the Indian Ocean from the Rise of Islam to 1750 (Cambridge, 1990). Chaudhuri, K.N. “India's Foreign Trade and the Cessation of the East India Company's Trading Activities, 1828–1840,” Economic History Review, 2nd ser., 19 (1966), pp. 345–63. Chaudhuri, K.N. Trade and Civilisation in the Indian Ocean: An Economic History from the Rise of Islam to 1750 (Cambridge, 1985). Chaudhuri, K.N. The Trading World of Asia and the East India Company, 1660–1760 (Cambridge, 1978). Clapham, J.H. Economic Development of France and Germany 1815–1914 (4th edn., Cambridge, 1936). Clarence-Smith, William Gervase. “The Production of Cotton Textiles in Early Modern South-East Asia,” in Riello and Parthasarathi, Spinning World, pp. 127–42. Clark, Gregory. A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World (Princeton, 2007). Cook, Harold J. Matters of Exchange: Commerce, Medicine, and Science in the Dutch Golden Age (New Haven, 2007). Cooper, Randolf G.S. The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India: The Struggle for Control of the South Asian Military Economy (Cambridge, 2003). Cooper, R.G.S. and N.K. Wagle. “Maratha Artillery: From Dabhoi to Assaye,” Journal of the Ordnance Society, 7 (1995), pp. 58–78. Crafts, Nicholas. “Productivity Growth in the Industrial Revolution: A New Growth Accounting Perspective,” JEH, 64 (2004), pp. 521–35. Crafts, N.F.R. and C.K. Harley. “Output Growth and the British Industrial Revolution: A Restatement of the Crafts–Harley View,” Economic History Review, n.s. 45 (1992), pp. 703–30. Cunningham, Andrew and Perry Williams. “De-centering the ‘Big Picture’: The Origins of Modern Science and the Modern Origins of Science,” British Journal of the History of Science, 26 (1993), pp. 407–32. Darwin, John. After Tamerlane: The Global History of Empire since 1405 (New York, 2008). Das Gupta, A. “Indian Merchants and the Trade in the Indian Ocean,” in Tapan Raychaudhuri and Irfan Habib (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of India, vol. I, c.1200–c.1750 (Cambridge, 1982), pp. 407–33. Das Gupta, Ashin and M.N. Pearson (eds.). India and the Indian Ocean 1500–1800 (Calcutta, 1987). Das Gupta, Monica. “Fertility Decline in Punjab: Parallels with Historical Europe,” Population Studies, 49 (1995), pp. 481–500. Datta, Rajat. Society, Economy and the Market: Commercialisation in Rural Bengal, c.1760–1800 (Delhi, 2000). Daunton, M.J. Progress and Poverty: An Economic and Social History of Britain 1700– 1850 (Oxford, 1995). Davis, Mike. Late Victorian Holocausts: El Ni o Famines and the Making of the Third World (London, 2002). Davis, Ralph. “English Foreign Trade, 1700–1774,” Economic History Review, 2nd ser., 15 (1962), pp. 285–303. Davis, Ralph. The Industrial Revolution and British Overseas Trade (Leicester, 1979). Deane, Phyllis. The First Industrial Revolution (Cambridge, 1965). Depitre, Edgard. La toile peinte en France au xvii et au xviii siècles; industrie, commerce, prohibitions (Paris, 1912). Dirks, Nicholas B. Castes of Mind: Colonialism and the Making of Modern India (Princeton, 2001). DuPlessis, Robert S. “Cloth and the Emergence of the Atlantic Economy,” in Peter Coclanis (ed.), The Atlantic Economy during the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries (Columbia, S.C., 2005), pp. 72–94. DuPlessis, Robert S. “Cottons Consumption in the Seventeenth- and Eighteenth-Century North Atlantic,” in Riello and Parthasarathi, Spinning World, pp. 227–46. Dutt, Romesh. The Economic History of India, vol. I, Under Early British Rule (2nd edn., London, 1906, repr. Delhi, 1990). Dutt, Romesh. The Economic History of India, vol. II, In the Victorian Age 1837–1900 (2nd edn., London, 1906, repr. Delhi, 1990). Dyson, Tim. “The Historical Demography of Berar, 1881–1980,” in Tim Dyson (ed.), India's Historical Demography: Studies in Famine, Disease and Society (London, 1989), pp. 150–96. Eaton, Richard M. The Rise of Islam and the Bengal Frontier, 1204–1760 (Berkeley, 1993). Eaton, Richard M. A Social History of the Deccan, 1300–1761: Eight Indian Lives (Cambridge, 2005). Ekelund, Jr., Robert B. and Robert D. Tollison. Politicized Economies: Monarchy, Monopoly, and Mercantilism (College Station, Tex., 1997). Eldem, Edhem. French Trade in Istanbul in the Eighteenth Century (Leiden, 1999). Ellison, Thomas. The Cotton Trade of Great Britain (London, 1886). Elvin, Mark. The Pattern of the Chinese Past (Stanford, 1973). Elvin, Mark. “Skills and Resources in Late Traditional China,” in Dwight H. Perkins (ed.), China's Modern Economy in Historical Perspective (Stanford, 1975), pp. 85–113. Elvin, Mark. “Three Thousand Years of Unsustainable Growth: China's Environment from Archaic Times to the Present,” East Asian History, 6 (1993), pp. 7–46. Epstein, S.R. “Craft Guilds, Apprenticeship, and Technological Change in Pre-Industrial Europe,” JEH, 58 (1998), pp. 684–713. Epstein, S.R. Freedom and Growth: The Rise of States and Markets in Europe, 1300–1750 (London, 2000). Epstein, S.R. “Property Rights to Technical Knowledge in Premodern Europe, 1300– 1800,” American Economic Review, 94 (2004), pp. 382–7. Farnie, Douglas. The English Cotton Industry and the World Market, 1815–1896 (Oxford, 1979). Faroqhi, Suraiya. “Ottoman Cotton Textiles: The Story of a Success that did not Last, 1500–1800,” in Riello and Parthasarathi, Spinning World, pp. 89–103. Febvre, Lucien. The Problem of Unbelief in the Sixteenth Century: The Religion of Rabelais, trans. Beatrice Gottlieb (Cambridge, Mass., 1982). Ferguson, Niall. Empire: The Rise and Demise of the British World Order and the Lessons for Global Power (New York, 2003). Field, Alexander James. “The Problem with Neoclassical Institutional Economics: A Critique with Special Reference to the North/Thomas Model of Pre-1500 Europe,” Explorations in Economic History, 18 (1981), pp. 174–98. Findlay, Ronald and Kevin H. O'Rourke. Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and the World Economy in the Second Millennium (Princeton, 2007). Finnane, Antonia. Speaking of Yangzhou: A Chinese City, 1550–1850 (Cambridge, Mass., 2004). Fitton, R.S. and A.P. Wadsworth. The Strutts and the Arkwrights (Manchester, 1958). Flinn, Michael W. “The Growth of the English Iron Industry 1660–1760,” Economic History Review, 2nd ser., 11 (1958), pp. 144–53. Flinn, Michael W. The History of the British Coal Industry, vol. II, 1700–1830, The Industrial Revolution (Oxford, 1984). Flynn, Dennis O. and Arturo Giráldez. “Born with a ‘Silver Spoon’: The Origin of World Trade,” Journal of World History, 6 (1995), pp. 201–21. Francks, Penelope. Rural Economic Development in Japan from the Nineteenth Century to the Pacific War (London, 2006). Frangakis-Syrett, Elena. The Commerce of Smyrna in the Eighteenth Century (1700– 1820) (Athens, 1992). Frangakis-Syrett, Elena. “The Trade of Cotton and Cloth in zmir: From the Second Half of the Eighteenth Century to the Early Nineteenth Century,” in Çaglar Keyder and Faruk Tabak (eds.), Landholding and Commercial Agriculture in the Middle East (Albany, 1991), pp. 97–111. Frank, Andre Gunder. ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian Age (Berkeley, 1998). Fraser, Derek. “Edward Baines,” in Patricia Hollis (ed.), Pressure from Without in Early Victorian England (London, 1974), pp. 183–209. Fremdling, Rainer. “Continental Responses to British Innovations in the Iron Industry during the Eighteenth and Early Nineteenth Centuries,” in Leandro Prados de la Escosura (ed.), Exceptionalism and Industrialisation: Britain and its European Rivals, 1688–1815 (Cambridge, 2004), pp. 145–69. Fremdling, Rainer. “Foreign Competition and Technological Change: British Exports and the Modernisation of the German Iron Industry from the 1820s to the 1860s,” in W. R. Lee (ed.), German Industry and German Industrialization: Essays in German Economic and Business History in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries (London, 1991), pp. 47–76. Fremdling, Rainer. “Transfer Patterns of British Technology to the Continent: The Case of the Iron Industry,” European Review of Economic History, 4 (2000), pp. 195–222. Fremdling, R. and B. Gales. “Ironmasters and Iron Production during the Belgian Industrial Revolution: The ‘Enquete’ of 1828,” in Paul Klep and Eddy van Cauwenberghe (eds.), Entrepreneurship and the Transformation of the Economy (10th–20th Centuries): Essays in Honour of Herman van der Wee (Leuven, 1994), pp. 247–58. Fukasawa, Katsumi. Toilerie et commerce du Levant: d'Alep à Marseilles (Paris, 1987). Fukazawa, Hiroshi. The Medieval Deccan: Peasants, Social System and States, Sixteenth to Eighteenth Centuries (Delhi, 1991). Furniss, Edgar S. The Position of the Laborer in a System of Nationalism: A Study of the Labor Theories of the Later English Mercantilists (Boston, 1920). Gadgil, D.R. The Industrial Evolution of India in Recent Times (London, 1924). Gadgil, Madhav and Ramachandra Guha. This Fissured Land: An Ecological History of India (Berkeley, 1993). Ganguli, B.N. Indian Economic Thought: Nineteenth Century Perspectives (New Delhi, 1977). Geggus, David. “The French Slave Trade: An Overview,” William and Mary Quarterly, 58 (2001), pp. 119–38. Genç, Mehmet. “Ottoman Industry in the Eighteenth Century,” in Donald Quataert (ed.), Manufacturing in the Ottoman Empire and Turkey, 1500–1950 (Albany, N.Y., 1994), pp. 59–86. Gerschenkron, Alexander. Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective: A Book of Essays (Cambridge, Mass., 1962). Gerth, H.H. and C. Wright Mills (eds.). From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology (New York, 1946). Gillispie, Charles C. “The Natural History of Industry,” Isis, 48 (1957), pp. 398–407. Glamann, Kristoff. “The Dutch East India Company's Trade in Japanese Copper, 1645– 1736,” Scandinavian Economic History Review, 1 (1953), pp. 41–79. Golas, Peter J. Science and Civilisation in China, vol. V, Chemistry and Chemical Technology, part 13, “Mining” (Cambridge, 1999). Goldstone, Jack A. “Efflorescences and Economic Growth in World History: Rethinking the ‘Rise of the West’ and the Industrial Revolution,” Journal of World History, 13 (2002), pp. 323–89. Goody, Jack. The East in the West (Cambridge, 1996). Greenberg, Dolores. “Reassessing the Power Patterns of the Industrial Revolution: An Anglo-American Comparison,” American Historical Review, 87 (1982), pp. 1237–61. Griffiths, Trevor, Philip Hunt and Patrick O'Brien. “The Curious History and Imminent Demise of the Challenge and Response Model,” in Maxine Berg and Kristine Bruland (eds.), Technological Revolutions in Europe: Historical Perspectives (Cheltenham, 1998), pp. 119–37. Griffiths, Trevor, Philip Hunt and Patrick O'Brien “Scottish, Irish, and Imperial Connections: Parliament, the Three Kingdoms, and the Mechanization of Cotton Spinning in Eighteenth-Century Britain,” Economic History Review, n.s., 61 (2008), pp. 625–50. Grove, Richard. “The Transfer of Botanical Knowledge between Europe and Asia, 1498– 1800,” Journal of the Japan–Netherlands Institute, 3 (1991), pp. 160–76. Guha, Sumit. The Agrarian Economy of the Bombay Deccan 1818–1941 (Delhi, 1985). Guha, Sumit, Health and Population in South Asia: From Earliest Times to the Present (New Delhi, 2001). Guy, John. Woven Cargoes: Indian Textiles in the East (London, 1998). Habakkuk, H.J. “The Historical Experience of Economic Development,” in E. A. G. Robinson (ed.), Problems in Economic Development: Proceedings of a Conference held by the International Economic Association (London, 1965), pp. 112–38. Habib, Irfan. The Agrarian System of Mughal India (2nd rev. edn., Delhi, 1999). Habib, Irfan. “Akbar and Technology,” in Irfan Habib (ed.), Akbar and His India (Delhi, 1997), pp. 129–48. Habib, Irfan. “Banking in Mughal India,” in Tapan Raychaudhuri (ed.), Contributions to Indian Economic History, vol. I (1960), pp. 1–20. Habib, Irfan. “Cartography in Mughal India,” The Indian Archives, 28 (1979), pp. 90–5. Habib, Irfan. “Labourers and Artisans,” in J. S. Grewal (ed.), The State and Society in Medieval India (New Delhi, 2005), pp. 166–73. Habib, Irfan. “Usury in Medieval India,” CSSH, 6 (1964), pp. 393–419. Habib, Irfan. (ed.). Confronting Colonialism: Resistance and Modernization under Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan (New Delhi, 1999). Habib, Irfan. (ed.). State and Diplomacy under Tipu Sultan: Documents and Essays (New Delhi, 2001). Haider, Najaf. “Precious Metal Flows and Currency Circulation in the Mughal Empire,” Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient, 39 (1996), pp. 298–364. Haider, Najaf. “Structure and Movement of Wages in the Mughal Empire, 1500–1700,” in Jan Lucassen (ed.), Wages and Currency: Global Comparisons from Antiquity to the Twentieth Century (Bern, 2007), pp. 293–321. Hajnal, John. “Two Kinds of Preindustrial Household Formation System,” Population and Development Review, 8 (1982), pp. 449–94. Hammersley, G. “The Charcoal Iron Industry and its Fuel, 1540–1750,” Economic History Review, 2nd ser., 26 (1973), pp. 593–613. Hardgrave, Jr., Robert L. A Portrait of the Hindus: Balthazar Solvyns and the European Image of India 1760–1824 (Ahmedabad, 2004). Harley, C. Knick. “Reassessing the Industrial Revolution: A Macro View,” in Joel Mokyr (ed.), The British Industrial Revolution: An Economic Perspective (2nd edn., Boulder, Colo., 1999), pp. 160–205. Harris, J.R. Industrial Espionage and Technology Transfer: Britain and France in the Eighteenth Century (Aldershot, 1998). Harris, J.R. “Skills, Coal and British Industry in the Eighteenth Century,” History, 61 (1976), pp. 167–82. Hartwell, Robert. “A Cycle of Economic Change in Imperial China: Coal and Iron in Northeast China, 750–1350,” Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient, 10 (1967), pp. 102–59. Hartwell, Robert. “A Revolution in the Iron and Coal Industries during the Northern Sung,” JAS, 21 (1962), pp. 153–62. Hatcher, John. The History of the British Coal Industry, vol. I, Before 1700, Towards the Age of Coal (Oxford, 1993). Hausman, William J. “A Model of the London Coal Trade in the Eighteenth Century,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94 (1980), pp. 1–14. Haynes, Douglas E. and Tirthankar Roy. “Conceiving Mobility: Weavers’ Migrations in Pre-Colonial and Colonial India,” IESHR, 36 (1999), pp. 35–67. Headrick, Daniel R. The Tentacles of Progess: Technology Transfer in the Age of Imperialism, 1850–1940 (Oxford, 1988). Heesterman, J.C. The Inner Conflict of Tradition: Essays in Indian Ritual, Kingship, and Society (Chicago, 1985). Hefford, Wendy. The Victoria and Albert Museum's Textile Collection: Design for Printed Textiles in England from 1750 to 1850 (New York, 1992). Heston, Alan. “Review of Shireen Moosvi, The Economy of the Mughal Empire c.1595: A Statistical Study,” Economic History Review, n.s., 41 (1988), pp. 670–2. Hilaire-Perez, Liliane. “Invention and the State in 18th-Century France,” Technology and Culture, 32 (1991), pp. 911–31. Hilaire-Perez, Liliane. “Technology as a Public Culture in the Eighteenth Century: The Artisans’ Legacy,” History of Science, 45 (2007), pp. 135–53. Hilton, George. The Truck System (Cambridge, 1960). The History and Description of Fossil Fuel, the Collieries, and Coal Trade of Great Britain (London, 1835). Hobsbawm, Eric. Industry and Empire: The Birth of the Industrial Revolution (new edn., London, 1999). Hobsbawm, Eric. Labouring Men (New York, 1964). Homer, Sidney and Richard Sylla. A History of Interest Rates (4th edn., Hoboken, N.J., 2005). Horn, Jeff. The Path Not Taken: French Industrialization in the Age of Revolution, 1750– 1830 (Cambridge, Mass., 2006). Hossain, Hameeda. The Company Weavers of Bengal: The East India Company and the Organization of Textile Production in Bengal 1750–1813 (Delhi, 1988). Hudson, Derek and Kenneth W. Luckhurst. The Royal Society of Arts, 1754–1954 (London, 1954). Hudson, Pat. The Genesis of Industrial Capital: A Study of the West Riding Wool Textile Industry, c.1750–1850 (Cambridge, 1986). Hudson, Pat. “Industrial Organisation and Structure,” in Roderick Floud and Paul Johnson (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain, vol. I, Industrialisation, 1700–1860 (Cambridge, 2004), pp. 28–56. Hughes, Edward. North Country Life in the Eighteenth Century, vol. I, The North-East, 1700–1750 (Oxford, 1952). Hurd, John M. “Railways,” in Dharma Kumar (ed.), Cambridge Economic History of India, vol. II, c.1757–c.1970 (Cambridge, 1982), pp. 737–61. Hyde, Charles K. Technological Change and the British Iron Industry, 1700–1870 (Princeton, 1977). Hyde, Charles K. “Technological Change in the British Wrought Iron Industry, 1750– 1815: A Reinterpretation,” Economic History Review, 2nd ser., 27 (1974), pp. 190–206. nalc k, Halil. “The Ottoman Cotton Market and India: The Role of Labor Cost in Market Competition,” in Halil nalc k, The Middle East and the Balkans under the Ottoman Empire: Essays on Economy and Society (Bloomington, 1993), pp. 264–306. nalc k, Halil. “When and How British Cotton Goods Invaded the Levant Markets,” in Huri slamo lu- nan (ed.), The Ottoman Empire and the World Economy (Cambridge, 1987), pp. 374–83. Inikori, Joseph E. Africans and the Industrial Revolution in England: A Study in International Trade and Economic Development (Cambridge, 2002). Inkster, Ian. “Potentially Global: ‘Useful and Reliable Knowledge’ and Material Progress in Europe, 1474–1914,” International History Review, 27 (2006), pp. 237–86. Jacob, Margaret C. “Mechanical Science on the Factory Floor: The Early Industrial Revolution in Leeds,” History of Science, 45 (2007), pp. 197–221. Jacob, Margaret C. Scientific Culture and the Making of the Industrial West (Oxford, 1997). Jacob, Margaret C. and Matthew Kadane. “Missing, Now Found in the Eighteenth Century: Weber's Protestant Capitalist,” American Historical Review, 108 (2003), pp. 20–49. Jayaraman, R. Sarasvati Mahal: A Short History and Guide (Thanjavur, 1981). John, A.H. “The London Assurance Company and the Marine Insurance Market of the Eighteenth Century,” Economica, 25 (1958), pp. 126–41. Johns, Adrian. “How to Acknowledge a Revolution,” American Historical Review, 107 (2002), pp. 106–25. Johns, Adrian. The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in the Making (Chicago, 1998). Johnson, Marion. Anglo-African Trade in the Eighteenth Century, ed. J. T. Lindblad and Robert Ross (Leiden, 1990). Jones, Eric. The European Miracle: Environments, Economies and Geopolitics in the History of Europe and Asia (3rd edn., Cambridge, 2003). Kasturi, Malavika. Embattled Identities: Rajput Lineages and the Colonial State in Nineteenth-Century North India (Delhi, 2002). Khan, B. Zorina and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. “A Tale of Two Countries: Innovation and Incentive among Great Inventors in Britain and the United States, 1750–1930,” in Roger E. A. Farmer (ed.), Macroeconomics in the Small and the Large: Essays on Microfoundations, Macroeconomic Applications and Economic History in Honor of Axel Leijonhufvud (Cheltenham, 2008), pp. 140–55. Khan, Iqbal Ghani. “The Awadh Scientific Renaissance and the Role of the French: c.1750–1820,” Indian Journal of History of Science, 38 (2003), pp. 273–301. Khan, Iqbal Ghani. “Technology and the Question of Elite Intervention in Eighteenth-Century North India,” in Richard B. Barnett (ed.), Rethinking Early Modern India (New Delhi, 2002), pp. 257–88. Khoury, Dina Rizk. State and Provincial Society in the Ottoman Empire: Mosul, 1540– 1834 (Cambridge, 1997). Klein, Herbert S. The Atlantic Slave Trade (Cambridge, 1999). Kling, Blair B. Partner in Empire: Dwarkanath Tagore and the Age of Enterprise in Eastern India (Berkeley, 1976). Krugman, Paul R. “Is Free Trade Passé?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1 (1987), pp. 131–44. Krugman, Paul R. “Trade, Accumulation, and Uneven Development,” Journal of Development Economics, 8 (1981), pp. 149–61. Kuhn, Philip A. Origins of the Modern Chinese State (Stanford, 2002). Kumar, Deepak. “India,” in Roy Porter (ed.), The Cambridge History of Science, vol. IV, Eighteenth-Century Science (Cambridge, 2003), pp. 669–87. Kumar, Dharma. Land and Caste in South India: Agricultural Labour in Madras Presidency in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge, 1965). Lambert, Andrew. “Empire and Seapower: Shipbuilding by the East India Company at Bombay for the Royal Navy 1805–1850,” in Philippe Haudrère, René Estienne and Gérard Le Bouëdec (eds.), Les flottes des Compagnies des Indes 1600–1857 (Vincennes, 1996), pp. 149–71. Landes, David S. The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present (Cambridge, 1969). Landes, David S. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So Poor (New York, 1998). Lavely, William and R. Bin Wong. “Revising the Malthusian Narrative: The Comparative Study of Population Dynamics in Late Imperial China,” JAS, 57 (1998), pp. 714–48. Lee, James Z. and Wang Feng. One Quarter of Humanity: Malthusian Mythology and Chinese Realities, 1700–2000 (Cambridge, Mass., 1999). Lemire, Beverly. Fashion's Favourite: The Cotton Trade and the Consumer in Britain, 1660–1800 (Oxford, 1991). Lemire, Beverly. “Revising the Historical Narrative: India, Europe, and the Cotton Trade, c.1300–1800,” in Riello and Parthasarathi, Spinning World, pp. 205–26. Leonard, Karen. “The ‘Great Firm’ Theory of the Decline of the Mughal Empire,” CSSH, 21 (1979), pp. 151–67. Lewis, Frank. English Chintz: A History of Printed Fabrics from Earliest Times to the Present Day (Leigh-on-Sea, Essex, 1942). Li, Bozhong. Agricultural Development in Jiangnan, 1620–1850 (New York, 1998). Li, Lillian M. Fighting Famine in North China: State, Market, and Environmental Decline, 1690s–1990s (Stanford, 2007). Lin, Man-houng. China Upside Down: Currency, Society, and Ideologies, 1808–1856 (Cambridge, Mass., 2006). Linebaugh, Peter. The London Hanged (Cambridge, 1992). Lobligeois, Mireille. “Atelier publics et filatures privées à Pondichéry après 1816,” Bulletin de l’École française d'Extr me Orient, 59 (1972), pp. 3–99. Lovejoy, Paul. Transformations in Slavery: A History of Slavery in Africa (Cambridge, 1983). Ludden, David. “Agrarian Commercialism in Eighteenth-Century South India: Evidence from the 1823 Tirunelveli Census,” IESHR, 25 (1988), pp. 493–519. Ludden, David. Peasant History in South India (Princeton, 1985). Macfarlane, Alan. The Savage Wars of Peace: England, Japan and the Malthusian Trap (Oxford, 1997). Machado, Pedro. “Awash in a Sea of Cloth: Gujarat, Africa, and the Western Indian Ocean, 1300–1800,” in Riello and Parthasarathi, Spinning World, pp. 161–79. MacLeod, Christine. “The European Origins of British Technological Predominance,” in Leandro Prados de la Escosura (ed.), Exceptionalism and Industrialisation: Britain and its European Rivals, 1688–1815 (Cambridge, 2004), pp. 111–26. MacLeod, Christine. Inventing the Industrial Revolution: The English Patent System, 1660–1800 (Cambridge, 1988). Malanima, Paolo. “The Energy Basis for Early Modern Growth, 1650–1820,” in Maarten Prak (ed.), Early Modern Capitalism: Economic and Social Change in Europe, 1400– 1800 (London, 2001), pp. 51–68. Mann, Michael. “Ecological Change in North India: Deforestation and Agrarian Distress in the Ganga-Yamuna Doab 1800–1850,” in Richard H. Grove, Vinita Damodaran and Satpal Sangwan (eds.), Nature and the Orient: The Environmental History of South and Southeast Asia (Delhi, 1998), pp. 396–420. Mantoux, Paul. The Industrial Revolution in the Eighteenth Century: An Outline of the Beginnings of the Modern Factory System in England (Chicago, 1983; reprint of revised edition of London, 1961). Markovits, Claude. The Global World of Indian Merchants, 1750–1947: Traders of Sind from Bukhara to Panama (Cambridge, 2000). Marks, Robert B. Tigers, Rice, Silk, and Silt: Environment and Economy in Late Imperial South China (Cambridge, 1998). Marshall, P.J. “The Company and the Coolies: Labour in Early Calcutta,” in P. Sinha (ed.), The Urban Experience, Calcutta: Essays in Honour of Professor Nisith R. Ray (Calcutta, 1987), pp. 23–38. Marsot, Afaf Lutfi al-Sayyid. Egypt in the Reign of Muhammad Ali (Cambridge, 1984). Martin, Gaston. Nantes au xviiie siècle: L’ère des négriers (1714–1774) (Paris, 1931). Marx, Karl. The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (New York, 1963). Mathias, Peter. The Transformation of England: Essays in the Economic and Social History of England in the Eighteenth Century (New York, 1979). Mazzaoui, Maureen Fennell. The Italian Cotton Industry in the Later Middle Ages, 1100– 1600 (Cambridge, 1981). McCloskey, Deirdre. The Rhetoric of Economics (2nd edn., Madison, 1998). McCrea, Lawrence. “Novelty of Form and Novelty of Substance in Seventeenth-Century Mimamsa,” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 30 (2002), pp. 481–94. McCrea, Lawrence. “Playing with the System: Fragmentation and Individualization in Late Pre-colonial Mimamsa,” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 36 (2008), pp. 575–85. Minkowski, Christopher Z. “Competing Cosmologies in Early Modern Indian Astronomy,” in Charles Burnett, Jan P. Hogendijk, Kim Plofker and Michio Yano (eds.), Studies in the History of the Exact Sciences in Honour of David Pingree (Leiden, 2004), pp. 349–85. Mitra, D.B. The Cotton Weavers of Bengal, 1757–1833 (Calcutta, 1978). Miyazaki, Yoichi. “Seicho Zenki No Sekitangyo: Kanryuki No Tanko Seisaku To Keiei (Coal Mining in Early Qing China: Coal Mining Policies and Administration during the Qianlong Period),” Shigaku Zasshi, 100 (1991), pp. 36–63. Mokyr, Joel. The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain 1700–1850 (New Haven, 2009). Mokyr, Joel. The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy (Princeton, 2002). Mokyr, Joel. “The Intellectual Origins of Modern Economic Growth,” JEH, 65 (2005), pp. 285–351. Mokyr, Joel. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress (New York, 1990). Montgomery, Florence. Textiles in America, 1650–1870 (New York, 1984). Moreland, W.H. From Akbar to Aurangzeb: A Study in Indian Economic History (London, 1923, repr. New Delhi, 1993). Moreland, W.H. India at the Death of Akbar: An Economic Study (London, 1920, repr. New Delhi, 1990). Muldrew, Craig. The Economy of Obligation: The Culture of Credit and Social Relations in Early Modern England (New York, 1998). Murton, Brian J. “Land and Class: Cultural, Social and Biophysical Integration in Interior Tamilnadu in the Late Eighteenth Century,” in Robert E. Frykenberg (ed.), Land Tenure and Peasant in South Asia (Delhi, 1977), pp. 81–99. Musson, A.E. and Eric Robinson. Science and Technology in the Industrial Revolution (Manchester, 1969). Nadri, Ghulam A. Eighteenth-Century Gujarat: The Dynamics of Its Political Economy, 1750–1800 (Leiden, 2009). Nair, Savithri Preetha. “Native Collecting and Natural Knowledge (1798–1832): Raja Serfoji II of Tanjore as a ‘Centre of Calculation,’” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, series 3, 15 (2005), pp. 279–302. Naquin, Susan. Peking: Temples and City Life, 1400–1900 (Berkeley, 2000). Nef, John. The Rise of the British Coal Industry, 2 vols. (London, 1932). North, Douglass C. Understanding the Process of Economic Change (Princeton, 2005). North, Douglass C. and Robert Paul Thomas. The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic History (Cambridge, 1973). O'Brien, Patrick. “Mercantilism and Imperialism in the Rise and Decline of the Dutch and British Economies 1585–1815,” De Economist, 148 (2000), pp. 469–501. O'Brien, Patrick. “Political Preconditions for the Industrial Revolution,” in Patrick O'Brien and Roland Quinault (eds.), The Industrial Revolution and British Society (Cambridge, 1993), pp. 124–55. O'Brien, Patrick. “State Formation and the Construction of Institutions for the First Industrial Nation,” in Ha-Joon Chang, Institutional Change and Economic Development (New York, 2007), pp. 177–97. O'Brien, Patrick, Trevor Griffiths and Philip Hunt. “Political Components of the Industrial Revolution: Parliament and the English Cotton Textile Industry, 1660–1774,” Economic History Review, n.s., 44 (1991), pp. 395–423. O'Brien, Patrick, Trevor Griffiths, and Philip Hunt, “Technological Change During the First Industrial Revolution: The Paradigm Case of Textiles, 1688–1851,” in Robert Fox (ed.), Technological Change: Methods and Themes in the History of Technology (Amsterdam, 1996), pp. 155–76. Ormrod, David. The Rise of Commercial Empires: England and the Netherlands in the Age of Mercantilism (Cambridge, 2003). Osborne, Anne. “Highlands and Lowlands: Economic and Ecological Interactions in the Lower Yangzi Region under the Qing,” in Mark Elvin and Liu Ts'ui-jung (eds.), Sediments of Time: Environment and Society in Chinese History (Cambridge, 1998), pp. 203–34. Osborne, Anne. “The Local Politics of Land Reclamation in the Lower Yangzi Highlands,” Late Imperial China, 15 (1994), pp. 1–46. Pamuk, evket. A Monetary History of the Ottoman Empire (Cambridge, 2000). Panikkar, K.N. “Cultural Trends in Precolonial India: An Overview,” in S. Irfan Habib and Dhruv Raina (eds.), Social History of Science in Colonial India (Delhi, 2007), pp. 1–24. Panikkar, N.K. and T.M. Srinivasan. “Kappal Sattiram: A Tamil Treatise on Shipbuilding during the Seventeenth Century,” Indian Journal of the History of Science, 7 (1972), pp. 16–26. Paris, Robert. Histoire du commerce de Marseille, vol. V, De 1660 à 1789; le Levant (Paris, 1957). Parthasarathi, Prasannan. “Agriculture, Labour, and the Standard of Living in Eighteenth-Century India,” in Robert C. Allen, Tommy Bengtsson and Martin Dribe (eds.), Living Standards in the Past: New Perspectives on Well-Being in Asia and Europe (Oxford, 2005), pp. 99–109. Parthasarathi, Prasannan. “Historical Issues of Deindustrialization in Nineteenth-Century South India,” in Riello and Roy, How India Clothed the World, pp. 415–35. Parthasarathi, Prasannan. “Rethinking Wages and Competitiveness in the Eighteenth Century: Britain and South India,” P&P, 158 (1998), pp. 79–109. Parthasarathi, Prasannan. The Transition to a Colonial Economy: Weavers, Merchants and Kings in South India, 1720–1800 (Cambridge, 2001). Parthasarathi, Prasannan and Giorgio Riello. “From India to the World: Cotton and Fashionability,” in Frank Trentmann (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of the History of Consumption (Oxford, forthcoming). Paulinyi, Akos. “John Kay's Flying Shuttle: Some Considerations on His Technical Capacity and Economic Impact,” Textile History, 17 (1986), pp. 149–66. Peabody, Norbert. Hindu Kingship and Polity in Precolonial India (Cambridge, 2003). Pearsall, Alan. “The Royal Navy and the Protection of Trade in the Eighteenth Century,” in Guerres et paix, 1660–1815 (Vincennes, 1987), pp. 149–62. Pearson, M.N. “Asia and World Precious Metal Flows in the Early Modern Period,” in John McGuire, Patrick Bertola and Peter Reeves (eds.), Evolution of the World Economy, Precious Metals and India (New Delhi, 2001), pp. 21–57. Perdue, Peter C. China Marches West: The Qing Conquest of Central Eurasia (Cambridge, Mass., 2005). Perdue, Peter. Exhausting the Earth: State and Peasant in Hunan, 1500–1850 (Cambridge, Mass., 1987). Perlin, Frank. “Proto-Industrialization and Pre-Colonial South Asia,” P&P, 98 (1983), pp. 30–95. Perlin, Frank. “State Formation Reconsidered,” MAS, 19 (1985), pp. 415–80. Peterson, Indira Viswanathan. “The Cabinet of King Serfoji of Tanjore: A European Collection in Early Nineteenth-Century India,” Journal of the History of Collections, 11 (1999), pp. 71–93. Phillimore, R.H. Historical Records of the Survey of India, 4 vols. (Dehra Dun, 1945– 1958). Pollock, Sheldon. The Ends of Man at the End of Premodernity (Amsterdam, 2005). Pollock, Sheldon. “Is There an Indian Intellectual History? Introduction to ‘Theory and Method in Indian Intellectual History,’” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 36 (2008), pp. 533–42. Pollock, Sheldon. “Literary Culture and Manuscript Culture in Precolonial India,” in Simon Eliot, Andrew Nash and Ian Willison (eds.), Literary Cultures and the Material Book (London, 2007), pp. 77–94. Pomeranz, Kenneth. The Great Divergence: China, Europe and the Making of the Modern World Economy (Princeton, 2000). Prakash, Om. “Bullion for Goods: International Trade and the Economy of Early Eighteenth-Century Bengal,” IESHR, 13 (1976), pp. 159–87. Prakash, Om. “The Dutch and the Indian Ocean Textile Trade,” in Riello and Parthasarathi, Spinning World, pp. 145–60. Prakash, Om. The Dutch East India Company and the Economy of Bengal, 1630–1720 (Princeton, 1985). Prakash, Om. “Global Precious Metal Flows and India, 1500–1750,” in John McGuire, Patrick Bertola and Peter Reeves (eds.), Evolution of the World Economy, Precious Metals and India (New Delhi, 2001), pp. 59–76. Qaisar, Ahsan Jan. The Indian Response to European Technology and Culture (Delhi, 1982). Quataert, Donald. “Clothing Laws, State, and Society in the Ottoman Empire, 1720– 1829,” International Journal of Middle East Studies, 29 (1997), pp. 403–25. Quataert, Donald (ed.). Consumption Studies and the History of the Ottoman Empire, 1550–1922: An Introduction (Albany, 2000). Raj, Kapil. Relocating Modern Science: Circulation and the Construction of Scientific Knowledge in South Asia and Europe (Delhi, 2006). Ram, H. Y. Mohan. “On the English Edition of Van Rheede's Hortus Malabaricus by K. S. Manilal (2003),” Current Science, 89 (2005), pp. 1672–80. Raveux, Olivier. “The Birth of a New European Industry: L'Indiennage in Seventeenth-Century Marseilles,” in Riello and Parthasarathi, Spinning World, pp. 291–306. Raveux, Olivier. “Spaces and Technologies in the Cotton Industry in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries: The Example of Printed Calicoes in Marseilles,” Textile History, 36 (2005), pp. 131–45. Ray, Rajat Kanta. “Asian Capital in the Age of European Domination: The Rise of the Bazaar, 1800–1914,” MAS, 29 (1995), pp. 449–554. Raychaudhuri, Tapan. “The Mid-Eighteenth Century Background,” in Dharma Kumar (ed.), The Cambridge Economic History of India, vol. II, c.1757–c.1970 (Cambridge, 1982), pp. 3–35. Raychaudhuri, Tapan “Non-Agricultural Production: Mughal India,” in Tapan Raychaudhuri and Irfan Habib (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of India, vol. I, c.1200–c.1750 (Cambridge, 1982), pp. 261–307. Raymond, André. Artisans et commerçants au Caire au xviii siècle, 2 vols. (Damascus, 1973). Raymond, André. “Les sources de la richesse urbaine au Caire au dix-huitième siècle,” in Thomas Naff and Roger Owen (eds.), Studies in Eighteenth Century Islamic History (Carbondale, Ill., 1977), pp. 184–204. Raymond, André. “L'impact de la pénétration Européenne sur l’économie de l’Égypte au xviii siècle,” Annales islamologiques, 18 (1982), pp. 217–35. Redford, Arthur. Manchester Merchants and Foreign Trade, 1794–1858 (Manchester, 1934, repr. Manchester 1973). Richards, John F. “Mughal State Finance and the Premodern World Economy,” CSSH, 23 (1981), pp. 285–308. Richards, John F. The Unending Frontier: An Environmental History of the Early Modern World (Berkeley, 2003). Richardson, David. “The Eighteenth-Century British Slave Trade: Estimates of its Volume and Coastal Distribution in Africa,” Research in Economic History, 12 (1989), pp. 151– 95. Riello, Giorgio. “Asian Knowledge and the Development of Calico Printing in Europe in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries,” Journal of Global History, 5 (2010), pp. 1– 28. Riello, Giorgio. “The Globalization of Cotton Textiles: Indian Cottons, Europe, and the Atlantic World, 1600–1850”, in Riello and Parthasarathi, Spinning World, pp. 261–87. Riello, Giorgio. “The Indian Apprenticeship: The Trade of Indian Textiles and the Making of European Cottons,” in Riello and Roy, How India Clothed the World, pp. 309–46. Riello, Giorgio and Prasannan Parthasarathi (eds.). The Spinning World: A Global History of Cotton Textiles, 1200–1850 (Oxford, 2009). Riello, Giorgio and Tirthankar Roy (eds.). How India Clothed the World: The World of South Asian Textiles, 1500–1850 (Leiden, 2009). Roberts, Lissa, Simon Schaffer and Peter Dear (eds.). The Mindful Hand: Inquiry and Invention from the Late Renaissance to Early Industrialization (Amsterdam, 2007). Roberts, Richard. “West Africa and the Pondicherry Textile Industry,” in Tirthankar Roy (ed.), Cloth and Commerce: Textiles in Colonial India (New Delhi, 1996), pp. 142–74. Roche, Daniel. The Culture of Clothing: Dress and Fashion in the Ancien Régime, trans. Jean Birrell (Cambridge, 1994). Rothstein, Natalie. “The Calico Campaign of 1719–1721,” East London Papers, 7 (1964), pp. 3–21. Rowe, William T. Hankow: Commerce and Society in a Chinese City, 1796–1889 (Stanford, 1984). Rowe, William T. Saving the World: Chen Hongmou and Elite Consciousness in Eighteenth-Century China (Stanford, 2001). Roy, Tirthankar. “Economic History and Modern India: Redefining the Link,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16 (2002), pp. 109–30. Roy, Tirthankar. “Knowledge and Divergence from the Perspective of Early Modern India,” Journal of Global History, 3 (2008), pp. 361–87. Rudner, David West. “Banker's Trust and the Culture of Banking among the Nattukottai Chettiars of Colonial South India,” MAS, 23 (1989), pp. 417–58. Rudner, David West. Caste and Capitalism in Colonial India: The Nattukottai Chettiars (Berkeley, 1994). Rule, John. The Experience of Labour in Eighteenth-Century Industry (New York, 1981). Rungta, Radhe Shyam. The Rise of Business Corporations in India (Cambridge, 1970). Said, Edward. Orientalism (New York, 1978). Saito, Osamu. “Forest History and the Great Divergence: China, Japan, and the West Compared,” Journal of Global History, 4 (2009), pp. 379–404. Samuel, Raphael. “Workshop of the World: Steam Power and Hand Technology in mid-Victorian Britain,” History Workshop, 3 (1977), pp. 6–72. Sangwan, Satpal. Science, Technology and Colonisation: An Indian Experience, 1757– 1857 (Delhi, 1991). Sangwan, Satpal. “The Sinking Ships: Colonial Policy and the Decline of Indian Shipping, 1735–1835,” in Roy MacLeod and Deepak Kumar (eds.), Technology and the Raj: Western Technology and Technical Transfers to India 1700–1947 (New Delhi, 1995), pp. 137–52. Sargent, Thomas J. and François R. Velde. The Big Problem of Small Change (Princeton, 2002). Sarma, Sreeramula Rajeswara. “Indian Astronomical and Time-Measuring Instruments: A Catalogue in Preparation,” Indian Journal of History of Science, 29 (1994), pp. 507– 28. Schoppa, R. Keith. Xiang Lake – Nine Centuries of Chinese Life (New Haven, 1989). Schubert, H.R. History of the British Iron and Steel Industry (London, 1957). Schumpeter, Elizabeth. English Overseas Trade Statistics, 1697–1808 (Oxford, 1960). Schwartz, Paul. “Textile Printing,” in Maurice Daumas (ed.), A History of Technology and Invention: Progress through the Ages, vol. III, The Expansion of Mechanization, 1725–1860, trans. Eileen B. Hennessy (New York, 1979), pp. 633–54. Schwartzberg, Joseph E. “South Asian Cartography: Geographical Mapping,” in J.B. Harley and David Woodward (eds.), The History of Cartography, vol. II, bk. 1, Cartography in the Traditional Islamic and South Asian Societies (Chicago, 1992), pp. 388–493. Sen, Amartya Kumar. Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation (Oxford, 1981). Shammas, Carole. “The Decline of Textile Prices in England and British America Prior to Industrialization,” Economic History Review, n.s., 47 (1994), pp. 483–507. Shapin, Steven. The Scientific Revolution (Chicago, 1996). Sharma, Virendra Nath. Sawai Jai Singh and his Astronomy (Delhi, 1995). Shiue, Carol H. “The Political Economy of Famine Relief in China, 1740–1820,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 36 (2005), pp. 33–55. Shiue, Carol H. and Wolfgang Keller. “Markets in China and Europe on the Eve of the Industrial Revolution,” American Economic Review, 97 (2007), pp. 1189–1216. Siddiqi, Asiya. Agrarian Change in a North Indian State: Uttar Pradesh, 1819–1833 (Oxford, 1973). Siddiqi, Asiya. “The Business World of Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy,” in Asiya Siddiqi (ed.), Trade and Finance in Colonial India, 1750–1860 (Delhi, 1995), pp. 186–217. Sieferle, Rolf Peter. The Subterranean Forest: Energy Systems and the Industrial Revolution, trans. Michael P. Osman (Cambridge, 2001). Sinha, N.K. The Economic History of Bengal, vol. I, From Plassey to the Permanent Settlement (2nd edn., Calcutta, 1961). Sinha, N.K. The Economic History of Bengal, vol. III, 1793–1848 (Calcutta, 1970). Sivin, Nathan. “Why the Scientific Revolution Did Not Take Place in China – Or Didn't It?” Chinese Science, 5 (1982), pp. 45–66. Sivramkrishna, Sashi. “Ascertaining Living Standards in Erstwhile Mysore, Southern India, from Francis Buchanan's Journey of 1800–01: An Empirical Contribution to the Great Divergence Debate,” Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient, 52 (2009), pp. 695–733. Spate, O.H.K. India and Pakistan: A General and Regional Geography (2nd edn., London, 1957). Spufford, Margaret. “The Cost of Apparel in Seventeenth-Century England, and the Accuracy of Gregory King,” Economic History Review, n.s., 53 (2000), pp. 677–705. Stein, Burton. “State Formation and Economy Reconsidered,” MAS, 19 (1985), pp. 387– 413. Stein, Robert Louis. The French Slave Trade in the Eighteenth Century: An Old Regime Business (Madison, 1979). Stiglitz, Joseph E. “The Contributions of the Economics of Information to Twentieth Century Economics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (2000), pp. 1441–78. Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information,” American Economic Review, 71 (1981), pp. 393–410. Studer, Roman. “India and the Great Divergence: Assessing the Efficiency of Grain Markets in Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century India,” JEH, 68 (2008), pp. 393–437. Styles, John. The Dress of the People: Everyday Fashion in Eighteenth-Century England (New Haven, 2007). Subrahmanyam, Sanjay. “A Note on Narsapur Peta: A ‘Syncretic’ Shipbuilding Centre in South India, 1570–1700,” Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient, 31 (1988), pp. 305–11. Subrahmanyam, Sanjay. The Political Economy of Commerce: Southern India, 1500– 1650 (Cambridge, 1990). Subrahmanyam, Sanjay. “The Portuguese, the Port of Basrur and the Rice Trade, 1600– 50,” IESHR, 21 (1984), pp. 433–62. Sugihara, Kaoru. “The East Asian Path of Development: A Long-Term Perspective,” in G. Arrighi, T. Hamashita and M. Selden (eds.), The Resurgence of East Asia (London, 2003), pp. 82–102. Supple, Barry. “The State and the Industrial Revolution 1700–1914,” in Carlo M. Cipolla (ed.), The Fontana Economic History of Europe: The Industrial Revolution (London, 1973), pp. 301–57. Tann, Jennifer and John Aitken. “The Diffusion of the Stationary Steam Engine from Britain to India 1790–1830,” IESHR, 29 (1992), pp. 199–214. Tann, Jennifer and M. M. Breckin. “The International Diffusion of the Watt Engine, 1775–1825,” Economic History Review, n.s., 31 (1978), pp. 541–64. Thirsk, Joan. Economic Policy and Projects: The Development of a Consumer Society in Early Modern England (Oxford, 1978). Thomas, P.J. Mercantilism and the East India Trade (London, 1926). Thomas, P.J. and B. Nataraja Pillai. Economic Depression in the Madras Presidency (1820–1854) (Madras, 1933). Thompson, E.P. “Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism,” P&P, 38 (1967), pp. 56–97. Thomson, J.K.J. A Distinctive Industrialization: Cotton in Barcelona, 1728–1832 (Cambridge, 1992). Timmins, Geoffrey. “Technological Change,” in Mary Rose (ed.), The Lancashire Cotton Industry: A History since 1700 (Preston, 1996), pp. 29–62. Tipton, Frank. “Government and Economy in the Nineteenth Century,” in Sheilagh Ogilvie and Richard Overy (eds.), Germany: A New Social and Economic History, vol. III, Since 1800 (London, 2003), pp. 106–51. Totman, Conrad. Early Modern Japan (Berkeley, 1993). Totman, Conrad. The Green Archipelago: Forestry in Pre-Industrial Japan (Athens, Ohio, 1998). Totman, Conrad. A History of Japan (Malden, Mass., 2000). Totman, Conrad. The Origins of Japan's Modern Forests: The Case of Akita (Honolulu, 1985). Tripathi, Amales. Trade and Finance in the Bengal Presidency (new edn., Calcutta, 1979). Turner, Michael J. “Before the Manchester School: Economic Theory in Early Nineteenth-Century Manchester,” History, 79 (1994), pp. 216–41. Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. “Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference-Dependent Model,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106 (1991), pp. 1039–61. Ülker, Necmi. “The Emergence of zmir as a Mediterranean Commercial Center for the French and English Interests, 1698–1740,” International Journal of Turkish Studies, 4 (1987), pp. 1–37. Unwin, George. Samuel Oldknow and the Arkwrights: The Industrial Revolution in Stockport and Marple (2nd edn., New York, 1968). van Santen, H.W. “Trade between Mughal India and the Middle East, and Mughal Monetary Policy, c.1600–1660,” in Karl Reinhold Haellquist (ed.), Asian Trade Routes (London, 1991), pp. 87–95. van Schendel, Willem. Three Deltas: Accumulation and Poverty in Rural Burma, Bengal and South India (New Delhi, 1991). van Zanden, Jan Luiten. The Long Road to the Industrial Revolution: The European Economy in Global Perspective, 1000–1800 (Leiden, 2009). van Zanden, Jan Luiten. “The Road to the Industrial Revolution: Hypotheses and Conjectures about the Medieval Origins of the ‘European Miracle,’” Journal of Global History, 3 (2008), pp. 337–59. Veinstein, Gilles. “Commercial Relations between India and the Ottoman Empire (Late Fifteenth to Late Eighteenth Centuries): A Few Notes and Hypotheses,” in Sushil Chaudhury and Michel Morineau (eds.), Merchants, Companies and Trade: Europe and Asia in the Early Modern Era (Cambidge, 1999), pp. 95–115. Vicente, Marta V. “Fashion, Race, and Cotton Textiles in Colonial Spanish America,” in Riello and Parthasarathi, Spinning World, pp.247–60. Victoria and Albert Museum. English Printed Textiles 1720–1836 (London, 1960). Viraphol, Sarasin. Tribute and Profit: Sino-Siamese Trade, 1652–1853 (Cambridge, Mass., 1977). von Braun, Wernher and Frederick I. Ordway, III. History of Rocketry and Space Travel (New York, 1967). von Glahn, Richard. Fountain of Fortune: Money and Monetary Policy in China, 1000– 1700 (Berkeley, 1996). von Tunzelmann, G.N. Steam Power and British Industrialization to 1860 (Oxford, 1978). Voth, Hans-Joachim. Time and Work in England, 1750–1830 (Oxford, 2000). Vries, Jan de and Ad van der Woude. The First Modern Economy: Success, Failure, and Perseverance of the Dutch Economy, 1500–1815 (Cambridge, 1997). Wadsworth, Alfred P. and Julia de Lacy Mann. The Cotton Trade and Industrial Lancashire, 1600–1780 (Manchester, 1931, repr. New York, 1968). Wagner, Donald B. The Traditional Chinese Iron Industry and its Modern Fate (Richmond, 1997). Wallerstein, Immanuel. The Modern World System II: Mercantilism and the Consolidation of the European World-Economy, 1600–1750 (New York, 1980). Washbrook, David. “Economic Depression and the Making of ‘Traditional’ Society in Colonial India,” Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 6th series, III (London, 1993), pp. 237–63. Washbrook, David. “Land and Labour in Eighteenth-Century South India: The Golden Age of the Pariah?” in Peter Robb (ed.), Dalit Movements and the Meanings of Labour in India (Delhi, 1993), pp. 40–59. Washbrook, David. “Progress and Problems: South Asian Economic and Social History c.1720–1860,” MAS, 22 (1988), pp. 57–96. Weber, Max. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, trans. Talcott Parsons (London, 1992, reprint of 1930 edn.). Weber, Max. The Religion of China, trans. Hans H. Gerth (New York, 1951). Weber, Max. The Religion of India, trans. Hans H. Gerth and Don Martindale (New York, 1958). Will, Pierre-Étienne. Bureaucracy and Famine in Eighteenth-Century China, trans. Elborg Forster (Stanford, 1990). Will, Pierre-Étienne and R. Bin Wong (with James Lee, Jean C. Oi and Peter C. Perdue). Nourish the People: The State Civilian Granary System in China, 1650–1850 (Ann Arbor, 1991). Williams, Raymond. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (London, 1976). Wong, R. Bin. China Transformed: Historical Change and the Limits of European Experience (Ithaca, N.Y., 1997). Wong, R. Bin. “Food Riots in the Qing Dynasty,” JAS, 41 (1982), pp. 767–88. Wong, R. Bin and Peter C. Perdue. “Famine's Foes in Ch'ing China,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 43 (1983), pp. 291–332. Wood, Sir Henry Trueman. A History of the Royal Society of the Arts (London, 1913). Wrigley, E.A. Continuity, Chance and Change: The Character of the Industrial Revolution in England (Cambridge, 1988). Wujastyk, Dominik. “The Questions of King Tukkoji: Medicine at an Eighteenth-Century South Indian Court,” Indian Journal of History of Science, 41 (2006), pp. 357–69. Young, H.A. The East India Company's Arsenals and Manufactories (Oxford, 1937). ## Unpublished Khan, Iqbal Ghani. “Revenue, Warfare and Agriculture in North India: Technical Knowledge and the Post-Mughal Elites from the Mid-18th to the Early 19th Century,” unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of London, 1990. Klein, Rudiger. “Trade in the Safavid Port City Bandar Abbas and the Persian Gulf Area (ca.1600–1680): A Study of Selected Aspects,” unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of London, 1994. Menon, Saraswati. “Social Characteristics of Land Control in Thanjavur District during the 19th Century: A Sociological Study,” unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Jawaharlal Nehru University, 1983. Narasimha, Roddam. “Rockets in Mysore and Britain, 1750–1850 A.D.,” lecture delivered on 2 April 1985 at the inauguration of the Centre for History and Philosophy of Science, Indian Institute of World Culture, Bangalore, National Aeronautical Laboratory, Project Document DU 8503. O'Brien, Patrick Karl. “Fiscal and Financial Preconditions for the Rise of British Naval Hegemony 1485–1815,” London School of Economics, Department of Economic History Working Paper, No. 91/05, November 2005. O'Brien, Patrick Karl. “The History, Nature and Economic Signficance of an Exceptional Fiscal State for the Growth of the British Economy, 1453–1815,” London School of Economics, Department of Economic History Working Paper, No. 109/08, October 2008. Osborne, Anne Rankin. “Barren Mountains, Raging Rivers: The Ecological and Social Effects of Changing Land Use on the Lower Yangzi Periphery in Late Imperial China,” unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University, 1989. Parthasarathi, Prasannan. “Productivity in South Indian Agriculture, c.1800,” paper presented at a Workshop on Agricultural Productivity, University of California, Davis, December 2002. Prakash, Om. “Indian Textiles in the Indian Ocean in the Early Modern Period,” Wong, R. Bin. “Taxation and Good Governance in China, 1500–1914,” unpublished paper presented at the Harvard Economic History Workshop, 23 September 2005. unpublished paper.