# VICTORIAN THINGS ASA BRIGGS The University of Chicago Press The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637 B. T. Batsford Ltd, London © 1988 by Asa Briggs All rights reserved. Published 1988 University of Chicago Press edition 1989 Printed in Great Britain 98 97 96 95 94 93 92 91 90 89 54321 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Briggs, Asa, 1921- Victorian things/Asa Briggs. p. cm. Companion vol. to: Victorian cities and Victorian people. Bibliography: p. Includes index. ISBN0-226-07483-8 1. Great Britain—History—Victoria, 1837-19o1. 2. Great Britain— Popular culture—History—1gth century. 3. Great Britain— Industries—History—19th century. 4. Material culture—Great Britain—History—i9th century. I. Title. DA550.B75 1988 941.081—dc19 88-30633 CIP Signs and the signs of things are used only when we are lacking things. UMBERTO ECO, The Name of the Rose, 1983 The other [project] was a Scheme for entirely abolishing all Words whatsoever .. . Many of the most Learned and Wise adhere to the new Scheme of expressing themselves by Things; which hath only this Inconvenience attending to it; that if a Man's Business be very great, and of various kinds, he must be obliged in Proportion to carry a greater Bundle of Things upon his Back, unless he can afford one or two strong servants to attend him. JONATHAN SWIFT, Gulliver's Travels, 1726 Most of the marks that man has left on the face of the earth during his two-million year career as a litter-bugging, meddlesome and occasionally artistic animal have one aspect in common: they are things, they are not deeds, ideas or words. GLYNN ISAAC, Whither Archaeology? 1971 ## CONTENTS Preface 9 Acknowledgements 10 1 Things as Emissaries 1 1 2The Great Victorian Collection’ 52 3‘The Philosophy of the Eye’ Spectacles, Cameras and the New Vision 103 4 Images of Fame’142 5The Wonders of Common Things’1 79 6 Hearth and Home’ 213 7 Hats, Caps and Bonnets 26o 8 Carboniferous Capitalism': Coal, Iron and Paper 289 9 Stamps - Used and Unused 327 ro New Things - and Old 369 Bibliographical Note 426 Index 441 ## PREFACE I am grateful to many people for their help in writing this book, particularly to Susan Hard and Janet Lovegrove, who have dug out, usually the right term, some of the detailed evidence, and to Carol Freeland and Yvonne Collins, who have typed my manuscript. The research has been mine, however, and it has been exceptionally interesting - and I bear sole responsibility for the text which has gone through many versions. Many people have helped me at different times with particular points of interest, among them my wife, to whom I owe much, and my son Daniel Briggs. I would also like to thank Richard Adams, Mordaunt Crook, Monique Charlot, Marcus Cunliffe, Leo de Freitas, Antony Hobson, Susan Lasdun, Richard Latner, Carolyn Marvin, Ileen Montijn, Maurice Rickards, Lesley St. Clair, Pauline Sergent, Frank Swartz, Clive Wainwright, Phillip Waller, Alexander Welch and John Raybould. Librarians have been, as always, helpful and considerate. I owe a particular debt to the staffs of the London Library, of the British Library, and of The British College of Opthalmic Opticians. I am deeply grateful to Anthony Seward, my publisher, for his unfailing understanding, courtesy, patience and help, and to Caroline Taverne at Batsford and to my friend Dr B. Mellor for carefully reading the proofs. Worcester College, Asa Briggs Oxford November 1987 ## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The publishers gratefully acknowledge the following sources ofillustrations: Photographs IIa The Bridgeman Art Library; III William Heinemann Ltd and John and Jennifer May; IV Barrie and Jenkins Ltd and Charles and Dorrie Shinn; V Mary Evans Picture Library; VIII Illustrated London News; IX Courtauld Institute of Art; X, XI National Postal Museum; XII, XIII Christopher Wood Gallery. Line illustrations pp. 65 and 184 Illustrated London News pp. 412 and 413 Mary Evans Picture Library.