# 4 Images of Fame Royalty first . . . Murderers Galore. JOHN BEDFORD, Staffordshire Pottery Figures, 1964 Tho' music old may lose its charm And long neglected lie, Attuned not to the modern ear, It yet may please the eye . . . With Fashion's list of fickle types That pass man's wit to name, Musicians - poets — statesmen swell Song-Titles'roll of fame. The World ofTravel, Sport and Art Within its wide scope fall, For – be the subjects what they may – TheCover' covers all. W. E. IMEsON, Illustrated Music Titles, 1912 ‘Shall Smith have a Statue?' COVENTRY PATMORE, Principles in Art, 1889 A brass never can be an architectural decoration. It must always be treated as a memorial. Ecclesiastical Art Review, March 1878 The idea of photography offering not just representation but record was well established by the end of Queen Victoria's reign. As early as 1855 the Ordnance Survey had begun to experiment with photography in producing maps, and by the end of the century anthropology was being influenced by photography at least as much as geography was. Photographs, I find', wrote the director of the Pitt-Rivers Museum, are so important an adjunct to a museum that I try to buy all I can.' Here, it was felt, was new evidence to set things straight and it could even be used in politics. Thus, The Times reported in 1888 how Gladstone had produced two photographs of Ireland as a historical record in a speech delivered at Birmingham on home rule; they were offered to his audience in order to show that official accounts of violent incidents at Mitchelstown were wrong. During the early part of the reign the idea of a historical record had been concerned primarily with documents, and it was in 1838 that the Public Record Office was created with Henry Cole as one of its Assistant Keepers. Indeed, Cole had played a prominent part in its creation. During the mid-Victorian years the process of acquisition and cataloguing continued, and routines were established after the new Public Record Office building was completed in 1866. Nor was acquiring and collecting confined to the P.R.O.: the Camden Society was set up in the same year as the P.R.O., the Early English Texts Society in 1864 and the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts in 1869. During the last years of the reign, however, it was beginning to be appreciated that pictures, including at the very end of the reign moving pictures, were essential evidence for the record, even if the provision of adequate archival facilities was to be long delayed. One of the most distinctive features in the marvellous’early cinema work of Georges Meliès was his reconstructed news reel. Not on the spot but in his studio he filmed simulated history - scenes of the Greco-Turkish War of 1897 and of the American intervention in Cuba a year later. As far as the real' historical record was concerned, Victorian historians asked questions that concerned not merely the nature of evidence about people and events and how to use it but about values. What was worth recording? What stood out? One of the favourite contrasts drawn by J. R. Green, author of the popular Short History of the English People (1874), was that between ‘common things'and‘great events'; and in his view social history, to which he gave new life, had to concentrate on the former, not the latter. His preference would have amazed Meliès, who wanted history to entertain, but it would have strongly appealed to Pitt-Rivers, who wanted anthropology to instruct. According to Green, history of all kinds had to deal not only with English Kings or English Conquest' but with the common people'and how they lived. Wars should not dominate the story. Swords had to be beaten into ploughshares. For him, therefore, the best kind of museums to open were not military or waxwork museums but folk museums. Green wanted his History to be interpreted and illustrated by pictures which should tell us how men and things appeared to the lookers-on of their own day, and how contemporary observers aimed at representing them'. He died, however, before he could realize this favourite wish', and it was left to his wife, who shared his interests and values, to produce a new illustrated edition of his History in 1892. In re-assessing English history Green, a Victorian liberal, born in the year when Queen Victoria came to the throne, was pointing to the future, for during the early and mid-Victorian years themselves there had been a growing rather than a declining interest in ‘great men'. Thomas Carlyle's Hero-Worship appeared in 1841. History, Carlyle believed, was nothing but the biographies of great men'. Fifteen years later, Ruskin, who knew much about lesser men, singled out ‘men who feel strongly and nobly.'One man is so little,'a lecturer in London's Exeter Hall told his audience in 1851, that you see him a thousand times without caring to ask his name. Another man is so great, that if you ... possess a “hair of him" when dead, it is something of which you are proud.' If you could not get ‘a hair of him', you could often get an image. Indeed, a year later, more images of the dead Duke of Wellington were in circulation than there had been in his lifetime. By a singular coincidence' Wellington died on the same day as Pugin, and there was more than a touch of Pugin in a lithograph showing his lying-instate in Chelsea Hospital. There was nothing Puginesque, however, about the memorial for Wellington designed in 1857 after competition by Albert Stevens, ‘a man of the Renaissance', and placed in St Paul's Cathedral, a cathedral unfashionable with all Gothic revivalists and abhorrent to William Morris. The monument, unfinished after many tribulations when Stevens died in 1877, has been described as the finest piece of nineteenthcentury sculpture. It was certainly as worthy a tribute to the great Duke as Tennyson's magnificent ode on his death. An earlier memorial to Wellington had been less lucky. One of the City's two monuments to the Duke, designed by Francis Chantrey in bronze, was also unfinished when Chantrey died. It was displaced in 1883 and almost melted down before finding safety in Aldershot. The choice of safe place was ironical. The monument did not commemorate a great Wellington victory in the field but his assistance to the City of London in getting a bill passed through Parliament for the rebuilding of London Bridge. The other great hero of the struggles against Napoleon, Horatio Nelson, had had his statue displayed on the ground – terra firma, the Illustrated London News called it – at Charing Cross in 1842, before it was moved to the top of the column in Trafalgar Square. It seemed to have ‘the great merit of likeness and character', and1oo,ooo persons' are said to have examined it in two days. The only regret of the Illustrated London News was that ‘more than thirty years had elapsed before soobvious a duty to Nelson's renown was accomplished'. His monument, it claimed, was far more than a national tribute to his fame: it was á funeral record ... raised in a sacred spot and consecrated by religion'. The News descended from the column to terra firma itself, however, when it remarked that ‘the sacred spot'was not the finest open space in the metropolis, but ‘the commonplace . . . front of the National Gallery'. Images, large or small - and Nelson's statue weighed eighteen tons - evoked sentiments as well as memories. Recalling the whole Victorian period, early, middle and late, in 1918, Edmund Gosse wrote without exaggeration that the Victorians . . . carried admiration to the highest pitch. They marshalled it, they defined it, they turned it from a virtue into a religion', while Samuel Butler, even more of a rebel than Gosse, wrote in his notebook, He is greatest who is most often in man's good thoughts'. As the readership of newspapers and periodicals grew, the idea of a kaleidoscope of ‘great events'took shape alongside the idea of a gallery of great men'; and although newspapers were as slow to produce images as The Annual Register, an indispensable national record, as early as 1843 the Illustrated London News, bedecked with wood engravings, had been designed to offer a whole living and moving panorama' to be enjoyed and museumpreserved' in the drawing room, the portfolios or the library'. There was the same conception of the panorama in the Graphic, founded in 1869, by William Luson Thomas, although there was no daily illustrated newspaper until the Daily Graphic appeared in 189o. The artist employed to illustrate these periodicals could indicate ‘a passing scene', it was claimed, by a few strokes of the pencil, ‘a kind of pictorial shorthand which is afterwards translated and extended in the finished drawing'. Yet the requirements of the machine press changed the character of wood engraving. A key figure in the story was Ebenezer Landells, who was a principal in many publishing ventures, as well as a successful engraver. The perception of the passing scene'that they and their editors fostered left a place not only for great men in war or politics, the kind of men who inspired ‘good thoughts', but for great names in sport or in crime, who might inspire the very reverse. It was not just that Lady Hamiltons were as much in demand as Horatio Nelsons. There was a place, too, for the brutal and the nasty. The Weekly Dispatch had made its reputation with vivid descriptions of prize fights and always sold large numbers ofextra copies after a particularly brutal murder; while it was not until 1872 that it could be said of The Observer that it was one of the safest contemporary papers that could be put into the hands ofladies'and was consequently to be found in families where only two or three others of its weekly contemporaties could find admission'. Moreover, at that time, thirty years after the death of the popular broadsheet printer James Catnach, there were still four ‘ballad presses'in active operation, dealing in contemporary sensations, the most successful of them Henry Disley's press in the midst of the notorious Seven Dials district. Throughout London and the provincial cities, embellished with many new statues of local and national heroes, there were still wall posters and almanacs and image-objects of all kinds as there had been long before Queen Victoria came to the throne. Louis James has described them in his Print and the People (1974) which begins in 1819, the year Queen Victoria was born, and ends in 1851. Yet such ephemera did not disappear with the building of the Crystal Palace. At the time of the notorious violent Northumberland Street murder of 1861, for example, one of the many ‘sensations' of a decade that made the most of them, a habitual dealer in popular prints was brought before the Magistrate's Court for obstruction.Had you been there before?' the magistrate asked him. ‘Yes, sir,'he replied, only for sellin'some of these here things', pointing to the prints which the police had confiscated. ‘They were remarkable', it was purported, for consistent inaccuracy in the main features and in all the details.' But this had not stopped them from selling. Throughout the reign, while the common people'were encouraged to acquire national mementoes of political leaders who were in the news, particularly at times of stress or celebration, they also without prompting were choosing their own heroes and heroines - and villains - as they always had done. They might be the kind of people who found a place in Madame Tussaud's wax museum, not least in its Chamber ofHorrors. But they could also be radicals who challenged the authorities. The Weekly Dispatch was thought to be a public nuisance in respectable circles not just because it dealt in crime but because it sometimes focused on Chartist leaders and because it once declared that there was no more harm in being an infidel than in being a clergyman. Stone or paper or wax were not only materials used to register people and events. There were objects also in wood, metal, silk and glass, with the range of commemorative objects varying in size and shape and, from time to time, in range. There might be small plaster models ofhuge future statues, and one well-known statue, Gibson's the Tinted Venus, was not only reproduced photographically by the London Stereoscopic Company in 1862 but became the subject of a farcical romance' in 1885. Fashions influenced production as much as more long-lasting cultural factors. Thus, most stereoscopic.images had been relegated to the rubbish dump long before the end of Queen Victoria's. Near its beginning, when the demand for wooden snuff boxes declined from the 183os onwards, the famous Mauchline box factory' in Perthshire began to turn out a very wide range indeed of wooden things, with varying finishes. In an age ofincreasing travel most of them dealt with places rather than with people but, not surprisingly, Sir Walter Scott figured as well as the monument erected after him in Edinburgh. So, too, did Sir Rowland Hill, pioneer of penny postage. Hill's own statue, designed for a competition by a young sculptor Onslow Ford in 1882, was an impressive, even subtle, work in bronze. It was worthy of the man who commissioned the penny black (see page 338) with its image ofimages. From the very beginning of their production during the early 186os Thomas Stevens's mounted silk woven pictures and bookmarks, known as ‘Stevengraphs', exploited the potential of popular portraits in silk: they might even be given away as Sunday School prizes or sent as Christmas presents. They were in demand at exhibitions, too, where Stevens sometimes exhibited his loom at work as well as his productions. His Dick Turpin's Ride to York on Bonny Black Bess' was issued at a York exhibition in 1879. The subject matter of Stevengraphs included both heroes of sport and politics, and both religious and political leaders. There was a place in the collection, too, for one trade-union leader, Joseph Arch, organizer of the Agricultural Workers. This was a very simple image compared with the often magnificent trade-union and friendly society emblems, printed or woven, which were commissioned by the unions themselves and which concentrated more on solidarity'than on leadership'. They often incorporated not only pictures of workers in their places of work, but inspirational mottoes, like In All Labour There is Profit' (the Stonemasons, 1868) or ‘8 Hours Labour' (The Gas Workers, 189o). There was elaborate allegory, too, employing traditional as well as historic figures. Between 187o and 19o0 1o0,ooo such trade-union emblems were sold. One of the finest of them was produced by the Amalgamated Society of Lithographic Printer in 1889, although one of the best of the late lithographers, Alexander Gow, is not listed among the members of the Lithographic Society. Very few new emblems were produced in paper in the years after Queen Victoria died. Trade-union banners continued to be carried, however, at big events in the history of the labour movement - strikes as well as galas. Commemorative artefacts for the home, including the working-class home, were for the most part decorative rather than functional objects, to be placed over the chimney-piece, on a window sill or in a glass cupboard. There were some functional pieces, however – among them jugs and plates, tobacco jars, inkwells, and, not least, money boxes and chamber pots, sometimes in Sunderland pink lustre: (Henry Doulton of Lambeth is said to have been the first potter fully to appreciate the significance of Chadwick and the ‘sanitary' idea.) Heroes and heroines might also be depicted on food tins, on pot lids, (the latter the subject of a detailed study in 1972 by C. Williams-Wood), and on match boxes; and in 1897 W.D and H.O. Wills produced their first set of fifty cigarette cards called ‘Kings and Queens'. They went back to Alfred and ended with Victoria. There was a direct relationship between pictorial prints and pottery images through the simple crafts of transfer printing. As early as 1756, a Liverpool potter, John Sadler, and a Liverpool painter, Guy Green, had developed a method of transferring printing to earthenware. Hitherto each piece had to be decorated by hand: now one man could do the work of ffty. The nature of this process would not have appealed to Ruskin or to Morris, Nor would the transfer process developed in Mauchline woodware by the early 185os. Nonetheless, such processes forged new links between the pottery trade and the press, with the Illustrated London News providing illustrative copy for commemorative plates and jugs. And there were other links, too, between different modes of presenting images. Thus, the Illustrated London News noted in 1856 how a statue of Franklin recently erected in Boston bore ‘a close likeness to the Staffordshire portraits'. The face on a medal of General Gordon was taken from a photograph. The new techniques of production coupled with enterprise in distribution laid the foundations both for huge expansion of the home market in the nineteenth century and for the rise of a substantial export market. Canada and Australia were particularly welcome customers. One Staffordshire potter incorporated the beaver and maple leaves into a Canadian design bearing a favourite nationalist motto in French Nos Institutions, Notre Langue, Nos Lois', and Canadian views were presented at a distance. Thirty years later Mauchline was producing views of Melbourne. In Europe there was often an active market in France and Italy for national heroes and heroines. Indeed, what Surgeon-Captain P. O. Gordon Pugh, author of Staffordshire Portrait Figures (197o), considers to be the tallest and finest Staffordshire patent figure ever made', that ofNapoleon, 24 inches in height, was produced for the French market. There were no religious inhibitions in the export business either. While some of the images designed for Britain were aggressively Protestant – Ridley and Latimer as a pair were paired with a figure calledProtestantism'- there was no hesitation in producing Roman Catholic images for Roman Catholic countries or even Islamic objects (not, of course, images) for Islamic countries. This was trade, and English Roman Catholics could be catered for, too. Two untitled pairs, showing a friar and nun, were produced at the height of the anti-Popery campaigns and have been identified as Sister Margaret Mary Hallahan and Father Bernard Moulaert, well-known figures in the Catholic communities of the Midlands. Stevens was equally versatile in offering both the great Baptist preacher C. H. Spurgeon (We preach not ourselves but Christ the Lord') and Cardinal Wiseman. He also had a Protestant Jesus died for all’ and a sentimental Mater Dolorosa, not to speak of a more simple I believe in God'. Appropriately the Fournal of the Society of Arts singled him out for his business acumen in 1873. ‘It is gratifying to note that every part of the work, mechanical and artistic, is English', his admirer wrote. Mr Stevens cannot see any reason why, in the name of competition, England should not be well up to the goal. Mr Stevens is a staunch advocate of perfect freedom of trade . . . “A fair field and no favour".' Staffordshire potters were as tolerant as he was. Thus at the time of the Franco-Prussian war of 187o, with a proper sense of neutrality, figures were produced of the King, Queen and Crown Prince of Prussia and leaders like Bismarck and Von Moltke on the German side and of Napoleon III and Marshall MacMahon on the French. In relation to Italy they moved with the Risorgimento, however, and after 1848 they had produced a Louis Kossuth which may or may not have reached Hungary. As far as the British market was concerned, fashions had been set long before 1851. Images in pottery of the Queen and Prince Albert proliferated after their wedding in February 184o, and there are ten Staffordshire portrait figures of Sir Robert Peel and more than a score of Wellington, whose death in 1852, like that of Peel two years earlier, was recorded in many different objects, including jugs. One of Peel in green smear glaze included the words Farewell great statesman. Long will thy honest worth be missed in the Councils of the Nation. And when the time of England's difficulty comes, Then will the people truly feel the Patriot they have lost in Robert Peel.'One Wellington jug shows the Duke in an oval cartouche topped by a ducal coronet and surrounded by standards emblazoned with his victories. Unlike the first London statue of him erected in Westminster Abbey, which showed him dressed as a classical orator, the potters dressed him as he dressed himself. Gibson, the sculptor, had considered that the human figure concealed under a frock coat and trousers' was not a fit subject for sculpture'. Boxers - and criminals - frequently depicted by the potters but not by the sculptors, included John Carmel Heenan and Tom Sayers, who drew a great boxing contest in 186o, watched by 12,ooo spectators: it pitted the 6'2" American boxer Heenan, who weighed nearly 14 stone, against the 5'8" English Sayers, who weighed under 1 I stone. Later heroes were the cricketer Frederick William Lillywhite, the celebrated round-arm bowler, and Captain Webb, the first man to swim the Channel unaided in 1875: he was to meet his death in 1883 attempting to swim across Niagara. From the world of crime the murderer James Rush and his housekeeper were represented among the Staffordshires in 1848/9, along with models of Stanfield Hall, the site of the murder, Potash Farm, where the murderer lived, and Norwich Castle, where he was executed. Rush is depicted clutching a bag of money: his housekeeper wears a white mob cap: Potash Farm has roses round the door. Stevens avoided murderers, but picked up a later generation ofsportsmen, among them R. Howell, bicycling Champion of the World', and W. G. Grace, the cricketer, on the occasion of his century of centuries. Grace and Spurgeon were Staffordshire figures also. Actors and musicians always had their popular audiences, in the home as well as on the stage. Sir William Macready, for example, was depicted by Staffordshire potters both as Shylock and as Macbeth, and there were at least eighteen figures of the ‘Swedish nightingale', Jenny Lind. Some Staffordshire pottery seems to have been sold outside theatres and music halls. Other pottery was sold at holiday resorts or at fairs. Indeed, the name fairing'was invented to describe one category of knick-knacks, few of them directly political (courtship figured more than cabinet making) and many of them manufactured in Germany, free trade in reverse. Dealers'names for such products included Bed Pieces, Cottage Mantelshelf China, and, in Lancashire, Valentines. Fairings, which might be prizes or which might be bought, made few artistic pretensions. There was one category of ware, however, that did and still does – Parian, a development of biscuit porcelain, which is often quite wrongly described as marble. The mid-Victorian formulae for making it included frit', a vitreous mixture of silica and alkali, china clay and felspar: adulterated versions included ball clay and even flint glass. The colour of the objects made from it depended on the amount ofiron silicate in the mix. The art depended in part, therefore, like photography, on chemistry, in part on technology. In 1844 Benjamin Cheverton patented a three dimensional pantograph' which enabled ‘exact'alabaster (or wax) models of busts to be made that were said to be far more lifelike’than Staffordshire portrait figures made from moulds; and in the same year the sculptor Gibson returned to England from Italy to produce Parian ware. He was probably not the inventor of the process which, when perfected, involved the assembly of parts and joining of the seams. There has been prolonged argument both about his claims, as there has been too about claims made for the first industrial manufacturer. Was it the firm of Copeland and Garrett, formerly Spode, who called it statuary porcelain', or Thomas Boote who said that he had invented it, or Minton's, who from the first used the nameParian'in their advertisements? The claims were examined in a Dutch book on the London Exhibition of 1862 published by order of the Government of Holland in 1864. Whoever first made Parian soon found that he had rivals, all encouraged by the Art Union and directly or indirectly by Henry Cole. Copeland is said to have been encouraged to experiment with ‘statuary porcelain' by the editor of the Art Fournal. We attach very great importance to this material', the Fournal wrote in 1846, ‘as offering a valuable medium for the multiplication of works of a high order of art, at a price which will render them generally available.'Gibson drew attention to the artistic claims of Parian when he approved of a reproduction in the new medium of his marble statue of Narcissus, sculpted in 1838 and recreated on Christmas Day 1845. So also did John Bell, whose Dorothea was made by Minton for Summerly's Art Manufactures and the Art Union and exhibited in 1851. Pugin himself designed a Madonna in 1847, known in the Minton Factory Book as Pugin's Pedestal'. Politicians and other ‘great men'- and women - soon figured prominently, however, alongside Narcissus, Dorothea and the Madonna. Thus before long Minton was presenting Hannah More as well as Queen Victoria, Copeland Jenny Lind as well as Wellington, Wedgwood aCarrera' George Washington and a George Stephenson, the latter reduced' from an E. W. Wyon statue, and Robinson and Leadbetter a Tennyson. In the first edition of The Ceramic Art of Great Britain (1878) Llewellyn Jewitt wrote of the last of these enterprises, Robinson and Leadbetter, which produced nothing but Parian ware, that it specialized in statuary groups and figures in large variety: and statuettes and busts, both classical, portrait and imaginative' along with vases of endless form, variety and size . . . brackets and pedestals .. . and a considerable variety of fancy articles'. It was also exporting large quantities to the United States, which produced its own Parian between 1847 and the late 185os at Bennington, Vermont and Greenpoint, New York. Among the Bennington products was a double-sided Charles Dickens spill-holder, fitting tribute not only to Dickens the novelist but to Dickens the journalist: he had written an article in Household Words (1852) which saluted the delicate new material called Parian'. Much Parian ware - and not only Pugin's models - lent itself to display on pedestals, doubtless as many of the historical characters represented would have wished: indeed, Copeland and Garrett specialized in items that could be placed on columns. Parian was less homely than Staffordshire', therefore, and more expensive. Robinson and Leadbetter, it was claimed by Jewitt, had studied excellence of body, originality of design and cleverness of workmanship' more than marketable cheapness'. Marketing may well have depended, indeed, on the fact that the products were not cheap. A Montreal auctioneer was not alone in 1864 in advertising Parian figures along with Crimson Damask curtains’ and awhat-not’ as desirable furnishings of a comfortably furnished residence'. Parian ware - and later Goss ware, designed for a broader market - figure along with Staffordshires' among the most characteristic of Victorian things. Indeed, for many twentieth-century collectors, these are the essential Victoriana. Staffordshires were little collected before the 195os, however, and it was not until 1951, the year of the Festival of Britain, that Thomas Balston published his first illustrated article on them in the Country Life Annual, to be followed seven years later by his authoritative book Staffordshire Portrait Figures of the Nineteenth Century: Bryan Latham's Victorian Staffordshire Figures had appeared in 1953. Interest in other items of Victoriana came even later. W. S. Bristowe's Victorian China Fairings did not appear until 1964, and Austin Sprake and Michael Darby's Stevengraphs was published in 1968 to commemorate the ninetieth anniversary of the first mounted silk pictures in 1879. The first big private collection of Staffordshires had been offered for sale in 1g62, and twenty years later Christie's had produced its first special catalogue on the subject. None of these books could be seen clearly in the perspectives of this chapter, however, before Benedict Read wrote his Victorian Sculpture in 1982. Appropriately the first piece of Victorian Staffordshire Balston had bought before the First World War was called‘The Fortune Teller', and Michael Thompson was to use the peculiar statistics of the graph of Stevengraph prices as main evidence in propounding his rubbish theory. Those Stevengraphs which had not been consigned to the rubbish heap and which had miraculously survived acquired a value far higher than would have been anticipated when the objects were first produced. Already in 1 968, however, Austin Sprake, a keen collector, had made the modest claim that the prices of Stevengraph portraits, less popular in the twentieth century than other thematic Stevengraphs, would catch upwhen a few more collectors appreciate their superb delicate weaving which reproduces the facial expressions, the whiskers and wrinkles as faithfully as the camera'. Staffordshires' had humble origins, although their twentieth-century collectors are not all quite as humble. As late as 1829, Simeon Shaw in his History of the Staffordshire Potteries could concentrate on the story of aristocratic orders potters received, including an order to Messrs Daniel from the Earl of Shrewsbury in 1827, twice the value of many previous orders. By the late 184os, however, there were more than thirty toy' or figure manufacturers in the Potteries, most of them humble potters', working in what one of George Hood's highly articulate employees, Colin Shaw, called rusty and grim premises'. By 1851, two years after the opening of the 112 miles of North Staffordshire Railway (with 39 stations), there were 165 manufacturers of china and earthenware manufacturers of all kinds. Already, therefore, a new popular market had come into being, described by John Bedford as a new and vigorous folk art - except that it had a strong flavour of the new urban populations rather than the peasant countryside'. As early as 1929, Herbert Read, unlike other twentieth-century critics of Victorian aesthetics, had recognized the unconscious artistry’ of Staffordshires. Unlike Stevengraphs they could make little claim to verisimilitude. Staffordshire images had nothing in common with photographs. The most sensitive account of their production is that of Anthony Oliver in his The Victorian Staffordshire Figures (1971). Like Reginald Haggar before him, he noted how small children were paid about two shillings a week and were expected to produce up to 4oo small images in unhealthy conditions in a long and uncontrolled working day. Leisure activities of adults and children not surprisingly included dog and cock fighting. In fact, we know more of the ways of life of the potters than we do of the skills of the designers: in 1843 one pottery manufacturer, whose father employed about ninety hands', told the Commissioners on the Employment ofChildren that he did not think that 15 hours a day was too much' and that ifthere were evening schools the children are so tired when they get home that. they would not attend them.'Nonetheless, art classes had been held in the Mechanics Institutes as early as 1834, and in 1845 the Mechanics Institute of Henley applied to Somerset House for aid in establishing a School of Design. Class instruction began in $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 8 4 7$ . In 1851 J. A. Hammersley, who was to become Superintendent of Art Treasures at Marlborough House, was lecturing the workers there on ‘The Aesthetic Theory of Ornamental Art. Because of late-nineteenth century and early twentieth-century changes in fashion, tracing back the history of particular designs in detail has become almost a sporting activity. There is a sense of discovery in the dealer John Hall's account of the surviving moulds in the possession of William Kent (Porcelains) Ltd, founded in 1878, which it has been shown belonged originally to the Parrs of Burslem, toymakers', from at least 1828 onwards. We can, of course, trace back the origins of many pottery designs to the Illustrated London News - the Peel on Horseback, for example - and to comic song covers a number of portraits, like that of actress and singer Rebecca Isaacs. I want to be a Bloomer', a reference to the dress reforms of Mrs Bloomer, was another song, appropriately illustrated, which inspired a piece of pottery. The cheapness of the Staffordshire products was one of their great attractions, a point fully realized by one large manufacturer of Staffordshires, Sampson Smith of Longton, who had already established his name and reputation before he moved to a new factory in 1859. Sampson Smith was responsible for some of the best-known designs of popular Staffordshires, some of which were still being reproduced at the end of the century. ‘Garibaldi at War', for example, was still selling as late as then at $\mathcal { E } ^ { 8 }$ per dozen, as were Gladstone and Disraeli, and Garibaldi on Horseback' was selling at $\mathcal { E } 3 0$ per dozen. Early wholesale prices had been much cheaper: the first copies of Garibaldi on Horseback’ for example, cost only 6os a dozen when they left the factory. The figures stood in their own right, made of whiter clay than earlier types and usually with flat-back design. Some were heavier than others, some more translucent. Some figures were far more ambitious than others. They also varied in size, from huge almost to miniature. As the reign went by, any attempt to imitate porcelain figures - some early royal figures had been produced both in earthenware and in porcelain - were abandoned. There was no real copyright in the figures, and they were - and subsequently often have been - pirated. Few bore marks of factory origin, and the collector realizes at once that some were well finished and others were not. Colour was important as an attraction, and among forgotten Victorian inventors F. W. Collins and A. Reynolds patented in 1848 a process for affixing three colours - blue, red and yellow - from a single transfer with a single firing. There are some remarkably colourful mid-Victorian Staffordshires, therefore, with cobalt blue (a cheap product) applied as a favourite shade under the glaze. Later in the century, however, figures became paler, and the underglaze blue virtually disappeared after 186o, possibly for reasons of economy. Underglaze black (or enamel black) used for dress coats and trousers of politicians like Gladstone and Disraeli and preachers like Spurgeon – or duller overglaze black – did not provide an adequate substitute. The quality of the gold deteriorated, as did much else, during the 188os: so-called bright gold', a liquid preparation of gold filings in aqua regia was harsher, if more stable, than best gold', (a highly toxic mixture of gold and mercury) had been, and ‘best gold'continued to be used in more expensive pieces. Lustre'could ‘improve’even dull designs, it was thought, and in 1852 John Ridgway patented a means of lustring ceramics in silver and copper using the electro-deposit method invented by George Elkington (see page 25). Decisions as to what particular pieces of image pottery to make were doubtless difficult, and some lines were soon discontinued. It is interesting that some politicians do not figure in the Staffordshire gallery of fame, whoever the potter. Thus, there was no Palmerston, although there were no fewer than fifteen places for Garibaldi. Later in the century, the Irish nationalist Parnell found a place, as William Smith O'Brien, transported to Australia, had done, decades before. Parnell figured also among the Stevengraphs, as did his enemy, the English radical Joseph Chamberlain. Yet there was no Staffordshire figure of Chamberlain, only a picture on a plate. No Whigs were ever included in the gallery of fame: there was no Lord John Russell, no Duke of Devonshire. Similarly, while there were fifteen Nonconformist ministers, some prepared for the thriving Welsh market (Mauchline in Scotland had one scene of an actual Welsh market), there was only one Anglican clergyman. Pio Nono, Pope Pius IX, found a place as did Cardinal Manning. The Tory Evangelical, the Earl of Shaftesbury, was included doubtless because of his concern for the poor, and so was the Tichborne claimant in the Tichborne case, Arthur Orton, who won the sympathy of the poor. The prosecutor's favourite question in the Tichborne case Would you be surprised to hear?' was turned into the title of a popular song, while the Shah of Persia, unrepresented in pottery, was the subject of another music hall song Have you seen the Shah?' If there were no inscriptions on early and mid-Victorian figures or other printed evidence relating to them, it would often be more difficult to recognize many of them, including Victoria and Albert, than to date them. There were, indeed, some extraordinary features about the images which have subsequently been pointed out by twentieth-century dealers and historians. The first Victoria, for example, modelled in the style of Obadiah Sherratt (1775-1846), is identical with an earlier figure of the opera singer Maria Felicity Malibran, who died in Manchester after falling from her horse the year before Victoria came to the throne. The only visual differences in this rapid reincarnation were the title and an added crown. There was nothing new, however, about such cavalier treatment. What is said to be the very first royal commemorative piece, a mug celebrating the coronation of Charles II in 166o, had been originally intended for a different event and the body is that of Oliver Cromwell. Perhaps this was no more remarkable than the stories of the same mould being used for Wellington's nose as for the teats on cow milk jugs, of Gladstone and Disraeli emerging from the same mould, or of using the mould of the Duke of Clarence after his death to create Robert Baden-Powell, complete with a new slouch hat. Poses were copied, too: that of the Prince of Wales in 1874 is identical with that of the King of Prussia. Animals seldom required precise representation, and Staffordshire dogs, hounds, poodles and whippets, white and gold, black and white, and red and white', were not only produced in greater numbers than people but continued to be made in large numbers and sold by the gross after the fashion for portrait figures had declined. So, too, were hens. Yet there were individual' animals of fame also, like Master McGrath', the black greyhound owned by Lord Lurgan, which won the Waterloo Cup three times, the last time in 1871, and Jumbo', the African elephant, obtained in 1865 from the Jardin des Plantes in Paris by the London Zoo. It is not clear whether or not Jumbo gave his name to the stuffed elephants of the nursery or the other way round. He certainly made his way into the Law Courts and into music when in 1882 the Fellows of the Royal Zoological Society decided by a substantial majority to sell him to Phineas T. Barnum for \$1o,ooo. A minority of Fellows tried unsuccessfully to seek a court injunction to prevent his leaving the country. The Daily Telegraph, rousing public protest and offering to collect £,1oo,ooo to outbid Barnum, was unsuccessful also. Jumbo himself was equally unsuccessful, for when on his way to the docks he sat down and refused to budge, Barnum, who referred to him genially as the biggest brute walking the earth', considered this the best possible advertisement. Nor was Barnum completely disconsolate when three years after being taken to the United States Jumbo was killed at Ontario charging a railway train. In his place he then introduced The Great Jumbo's Widow'. Some of the best known music of Jumbo was anti-Yankee': (I love the dear old British flag, of it, my boys, I'll always brag') but there was also a popular Jumbo and Alice Quadrille' by Henry Klein: Jumbo said to Alice I love you', Alice said to Jumbo I don't believe you do', If you really love me, as you say you do, You wouldn't go to Yankeeland and leave me at the Zoo. There had been an earlier C. W. Marriott Alice Quadrille based on Alice in Wonderland and called The Wonderland Quadrilles: it won the approval of Tenniel, whose monograph appeared on the title page. There was also a Jolly Dog's Galop' drawn in 1863 by Alfred Concanen. The fame of Master McGrath must have been as great as that ofJumbo or of Alice in Wonderland in the Potteries. Yet in an area with a strong minority interest in popular education there was a secure local place also for Shakespearean pieces, including the seven models derived from Tallis's Shakespeare Gallery in 1852/3, well modelled, painted all round and more expensive than other pieces, which have given their name to a category of statuettes. Other pieces were made for the Shakespeare tercentenary celebrations in 1864. Surprisingly, however, there was no Dickens in the Staffordshire figure collection and perhaps less surprisingly no Tennyson. Stevengraphs, made in Coventry and praised for excellence, skill and resource' by no less a person than Gladstone in 187o, included both Ye Lady Godiva’ and Ann Hathaway's Cottage'in nearby Stratford, and three Shakespeare tercentenary ribbons, not intended as bookmarks but as three parts of a favour' to be joined together by the customer. ‘They are marvellously worked', wrote the Derby Mercury, and are undoubtedly the best specimens of weaving we have seen'. Stevens was shrewd enough to go on selling the ribbons long after 1864 with the words ‘Shakespeare's Tercentenary' omitted. He sensibly included also a Shakespeare bearing the words ‘He was not for an age but for all time'. Dickens figured in his collection, but there was still no Tennyson. Nor was there a Tennyson in Doulton salt-glazed stoneware, first made at Lambeth and later at Burslem. There was a Shakespeare and a Dickens, however, along with a Burns, an Albert, and a Victoria. In Parian ware you could find a Dickens bust as well as the Dickens spilljar, and you could also find a Thackeray (if mis-spelt as Thackary) - and a Tennyson, not to speak of a Palmerston. Obviously the customers for Parian ware were better-off. And while some firms producing Parian ware concentrated on objects rather than figures, like the fine-tracery open work basket produced by the Belleck Factory at County Fermanagh, opened in 1 863, even the Belleck factory produced a Dickens along with a Parnell and a Wesley. There had never been any doubt about Wesley's popularity in the Potteries from the eighteenth century onwards, and there is one Enoch Wood bust made after Wesley himself had given a sermon in Wood's house. Once again, there were oddities of treatment. It is said that when Wesley visited Wednesbury, effigies were made of him in haste by painting the cervicles of horses to resemble the preacher with a cravat. One well-known nineteenth-century potter, W. H. Goss, known to thousands of collectors, some of whom were to form a league, later to be called the International League of Goss Collectors, was born not in the Potteries but in London in 1833, and on his mother's side he was of Huguenot descent: he is said to have studied at the Government School of Design in London and to have learnt pottery from Alderman Copeland: he was also a friend of the editor of the Art Fournal. Goss, who established his pottery at Stoke-on-Trent in 1858, specialized in small portrait busts in ivory porcelain’along with tobacco and scent jars, bread platters and 'heraldic china', including many commemorative items, which were to continue to be produced well into the twentieth century. The first printed Goss Record, the brainchild ofJ.J.Jarvis of Enfield, Middlesex, giving a list of agents who sold Goss porcelain, was not published until 19or. Goss died in 1 9o6, but his firm survived to benefit from the First World War when there was a great demand for commemorative pieces. It finally disappeared after takeovers in the Second World War in 194o. Goss had left Copeland's factory in 1858 and was soon using a family crest and producing in terra cotta as well as in pearl, china and modified Parian' ware. His first bust was probably that of Palmerston - both Gladstone and Disraeli were to follow - and in 1862 he won a bronze medal at the London Exhibition, for his ivory porcelain': in the same year the Art Fournal called his pieces ‘generally of a cheap order, frequently for “the masses". His modeller and general manager, William Bromley, was induced to leave him in 1863 to go to Belleck, taking with him many of Goss's workmen. One of the most accomplished of them, William Gallimore, lost his right hand in an accident, but learned to model with his left before migrating to the United States. He never seemed to take care', wrote Jewitt, ‘but a perfect portrait would appear to grow out of a series of hurried and apparently careless dabs at the wet clay'. Goss's later range, manufactured in large quantities from 1865, included jewelled porcelain after the manner of Sèvres', egg shell porcelain, the thinnest and most delicate ever made', a Lady Godiva riding her horse, Little Red Riding Hood', Napoleon I, bearing of all things the arms of the island of St Helena, and, of course, Queen Victoria in many versions and bearing many legends. One 1887 design showed the Queen inside the Garter Star, but this had to be withdrawn because of official protests over illegal use of the Star. Another in ι897 showed national emblems, including the rose, the leek, the thistle and the shamrock round an imperial crown. It bore the words liberty, loyalty, legality'. The first heraldic pieces, in themselves not a new idea, were produced in large quantities from the 188os onwards and proved a great business success when the market for bigger Staffordshire figures was declining. ## II For all J. R. Green's distaste for heraldry, for the history of royal families, and for war, neither he nor his fellow citizens, among them potters like Goss, could ignore any of these themes. Victoria's long reign was registered not only on her coins and stamps but on much else besides, and her jubilees were public landmarks. Other monarchs, even other régimes, came and went. She stayed. There were always official medals too, and in the early years of the reign one William Wyon, who died in the year of the Great Exhibition, produced a medal of the Queen which was directly used both for coins and for stamps. His son, Leonard Charles, who died in 1891, and his cousins dominated British medal making until the last years of the reign. The Queen's most recent biography by Stanley Weintraub begins not with the events but with the things of 1887, including the Jubilee inkstand given to her by the Prince of Wales. Its lid was a royal crown, and in the privacy of her diary she described it as very pretty and useful'. This, of course, was a very special object. The Queen's loyal subjects, who sent her more than 2,ooo illuminated addresses, could acquire Jubilee medals (ten times as many popular medals were produced for the Jubilee than for any previous occasion in history) and be given, particularly if they were children, mugs and plates or buy glass dishes and Staffordshire figures. There was even a souvenir clay pipe. An 187os figure of the Queen, standing crowned, with veil, ermine-edged cloak and multi-flounced skirt was reissued for the Jubilee, now bearing the words Year ofJubilee'. The same figure was to be used in 1 9oi at her death, this time with the date of death added. In between there had been one new figure of the Queen on a pedestal. It was the only recorded portrait' of the Queen during the last twenty-five years of her reign other than those made from earlier models. Yet there was one realistic gold medal issued in 1887, that of the Art Union which did not seek to hide the age of the Queen. The City of London's medal, designed by Anton Scharff, and produced by Elkingtons, was sent abroad to 39 libraries, museums, societies, including Leeds and Sheffield libraries and the Imperial Library in Vienna. By 1 9oi there were, of course, statues of Prince Albert everywhere - not to speak of the Albert Memorial – and his name, like hers, had been given also to streets, parks and public houses. Even when he was very young, Punch had observed that we are charmed to see in the shops a new portrait of Prince Albert. It was very much wanted and makes, we think, the forty-ffth of the year.' The Queen, venerable by 189o, had appeared in her time in many youthful poses: thus, in one delightful Staffordshire figure she is shown mounted on a chestnut horse and wearing a tight-fitting riding habit and a low round crimson hat. This was before she had turned completely to bonnets (see page 263), and there was need for only one single word as an inscription-Queen'. Cartoonists made more of her vulnerability at the beginning of her reign than of her prowess. Thus, John Doyle in a well-known cartoon Susanna and the Elders' showed her riding between Melbourne and Palmerston, and the Observer produced (exceptionally) a crude engraving of her Coronation in 1838. In Punch in 1841 she is depicted as Little Red Riding Hood’with Peel as the wolf. Not surprisingly, the first Victorian Staffordshire noted by Thomas Balston was the wedding of Albert and Victoria, and he noted too how very soon after there were figures showing the Queen holding a baby in long clothes. Already by 1846, however, Balston remarks, it seemed as if the public were losing its interest in royal babies or children: there are no figures of the seven younger children in childhood. Marriages, of course, were to remain interesting: thus the Princess Royal reappeared on the occasion of her marriage to Prince Frederick William of Prussia in 1858 Albert was unrecorded in pottery during the Crimean War, or later during the 185os, but when he died in 186r, one moulded jug issued in commemoration looked back to the Great Exhibition in the background. A large and still imposing Albert tazza, showing the Island Palace Home'at Osborne- and yet again the Exhibition - was commissioned from Copeland by the Art Union and distributed to subscribers by ballot after his death, and in 1887 a new Albert plate bore his portrait encompassed with a wreath. It is doubtful if the Queen would have approved. The Prince of Wales, who had first appeared (after a painting by the royal family's favourite painter Winterhalter) in a sailor suit and as a Highland boy on a Shetland pony, was depicted skilfully a year after Albert's death in civilian dress following his engagement to Princess Alexandra. There was a reissue of an old medal of the Prince in 18go with the name Prince Alfred on it. The potter had confused two sailors. By then the Prince of Wales looked completely different, and there was only one late new model made by Sampson Smith during the 187os before his Coronation images in 19o1 and 1902. There were two other late-nineteenth century royal figures, however, the second of whom was to become an indefatigable collector. The Duke of Clarence, who died before he could marry Princess May, was paired with her in 18qi: she was wearing a pearl necklace and carrying a large ostrich fan, ostrich feathers being treasured status objects. May married the future George V instead (himself a collector of stamps) and was to be known to posterity as Queen Mary. No Staffordshire figure could have quite done justice to Queen Mary or to her collecting habits. Nor did the crude figures of Edward and Alexandra which were prepared for the delayed Coronation. Foreign royalty received ample attention also during the mid-Victorian years, particularly Napoleon III and Empress Eugénie - in many guises. During the Crimean War Britain and France were allies, and a halfallegorical figure piece of 1865 shows the Emperor in uniform being transported on a roaring British Lion. This was a time for flag waving, and there was an inevitable patriotic vein in the products of the Potteries during the Crimean vears just as there was in the pictorial music covers of Victorian songs. During the vear of the Great Exhibition there had been songs and dances of peace, like ‘the Crystal Palace Quadrille'. Now artists of pictorial music covers turned enthusiastically to action themes which could be more dramatically illustrated. A. Hyatt King has noted in a brief pioneering study published in 195o how it was during the 185os that decorative black and white music title pages gave way to chromolithographical covers. It was not that chromolithography had not been employed before: Louis Antoine Jullien, conductor and impresario of Crystal Palace fame, used it for the covers of polkas and quadrilles, and Nelson and Jeffreys had issued their musical annual The Queen's Boudoir with illustrations in chromolithography' as ‘specimens of fine art'in 184o/1. What happened during the Crimean War was that chromolithography began to be considered almost essential for the illustrations. It went well with the text. Thus, Augustus Butler, ‘a Bohemian of Bohemians', who nonetheless specialized in military song covers, produced ‘The Cardigan Galop' and Thę Guards Quadrille', while Alexandre Laby, whose masterpiece was a painting called The Death of St Joseph', produced the cover for a song version ofTennyson's The Charge of the Light Brigade', with music by John Blockley. Pathos might go with patriotism, however, as the century proceeded: Now what will become of poor old Ireland?', and Brighter Days Will Come'. Yet pace Green, who was writing after the Crimean War, Victorian historians could no more avoid the topic of war even than in peacetime Victorian boys could avoid toy soldiers. War', Henry Vizetelly told the proprietor of the Illustrated London News, was ‘the food on which picture newspapers thrive best'. In the middle years of the century the images left behind at the end of the Crimean War provide almost as valuable evidence for the historian as the millions of words. There are, indeed, almost as many surviving‘Crimean things'as there are things directly associated with the Crystal Palace. Whole galleries of commemorative pottery - and other memorials offame- were produced in 1853, 1854, 1855 and 1856. There are, for example, at least eleven Staffordshire figures of Field-Marshal Lord Raglan, the Commander-in-Chief, and three of his successor, Sir James Simpson. Divisional Commanders on display included General Sir George Cathcart, killed in a cavalry charge, and General Sir William Codrington. There were figures of war heroes, too, like Colonel Sir George de Lacy Evans, who threw back a group of Russians from Sebastopol, itself the subject of many models. In Parian ware there was less to offer, but in the plethora of Crimean prints and Crimean music covers, every kind of technique was used - etchings, woodcuts, lithographs and zincographs - and every kind of typographical art exploited. Some of the prints were as ephemeral as the pictures in the Illustrated London News, one of which was said to have been sent to London by an artist whose friend had his horse killed in the very square where the artist was producing his sketch. Some, however, were to have a very long life, among them eighty hand-tinted lithographs by W. Simpson which survive in a group called The Seat of War in the East. The rarest of them today is one showing Florence Nightingale ministering to the wounded. There were many private memorials, too, after the Crimean War was over, like the statue of the horse, Sir Briggs, kept by Godfrey Morgan, Lord of Tredagar and hero of Balaclava: he also maintained a menagerie. At the Green Jackets Museum in Winchester you can see not only water colours of the Crimea by Brevet-Major H. Clifford V.C., but a lady's slipper and embroidered scarf taken out of a Russian lady's bedroom' by a Captain Wilkinson in February 1854. There is also a Russian necklace presented to a British Soldier by a Russian soldier after peace was signed. Such Crimean private things are to be found in many places. I have in my possession a remarkable hand-illustrated record of the war battles of the Crimea with the signatures of officers and men arranged geometrically to form an ingenious pattern. I also have several Florence Nightingale Lady of the Lamp' pictures and Florence Nightingale Staffordshire portrait figures. The lamp image, surprisingly never used by the Staffordshire potters, was only one of several Florence Nightingale images of fame. Nightingales themselves could figure in cartoons - and music covers - all of which stimulated voluntary effort from the unknown millions. Another nurse who attracted popular attention, the Jamaican Mary Seacole, figured prominently as Our Own Vivandière' in Punch: over the headstone of her tomb in Shepherds Bush, one of many Crimean memorial tombs, she was described as a notable nurse who cared for the sick and wounded in the West Indies, Panama and on the battlefields of the Crimea'. Florence Nightingale, the subject of a striking 1856 photograph, was to live until 1913. Her own favourite Victorian thing was a brooch presented to her by Queen Victoria in 1856: it bore the words Blessed are the Merciful'. The Crimean War was an extremely unpleasant, if popular war, and since it was fought at a great distance it tested the strengths and weaknesses of the communications system as much as military - and medical- organization on the spot and the personal qualities of the generals taking part in it. News about it was precious. So was family news in the opposite direction: one transferred pottery design shows the much awaited Arrival of the Post in the Army before Sebastopol'. Many thanks for the stamps, paper and pens that arrived so timely', wrote one soldier, my pens and paper were quite done. The Illustrated London News did not hesitate to describe the horror: It was impossible to pass along' after Inkermann, we read, without treading on the wounded or the dead, so thickly was the ground covered with them.'And it catalogued an inventory ofrelics' left on the battlefield-Russian cartridges not yet broken - ramrods - Miniéballs - Russian pouches - belts - old gun barrels – fragments of clothing'. There was a litter both of things and of people. W. H. Russell, the famous Times war correspondent, described in Victorian People, looked behind the litter to expose and to explain as well as to describe. Because the War entailed heavier casualties from disease than from combat, medicine had to be considered as critically as action, and Florence Nightingale, herself deeply preoccupied with the inadequacies of military organization, was a necessary romantic heroine, depicted in many paintings which did not do justice to the grim realities of the horror which she experienced far away from home. Distance had much to do with attitudes. Gaps in communication, were generally associated with failures in organization, and while many of the images of war left out the fact that heroism and folly often went together, as they had atthe unfortunate murderous' Charge of the Light Brigade, they could never completely leave out the plight of the wounded. Thus, the Royal Patriotic Jug', black-printed and gilded and advertising a‘Royal Patriotic Fund', shows wounded soldiers on one side and on the other an angel who is surely related to John Bright's powerful angel of death'whom he invoked in one of his most famous speeches. (See Victorian People, Chapter VIII.) This was genuinely a war of crutches as well as swords and of words. Of course, swords and words went together. The picture on a rare uncaptioned Kertch mug showing the 1oth Hussars in action and the Cossacks retreating – with a Hussar impaling a retreating Russian on his sword - was based on an illustration with commentary in the Illustrated London News, and a group of invalided soldiers returning from the Crimea was based on an illustration in Cassell's Illustrated Family Paper. It is remarkable that many of the images of war, including one series of ‘incidents of the war', appeared on children's plates, some in black and white, some in colour, and it seems equally remarkable now - though it would not have seemed so then – that many of them were probably made by child potters, who had figured so prominently in the Report of the Royal Commission on Children's Employment in Industry in 1843. Their own work carried with it danger, for processes like dipping usually led to lead poisoning, and there must have been many child potters in the 185os who were aware that not all wounding was wounding in war. Nor was all the wounding a wounding of people. The children's plates sometimes showed animals, particularly horses, around their borders, and the shot horse of the Victorian artist of the Illustrated London News was by no means a unique creature. There was an educational element in iconography for children, but it is not always clear what the lessons learnt really were. This was an age when schools were not managed by the state nor by local authorities and when schooling was not compulsory - many of the people who made the pottery of images could neither read nor write - and as far as sick children were concerned there was no children's hospital in Britain until the opening of Great Ormond Street in 1858. Photography was more prominent by then than it had been in 1851, partly because of the war work of the solicitor, Roger Fenton, first Honorary Secretary of the Photographic Society (see above p. 129) who had been born in the same year as Queen Victoria and who was sent out to the Crimea in March 1855 with letters of introduction from Prince Albert. He took no fewer than 36o Crimean War photographs. Yet unlike the influential words of Russell, Fenton's photographs conveyed none of the horrors of war, so that the historian has to turn to other sources for war in action. The nature of visual evidence concerning war was raised explicitly in the Illustrated London News in November 1853. The historian of the war in future years', the reporter stated, will be seen bending over these memorials, and comparing them with the literae scriptae of the correspondents of the journals, in order that, before setting himself to deck out his epigrammatic paragraph, or to roll his sonorous period, he may be well “up"in the fortunes of the country and the bearing of those who fought on its soil.’Fenton inspired ‘sonorous periods' rather than repudiated them. Characteristic Fenton titles - and they were noticed as much in Paris as in London - included ‘The Cookhouse of the 8th Hussars' or A Quiet Day at the Master Battery', and evenA Cantonière tending a Wounded Man' gives no sense of the agonies of the wounded nor, indeed, of the filthy conditions within which Fenton himself had to work. Yet Fenton saw the same sights as Russell and could write himselfin one graphic passage of how we came upon many skeletons half buried. One was lying as if he had raised himself upon his elbow, the bare skull sticking up with still enough flesh left in the muscles to prevent it falling from the shoulders.' Perhaps in retrospect the most interesting feature of his art was that his studio of battle'was an ingenious transportable tent which took the place ofa dark room. Fenton, approved of by the Queen, was certainly as much interested in images of fame, however, as any maker of prints or pots, and one of his bestknown photographs, ‘Council of War', a typical set group, shows Lord Raglan, General Pelissier and Omar Pasha (all subjects of Staffordshire portrait figures) in solemn deliberation. Fenton soon learned that in this as in all wars lesser men wanted to be remembered too. Everybody is bothering me for their portrait to send home', Fenton complained, my hut seems to be the rendezvous of all the colonels and captains in the Army. When the War was over, the colonels and captains were remembered, dead or alive, in long lists on military memorials, sometimes ornately decorated. Winchester Cathedral is rich in them: one of them, that of the 97th Regiment, refers to the fruitless assaults on the Redon battery in which Campbell was killed. There is a memorial to the 7th Royal Fusiliers also, and their colours hang in the south transept with the names of their battle honours - Alma, Inkerman, Sebastopol. The memorial notes honestly, however, that more than halfof the Royal Fusiliers' original strength died in action or disease', and the memorial to the 97th Regiment is even more specific. One hundred and twenty-two men died of cholera in Greece on their way out to the Crimea, one died ofdysentery brought on by exposure in the trenches', and another was suffocated by the fumes of charcoal' possibly given off by a brazier in an ill-ventilated dug-out or tent. Such monuments reveal, like Mary Seacole's tomb, that the war experience they record was not restricted to the Crimea. Personal history, like regimental history, might cover a variety of campaigns. Thus, the Winchester memorials relate, often vividly, the Crimean War to the Indian Mutiny'of 1857, the Afghan Wars, the Ashanti Wars, the South African Wars and, as a terrible climax, the Great War'. There are also many memorials recording deaths at sea. Official medals tell the same story. In 1854 the Queen had commanded that a medal bearing the single word Crimea' should be struck and that bars from Alma and Inkerman should be awarded to those who had taken part in the battle. Further bars were added later for Balaclava and Sebastopol. The medals were issued promptly while the battles were still in progress. The bars have been described by Augustus Steward as ‘the most ornate of the whole series given with British medals', but the obverse side of the Wyon design was the same as that on the Peninsular and India General Service medal. While the nineteenth-century memorials and medals are mainly concerned with so-called little wars', in retrospect at least the Crimean War, which involved the Great Powers for the first time since 181 5, might well have been a ‘great' one, and certainly when it ended no one who had expected it to produce‘great' results - and there were many who had - was really satisfied. Nonetheless, there is one Staffordshire piece called ‘The Victory', based on an illustration in Cassell's Illustrated Family Paper with the caption The Real Peace Negotiations', which shows ordinary soldiers, not officers. There is also a well-knownPeace Jug' produced not in the Potteries but at Kirkcaldy in Scotland, showing on one side returning soldiers, and there is at least one local peace beaker commemorating a Peace Festival held at Worksop on May 25th 1856. Much commemorative pottery, like the popular medals, was made not for national but for local events, and it is important to recall that as far as war was concerned local origins and local loyalties determined the pattern of Army organization. According to Major-General R. F. K. Goldsmith, author of a pamphletThe Military Memorials of Winchester Cathedral', In moments of crisis, the British soldier, true to the national character, draws his inspiration more from his membership of a regimental family with its comradeship and identifiable traditions than from higher but more intangible ideals. While the Crimean War lasted, war themes as expressed in things were of two kinds – those dealing with particular events, like the Battles of the Alma or of Balaclava, and those incorporating more general war motifs. May they ever be united’, were the words often to be found on plates, plaques, mugs, jugs and even on chamber pots: the pictures might be of Victoria and Napoleon III or of British and French soldiers. Sometimes, when there were no pictures, there were clasped female and male royal hands or crossed flags. Other designs introduced the third ally, Turkey, and some of the symbols of the enemy, most prominent the Russian eagle. The Turks, like the French, had issued a special medal. So, too, had the Sardinians. It is not so much these memorials of the Crimean War that have lingered longest, however, but rather three words related directly to things which entered the vocabulary for the first time - the raglan overcoat, named after Lord Raglan; the balaclava, the knitted helmet worn to stop frostbite; and the cardigan, named after the colourful general who led the charge of the Light Brigade. The haughty Cardigan, it has been said, was for years the best hated man in England. Yet not only did he give his name to a humble knitwear garment, but when he talked to the Queen on his return from the Crimea he concentrated not on glory but on common things. There had been no hammers, nails, bill-hooks etc, so no wood could be obtained, and they could not construct anything. The things never came . . . Memories of the Crimean War had not faded when in 1857 news came through of the Indian ‘mutiny'. Before the public had had time to buy handsome jugs celebrating the centenary of the battle of Plessey, the battle which won Bengal', the shock of the mutiny'was almost as great as that of the Crimean War. As the Meerot mutineers marched on Delhi and besieged it for three months, cholera, dysentery and fever were once more in the news along with military glory. In Winchester Cathedral one tablet shows Colonel Chester, a good man, a brave soldier, a sincere friend', who was killed in a skirmish with the mutineers during the march on Delhi, while another shows Lieutenant Rivers who died of cholera during the siege. Staffordshire figures of General Sir Henry Havelock, Commander-in-Chiefof the Army in India who died in 1857, were widely circulated, and on this occasion too there was a heroine -Highland Jessie' as she is called on the Staffordshire figures. She, too, was a nurse, and she was the first person to hear the sound of the Highlanders'Bagpipes as Sir Colin Campbell's force approached to relieve Delhi. (A flamboyant piece of piano music called ‘The Battle March of Delhi' recalled the event.) In one of the Staffordshire figures Jessie's left hand rests on the shoulder of a soldier dressed in Indian tropical uniform and sitting, appropriately enough, on a powder barrel. The Highland Jessie’ remains a more popular piece of Staffordshire than the Campbells. Indeed, the collector/dealer John Hall rescued his Campbell from a Burnley dustbin. At the end of the decade there was a burst of patriotism in 1859 and 186o when volunteer riflemen were mobilized to present a show of force against Napoleon III, and one Staffordshire pottery piece shows a rifle range with a tented camp in Wimbledon Common in the background. There were also plates showing drill positions both of riflemen and bayoneteers, based on a publication of the School of Musketry at Hythe, Manual Exercise. Punch lent a touch of satire at the moment ofcrisis', but there was a touch of romance when R. J. Hammerton anticipated later music illustrators with his cover for My Beau in the Rifle Brigade'. Napoleon's annexation of Savoy and Nice in 186o aroused not only riflemen but the many armchair lovers of Italy who bought their Garibaldis with enthusiasm. Indeed, in the same year, the Illustrated London News provided the pictorial source for a pair of Staffordshire figures of Garibaldi and Victor Emmanuel, who ten years later was to become the first king of united Italy. When Garibaldi visited London for ten days in 1864 to the delight of the crowds and a Workingmen's Garibaldian Fund Committee, founded four years earlier, he went to the Crystal Palace twice. Doubtless many images were sold on this occasion as they also must have been on the day when a great procession, led by the Cordwainers and bearing the most colourful trade-union and friendly society banners, made its way from Elm Street station to Stafford House to salute the Italian hero. (John Bright watched from a balcony in the Board of Trade.) There were a few redshirted Englishmen who had actually fought with Garibaldi, and Colonel Peard, paired in pottery with him, was known to the public as Garibaldi's Englishman'. Another pair, this time on a mug, consisted of a Garibaldi and a Havelock. Thereafter, Garibaldi's famous red shirt could be seen in more English homes than Abraham Lincoln's cloak, but the figures of both men were popular. As Bryan Lethem pointed out in an excellent little book on Victorian Staffordshire Portrait Figures, published in 1953, interest in such figures was often greater than knowledge, and more than one Benjamin Franklin figure is labelled General Washington. There are also some interesting homeproduced American Civil War pieces, like a pottery platter made by the Edwin Bennett Pottery Company of Baltimore, depicting a Civil War battle, but this was made not in 186r but in 1901. During the 186os, American potteries for the most part could not compete with the British in producing either figures or more useful articles for the table, and there is an element of irony in the cultural history of the two countries in that while Englishmen were buying Lincolns and character figures from Uncle Tom's Cabin, the Confederate Government in the South was ordering useful china from England. The table service used on board the Trent, the ship which, when seized, provoked the international crisis in 1861 in which Albert successfully intervened just before his death – he changed the wording of a Foreign Office dispatch - had been bought from a Burslem firm in the Potteries. During the 187os and 188os, the Staffordshire potters, sensitive to shifts in mood, favoured war less than religion as a subject for their artefacts; and this seemed natural enough given that the Potteries area remained as renowned for its Methodism as for its pots. Surprisingly they did not produce any figures of their own first early-nineteenth century revivalist Hugh Bourne, founder of Primitive Methodism, but they took particular pride in the figures of the American revivalists Dwight Moody and Ira Sankey who made two highly successful evangelistic tours of Britain in 1 $\cdot 8 7 3 - 5$ and $\mathrm { I 8 8 1 - 3 }$ The potters also produced an outstanding head and shoulders of General Booth, founder of the Salvation Army, wearing his hat and uniform and carrying a device with the words Blood and Fire'stamped on it. None of the war figures produced during the Egyptian Wars (1882-5), the River War (1896-1898) or the Boer War (1899-1902) are comparable in artistry with this religious figure (nor with an allegorical Band of Hope figure), although the four portraits of General Gordon, killed at Khartoum, are historically interesting, and in metal there is an Afghanistan Medal issued in 188o which is crammed with an immense amount of interesting detail. Melton Prior's drawings of the Ashanti War and of later little wars', which were published in the Illustrated London News, which he had joined in 1868, are fascinating too. The sketches had added point in that Prior carried a double-barrelled shotgun and had actually fought in one battle; and on his return, he liked to appear in military jacket and wide-brimmed hat when he gave popular lectures. Once the Prince of Wales was in his audience. When the Boer War drew Prior out to South Africa, another illustrator produced a full page sketch of him at work on the spot, ‘the sketcher sketched'. Yet another illustrator, Frederick Villiers, was as romantic a figure as Prior. His memoirs were called Villiers: His Five Decades of Adventure. The Boer War produced two official medals and more bars (26) than had ever been issued before, but there were few popular medals.It inspired a final burst of activity in the Potteries during the very last years of the century and the beginning of the twentieth. No artist' in the words of the Art Fournal, attempted to depict a scene of actual carnage although the photographer Horace Walter Nicolls, who had worked in Chile during the 188os, produced outstanding photographs, preserved in the Imperial War Museum, which he hoped would appeal to the artistic sense of the most fastidious'and would at the same time have the enhanced value of being truthful'. Violence was certainly far removed from a medal produced by the Austrian Emil Fuchs, an art nouveau designer, while Staffordshires, which came into fashion again, mainly represented officers in equestrian poses and left no place for the wounded. They were all of soldiers - Lord Kitchener, the subject of an earlier figure produced at the time of the Battle of Omdurman in the Sudan; General Sir Redvers Buller; Lord Roberts of Kandahar, who after three months of war succeeded him as Commander-in-Chief; General Sir John French, with a long military career ahead of him; Colonel R. S. S. Baden-Powell, who in 19o8 was to found the Boy Scouts; Major-General Sir Hector Macdonald, Fighting Mac'who had risen from the ranks; and Lord Dundonald. By then there had been a marked decline in artistry in Staffordshire making, and the headdress of the officers varied more than the horses they rode. Indeed, it was more expressive than their faces. One figure of Kitchener in Sudan shows him wearing not a peaked cap but, like Gordon, a fez: one of Macdonald, also a hero of Omdurman, shows him wearing a busby: Sir John French wears a helmet in one figure and a cocked hat in another: Baden-Powell wears his famous - and more appealing - slouched hat. Surgeon-Captain Pugh in his study of Staffordshires has traced back some of the designs to figures on a music cover called Siege of Ladysmith and subtitledGrand Divertimento'. There was one Staffordshire piece, too, which brought in symbolic rather than real figures. It was hastily and messily prepared for the Peace of Vereeniging which brought the war to an end in May 19o2. Significantly, perhaps, it was a modification of an earlier piece produced in 1882 when the Kilmainham Treaty brought together Gladstone and Parnell in a shortlived Anglo-Irish Deal. In its 19o2 form it shows a bearded Boer and John Bull in a Union Jack waistcoat shaking hands -in both cases new heads had been substituted since Kilmainham - and it bears words which in the light of later events both in South Africa and in Ireland were to acquire profound irony in the twentieth century -Peace on earth, goodwill towards men'. ## III Gladstone and Parnell were paired at the time of Kilmainham, the subject of cartoons very different from the piece of Staffordshire. Both men had their disciples, and both men repelled as well as attracted. There was a break in Parnell's career, and because of Gladstone's longer, if often equally controversial, political career, it is interesting to trace how he, in particular, was associated at various times of his life with a wide variety of Gladstonian things, not least the Gladstone bag and the Gladstone collar. Most of them became named objects relatively late in his life, however. He had long been known for his zeal as an axeman in chopping down trees, but it was when he was already old that visitors to Hawarden used to carry away with them some of the wooden chips left from the choppings. Lord Randolph Churchill made fun of the habit when he deliberately tried to destroy Gladstone by calculated irreverence. He did not succeed. Gladstone's daughter described the mountain of things'left for him at Hawarden on his 8oth birthday - flowers, blankets, gingerbreads, pocketbooks, sausages, crumpets, pillows, books, lamps, vases, rings, cushions etc, etc'. An early free-trader and a confirmed supporter of Peel at the time of the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, Gladstone would have found no place then in any Staffordshire gallery. Cobden did, of course, as did a lesser-known repealer, Colonel James Perronet Thompson, and Peel himself, a subject for teapots as well as plates. Bright, Cobden's closest colleague, was not depicted at that time and had to wait until later. There is only one known transfer of a print of him - on a mug - and on that he is in late-Victorian dress. His portrait was often paired with Gladstone in prints, however, and like Gladstone and Lord Randolph Churchill he appeared on Stevengraphs. The Anti-Corn Law League, which was led by Cobden and Bright, is interesting in the history of political images since it made the greatest possible use in a pioneering fashion not only of tracts but of memorabilia. It also made the most of dreams of cornucopia. A seaport scene on a mug suggested that if British manufactures were exchanged for foreign corn every port would thrive. Another plate proclaimed the power of commerce –The Staffordshire Potteries and free trade with all the world.' There was the same approach to cornucopia in the great bazaars held at Manchester in February 1842 and, to the sounds of Jullien's music, at Covent Garden in May 1845. There, according to Harriet Martineau, the porcelain and cutlery exhibitions, the mirrors and grindstones, the dolls and wheat-sacks, shoes and statuettes .. . made a curious and wonderful display, which was thought to produce more effect on some Parliamentary minds than all the eloquence yet uttered in the House of Commons'. The League has subsequently passed down to posterity not only through publications like the Antibread Tax Circular or through trade and revenue statistics, but through anti-monopoly scarves and pincushions, free-trade tea and breakfast sets, table-cloths and handkerchiefs, and ornate engraved membership cards. One of the cards showed the opposite of cornucopia. On one side was a picture of a starving family with the caption Give us this day our daily bread': on the other there was a picture of Bethlehem. Religion and politics were one. When Cobden went on in 186o to negotiate successfully with the French for a free-trade treaty, subscribers to a fund collected for him included many of the makers of the most Victorian of Victorian things. Pilkington Brothers, the glass-makers of St Helens, subscribed £5oo, as did George and John Crossley, carpet makers of Halifax, and Titus Salt, textile manufacturer of Saltaire. Yet even at that relatively late date Gladstone as a Peelite Chancellor of the Exchequer had still not been finally converted intothe People's William'. He seemed to be a supporter of the South during the American Civil War, and it was not until 1865 that he was unmuzzled' when after eighteen years as a Member of Parliament for Oxford University he moved to a popular constituency. In 1864 as a lover of Italy he had welcomed Garibaldi to London, and in the same year he publicly supported the extension of the franchise to working men. Yet the famous spy cartoon The People's William' did not appear in Vanity Fair until July 1879. At that time Gladstone, who had been Prime Minister from 1868 to 1874, was in opposition, and Disraeli was at the helm, and it was during their years of rivalry that the first significant Staffordshire pieces dealing with domestic politics since the 184os began to appear. Gladstone was paired at least twice in pottery with Disraeli, and both figured in Parian ware. The fact that the Staffordshire Disraelis bore the words Beaconsfield’ shows that they were issued after Disraeli was given his title in 1876. Another Disraeli bust in Goss ware can be dated 1879 from a description in The Reliquary which also referred to a bust of the future Prime Minister Lord Salisbury. He and Disraeli were depicted against the keystone of an arch and were described as the Keystones of the Kingdom'. Between 1878 and 188o Gladstone was throwing stones rather than serving as a keystone. Returning to politics after the brief retirement which followed his defeat at the general election of 1874, he stumped the country, first attacking Disraeli's foreign policy and then the whole of his policy. He became known in the flesh during these years and not just as an image to far bigger audiences than Disraeli had ever assembled. Yet the universal demand for images of both men shows that while offering what seemed to him and to many of his supporters to be a moral choice Gladstone had at the same time given both a prize-ring flavour and a theatrical flavour to the struggle for political power. It was he, not Disraeli, who had a special chair when he visited the Lyceum Theatre (it was specially upholstered for him in very old age), and it was his house at Hawarden rather than Disraeli's house at Hughenden which was turned into a place of popular pilgrimage: 26,ooo people were to visit a flower show there in 1896. Finally, there was more than a touch of the preacher in him, and he was shown in one Staffordshire figure standing bare-headed in a pulpit with his right hand on the turban of a Turk who stood against its front. The Turks, old allies of the Crimean War, had never won Gladstone's praises. Given such an approach to politics it is ironical that before and after Disraeli's death Gladstone was to accuse his rival of revelling in display'. Unfortunately there are no details of the relative shares of sales of Gladstone and Disraeli Staffordshires which might tempt us to measure the strength of public reactions to the two parties without resorting to all their manifestos or to the printed election ephemera. Gladstone, however, was associated with far more images than Disraeli, partly, of course, because he lived seventeen years longer, dying fittingly on Ascension Day in 1898, but partly, too, because he enjoyed addressing crowds all over Britain and because people who heard him in person wanted to have a keepsake of him. At Longton, one of the Potteries' six towns, the living and working museum of British pottery'which traces the history of British ceramics is called ‘The Gladstone Pottery': it was so named after a visit from Gladstone to Potbank Yard, one of the many visits he paid to industrial locations, another of them Middlesbrough, described in Victorian Cities. In Arnold Bennett's The Old Wives' Tale one of the Potteries characters describes him as the semi-divine Gladstone'. During the busy years after the early 188os, when Gladstone had already begun to be called ‘the Grand Old Man', or just the G.O.M., he was frequently depicted with Mrs Gladstone, whom he had married in 1839 and who was to outlive him by two years. There are many pictures, including photographs, of the two of them at Hawarden, and there is one excellent photograph of her alone just before her death. There is no Stevengraph of her, but she is paired with him in Staffordshire pottery and shares with him matching plates. They are sometimes surrounded with flowers. Primroses, Disraeli's favourite flower, were not the only flowers, therefore, which were depicted on Victorian things including, not least, song covers. Yet Disraeli was a powerful enough personality with or without flowers to inspire the production of Disraeli things even after his death. There were Disraeli jugs and octagonal plates, complete with primrose decorations, and there were memorials of what he considered to be scenes of triumph, like the Congress of Berlin in 1878. One year after he died, Primrose Day was inaugurated in his memory, and thereafter real or portrayed primroses figured prominently for new generations in Conservative memorials and celebrations. Primroses decorated his statue in Parliament Square and gave their name to a new Primrose League. Only the poppies of the First World War were to linger longer in the public mind. Music covers once again caught the mood. One patriotic conservative' song entitled Primrose Day' was dedicated to Lord Randolph Churchill and was recommended for Conservative banquets. Other flowers depicted on Victorian things included a spray of white lilies for Bright, and for Joseph Chamberlain, who broke with Gladstone on home rule, his favourite orchids. Gladstone in one Stevengraph was decorated with a spray of thistles and roses, Parnell had clover leaves and a yellow harp, and Lord Salisbury was surrounded by roses – red, bright yellow, and orange. By the 188os the borders of music covers showed increasing numbers of domestic objects as well as flowers – china, glass and furniture. There was no national agreement about party colours in the nineteenth century, when local political leaders, more immediately known to their audiences, often demanded their image of fame also - in the form of commemorative mugs or medals as much as statues in the parks. There was in fact a wide range of things, some of them Goss things, associated with local great men', some of whom were by any criteria outstanding. There were many local Stevens products also, like the bookmark made for the Fine Art and Industrial Exhibition at Coventry in 1867 which incorporated a view of the city and a bust of a local ‘great man', Lord Leigh, the President of the Exhibition, with his coat of arms underneath. More than one local great man' was a collector and more than one was a benefactor. An outstanding example of both is the jeweller Joseph Mayer, a collector of antiquities, who was born in the Potteries in 183o. Before he presented his collection to Liverpool in 1867 to form the basis of the City's Museum Collection he had been concerned with many contemporary local Liverpool things, including a Royal Mersey Yacht Club Challenge Cup in 1 845, a model silver cradle presented to the wife of the Mayor of Liverpool in 1848, a seal, also of 1848, designed for the curator of the Historic Society of Lancashire, a trowel which he made for the laying of the foundation stone of St Peter's Church in Everton in 1849, medals to commemorate the centenary of the philanthropist William Roscoe in 1853 and the opening of the free Public Library and Museum in 186o, and an elaborately carved Roscoe chair which he also designed and which was made from timbers acquired when Roscoe's house was demolished. It comes as no surprise that Mayer left an unpublished manuscript Materials Towards a History of the Arts. The trowels used in the laying of church and chapel foundation stones have often survived the churches and chapels themselves. Sometimes, too, they have survived the Victorian objects to be found in those churches and chapels, including memorial brass and stained glass. One church in Leicester, St Mark's, which exceptionally included stained glass of Labour leaders, as interesting as the trade-union banners to be found in the Museum of Labour History in London, is at present on the danger list. Statues, of course, have always been vulnerable, proving how fickle images of fame can be. For example, Thomas Attwood's statue in Birmingham, like John Fielden's in Todmorden, were moved from their first places of honour to public parks. Coventry Patmore was not unduly worried about this. It should be remembered', he wrote, that, in our haste, we may be placing an awful and easy vengeance in the hands of posterity; which might choose, not to pull down such monuments, but - to let them stand.' ## IV Within the compass of the arts dealt with by Mayer, printing became more important during the Victorian period than it ever had been before, influencing and being influenced by other arts; and the delineation ofgreat men’on the printed page was a favourite pursuit.Books', the Manchester Guardian proclaimed in 1852, are the cheapest luxury, the most rational enjoyment, within the reach of all the classes, that in this nineteenth century can be presented to mankind', and for Carlyle they were like scouts ... penetrating the whole habitable globe'. Newspapers shared the same acclaim (see page 324). ‘The cheap daily press will do more than any other agency to form the public opinion of this country', wrote Cobden, for once echoing Disraeli who had declared in his novel Coningsby, published in 1842 before the telegraph had established itself, that opinion now is supreme, and opinion speaks in print'. At Gladstone's Hawarden, where newspapers were always in demand and where journalists were amongst the most regular visitors, books were treated more tenderly than trees. Indeed, the Grand Old Man devised a mobile storage system to save precious library space. Yet despite the rise of publishing and changes in the technology of printing associated with the machine press, Victorians also felt that print had its limitations, partly because there was a substantial, though declining, illiterate population, partly because even at the end of Queen Victoria's reign, when the ‘number of people who can read' was ‘enormous', the printing press, following the law of supply and demand', seemed to be now appealing to the uneducated mass of all classes'. One anxious observer who made this particular judgement in the Nineteenth Century in the year that Queen Victoria died was the young historian G. M. Trevelyan. By the time that he died, equally anxious observers were complaining that the uneducated mass'was beginning to live in a world not only of words but of pictures. It had broken, it was suggested, with Victorian cultural traditions. In fact, there were significant changes in the way in which the Victorians themselves handled pictures before the coming of the cinema. The woodcut which in the eighteenth century had been largely relegated to the chapbook came into its own in an age of cheaper books, periodicals and newspapers, and there was a growing interest in other modes of illustration, particularly wood engraving, and photography, which for W. S. Ivins in his Prints and Visual Communication (1953) brought with it a major breakthrough. ‘Up to that time', he wrote, ‘very few people had been aware of the difference between pictorial expression and pictorial communication of statements about fact. The profound difference between creating something and making a statement about the quality and character of something had not been perceived .. . Photography and its processes quietly stepped in and by taking over one of the two fields for its own made the distinction that the world had failed to see. Ivins commented on the changes in the graphic arts before photography, although he did not cover much of the relevant evidence, such as the reminiscences of the radical engraver W. J. Linton who emigrated to the United States in 1866. Nor did he mention one range of specifically Victorian things - Baxter prints, which have been collected as eagerly as Staffordshire portrait figures, often by the same people. They frequently offer images of the same people also, setting out to represent not to satirize. They were deemed free from objectionable features' which Thomas Wright in his History of Caricature (1864) had associated with pre-Victorian cartoons, and they had none of the political edge of Charles Knight or of the early Punch. Interest in collecting Baxter prints preceded interest in collecting Staffordshire figures, however, and as early as 19o8 C. T. Courtney Lewis produced amanual for collectors', to be followed three years later by his George Baxter, Picture Printer of the Nineteenth Century. For Lewis, Baxter Was in his way a historian'whodepicted the events of the early Victorian days in which he lived as graphically by means of the pencil as any writer with his word pictures', a comment that recalls Thackeray's description ofJohn Leech as the social historian of the nineteenth century. George Baxter was born at Lewes in Sussex in 18o4, the son of a local printer and publisher, who learned engraving at a time when copper engraving was still the main engraving process, very soon to be largely replaced by steel engraving. The engraver's instrument was not a pencil but a burin or engraver which was moved across the surface of the copper or steel plate to follow a desired line. Baxter's main interest was in providing colour, as much of a challenge to him as the provision of colour was to be in the development of twentieth-century television. Very soon after beginning business on his account in 1829, he was experimenting with pictures in polychromatic colours, starting with birds and butterflies (as Mass Observation was to start in the twentieth century) before turning to people. When in 1836 he produced a print called the Conqueror [sic] of Europe', the title did not refer to Napoleon – or to Louis XIV – but to a flower, the auricula, and it appeared in the Horticultural Fournal. Baxter had obtained his first patent a year earlier, and in the year when Queen Victoria came to the throne he published his fascinating The Pictorial Album or Cabinet of Paintings which included a print of Cleopatra holding the asp to her bosom. The first contemporary great person depicted in his gallery of fame was, not surprisingly, a very different Queen – Victoria– and his first print of her appeared in Sir Harry Nicholas's History of the Orders of Knighthood in 1842. Thereafter, many familiar contemporary figures, like Albert, Peel, Wellington, Napoleon III and the Prince of Wales, took their place in Baxter's albums alongside Victoria. Jenny Lind was there too. Yet Baxter was less interested in worldly fame than the makers of Staffordshire were. Before Victoria he had produced a series of missionary prints - his first portrait was of a Congregationalist missionary, the Rev John Williams - and before the missionaries he had chosen as subjeçts people of whom J. R. Green would have approved -‘Bohemian Peasants', ‘Hungarian Peasants'and Southdown Sheep'. Present at Queen Victoria's coronation in 1838, Baxter was given special facilities there, but it took him almost three years to prepare his splendid print Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria receiving the Sacrament at her Coronation', complete with a key to the dramatis personae. It was bought, according to one contemporary account, not by the common people’ but by patrons'and by people of quality, present at, or much interested in the ceremony' and it was dedicated by command to the royal Family'. The work was set in a maple and gold frame with the royal arms in gold at the top. It came in two sizes $- 2 \tt { I } \frac { 3 } { 4 } ^ { \prime \prime } \times \tt { I } 7 \frac { 1 } { 2 } ^ { \prime \prime }$ and $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 7 \frac { 1 } { 2 } \times \mathrm { ~ I ~ } 3 \frac { 3 } { 4 } ^ { \prime \prime } ;$ the larger size cost 5 guineas, the smaller size 3 guineas, and there was also a sepia print. Yet the prices asked were not standard, and some people paid as much as 1o guineas. A further related picture was published in 1841 – that of the Queen opening the first Parliament of her reign. All Baxter's earliest works had been designed for books and had no signatures: from 1835 onwards, however, they often bore markings like ‘Baxter's Patent Oil Colour Painting’ or ‘Printed in Oil Colours by G. Baxter, Patentee', and they were designed not for the pages of a book, but to hang on walls, like oil paintings. The great wood engraver Thomas Bewick, born in 1753, whose Memoir, published in 1862, thirty-four years after his death, had anticipated this in one prophetic passage: Prints', he judged, might with good effect be made from wood blocks printed in colours like paper hangings, of subjects fit to embellish every house throughout our country'. Already before 1862 there had been a proliferation ofother Baxter objects also – including Baxter pocket books, music covers and needle-box prints. One box-print dealt with ‘The Year of the Great Exhibition', another with the Allied Sovereigns and the Commanders of their Forces during the Crimean War, and a third with ‘the Queen and the Horses of India', including, surprisingly, in the collection the Duke of Cambridge, Napoleon III and his son the Prince Napoleon. Baxter was deliberately appealing now not to a handful of patrons, but to ‘the million', and his prints were advertised as cheap artistic pictorial illustrations'. Yet he continued to stress high quality. By no other means can such extreme detail, such truthful colouring, and such unlimited numbers be produced'. He made the same point in relation to his Crimean War prints, which included ‘The Siege of Sebastopol' and on a more homely plane ‘The Soldier's Farewell, The Parent's Gift." Baxter's techniques were painstaking. He began by engraving the picture he wished to publish on a sheet of soft steel (or copper) and went on to take impressions of the key plate he had prepared and to cut wooden or copper blocks, based on it, the numbers of the blocks depending on the number of colours he wished to employ. The different blocks were then used in succession, each printing one colour, and as one block dried another was carefully superimposed. The key plate was used to complete the picture. It was an expensive process', Baxter declared, based on step-by-step improvements which produced coloured impressions of a high degree of perfection, far superior to those which are coloured by hand'. Perhaps his biggest leap ahead came early in the story when he used oil rather than water colours. Such techniques, which to Baxter were arts not crafts, can be related to more general trends in the history of printing, just as the appeal of his finished products can be related to more general trends in the history of society and culture. As far as both arts and techniques were concerned - and there were other step-by-step improvements'in both - useful and now familiar distinctions were being drawn by the Victorians. Relief techniques, associated with wood engraving, went back to the medieval wood cut, and were sharply distinguished from intaglio techniques, associated with line engraving from copper or steel plates. The distinction was drawn picturesquely by Ruskin. In metal engraving you cut ditches, fill them with ink, and press your paper into them; in wood engraving you leave ridges, rub the tops of them with ink, and stamp them on your paper.'A more important distinction affecting use was that with woodcuts printing-type, text and illustrations could be printed together on the same press, while intaglio techniques demanded a separate press. Illustrations had to be printed separately or when they had to be integrated with the text called for double printing, once for the text and once for the illustrations. There was a third way into nineteenth-century print making - lithography, discovered at the end of the eighteenth century and based on the simple fact that grease repelled water. The design for a lithograph was drawn with a greasy crayon or ink on a block of limestone - or later of zinc or aluminium - and the block was covered with water which was repelled from the greased surfaces. Paper was then applied to the block in a flat bed press and the print was made. Much of the success of the lithograph depended on the skill of this last operation. The challenges in such processes – and in the logical development of the third, chromolithography - were fully appreciated in an age when there was an increasing demand - and a different kind of demand - for such a product; and Baxter had to cope both with rivals, like Abraham Le Blond, to whom he subsequently sold his licence, and his former pupils, Gregory Collins and Reynolds, whose work could be seen in the Art Fournal: Reynolds later went to join Minton. Baxter also had to cope with critics, some of whom were enemies. Thus, the Illustrated London News, not without its own vested interest, dismissed the best of Baxter's own Exhibition prints as pretty and pleasing' and called the rest inartistic' and based on ‘very bad drawing'. For a recent critic, Ronald Russell, No matter how one defines “artistic merit",' Baxter prints cannot be claimed to have any'. In his view, at their best they do no more than exude a period flavour'. The same could have been said, of course, of the prints issued across the Atlantic by Currier and Ives, founded in 1834. Their cheap and popular' hand-coloured lithographs, pictures with no pretensions, sold in huge quantities at far cheaper prices than Baxter prints - from 1 5 cents to 25 cents retail. The firm opened a London office. Its catalogue listed among the categories of paintings ‘Catholic Religious', Patriotic' andFamily Registers' along with Horses', Kittens and Puppies' and Ladies' Heads’. Baxter's attempt in face of competition to combine cheapness with quality was evident in all his comments on his own work, many of which stressed, as did Courtney Lewis, the honest grit' which he put into his productions. He was remarkably consistent too. As he stated in the preface to his Guide to the Great Exhibition, the most topical of events, he was determined to reproduce artistic pictures'which were not simply topical, and which would be within the reach of everyone. There were some contemporaries who acknowledged his achievement. Thus, for the pro-Palmerstonian Morning Post in 1859 - in full agreement with the liberal Daily News, which had been founded in 1846 under the editorship of Dickens–Baxter's printing in oil colours is really one of the most beautiful and ingenious inventions of our time'. Lord Brougham, who believed in diffusing everything, words even more than pictures, had long ago concurred: Baxter's invention, he claimed in 1849, was of public utility, because whatever makes good coloured prints . . . of easy access to the common people, to the cottagers and labourers, is of great use to them in every respect. It is a pleasure to them and now it is made a cheap pleasure.' Brougham, whose head had once appeared on a stoneware gin flask, did not talk about Baxter's gallery offame: already by 1849 his own fame had greatly diminished and there must have been few people who knew what he looked like. It seemed likely that Baxter's own fame would be just as short-lived, for although he dreamed of wealth, he was a complete failure as a businessman. Nor did he have admirers, as Linton, Patriarch of the Art of Engraving' did: hero worshippers bowed down before him as a genius'. In his early years Baxter could not interest publishers based on Paternoster Row, and in 1835, the year when he took out his unique patent, he was already in serious financial difficulties. The London Missionary Society briefly saved him as it might have saved an aborigine, but a member of his family described him in 184o, when he was working on the Queen's Coronation, as desperately poor'. The first prints said to have made a profit for him were those of the Queen and Albert. In 1854 he lost his patent, and although he won a prize at the Paris Exhibition of 1855, where, as in 1851, he had a stand of his own, in 1857 he quarrelled with his family, and in 186o he was forced to retire from business. All his plant, plates, blocks, drawn, engraved and highly finished by the patenter himself, and over 1oo,ooo prints, were now put up for sale in London. Yet even this sale did not save him - nor did further sales in the provinces - and five years later he was adjudicated a bankrupt on his own petition. Towards the end of 1866 he was struck by a horse-drawn omnibus and died early in 1867. It would be a mistake to attribute Baxter's business failure entirely to his personal qualities, although he was not of the stuff from which Victorian entrepreneurs were made. Engraving of all kinds was to go through a Victorian crisis, while the intricate work of a chromolithographer of the calibre of J. B. Waring seemed redundant when the Germans introduced cheaper techniques later in the century. Waring's Masterpieces of Industrial Art and Sculpture at the International Exhibition of 1862 had used three thousand stones to produce three hundred chromolithographs. It can not be said, however, that the final challenge to the kind of work Baxter did - photography - was unappreciated by him. The work of early photographers greatly interested him, and in 1858 he actually took out a patent himself for colouring photographic pictures'. The late-Victorian story after his death is complicated. During the last decades of the Queen's reign, pictorial art' was left to the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers, founded in 188o, to a few artist-engravers using wooden blocks to reproduce in colour, to Walter Crane and to Kate Greenaway, and, not least, to the art photographers (see page 131), none of whom were conspicuously interested, as Baxter had been, in furnishing galleries of fame. There were many cross currents, however. Thus, when Joseph Lundall wrote his Brief History of Wood Engraving in 1895, six years after Linton's The Masters of Wood Engraving, he observed that owing to the invention of various mechanized processes, and the perfection to which photography has risen, the art of wood engraving must seem to be in danger of becoming extinct.'Yet with William Morris and arts and crafts' in mind– and with developments in the United States - he was quick to add that this is by no means the real case'. Baxter's own lost reputation began to recover surprisingly soon - after Frederick Möckler had acquired Baxter's plates from Le Blond, had produced a portfolio of reprints and in 1893 a catalogue, had created a Baxter Society (with Lord Leighton, Britain's first painter-peer as President), and in 1896 had organized a Baxter exhibition. When Courtney Lewis published his The Picture Painters of the Nineteenth Century in 1911, he paid generous tribute to Möckler, whom he interviewed. He added that cheapness' was still an asset as far as Baxter prints were concerned: collectors of moderate means'would be able ‘to spare from time to time the comparatively small amounts that are needed for the accumulation of these prints'. They would have the extra satisfaction, he concluded, of gathering not puerile things', the craze of the hour', but things with abiding interest, which had been growing in public estimation and value for nearly twenty years', and which were destined to take a very much higher position'. There was no rubbish theory here. As one of his illustrations Courtney Lewis included without comment Baxter's‘The End ofTime'(1835) which portrayed the Angel from the Book of Revelation proclaiming the Creator not only of Earth and the things that therein are' but of Heaven and of all the things that therein are' also. Heroes might get a little nearer to Heaven than their worshippers, but the millions for whom the images described in this chapter were intended had to be content with the things of Earth, among them the most common things that J. R. Green most prized, and among these were now photographs. Conotone's photograph albums in The Old Wives' Tale preferred an astonishing menagerie of unknown cousins and their connections, and of townspeople'to heroes local or national. Nothing will open the memory, evoke the past, regain the deed, rejuvenate the ageing, and cause both sighs and smiles', Bennett commented, like, a collection of photographs gathered together during long years oflife.' Heroes came and went, and great empires might fade like Nineveh and Tyre, but ordinary families' remained. Fame, Green was not alone in insisting, was not the most important aspect of life. Nor was doing good'. Any one who knows what the worth of family affection is among the lower classes', Green wrote in 1871, and who has seen the array of little portraits stuck over a labourer's fireplace ... will perhaps feel with me that ... the sixpenny photograph is doing more for the poor than all the philanthropists in the world.'