Appendix A

Otto Neurath

# Social and economic museum of Vienna

1925

'Geselischafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum in Wien', Österreichische Gemeinde-Zeitung, Jg. 2, Nr. 16, 15 August 1925, pp. 1–12. Translated by Robin Kinross.

## 1: Aims

The present age requires of all of us a rational understanding of social correlations. One can no longer limit general knowledge to reading, arithmetic, writing, and to some knowledge of the natural sciences, literature, and history; one must also explain the social process and make its ways understandable. The pedagogy of this subject is still in its infancy. We possess, however, a whole series of exemplary museums, films, books, through which scientific education is transmitted. Among other things, this means that the educated population supplies the productive sector with a large number of well-prepared enginèers, doctors, printers, electro-technicians. The extraordinarily rapid development of radio may be explained in part thus, that technical ability is to be found in the widest circles. The nineteenth century was rightly called a century of science, a technical century.

Many think that the century of social regulation is here; a century in which the shaping of social life will be comprehended at its deepest levels. The social revolution of recent years, the democratization of public administration, the extension of the rights of workers and the white-collared in industry, has led to more and more people demanding education in social and economic processes. It is not easy to satisfy this demand. The proven results of research in this area are not very comprehensive; also the correlations described are extraordinarily complicated. As regards methods of presentation, we are still just at the beginning.

Modern man has been rather spoiled by cinema and illustration. He takes a great part of his education in pleasurable ways, partly during his leisure time, through visual impressions. If one wishes to spread social education widely, one

must use such means of presentation. The modern poster shows us the way! Scientific processes may be depicted, as it were, directly. One can capture the star system with the help of a series of slide projectors, as has been demonstrated at Jena; now the year's movement of the planets, speeded-up, is run before the spectator within an hour. One can build models of human hearts and can demonstrate the pumping process in detail. But how can one show the inner processes of the social body, the shifts in class structure, the circulation of money and goods, the activities of banks, the connections between income and tuberculosis, between birth figures and mortality rates? Here models are also possible, and graphic presentations. But they require much greater distancing from reality, they place greater demands on the person who devises them, and on the spectator. To create a centre for social and economic education through predominantly visual media – graphics and models – is harder than to establish a centre for technical or medical education, where mistakes can do much less damage. Perhaps the time will come when established conventions have been formulated for the presentation of social-economic findings, so that graphic statistics can be generally read', just as easily as one can now read books or musical notation. Until this is achieved, one must use methods that are direct and comprehensible without such a convention. This is the task of the social museums that will come into being in the present phase of history. These museums are not required to show peculiarities or to collect mementoes. It is therefore not a matter of bringing sentimental objects together, but of forming a collection of educational pictures, models etc., so that it is a systematic whole and a real course of instruction for anyone who, without preparation, wishes to concern himself with social or economic questions. The means to be considered are, above all, graphic presentations, pictures, models, films, slides; but also, illustrations, lectures, publications, and all other appropriate means. The necessity for such a museum can hardly be doubted our age demands it.

The museums of the past were first of all places for curios and rarities, collections of loved objects, treasure chests; money-value and scarcity of single show-pieces were fundamental factors. Princes, rich private citizens, city goverņments, and monasteries have later made such unsystematically acquired collections accessible to the common visitor. It is evident that the museums that originate from such collections have something lifeless about them. The visitor feels them to be 'of the past'; he is respectfully pushed past various lances swords, helmets, tattered flags, busts, autographs – mostly arranged decoratively, speaking more to feeling than to understanding, they satisfy the delight in display and have little effect on the sense of purpose. The modern museum seeks to be a teaching museum, a teaching process that works with compact materials. In a modern technical museum, in order to show the development of weapons, one has to show the weapons themselves! To establish a modern museum implies being a teacher. Technical museums will now attach themselves to social museums.

Whereas a technical museum leads one round the highest achievements of the human spirit, a social-economic museum will show what goes to make up the life of the people. In so far as technical things are touched upon it is, therefore, to show the spread of a technical achievement, perhaps to show by how many people it is used – not how it works. A technical ruseum shows building methods, a social-economic museum shows how many houses are unfit for dwelling, how many are fit. But the social-economic museum will occasionally also display technical objects, with explanation; architectural models as well, and anatomical structures for education in health and its social meaning.

It is proposed that the main work of the Museum will, in general, be carried out from a centre – because experience has taught that it is much harder than it seems at first glance to produce useful graphic presentations for the purpose of popular education. Even if one has got over initial faults and mistakes, such as are commonly encountered in presentations designed for popular education, it is not possible to apply immediately and successfully the principles that have perhaps been established. For, although a graphic presentation of statistical quantities and relations may be no longer mistaken, so too it may be no longer stimulating. We must consider factors that can as little be formulated, as recipes, as the means that a good poster artist uses. The training of appropriate skills for the production of really useful pictorial and plastic presentations takes a great deal of time. Not only must the methods of presentation be thoroughly examined for their intellectual quality, but also, dimensions, colours, distribution of space, and so on, must always be revised until a result that will then be satisfactory is achieved; but after some time, when the pedagogy of such a museum has advanced, it will again demand improvement.

## 2: Origins and tasks

The Gemeinde Wien (Municipality of Vienna), which is doing so much for general enlightenment and for education, has resolved to assume responsibility for a social and economic museum. The Museum has been constituted in law as an association [Verein], as explained in a municipal decree, in order to enable other interested organizations to play a part in its development. Besides those of the Gemeinde Wien, the greater part of the funds are provided by the Wiener Arbeiter- und Angestelltenkammer (Vienna chamber of workers and salaried staff), the Gewerkschaftskommission (Organization of trade unions) and the Sozialversicherungsinstitute (Social insurance institutes).

The Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum has not come into existence in one step. First, the Österreichisches Siedlungsmuseum (Austrian settlement museum) was created – this has now been turned into the 'Siedlung und Städtebau' (settlement and town-planning) section of the Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum. This Siedlungsmuseum originated in connection with the last great Siedlungs- und Wohnbauausstellung (settlement and housing exhibition) of 1923,

organized by the Österreichischer Verband für Siedlungs- und Kleingartenwesen (Austrian associ ation for settlement and allotment gardens), with the strongest support of the Gemeinde Wien and the Society of Friends. The Arbeiter- und Angestell tenkammer for Vienna and Lower Austria, the Gemeinwirtschaftliche Siedlungs- und Baustoffanstalt (Cooperative institution for provision of housing and building materials; abbreviated as 'Gesiba'), the Grosseinkaufsgesellschaft der Konsumvereine (wholesale purchasing body of the cooperative movement) and other organizations provided means for its establishment. Graphics, photographs, and models from the exhibition were brought together here. Further material was purchased and constructed, and thus the basic stock for a collection was created. It shows, on a general economic basis, how human settlements develop, how cities are sometimes created by planning, how they sometimes develop through uncoordinated erection of buildings, how the large apartment blocks of the nineteènth century were gradually superseded in almost all areas by the construction of garden suburbs and garden cities.

While important parts of the Kleingarten-, Siedlungs- und Wohnbauausstellung of 1923 could be saved at the last moment for the Siedlungsmuseum, it was arranged in advance that certain items of the Gemeinde Wien's, made for the Hygiene exhibition, would be secured for the Museum. Through close cooperation between the director of the Hygiene exhibition, the municipal authorities and the Museum management, unified dimensions were determined for the graphics and photographs and for the production of permanent models in glass cases. The objects exhibited by the Gemeinde Wien will now stay together permanently in the Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum. A partial exhibition is now on display at Parkring 12, Wien I. The principles that were applied to the joint display sections of the Gemeinde Wien and Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum, to the details of frames in particular, also hold good for the sections

prepared by the Arbeiterkammer Wien. A further unification was achieved by the fact that the technical department of the Museum produced graphics not only for itself, but also for the Gesundheitsamt (Department of health), the sanitary, street cleaning, and ambulance services of the Gemeinde Wien.

In this way the section of'settlement and town-planning' and the subject of 'social hygiene' (in the section called 'living standard and culture'), come to be represented most completely in the Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum. But already, once the Siedlungsmuseum had been formed, various things had been done for the 'work and organisation' section, in establishing an introductory section that would be concerned with population and economy. Here the development of organizations for production is shown; the development of industry, banks, and so on; the development of the workers' movement, through unions and cooperative organizations.

The need to turn to the best advantage the experience of the Museum in the field of instructional presentation has led to discussions with official bodies and educational organizations about the production of material for exhibition and educational purposes.

The Museum, as a thoroughly modern educational centre, will supply teaching materials as required. The pedagogy practised here will become a normal part of general educational practice.

Guided tours through the Museum, of parties from schools and associations, will spread the appreciation of this kind of presentation. Successful pictorial presentations could be chosen for slide series and for reproduction.

What are for most people 'dead' statistics will be brought to life. To this end, the Museum has already joined in association with the Statistisches Amt der Gemeinde Wien (Statistical office of the municipality), and is going to collaborate in publishing illustrated pages in the monthly statistical bulletins of the Gemeinde Wien – which will awaken interest in statistics about the community