# Towards the Twentieth Century During the nineteenth century manufacturers'relentless exploitation of new techniques andmaterials increasingly made accessible to middle-class consumers a wide range of objects with rich and elaborate decorative detailing in an encyclopaedic variety of historicizing styles. Superficially exuding a resonance of education and taste, such products had previously been the preserve of a cultural élite who often purchased furniture, furnishings, and domestic equipment which embodied the skills and virtuosity of individual craftsmen. This new class of widely available mass-produced goods was made possible through such processes as electroplating, stamping and moulding, and the exploration of materials such as gutta-percha, papier-mâché, or castiron which possessed rich possibilities for the imitation of more expensive and individually-produced artefacts and the lavish fabrication of decorative detailing. Such designs were heavily criticized by many nineteenth-century critics, particularly in Britain by John Ruskin, William Morris, and Arts and Crafts followers, who not only viewed them as ‘dishonest' through their ‘inappropriate'use of materials and modes of construction, but also deplored what they felt were the dehumanizing consequences of industrialization for those involved in their manufacture. However, although such opinions, writings, and design practice aroused considerable interest amongst progressive designers and critics of the industrialization process in Europe and the United States in the later nineteenth century, their actual impact upon the majority of manufacturers involved in the mass-production of consumer goods was extremely limited. By the closing years of the nineteenth century the significance of the various shifts in industrial power that had been taking place in Europe and North America for some time became increasingly apparent. Britain, once characterized as the workshop of the world', found her capacity for industrial innovation challenged not only by the United States, but also by a number of other countries including Germany. The latter, following her unification in 1871, had developed new steel, chemical, and electrical industries alongside the establishment of technical high schools which offered a positive educational programme for engineers, manufacturers, and industrial managers. British concern about her own comparative trading position had been acknowledged in governmental circles since the early 183os when Sir Robert Peel had attributed the decline in her exports to poor standards of design in British manufacture, a cri de cœur which has been voicedat times of significant economic crisis over the succeeding 16o years.1 The superior industrial strategy of Germany and the United States was clearly identified in a Royal Commission of 1886, and by the turn of the century economic and industrial comparisons with these two countries were being made frequently in British journals and other publications. Furthermore, the twin concepts of Taylorism and Fordism developed in the United States in the early years of the twentieth century became highly influential throughout the industrialized world, and were important facets of her dominance in economic mass-production in the interwar years. Taylorism was a system which sought to achieve industrial efficiency on the factory floor. Devised by Frederick Winslow Taylor in the late nineteenth century through a series oftime and motion' studies which broke down workplace activities into their most efficient constituent parts, it was documented in his Principles of Scientific Management of 191. It was applied subsequently to several areas of human activity with consequent implications for design, such as in theplanning of efficient, labour-savingkitchens and domestic equipment. Fordism related to Henry Ford's introduction of the moving assembly line for the Model T Ford automobile in 1913. Dramatically cutting down the time for car chassis production, it had obvious wider economic implications for standardized massproduction (and thus patterns of consumption) throughout the industrialized world. By the early 19oos many of the key inventions which were to become fundamental to life in the new century were becoming increasingly available to the everyday consumer: electric lighting and domestic appliances; homogenizing communications media such as the telephone, the gramophone, and the cinema; and the automobile which also played a key role in bringing together rural and urban communities. Before long the radio and the aeroplane further transformed people's lives in terms of dissolving national and regional barriers. Few progressive design theorists and practitioners managed to exert a significant impact in such areas prior to the First World War. However, there was a growing recognition of the importance of reconcilingdesign thinking with the realities of mass-production technology if such an outlook was to have a significant bearing on everyday life. Amongst avant-garde design groups of the early twentieth century the Italian Futurists, founded by Filippo Tommaso Marinetti in 1909, were perhaps the most unequivocal in their embrace of the possibilities afforded by technological innovation andperceptions of the dynamism