# Design and Social Responsibility ## The USA: design and consumer organizations Although consumer rights have gradually evolved through the twentieth century it can be argued that their significance in any widespread societal sense emerged after the end of the Second World War. None the less, they evolved in a less structured way over a longer period of time, particularly in the United States. In the last quarter of the nineteenth century there were large population increases, significant moves from rural areas to the city, and dramatic improvements in transport and communication systems. A number of organizations were founded in the same period, including the pioneering Consumers' League in New York City in 1891 and the National Consumers' League in 1898 which, within five years, boasted $6 _ { 4 }$ branches in 2o states. They came into being at a time when consumers were faced with an increasingly wide range of products, together with changes in shopping patterns: premium stamps were introduced by Sperry & Hutchinson in 1896, the A & P Company (the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company) had launched its cash-and-carry Economy Stores' at around the turn of the century, and the first self-service grocery store, a Piggly-Wiggly, opened in Memphis, Tennessee in 1916.1 The majority of the most significant early steps in consumer protection were enacted in the area of food and hygiene.2 However, as has been seen in Chapter 3, by the 192os there was a rapid growth in sales of all kinds of goods, sustained by widespread advertising both on the radio and in printed media. Attention has already been drawn to a number of critical reactions to the commercialization of American life at this time; in the consumer sphere in 1927Stuart Chase and Frederick J. Schlink published Your Money's Worth: A Study in the Waste of the Consumers' Dollar, an attack on contemporary advertising practices and the phenomenon of pressure selling. Schlink went on to found a Consumers' Club in White Plains, New York, which undertook product testing, leading to the establishment of Consumers' Research Inc. which did this on a much wider scale. Financed by its users, its recommendations covered a wide range of products across the whole consumer spectrum; lists of both approved and disapproved items were published. The Good Housekeeping Institute, the Delineator