# Notes ## Introduction 1. A useful introductory text is John A. Walker, Design History and the History of Design (Pluto Press, London, 1989). Key articles which have evaluated particular ways in which the history of design may be approached include Clive Dilnot, 'The State of Design History, Part I: Mapping the Field' and 'The State of Design History Part II: Problems and Possibilities', Design Issues (MIT), 1.1 (Spring 1984), 3-23, and 1.2 (Fall 1984), 3-20, and Cheryl Buckley, Made in Patriarchy: Towards a Feminist Analysis of Women and Design', Design Issues, 3.2 (Fall 1986), 3-14. More recently, Design Issues devoted a whole issue (11.1 (Spring 1995)) to considering the place of design history as a distinct field of academic study. 2. First published as Pioneers ofModern Design by Faber & Faber, London, 1936. 3. N. Pevsner, Pioneers of the Modern Movement: From William Morris to Walter Gropius (Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1977). 4. (Oxford University Press). 5. (Studio Vista, London). 6.(Thames &Hudson, London, 1986). 7. D. Miller, Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Blackwell, Oxford, 1987). Although he described design history as 'bizarre' in this text, perhaps due to a lack of awareness of contemporary research and debate in the field, a number of anthropological studies have been influential in more recent design-historical research and publication. For example, T. Putnam & C. Newton (eds.), Household Choices (Futures Publications, London, 199o), moved significantly away from the design, manufacture, and development of products towards concepts of choice, reception, and understanding. 8. See e.g. A. Callen, Angel in the Studio: Women in the Arts and Crafts Movement (London, 1979), R. Parker and G. Pollock, Old Mistresses: Women, Art and Ideology (London, 1981). 9. See R. Parker, The Subversive Stitch: Embroidery and the Making of the Feminine (London, 1984) or M. Droste, 'Women in the Arts and Crafts and in Industrial Design 1890-1933' in Frauen im Design: Berufsbilder und Lebenswege seit 19oo/Women in Design: Careers and Life Histories since 1900 (Design Center, Stuttgart, 1989), 174-202. 10. Key texts include J. Attfield and P. Kirkham (eds.), A View from the Interior: Feminism, Women and Design (Women's Press, London, 1989; rev. edn. 1995), C. Buckley, Potters and Paintresses: Women Designers and the Pottery Industry 1870-1955 (Women's Press, 1990) and Frauen im Design (n. 9 above). ## Chapter 1 1. As e.g. in the period immediately following the First World War, which saw the establishment of the British Institute of Industrial Art; the economic difficulties encountered in the early 193os led to the establishment of the Council for Art and Industry in 1933; the perceived problems of competitiveness in the post-Second World War export markets resulted in the establishment of the Council ofIndustrial Design; the 198os saw the Thatcher Government's'Design for Profit' initiatives. 2. See e.g. N. Pevsner, op. cit., F. MacCarthy, A History of British Design 1830-1979 (Allen &Unwin, London, 1979), J. De Noblet (ed.) Design: Miroir du Siècle (Flammarion/APCI, Paris, 1993), and W. Kaplan (ed.), Designing Modernity: The Arts of Reform and Persuasion 1885-1945(Thames &Hudson/Wolfsonian Foundation, London/Miami, 1995). 3. Key texts include M. B. Miller, The Bon Marché, Bourgeois Culture and the Department Store 1869-1920 (Allen &Unwin, London, 1891); R. M. Hower, History ofMacy's ofNew York 1858–1919: Chapters in the Evolution of a Department Store (Harvard University Press, Cambridge., Mass., 1943); and R. W. Twyman, History of Marshall Field and Co., 1852–1906 (University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, 1954). 4. B. Lancaster, The Department Store: A Social History (Leicester University Press, London, 1995), presents an extremely useful analysis of the subject which, although British-centred, takes account of wider historical and theoretical perspectives. 5. See e.g. W. Leach, Land of Desire: Merchants, Power and the Rise of a New American Culture (Pantheon, New York, 1993) 6. J. Heskett singled out this company as an indicator of wider patterns of consumption in Germany in Design in Germany 1870-1918 (Trefoil, London, 1986),86-92. Stukenbrok's Illustrierte Hauptkatalog of 1912 was reprinted in Heidelberg in 1973. 7. There had been earlier organizations with many common aspirations, including the Dürerbund founded by Ferdinand Avenarius in 1902 to promote art in everyday life and the Bund für Heimatschutz (Society for the Protection of the Homeland), founded in 1904. 8. A Proposal for the Foundation of a Design and Industries Association (DIA, London, 1915), 3. 9. Ibid. 10. Although its Treasury grants ceased within two years due to the economic slump of 1921. I1. This came about in response to the writings of Count Léon de Laborde. He abhorred the propensity ofFrench manufacturers to celebrate an encyclopaedic historicism in their products. ## Chapter 2 1. This key text was first published by Faber &Faber (London) in 1936. Its historical significance was considerably enhanced with the second edition which was published by the Museum ofModern Art, New York, in 1949, itself a key propagandist of the modernist cause. The most striking change of this redesigned volume was the increase in the number ofillustrations from 84 to 137. It was further revised and partly rewritten when published as The Pioneers ofModern Design: From William Morris to Walter Gropius by Penguin Books (Harmondsworth) in 196o and has subsequently undergone many reprints. 2. Despite the wide range of material already published in the field, modernism is an area about which there is still much to research. A very useful publication is P. Greenhalgh (ed.), Modernism in Design (Reaktion, London, 1990). 3. The aesthetic and symbolic aspects of modernism, as exemplified in its manipulation of abstract forms, adoption of new materials, and compatibility with the zeitgeist or'spirit of the age' have often been underplayed, with considerable emphasis on the mechanistic notion that 'form follows function'. Tim Benton, in an extremely useful essay on 'The Myth of Function', in Paul Greenhalgh (ed.) (above, n. 2), 41-53, argued forcefully that this simplistic association of modernism with functionalism has done much to reinforce the perceptions of those who have portrayed it as'dehumanizing'. 4. For studies in material culture see e.g. D. Miller (above, Introd. n. 7), M. Douglas and B. Isherwood, The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption (Allen Lane, London, 1975), and G. McCracken, New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities (Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 1988). 5. Frauen im Design (above, Introd. n. 9) contains some very useful essays which open up fresh avenues of research in relation to women and modernism. Various approaches to the study of women and design are considered in J. Attfield and P. Kirkham (eds.) A View from the Interior (above, Introd. n. 1o). 6. R. Lynes, Good Old Modern: An Intimate Portrait of the Museum of Modern Art (Athenaeum, New York, 1973), considers the museum's opposition to commercial styling and preference for purist' forms. See also, J. Mashek, Embalmed Objects: Design at the Modern', Artforum, February 1975, 49–55. 7. Certain aspects of the heritage of the Bauhaus in Dessau are discussed succinctly byJ. Aynsley, 'News from Elsewhere: Leipzig/Berlin',Journal of Design History, 4.1.(1991),43-7. 8. G. Berghaus,'Girlkultur—Feminism, Americanism, and Popular Entertainment in Weimar Germany', Journal ofDesign History, 1.2/3 (1988), 1, 3-4 gives a perspective on many wider aspects of consumer attitudes, together with a wide range of useful references. Useful also is J. Heskett, 'Design in Inter-War Germany', in W. Kaplan, (ed.), Designing Modernity(above, n. 1.2), 257–85. 9. Loos's essay is discussed at some length by Reyner Banham in AdolfLoos and the Problem of Ornament', Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (London: Architectural Press, 1960), ch. 7. 10. Trans.J. Dunnett (London: Architectural Association, 1987), 87-8. 11. H.-R. Hitchcock Jr. and P. Johnson, Modern Architecture: International Exhibition and The International Style: Architecture Since 1922 (both published in New York: Museum ofModern Art, 1932). 12. The arguments at the Werkbund congress of 1914 were far more complex than this in terms of the internal politics of the Werkbund, the desire to create a modern, German style closely linked with industry, and differing perceptions of the nature of the export markets to which these goods were ultimately directed. This is articulated in some depth in Joan Campbell, The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts (Princeton University Press, Princeton and Guildford, 1978), particularly in ch. 3, Cologne in 1914', 58–81. 13. Founded in 1902 by the writer and poet Ferdinand Avenarius, the Dürerbund sought to promote art in everyday life. 14. Some writers, most notably Marcel Franciscono, Walter Gropius and the Creation of the Bauhaus in Weimar: The Ideals and Artistic Theories of Its Founding Years (University of Illinois, Urbana, 1971), have argued that Gropius had never fully abdicated his functionalist tenets, and that shortages of money and industrial materials at the school, together with the energies he expended in promoting the school at the expense of a heavy personal involvement in the curriculum, have tended to disguise this fact. 15. Magdalene Droste, 'Women in the Arts and Crafts and in Industrial Design 1890-1933', in Frauen im Design (above, Introd. n. 9),174-202. 16. This aspect of Bauhaus activity prior to the move to Dessau in 1925 is fully discussed in Anna Rowland, 'Business Management at the Weimar Bauhaus', Journal ofDesign History (1988),153-75. 17. These include G. Naylor, The Bauhaus Reassessed(Herbert Press, St Neots, 1985), and H. Wingler, The Bauhaus— Weimar, Dessau, Berlin, Chicago (1962; new edn., MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1977). 18. Op. cit. (above, n. 12), 5. 19. Droste (above, n. I5). 20. The complexities of this are discussed in Campbell(above, n.12), 176-179. 21. Droste (above, n. 15), 197. 22. It was first published briefly in 1922, but the economic climate was too difficult to sustain it. 23. This is extensively considered by Nicholas Bullock, 'First the Kitchen—Then the Facade', AA Files (London, May, 1984), 59 ff. 24. Lihotsky and the Frankfurt kitchen are also usefully discussed in 'The Frankfurt Kitchen: Contemporary Criticism and Perspectives', in Frauen im Design, (above, Introd. n. 9), pp.160-9. 25. See J. Heskett, Modernism and Archaism in Design in the Third Reich', Block, 3 (1980) 13 ff. and 'Art and Design in the Third Reich', History Workshop Journal, 6 (1979), 139-53. 26. For further discussion of Corbusier's furniture designs see C. Benton, 'Le Corbusier: Furniture and the Interior', Journal of Design History, 3. 2/3 (1990), 103-24. 27. Although A. Branzi, The Hot House: London, 1984), claims that the first Rationalist interior was in fact Ivo Pannaggi's Casa Zampini. 28. See e.g. B. Zevi, 'The Italian Rationalists', in D. Sharp (ed.), The Rationalists: Theory and Design in the Modern Movement (Architectural Press, London, 1978), 118–29. 29. Founded in Milan as Casa Bella in 1928 with an intended readership of women it became more progressively oriented under its new title, launched in 1934. 30. This title was first taken up at Monza in 1930. 31. These are usefully discussed in the introduction to Scandinavia: Ceramics and Glass of the 2oth Century (Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 1989). 32. Originally founded under the Swedish parent company Rörstrand in 1874. ## Chapter 3 1.(Harper, New York). 2. Charles Richards stated in his report on Art in Industry of 1929 that there were 55 schools teaching 'industrial design' in the United States, but that this was often linked to the use of museums as providers of exemplars and very much dominated by stylistic influences from the past, such as Art Nouveau or Arts and Crafts. 3. (1932; Dover reprint, New York, 1977), 21-3. 4. Autobiographical texts by industrial designers include R. Loewy, Never Leave Well Enough Alone (Simon & Schuster, New York, 1951), and Industrial Design (Faber, London, 198o), and H. Dreyfuss, Designing for People (Simon & Schuster, New York, 1955). N. Bel Geddes, Horizons in Industrial Design (above, n. 3), and R. Loewy, The Locomotive: Its Esthetics (The Studio, New York, 1937) are expansive and optimistic statements about the power of the industrial designer to alter the consumer's outlook, to improve the quality oflife—and at the same time to increase sales. Rather more measured accounts of the profession may be found in W. D. Teague, Design This Day: The Techniques of Order in the Machine Age (Harcourt Brace, New York, 1940), and H. Van Doren, Industrial Design: A Practical Guide (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1940). 5. Such historical accounts include Donald J. Bush's eulogistic The Streamlined Decade (George Braziller, New York, 1975) which centres on the stylistic rather than economic aspects ofindustrial design; there are many historical texts which focus on the achievements ofindividuals, such as The Designs of Raymond Loewy (exhibition catalogue, Smithsonian Institute, Washington, 1975) or A.Schönberger (ed.), Raymond Loewy: Pioneer ofAmerican Industrial Design (Internationales Design Zentrum, Berlin, 199o). A balanced account of the period may be found in J. Meikle, Twentieth Century Limited: Industrial Design in America, 1925-1939 (Temple University Press, Philadelphia, 1979), in which relationships between design, business, and society are evaluated. 6. Miller (above, Introd. n. 7), 142. 7.(above, n. 4). 8. Such as K. C. Plummer, 'The Streamlined Moderne',Art in America,January/February 1974, 46-54, D. Gebhard, 'The Moderne in the US, 1920-1941',Architecture Association Quarterly, July 1970, 4-20, and D. J. Bush (above,n.5). 9. W. D. Teague, 'Building the World of Tomorrow', Art & Industry, April 1939, 126. 10. See e.g. D. A. Hounshell, From the American System to Mass-Production 18oo-1932 (Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 1984). I1. E.J. O'Brian, The Dance of the Machines: The American Short Story and the Industrial Age (Jonathan Cape, London, 1929), 115. 12. A number of his writings are collected in J. Meller (ed.), The Buckminster Fuller Reader (Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1971). 13.'The Comprehensive Man', revised text of a lecture given at the University of Oregon in 1959, in J. Meller (ed.) (above, n. 12), 134. 14. This is usefully and lucidly discussed in T. Gronberg, 'Cascades ofLight: the 1925 Exhibition as Ville Lumière’, Apollo, July 1995,12-16. 15. The official reason given was that there were insufficient American goods which conformed to the official guidelines for the exhibition, which required designs displaying 'modern aspiration and real originality' However, it is more likely that the lack of participation was due to the distance, cost, and lack of clear economic advantage. 16. These included Lord & Taylor and Macy's in New York in 1928. 17. D. Naylor, American Picture Palaces: The Architecture of Fantasy (Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1981), provides a useful account of this striking genre. 18. (Architectural Press, London, 1945), 4. 19. Many such developments are discussed in G. Wright, Building the Dream: A Social History of Housing in America (University of Chicago Press, 1981). 20. See e.g. S. Worden, Furniture for the Living Room: An Investigation of the Interaction between Society and Design in Britain from 1919 to 1939' (unpublished Ph.D thesis, University of Brighton, 198o), and J. Attfield, 'The Role of Design within the Relationship between Furniture Manufacture and its Retailing (1935–65) with Initial Reference to the Firm ofJ. Clarke (unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of Brighton, 1992). Of more general interest, but providing useful starting points, are A. A. Jackson, Semi-Detached London (Allen & Unwin, London, 1973), and P. Oliver et al. Dunroamin: The Suburban Semi and Its Enemies (Barrie &Jenkins, London, 1981) A useful introduction to the problems of interpreting the'ordinary' room is byJ. Porter and S. Macdonald, 'Fabricating Interiors: Approaches to the History ofDomestic Furnishing at the Geffrye Museum', Journal ofDesign History, 3. 2-3 (1990), 175–82. 21. Perhaps the most significant attempt to examine furnishings and home decoration from a consumer's point of view is to be found in T. Putnam and C. Newton (eds.), Household Choices (Futures Publications, London, 199o). 22. The archives of the Ideal Home Exhibition are located in the Archive of Art &Design at Olympia, an outpost of the National Art Library (Victoria and Albert Museum). 23.'The Salon des Arts Ménagers, 1923-83: A French Effort to Instil the Virtues ofHome and the Norms of Good Taste', Journal of Design History, 7. 4 (1994), 267–75. This is also discussed in R.-H. Guerrand, 'Comfort', in J. de Noblet (ed.), Design: Mirror of a Century (Flammarion, Paris, 1993) 74–82. Chapter 4 1. For a general reading of the significance of international exhibitions see P. Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas: the Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions and World's Fairs, 1851–1939 (Manchester University Press, 1988). 2. For the only authoritative account in English of Polish design and vernacular traditions see D. Crowley, National Style and Nation State: Design in Poland from the Vernacular Revival to the International Style (Manchester University Press, 1992). 3. Some of these key issues are taken up in the exhibition catalogue Art and Power: Europe under the Dictators 1930-45(Hayward Gallery, London, 1995). 4. Hungary, like Poland sought to utilize a 'national' style derived from vernacular roots early in the century. See e.g. Katalin Keserü, 'The Workshops of Gödöllö: Transformations of a Morrisian Theme', Journal of Design History, 1.1 (1988), 1-23. 5. (Thames &Hudson, London), 15. 6.J. Gloag The English Tradition in Design (Penguin, London, 1947), 35. 7. The distinction that perhaps should be made between 'English'or'British'involves a complex area of debate. For the purposes of this brief summary of British/English national identity I have tended to adopt the terminology adopted by contemporary commentators. 8. See e.g. A. Howkins, 'The Discovery of Rural England', in R. Colls and P. Dodd (eds.), Englishness: Politics and Culture 188o/192o (Croom Helm, London, 1986). 9. F. MacCarthy, e.g., All Things Bright and Beautiful: Design in Britain from 183o to Today (Allen &Unwin, London, 1972), doesn't even mention it. See J. Woodham, 'Design and Empire: British Design in the 1920s', Art History, June 1980, 229–40, 'Images of Africa and Design at the British Empire Exhibitions between the Wars', Journal of Design History, 2.1 (1989), 15–33, or The Industrial Designer and the Public (Pembridge, London, 1983), for discussion of the field. 10. It attracted almost a further 1o million visitors in the following year. 11. SeeJ.M.Mackenzie, Propaganda and Empire: The Manipulation of British Public Opinion 188o-1960 (Manchester University Press, 1985) and id. (ed.), Imperialism and Popular Culture (Manchester University Press, 1986). 12. L. Weaver, Exhibitions and the Arts of Display (Country Life, London, 1925), 42. 13. [G. S. Holme], 'Where there is Non-Vision the People Perish', Studio, July, 1930. 14. C. Hussey, 'The Week-end House', Guide des objects exposés dans le pavillon du Royaume Uni: 1937 Exposition Internationale Paris (HMSO, London, 1937), 507. 15. Sir Thomas Barlow, speaking at the Council for Art and Industry meeting of 11 November 1937, file BT 60/40/2 at the Public Record Office, Kew. 16. A Dream of England: Landscape, Photography and the Tourist's Imagination (Manchester University Press, 1994); for the reference to Picture Post see the section 'Landscape for Everyone', 198–205. 18. A notable exception is Paddy Maguire, whose important article on'Craft Capitalism and the Projection of British Industry in the 1950s and 1960s', Journal of Design History, 6.2 (1993), 97-114, includes some splendid examples of heritage props for the support of British displays abroad. 19. Board of Trade Journal, 13 April 1962. 20. 'Modernism and Archaism in Design in the Third Reich', Block (Middlesex Polytechnic), no. 3 (1980), 17-20, and'Design in Interwar Germany', in W. Kaplan (ed.), Designing Modernity (above, n. 1.2), 257–85. 21. Seen also in the essay on Functionalism in Nazi Germany: Neoclassicism 1933-1945', in H.Fuchs and F. Burkhardt, Product— Design—History: German Design from 1820 down to the Present Era (Institute for Foreign Cultural Relations, Stuttgart, 1986). 22. Although a grandiose, updated form of Neo-Classicism was the favoured official style for all significant buildings and architectural schema. 23. S. Weissler, 'Imprisoned Within a Role: An Assessment of Arts and Crafts Production by Women Under National Socialism', in Frauen im Design (above, Introd. n. 9), 234-43. 24. For a full discussion of the political complexities of the DWB's activities after 1933, see ch. IX, 'The Werkbund and National Socialism', inJ. Campbell, The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts (Princeton University Press, 1979) 243-87. 25. Ibid. 275. 26. H. Fuchs and F. Burkhardt (above, n. 2o). 27. Such as the Association of Decorative Arts and Industries, founded in 1920. Chapter 5 1. R. Lynes, The Taste-Makers: the Shaping of American Popular Taste (1954; Dover, New York, 1980). 2.S. Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous History (1948; Norton, New York, 1969), 617–19. 3.'The Consumer Markets: 1954-1959', Fortune, August 1954, 82. This was the last of the twelve articles. 4. Pp.96-101. 5. E. Larrabee, 'The Six Thousand Houses That Levitt Built', Harper's Magazine, 197 (1948),82. 6. B. Friedan, The Feminine Mystique (1963; Penguin,Harmondsworth,1972),15-16. 7. R. Venturi, D. Scott Brown, and S. Izenour (MIT, Cambridge, Mass.), 1972. 8. See e.g. A. Hess, Googie: Fifties Coffee Shop Architecture (Chronicle, San Francisco, 1985). 9. (Bloomsbury, London). 10. Ibid. 4. 11. (Cambridge University Press). 12. Utility or Austerity’, Architectural Review, January 1943, 3. 13. For fuller discussion see J. M. Woodham, 'Design Promotion 1946 and After', in P. Sparke (ed.), Did Britain Make It: British Design in Context 1946-1986 (Design Council, London, 1986), 23-37, and‘The Post-War Consumer: Design Propaganda and Awareness, 1945-1965', in N. Hamilton (ed.), From the Spitfire to the Microchip: Studies in the History ofDesign (Design Council, London, 1985),6–11. 14. The Enemies of Design (Design & Industries Association), 3. 15. For further discussion of this see e.g. ch. 5, Propaganda and Organisation of Modern Design', in J. M. Woodham, The Industrial Designer and the Public (Pembridge, London, 1983). 16. Many aspects of the cultural orientation of the early years have been discussed in J. M. Woodham, Managing British Design Reform I: Fresh Perspectives on the Early Years of the Council ofIndustrial Design’, Journal of Design History, 9.1. (1996), pp. 55–65. See also J. M. Woodham, 'Managing British Design Reform II', Journal of Design History, 9, 2, 101-15. 17. In addition to the BCMI Reports, an extensive range of COID/Mass Observation-related material can be consulted in the Design Council Archive in the Design History Research Centre, the University of Brighton, and at the Mass-Observation Archive at the University of Sussex. 18. A Designer's Trade (Allen &Unwin, London,1986). 19. An Eye for Design (Max Reinhardt, London, 1987). 20. Ed. M. Banham and B. Hillier (Thames &Hudson, London 1951). 21.'The Style: Flimsy... Effeminate?'in M. Banham and B. Hillier, op. cit. 190–8. 22.The influence of the Festival of Britain on design today', Journal of the Royal Society ofArts, June 1961, 503–15. 23.(above,n.2.27),39. 24. D. P. Doordan, 'National Agendas for Italian Design after 1945', paper given at 'Design, Industry and Government Initiatives: Past, Present and Future' international conference at the University of Brighton, November 1995 (to be published). 25. A catalogue was also produced: R. M. Rogers, Italy at Work: Her Renaissance in Design Today (Istituto Poligrafico dello Stato, Rome, 1950). 26. In 1948 Handicraft Development Inc. and CADMA were reorganized as the Compagna Nazionale Artigiania (CNA). 27. An exhibition of Olivetti products and graphics was put on in 1952, two years before the company opened its striking New York showroom on Fifth Avenue. 28. This is discussed in G. Berghaus, Girlkultur(above, n. 2.8), 193 ff. 29. Design Quarterly, 40 (1958), 1–27. 30. E. Wilkinson, Japan versus Europe (Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1983), offers a very useful insight into changing perceptions ofJapan in Europe over the previous hundred years or more. 31. Hansard(London), 23 November 1950, 500. 32. The quotation relates to a visit by the President of the British Cycle and Motor Manufacturers to Earl's Court in November 1951: Board ofTrade Records, Public Record Office, Kew, File BT 11/4452. It is significant, however, that pencilled in the margin is the comment of a Board ofTrade official who declared 'Far too complacent. Quality has improved.' 33. Time, 23 February 1961. 34. (Wiley, Chichester). 35. The initials of the consultancy stood for Group Koike, in honour of their professor who had done much to stimulate their interest in the emergent discipline of industrial design. 36. A very useful detailed account of all the major developments is contained in JETRO, Japan's Post War Industrial Policy: Economic Programs in the Reconstruction and Expansion Periods (Japan External Trade Organization, Tokyo, Japan, 1985). For some aspects of export history see JETRO, A History ofJapan's Postwar Export Policy: Japanese Experience (Japan External Trade Organization, Tokyo, 1983). 37. Interviewed by the author in Tokyo, November, 1985 when Takeshi Inoue was Director of the Overseas Division of GK Industrial Design. ## Chapter 6 1. (Cambridge University Press (first edition 1983), 1992. That six editions were needed in under ten years perhaps points to its particular applicability to such concepts in 198os Britain. 2. W. Olins, Corporate Identity: Making Business Strategy Visible through Design (Thames &Hudson, London, 1989), 13. 3. That this was seen as an increasingly important aspect of the opportunity for corporate communication is evidenced by texts such as J. Grinling, The Annual Report: A Guide to Planning, Producing and Promoting Company Reports (Gower, London, 1986). 4. (above n. 2), 132. 5. F. H. K. Henrion and A. Parkin, Design Co-ordination and Corporate Image (Studio Vista, London, 1967), 7. 7.S. Baker, 'Re-reading The Corporate Personality, Journal ofDesign History, 2.4 (1989),275-6. 8. These include J. K. Galbraith, The New Industrial State (Hamish Hamilton, London, 1967), G. Bannock, The Juggernauts: the Age of the Big Corporation (Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1973), and A. Mattelart, Multinational Corporations and the Control of Culture: the Ideological Apparatuses of Imperialism (Harvester, Brighton, 1979). 10. (Ediciones Universitarias de Valparaíso, Chile). An English edition, How to Read Donald Duck: Imperialist Imagery in the Disney Comic, with a foreword by David Kunzle, was published by International General, New York, 1975. 11. Doyle Dane Bernbach was founded in New York in 1949 and soon expanded with offices worldwide. Highly successful, it set new standards of co-operation between copywriters and art directors, with visual elements carrying equal editorial weight to that of advertising copy. 12. A. Mattelart, Multinational Corporations and the Control of Culture (above, n. 8). 13. The corporate implications of armies are considered in L. Mumford, Technics and Civilisation (1934; Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1962). 14. The overt symbolism of regimes such as Mussolini's conception of a 'Roma Secunda' and Hitler's Third Reich have been considered in Chapter 3. Wally Olins considers the latter in The Corporate Personality (Design Council, 1962). One might look back considerably further to, e.g., the city states and courts of the Renaissance, with the institution of programmes for building and cultural patronage as a means of projecting particular notions of corporate identity. 15. From 1949 it became part of the Illinois Institute ofTechnology. For further discussion of the early debates and politics of the institution see A. Findeli, 'Design Education and Industry: the Laborious Beginnings of the Institute of Design in Chicago in 1944', Journal of Design History, 4.2 (1991), 97–115. 16. Discussed more fully in ch. 9, 'The Aspen Muse and the Twilight of Modernism', in J. Sloan Allen, The Romance of Commerce and Culture (University of Chicago Press, 1983). 17. For an extremely useful discussion of the form, content, and influence of this magazine see J. AynsleyGebrauchsgraphik as an Early Graphic Design Journal, 1924-1938',Journal of Design History, 5.1 (1992), 53–72. 18. This has been discussed interestingly in ch. 6, 'Design in the Office', by A. Forty, Objects of Desire: Design and Society 1750-198o (Thames and Hudson, London, 1986). 19. SeeJ. Heskett, Philips: A Study of the Corporate Management of Design (Trefoil, London, 1989). 20. S. Bayley, Coke! Coca-Cola 1886–1986: Designing a Megabrand(Conran Foundation, London, 1986). 21. S. Bayley(ed.), Sony: Design (Conran Foundation, London 1982). 22. A. Drexler, 'Introduction' to Charles Eames: Furniture from the Design Collection (MOMA, New York, 1973), 3. 23. (MOMA, New York, 1950). 24. Quoted in Design Process Olivetti 1908–1978, exhibition catalogue, Frederick S. Wight Art Gallery (Olivetti, Ivrea, 1979), 19. 26. As in B. Radice, Memphis: the New House and Garden, February 1982, 108–17; H. Cumming, and A. Van Tulleken, 'Memphis Design and Other International Styles', Art and Design (London), March 1986,50-7. 27. The Officina was launched in 1983 as the experimental arm of the metal goods manufacturer, Alessi. 28. See e.g. Volker Fischer (ed.), Micro-Architecture', in Design Now: Industry or Art? (Prestel Verlag, Munich, 1989), 207–40. 29. (Wright Art Gallery, University of California, Los Angeles, 1979, 19). The term Piazza implied architectural structures and spatial relationships: these were defined by the forms of the tea and coffee pots, sugar bowl, and milk jug, set within the spatial definitions of their tray. ## Chapter 7 1.(HMSO, London). 2. M. Gray, 'SIAD: The First Forty Years', The Designer, October 1970, 4. 3. Board ofTrade, Report of the Committee appointed by the Board of Trade under the Chairmanship of Lord Gorell on the Production and Exhibition of Articles of Good Design and Everyday Use (HMSO, London, 1932). 4. Art and Industry: The Principles of Industrial Design (Faber & Faber, London, 1934). 5. (Faber &Faber, London). 6.(Cambridge University Press). 7. The most important of these were Industrial Art in relation to the Home, held at Dorland Hall, London in 1933, and Contemporary Industrial Design, held at the same venue in 1934. 8.e.g. N. Carrington, Industrial Design in Britain (Allen &Unwin, London, 1976), F. MacCarthy, (above, n. 1.2),J. Woodham, The Industrial Designer and the Public (Pembridge, London, 1983), and R. Stewart, Design and British Industry (John Murray, London,1987). 9. (Design Council, London, 1983), 36. 1o. R. Stewart (above, n.8). I1. This was reflected in the growing amount of literature in the field, ranging from texts which sought to validate the profession to those which were to act almost as handbooks for those involved: e.g. F. A. Mercer, The Industrial Design Consultant: Who He Is and What He Does (Studio, London, 1947), J. Gordon Lippincott, Design for Business (Paul Theobald, Chicago, 1954), F. Ashford Designing for Industry: Some Aspects of the Product Designer's Work (Sir Isaac Pitman, London, 1955), J. Pilditch and D. Scott, The Business of Product Design (Business Publications Ltd, London, 1965), and D. Goslett The Professional Practice ofDesign (196o; rev. edn., Batsford, London, 1971). 12. See e.g.J. Sorrell, The Future Design Council (Design Council, London, 1994). This, and much of the surrounding debate, is covered by Charlotte Benton in her review of the book in the Journal ofDesign History, 7.4(1994), 310-12. 13. For further discussion of the State's involvement with design in Poland see D. Crowley, 'Building the World Anew: Design in Stalinist and Post-Stalinist Poland', Journal of Design History, 7.3 (1994), 187–203. 14. See e.g. M.H., Design in Russia', Industrial Design, April 1963, 72–5, R. Hutchings, 'USSR', Design, January 1976, 48-9,J. Woudhuysen, 'Soviet Design: Quality Consumer Goods at Last', Design, January 1978, 27, and J. Lott, 'Trying to Sort Out the Soviet Union', Design, October 1981, 36-7. 15. Design in Ireland: Report of the Scandinavian Design Group in Ireland (Irish Export Board, Dublin,1961). 16. S. Freedgood, 'Odd Business,This Industrial Design', Fortune (New York), February 1959. 17. This is a process which has continued as many emerging industrialized nations have given an increasing priority to design. 18. (Pembridge, London, 1981),48. 19. 'Overseas Review: Ulm', Design, June 1959, 53-6. 20. 'Review Article: Hochschule für Gestaltung Ulm: Recent Literature', Journal of Design History, 1.3-4 (1988), 249-56. Journal of Design History, 1.3-4 (1988), 249-56. 21. H. Jacob, HfG: A Personal View of an Experiment in Democracy and Design Education', Journal ofDesign History, 1.3-4 (1988), 221-34. Other views may be found in B. Meurer, 'Modernity and the Ulm School', in J. De Noblet (ed.), Design: Reflections of a Century (Flammarion, 1993). For a women's perspective see G. Müller-Krauspe, 'There Were 26 ofUs: Women at the HfG' in Frauen im Design (above, Introd. n. 9), 254 ff. 22. (Council ofIndustrial Design, London). 23. The use of design methods can be studied in the hospital bed project carried out at the Industrial Design (Engineering) Research Unit at the Royal College. This is examined in Industrial Design and the Community (Lund Humphries, London, 1967), 17-56. 24. W. E. Woodson, Human Engineering for Equipment Designers (University ofCalifornia Press, Berkeley, 1954). 25. See e.g. H. Murrell, How Ergonomics Became Part of Design', in N. Hamilton (ed.), From Spitfire to the Microchip (above, n. 5.13), 72-6. 26.(above,n. 3.4). 27.(1966; rev. edn., Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1976). 28. (Hodder & Stoughton, London). ## Chapter 8 1. This was noted by the sociologist David Riesman in The Lonely Crowd(1950; Yale University Press, New Haven, 1961). 2. (Éditions du Seuil, Paris, 1957). An English translation by A. Lavers was published by Jonathan Cape, London, 1972. 3. (Capeli Editore, Bologna). 4. (Museum ofModern Art, New York). 5. Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (Architectural Press, London, 196o). 6. See above, Introd. n. 3. 7. In a recent publication it has been argued forcibly that the history of the IG has been 'mythologised' and that the role of design in the Group's activities has been unduly overshadowed by the emphasis on fine arts. See A. Massey, The Independent Group: Modernism and Mass Culture in Britain 1945–59 (Manchester University Press, 1995). See also A. Massey and P. Sparke, 'The Myth of the Independent Group', Block, 10 (1985), 48–56. 8. (above, n. 5, 7th impression, 1977), 10. 9. Ibid. 10. ‘Technology and the Home', Ark, 19 (1956), 26 11. See esp. ch. 8, 'The Myth of the Independent Group: Historiography and Hagiography'in A. Massey (above, n. 7), 109-27. 12. Ibid. 98. 13. Architectural Review, August 1948, 88–93. 14. What is Modern Design? (Museum of Modern Art, New York, 1950), 7. However, he began to accept a wider canon of taste by the end of the decade in his article 'The Design Shift 1950-196o', Industrial Design, 7 (August 1960), 50-1. 15. Design, 134 (1960), 28–32. A number of his views on design are contained in his Collected Words (Thames &Hudson, London, 1992). 16. Design, 134 (1960), 25. 17. Block, 4 (1981), 44 ff. 18. This rather indicates that the homogenizing effects ofUS culture are only one aspect ofHoggart's concerns about the erosion of the British way oflife since the tubular steel chair was, at least in its origins, an emblem of modernism,or the International Style which many reacted against in the interwar years as it did not embrace national characteristics. 19. The Uses of Literacy (Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1977edn.), 248 20. See e.g. N. Whiteley, Pop Design: Modernism to Mod(Design Council, London, 1987), or C. McDermott, Street Style: British Design in the 8os (Design Council, London, 1987). 21. Part 1, 1959, and Part 2, 1960 (London Press Exchange, London). 22. See e.g. N. Whiteley (above, n. 20). 23. Architectural Review, October 1967, 255–7 24. The organization was undergoing something of a shift away from its concentration on consumer goods towards capital goods and engineering, a shift which was endorsed in its reconstitution as the Design Council, 1972. 25. (above, n. 4), 22. Although published in 1966 it was written in 1962. 26.J. Jacobs, The Death and Life of Great American Cities: the Failure of Town Planning (Random House, New York, 1961), and P. Blake, in the rather more sensational Form Follows Fiasco: Why Modern Architecture Hasn't Worked (Little, Brown and Company, Boston, 1977), are typical examples of such critiques. 27.(Academy, London). 28. The Hot House (above, Ch. 2, n. 27), . 29. 'Memphis and Fashion', from Memphis: Research, Experiences, Results, Failures and Successes ofNew Design (Thames &Hudson, London,1984),187. 30. V. Fischer (ed.), Design Now: Industry or Art?(Prestel-Verlag, Munich, 1989), 74. 31.J. Thackera, (ed.), New British Design (Thames & Hudson, London, 1986), 11. 32. A. Greiman, Hybrid Imagery: the Fusion of Technology and Graphic Design (Architecture Design and Technology Press, London, 1990), provides a résumé of her work from the late 197os onwards. 33.J. Wozencroft, The Graphic Language of Neville Brody (Thames & Hudson, London, 1988). For more recent discussion of his work see J. Wozencroft, The Graphic Language of Neville Brody 2 (Thames & Hudson, London, 1994). 34. See e.g. N. Whiteley (above, n. 2o). 35. T. Palmer, The Trials of Oz (Blond &Briggs, London, 1971). 36.(above, n. 30), 87. ## Chapter 9 1. See P. Stanfield, 'Heritage Design: the Harley-Davidson Motor Company', Journal of Design History, 5.2 (1992) 141-55. . These instances and others are discussed in Jeffrey Meikle's useful essay, 'Domesticating Modernity: Ambivalence and Appropriation, 1920-1940', in W. Kaplan (ed.), Designing Modernity (above, n. 1.2), 143–67. 3. Which was in turn funded by the Works Progress Administration (WPA), established under Roosevelt. 4. In many ways this paralleled the use of crafts workers in British imperial exhibitions. However, there were often ideological distinctions to be made, as at Wembley 1924, where (black) African crafts workers were working under the public gaze. The message of British imperialism was that Britain was the centre ofindustrial manufacture and that the colonies provided her with raw materials. In general colonial output was on a scale that was not seen as economically threatening but which none the less held an exotic allure. 5. See William B. Rhoads, Colonial Revival in American Craft: Nationalism and the Opposition to Multicultural and Regional Traditions', in J. Kardon (ed.), Revivals! Diverse Traditions 1920-1945: The History of Twentieth Century Craft (Abrams, New York, 1994), 41–54. A number of other essays in this volume are very useful, particularly in relation to wider ethnic and cultural concerns. However, in this more limited discussion of (white, Anglo-Saxon Protestant) heritage see especially Harvey Green Culture and Crisis: Americans and the Craft Revival', pp. 31-40. 6. Seen in the foundation of the Society for the Revival of Spanish-Colonial Arts in 1925 (renamed the Spanish Colonial Arts Society in 1929). It also promoted a Spanish Arts 7. The streamlined Modern Diner' in Pawtucket, RI, of c.194o, manufactured by Sterling Diners ofMerrimac, Mass., was placed on the National Register of Historic Places. 8. Yearning for Yesterday: A Sociology ofNostalgia (Collier Macmillan, London, 1979). 11. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1992). 12. Although, prior to taking up the name of Crabtree & Evelyn, the company marketed soaps in a small shop in Cambridge, Mass., in the 196os. 13. T. Reese, 'When More Is More', Print, March-April 1987, 84. 14. These included K. Walsh, The Representation of the Past: Museums and Heritage in the Post-Modern World (Routledge, London, 1992). He considered that the war had posed a threat to the status of the ruling classes and that in its aftermath there was a perceived need to preserve what they stood for. 15. Although there was a period in the 195os when the COID worked with the Rural Industries Bureau and embraced certain aspects of the crafts within its orbit. 16.(British Council/Longmans Green &Co.,London). 17. Ibid. 22. 18. (Collins, London). 19. English Popular Art (Batsford, London). 20. (Architectural Press, London, 1951). This publication was the culmination of a series of articles which Jones had been producing for the Architectural Review since 1944. 21. Burlington Magazine (London), September 1952, 203. 22. Such as P. Cormack, Heritage in Danger (New English Library, London, 1976). 23. In other words, the Welfare State implemented by Clement Attlee's Labour Government in the later 1940s. 24. The original competition attracted about 3oo entries, none of which was felt to be appropriate. 25. Preface by Laura Ashley to the Laura Ashley Home Furnishings Catalogue 1982 (Laura Ashley, Carno, Powys, 1982). 26. The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate ofDesign (Methuen, London). 27.'Time Will Tell', Design Week, November 1990. 28. Other examples are cited in P.J. Fowler The Past in Contemporary Society: Then, Now (Routledge, London, 1992), particularly in ch. 11, Exploiting the Past', 129-38. 29. G. Darley, 'History as Bunk', Financial Times (London), 2 December 1989, p. xvii However, the criteria employed included such issues as catering, car parking, and toilet facilities, as well as sales literature. Authenticity and intelligence of historical presentation was subject to no factual or qualitative assessment. 30.(above, n. 14), 129. ## Chapter 10 I. This was an innovation of Clarence Saunders who patented the idea in 1917. 2. The 19o6 Pure Food Bill, spurred on by Upton Sinclair's horrific account of the malpractice of the American meat-packing industry in his publication, The Jungle, was passed despite the opposition of the powerful Chicago-based industrial lobby. . Such as the Ladies Home Journal and the Woman's Home Companion. 4.J. G. Brainerd, 'Introduction', The Ultimate Consumer: A Study in Economic Illiteracy The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Philadelphia, May 1934), p. ix. 5. Report of the Purchase Tax/Utility Committee (HMSO, London, 1952). 6. Originally established in 19or as the British Engineering Standards Committee. For further historical details see C. Douglas Woodward, BSI: The Story of Standards (British Standards Institute, London, 1972). 7. The British Good Housekeeping Institute was started in 1924, later than its American counterpart, together with its magazine Good Housekeeping. 8. Many aspects of such developments have been discussed by S. Worden, 'A Voice for Whose Choice? Advice for Consumers in the Late 193os', in T. Bishop (ed.), Design History: Fad or Function?(Design Council, London, 1978),41-8. 9. Originally known by the more long-winded title of Advisory Council on Standards for Consumer Goods. 1o. For a fuller discussion of women's consumer groups in postwar Britain see ch. 7, 'Consumer Awareness', in Jonathan M. Woodham, The Industrial Designer and the Public(above, n. 7.8), 90–8. 11. Which? was available by subscription only, unlike the American Consumer Reports which could be purchased off the shelf. 12. See, e.g., the discussion of such work in F. Klingender, Art and the Industrial Revolution (1947; Paladin, St Albans, 1972). Although scholarship in relation to many of the artists has moved on from the 1968 revised and enlarged edition of the original text, it remains an important contribution to discussions of scientific and cultural change in the 18th and 19th centuries. 13. (1957; Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1960). 14. (Grossman, New York, 1965). For further detailed criticisms and bibliographic references see also J. W. Eastman, Styling vs. Safety (University Press of America, 1984). 15. According to Nader in his address to the National Consumer Assembly, Washington, DC, in November 1967, reprinted in G. S. McClelland, The Consuming Public (H. W. Wilson, New York, 1968), 102 ff. 16. These and other poll statistics are drawn from ch. 11, 'Morality and the Marketplace', in P. Blumberg, The Predatory Society: Deception in the American Marketplace (Oxford University Press, 1989). 18. Ibid. 1I2. 19. See above, n. 1o. 20. As discussed in his article of 1961 on 'Influences on My Work' reprinted in J. Meller, (ed.), The Buckminster Fuller Reader (above, n. 3.12) 44-68. 21. Many of these lectures are reprinted in J. Meller, op. cit. 22. It had been first published in Stockholm, Sweden in 197o under the title Miljon och Miljonera (The Milieu and the Millions). It was published in paperback in Britain by Granada, St Albans, in 1974. The revised editions came out in 1984 and 1991, the latter published by Thames &Hudson, London. 23. P. Madge, 'Design, Ecology, Technology: A Historiographical Review', Journal of Design History, 6.3 (1993), 149–66. See also Frank Jackson's review of the 1991 edition, also in the Journal of Design History, 6.4 (1993),307-10. 24. The papers were published byJ. Bicknell and L. McQuiston (eds.), Design for Need: The Social Contribution ofDesign (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1977). 25. e.g. the design of teaching and training devices for the retarded, handicapped, and disabled; also design for medicine, surgery, dentistry, and hospital equipment. 26. See e.g. S. Goldsmith, Designing for the Disabled(2nd edn., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967). A number of aspects relating to bathrooms and related equipment are discussed in chs. 20 and 21 in A. Kira, The Bathroom (rev. edn., Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1976). 27. The outlooks of these groups are described London, 1993), 110-13. 28. In 1967 Ettore Sottsass Jr. described the houses of the Beat poets as places free of objects and books—what he saw as 'parking spaces' from which life might be reinvented. 29. LSD, one of a number of hallucinogenic drugs favoured by such countercultures. 30. P. Harper, G. Boyle, and the editors ofUndercurrents, Radical Technology (Wildwood, London, 1976), 5. 31. (Secker & Warburg, London). 32. (Blond & Briggs, London). 33. (Calder &Boyars, London). 34. Made in Patriarchy: Toward a Feminist Analysis of Women and Design', Design Issues, 3.2 (1986), 4. 35. For further discussion of such issues see e.g. C. Buckley, op. cit.;J. Attfield and P. Kirkham (eds.), A View from the Interior (above, Introd. n. 1o); and ch. 4, Feminist Perspectives', in N. Whitely, Design for Society (above, n. 27). The latter provides a basic run-through of a number of key texts and approaches. 36.J. Elkington and J. Hailes, The Green Consumer Guide: From Shampoo to Champagne—High Street Shopping for a Better Environment(Victor Gollancz, London,1988). 37.J. Elkington and T. Burke, The Green Capitalists: How Industry Can Make Money and Protect the Environment(2nd edn., Victor Gollancz, London, 1989). 38. (Lawrence King, London). 39. (Design Council, London). 40.(Thames &Hudson, London). 41. Such as the Zanussi Nexus Jetstream RS' washing machine. 42. On Living in an Old Country: The National Past in Contemporary Britain (Verso, London). 43.(Routledge, London). 44.(above, n. 6.2), ch.8,205–6. 45. Discussion paper No. I (Friends of the Earth, London). 46. C. andJ. Plant (eds.)(Green Books). 47.(above,n. 23),161.