models that theory provides through which we link what we know to what we do.

## 1.2 Defining theory

In its most basic form, a theory is a model. It is an illustration describing how something works by showing its elements in relationship to one another. Some models show the elements in a dynamic relationship by describing process or action. Others, such as taxonomy, describe relationships without describing process or action. The dynamic demonstration of working elements in action as part of a structure or the demonstration of relationship is what distinguishes a model from a simple catalogue.

Merriam-Webster<sup>18</sup> (p 1223) defines theory as, ‘1: the analysis of a set of facts in their relation to one another, 2: abstract thought: speculation, 3: the general or abstract principles of a body of fact, a science or an art, 4a: a belief, policy, or procedure proposed or followed as the basis of action, b: an ideal or hypothetical set of facts, principles or circumstances—often used in the phrase ‘in theory,’ 5: a plausible or scientifically accepted general principle or body of principles offered to explain phenomena, 6a: a hypothesis assumed for the sake of argument or investigation, b: an unproved assumption: conjecture, c: a body of theorems presenting a concise systematic view of a subject.’

The distinction between a science and a craft is systematic thought organized in theory. Craft involves doing. Some craft involves experimentation. Theory allows us to frame and organize our observations. Theory permits us to question what we see and do. It helps us to develop generalizable answers that can be put to use by human beings in other times and places.

This is a central issue in design. To ‘[devise] courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones’ on a predictable basis means understanding ‘things: how they are and how they work,’ which is Simon’s<sup>1</sup> (p 129) explanation of science. One form of design practice is allied to art and craft. It is intuitive. It sometimes produces desired results. On occasion, the intuitive practice of design produces unpredictable desirable results that can be seized retrospectively as the useable result of muddling through. Far more often, however, muddling through produces failures of two kinds. The first kind of failure involves proposals that fail in the early stages of conception or development. This is a good time for failure, since failure in conception or development eliminates potentially wasteful efforts. The second kind of failure involves completed attempts at solutions in which the designers believe that they have solved the prob-

18 Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 9th edn, Merriam-Webster, Inc., Springfield, MA (1990)

lem even though they have not done so. This is far more costly in every sense. One of the central aspects of this kind of failure is the fact that some designers never learn that they have actually failed to meet client needs, customer needs, or end-user needs. This is because designers often end their involvement with the project before the failures arise and the clients of most failures do not return to the original designer for repair work.

Another face of design practice involves efforts to render the outcomes of design predictable. Predictability is created by the effective response to problems, and it has similarities to science, engineering, and technology. The basis of Simon’s concept of design science is the idea of applicable theories of how to devise courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones. This science is geared to industrial production, including production in the digital industries of the knowledge economy.

Industry now meets the vast majority of the world’s physical needs, and industrial productivity is a necessity in a world with billions of people. Industrial production—and, therefore, design—touches nearly everything we do, use or consume. Nevertheless, the designers who plan and create industrial artifacts are not artisans. They are involved in the industrial process. Therefore, the design process is necessarily in transition from art and craft practice to a form of technical and social science focused on how to do things to accomplish goals. To meet the challenges of the design process requires understanding the actions that lead from existing situations to preferred ones. This means understanding the principles of predicting and measuring outcomes based on what W. Edwards Deming<sup>19</sup> (pp 94–118) terms profound knowledge. This knowledge is comprised of ‘four parts, all related to each other: appreciation for a system; knowledge about variation; theory of knowledge; psychology’<sup>19</sup> (p 96). According to Deming<sup>20</sup> (p 19), ‘Experience will answer a question, and a question comes from theory.’

19 Deming, W E The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Center for Advanced Engineering Study, Cambridge, MA (1993)

20 Deming, W E Out of the Crisis. Quality, Productivity and Competitive Position Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1986)

21 Mautner, T A Dictionary of Philosophy Blackwell, Oxford (1996)

22 McNeil D H ‘Reframing systemic paradigms for the art of learning’, Conference of the American Society for Cybernetics (1993)

Theory can be described in many ways. Some theories are complex and sophisticated. Others are simple. Mautner<sup>21</sup> (p 426) defines theory as ‘a set of propositions which provides principles of analysis or explanation of a subject matter. Even a single proposition can be called a theory.’ This often depends on the nature of the subject.

McNeil<sup>22</sup> (p 8) proposes eleven characteristics of any general theory. (1) A theory has a constitutive core of concepts mutually interrelated with one another. (2) A theory has a mutually productive, generative connection between central concepts and the peripheral concepts where theory verges onto practice. (3) The core concepts of a theory are stated in algorithmic compression, parsimonious statements from which the phenomena in the theory can be reproduced. (4) A theory has an irreducible core of concepts, a set of concepts in which no central concept can be removed without altering the scope and productivity of the theory or perhaps destroying it entirely. (5) Two or more of the core concepts in a theory must be complementary to each other. (6) The central concepts of a theory must be well defined and must harmonize as much as possible with similar concepts of enlightened discourse. (7) The central concepts of a theory must be expressed at a uniform level of discourse. Different levels of discourse must be distinguished and used consistently. (8) More general theories (higher-level theories) must relate to less general theories (lower-level theories) and to special cases through a principle of correspondence. This principle confirms and guarantees the consistency of the more particular theories and their applications. (9) Explicitly or implicitly, a theory describes dynamic flows with contours that trace relatively closed loops as well as relatively open links. (10) A theory states invariant entities in its assumptions or formulas that provide standards for measurement. (11) Theories describe phenomena in the context of a conceptual space. This implicitly establishes a relationship between the observer and the phenomena observed.

The ability to theorize design enables the designer to move from an endless succession of unique cases to broad explanatory principles that can help to solve many kinds of problems. Warfield<sup>23</sup> (p 100) describes the generic aspect of design as ‘that part of the process of design that is indifferent to what is being designed, being applicable whatever the target may be.’ He contrasts this with the specific aspect of design, ‘that part of the design process that is particular to the target class.’ Warfield<sup>24,25</sup> identifies 32 basic postulates of the generic design process, which he groups under six categories: the human being, language, reasoning through relationships, archival representation, the design situation, and the design process. This generic design process is inevitably theory-rich. Theory is not entirely abstract, any more than science is abstract. Quite the contrary: sound theory requires engagement with empirical reality.

23 Francois, C International encyclopedia of systems and cybernetics. K. G. Saur, Munich, Germany (1997)

24 Warfield J N ‘Generic planning’ Knowledge in Society Vol 3 No 4 (1990)

25 Warfield, J N A Science of Generic Design: Managing Complexity through Systems Design Iowa State University Press, Ames, IA (1994)

26 Dictionary of Ideas, Brockhampton Press, London (1994)

The Dictionary of Ideas<sup>26</sup> (p 507) defines theory as ‘a set of ideas, concepts, principles or methods used to explain a wide set of observed facts.’ A designer who cannot observe facts cannot theorize them. Design requires humility in the face of empirical facts. Design based on the idea of individual genius or artistic imagination involves the externalization of internalized images. This involves a priori ideas and images. The designer comes first in this model of the design process. In contrast, solving problems demands robust engagement with the problem itself. The problem comes first.

The problem sets the premise by establishing the boundary conditions of a solution. At the same time, the problem opens a forum for the imagination and expertise of the designer. Social science depends on what C. Wright Mills described as ‘the sociological imagination.’ Mathematical invention involves a journey of psychological discovery through what Jacques Hadamard termed ‘the mathematician’s mind.’ Across the many fields of the natural and social sciences, progress comes when individuals and groups apply their genius to the understanding of how the world works and why. Understanding why things come to be, why they perish, and why they are as they are involves discipline and imagination both. Thus, Weick<sup>27</sup> describes theory building as ‘an act of disciplined imagination.

## 2 How theory works

Sutherland<sup>28</sup> (p 9) describes theory as ‘an ordered set of assertions about a generic behavior or structure assumed to hold throughout a significantly broad range of specific instances.’ To understand the nature of a behavior and organize an ordered set of assertions that describe it in a valid and verifiable way requires the characteristics described by McNeil<sup>22</sup> (p 8).

Weick<sup>27</sup> addresses the question of shaping a theory that fulfills these criteria—or similar criteria—while functioning at a sufficiently rich and nontrivial level to be useful. A body of writings equivalent to the rich literature of inquiry on theory construction in the natural and social sciences has yet to be developed in design studies. This is understandable in a discipline that is quite new compared with information science, physics or sociology, let alone philosophy, mathematics or geometry. This is also understandable in a field where the graduate programs, doctoral seminars, and research conferences that constitute the forums of theory development are just now beginning to blossom.

27 Weick, K E ‘Theory construction as disciplined imagination’ Academy of Management Review Vol 14 No 4 (1989) 516–531

28 Sutherland, J W Systems: Analysis, Administration and Architecture Van Nostrand, New York (1975)

29 Whetten, D A ‘What constitutes a theoretical contribution’ Academy of Management Review Vol 14 No 4 (1989) 490–495

Having defined theory, we must ask, ‘What constitutes a theoretical contribution?’ David A. Whetten (1989) explored this question in an article of the same title.

Whetten<sup>29</sup> begins by identifying the four elements of any theory. These four elements answer six questions: (1) ‘what,’ (2) ‘how,’ (3) ‘why,’ and (4) ‘who-where-when.’ The ‘what’ element articulates the factors that must be considered part of an explanation of the phenomena under study. Whetten identifies two criteria as central to judging the value of a ‘what.’

These are comprehensiveness and parsimony. Are all the elements identified? Are there enough elements to account for all issues without a surplus? Whetten<sup>29</sup> (p 490) describes ‘sensitivity to the competing virtues of parsimony and comprehensiveness’ as the mark of a good theorist.

The ‘how’ of a theory shows how the factors identified in the ‘what’ are related. Whetten<sup>29</sup> (p 491) describes this as a process of using metaphorical arrows to connect the boxes in a model. This delineates the patterns that show elements of a phenomenon in their dynamic relationship to one another<sup>30</sup>. This description often reveals causality, and it builds a foundation for the explanatory power of the model represented by a theory<sup>30</sup>.

The ‘why’ element involves the underlying ‘dynamics that justify the selection of factors and the proposed causal relationships… (t)his rationale constitutes the theory’s assumptions—the theoretical glue that welds the model together… What and how describe. Only why explains’<sup>29</sup> (p 491).

Finally, the ‘who, where, and when’ of a theory substantiate theory with empirical data while setting limits on its uses and applications.

According to Whetten, there are several ways to make significant contributions to theory. Discovering or amending new items in the ‘what’ of an existing theory will generally make only a marginal improvement, but the ability to identify the ways in which the structural relationships of a theory change under the influence of new elements is often the beginning of new perspectives. New explanations—changes in the ‘why’ of a theory—offer the most fruitful, and most difficult avenue of theory development. As an editor of a leading journal, Whetten<sup>29</sup> (pp 494–5) asks seven key questions of theoretical contributions. Of these, three apply to theory-construction in general: (1) what’s new? (2) so what? (3) why so? Two of the remaining four questions involve the internal qualities of the contribution as a paper, (4) well done? and (5) done well? The last two deal with context and the field within which the contribution is offered; (6) why now?, and (7) who cares?

30 Friedman K ‘What designers need to know for the twentyfirst century’ Lecture delivered at the Norwegian Industrial Design Society, Institute for Industrial Design, Oslo College of Architecture, Oslo

31 Parsons T and Shils E A (eds) Toward a General Theory of Action. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA (1951)

Theories in any field develop in a pattern of increasingly sophisticated types.

Parsons and Shils<sup>31</sup> (pp 49–51) describe several levels of theoretical systems. They state that ‘in one sense, every carefully defined and logically integrated conceptual scheme constitutes a ‘system,’ and in the sense, scientific theory of any kind consists of systems’ (p 49). They go beyond this, to ask three questions about theoretical systems. The first question involves generality and complexity. The second involves what they call ‘closure,’ the degree to which a system is self-consistent, and the degree to which the assertions of any one part of the theory are supported or contradicted by the other parts. The third question involves what they label ‘the level of systematization.’ This involves the degree to which theory moves toward general scientific goals.

Parsons and Shils<sup>31</sup> (p 50) propose four different levels of systematization for theories, moving from the most primitive to the most advanced. These are (1) ad hoc classification systems, (2) systems of categories, (3) theoretical systems, and (4) empirical–theoretical systems.

This implies a schema of increasingly useful kinds of theories based on the relations among the parts of a theoretical system. In Parsons’s and Shils’s schema, theoretical development implies a ‘hierarchy from ad hoc classification systems (in which categories are used to summarize empirical observations), to taxonomies (in which the relationships between the categories can be described), to conceptual frameworks (in which propositions summarize explanations and predictions), to theoretical systems (in which laws are contained within axiomatic or formal theories)’<sup>32</sup> (p xiii).

While it is useful to distinguish between taxonomy and theory, it is fair to say that at some points, taxonomy is a kind of theory because it offers a model of existing data and demonstrates the relationships between and among facts.

Theories that describe structures offer models without moving parts. In this sense, theories are models that resemble maps or model houses. Theories that describe processes, activities, or systems generally require dynamic descriptions. In this sense, theories are models that resemble model engines or model train sets, and they must describe motion to demonstrate the properties of the systems they resemble.

32 Webster, J and Watson, R T ‘Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: writing a literature review’ Management Information Science Quarterly Vol 26 No 2 (2002) xiii–xxiii

33 Varian, H R H ‘How to build an economic model in your spare time’ in M Szenberg (ed.) Passion and Craft. Economists at Work, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI (1997)

Hal Varian<sup>33</sup> discusses the challenges of theory construction and some helpful approaches to representing aspects of reality in robust yet simple ways. Rather than starting with literature or seeking general features, he advocates seeking useful data on interesting issues. Moving from interesting issues, Varian proposes creating models that exhibit the characteristics of the issues, repeating the process until one has the simplest possible model that demonstrates the phenomena under consideration.

‘Keep at it till it gets simple,’ he writes<sup>33</sup> (p 1). ‘The whole point of a model is to give a simplified representation of reality. Einstein once said