## CRISIS OF MODERNISM insights can give you a shock. i had a shock like that on a visit to moscow in the mid seventies. i had been invited to discuss certain questions with the people responsible for the olympic games, which were to take place in moscow in 1980. in this context i suggested that pioneering works of russian constructivism should be renovated, as visitors from the west were very interested in this architecture. i said that this architecture had been a crucial stimulus for the development of modern architecture. i was met with incomprehension and rejection. this was still the period of “socialist realism”, when painters were concerned to remain near to the people with superficial fidelity to nature and credible symbolism and gesture. this also means comprehensible to the simple worker, for the people. nikita khrushchev had already criticized stalin's wedding-cake style for being bombastic, decorative and uneconomical. stalin had had seven tower-like high-rise buildings put up around the centre of moscow as a sign of the victory over fascism, which like the famous moscow underground railway were decorated with feudal pomp and tarted up with bombastic drama, known to the people as the wedding-cake style. each tower was topped with a pointed spire with a red star on the top. the wedding-cake style fell prey to derision and irony and showed what happens when the state begins to worry about the cultural well-being and happiness of its citizens, which always basically leads to securing its power by giving out sweets. khrushchev broke with the stalinist era and enjoyed laughing at obsessions with being a great man. but they were a long way away from bringing a nonrepresentational painter like Malevich out of the cellar, as i recommended to the lady director of the tretiakov gallery, or remembering a russian architect like melnikov, who built the rusakov clubhouse, which is still stimulating today. natural and realistic behaviour was the order of the day, and they were still going to stay close to the people, but using a simpler approach. I visited melnikov's domestic building that had once been epochmaking. melnikov was not only ostracized, he was intimidated and forgotten, and he was talked about behind people's hands. i would not have been admitted if a friend of his hadn't been standing outside the door with me. this friend was in a position to show me all the buildings i had in mind when i suggested that the constructivists should be made accessible to the world. but gollosov's suyev clubhouse was in just as lamentable condition as ginsberg and milinis' narkomfin residential block and melinokov's rusakov clubhouse itself. even the trade union building le corbusier built in moscow was in a condition of intentional decay that made it impossible to look at only vesnin's pravda building and shchussev's lenin mausoleum had the good fortune to enjoy political goodwill. along with berlin and new york, moscow was the most important city as far as 20th century cultural impetus to develop humane technology and to see science and technology becoming components of a new creative culture was concerned. moscow was an important melting pot for new ideas and approaches. this moscow was to be forgotten on command, the city transformed itself into a collection of neoclassical copies in white stucco. of course one wonders how stalin was able to make the cultural rubbish of the wedding-cake style into an obligatory architectural doctrine by state decree and forbid architecture that consciously subscribed to technology and industrial manufacture in the way that socialism wanted to humanize technology and industry over all. at first one tends to think that stalin got this from hitler. speer's neoclassicism was gigantic and bombastic, and the gesture of the sculptures by artists like thorak and breker that were placed upon it was dramatically overblown and stilted. the nuremberg buildings gave an idea of how german cities were to be rebuilt after the war, if the war were to be won: monumental, overladen and overproportioned. but then the discovery was made, and it was this that was akin to a shock, that it was not stalin enforcing his taste here, but the so-called modern architects themselves. there is a design by ginsburg for a theatre in novosibirsk dating from 1931 that is all constructivist functionality. but five years later ginsburg built this theatre in a style of highly academic classicism. what had happened? ginsburg himself had become convinced that the masses did not understand the new constructivist architecture. ginsburg was not only one of the most successful constructivist architects, he was also the movement's theoretician. the man who had brought le corbusier to moscow developed an artistic theory according to which all styles start simply, but that they cannot be tolerated in their simple form; they become decorative, until finally they go under in a kind of baroque overload, this means that ginsburg, just like all bourgeois art theoreticians, thought in stylistic and formal terms, he started with aesthetics. in the end he did not think at all constructively and functionally, technology was just a new formal repertory, a material at the artist's disposal, a new sign language, a new zeitgeist that was being used. i went into the moscow museum of architecture and asked to see ginsburg's drawings and had to admit, shakily: it was the modern movement itself that brought all the historical kitsch back from the rubbish dump. and i discovered that ginsburg was interpreting modernism formalistically as early as 1923. his books were called: rhythm in architecture and style and epoch. i was myself staying in a hotel that shchussev had built about 1934, already with the first classical profiles and cornices, in concrete at first, later they had to be executed in natural stone. at first it was still restrained classicism, profiling of surface using pilaster cornices and window borders followed the rules of suprematism as developed by malevich in his spatial models. there were also individual designers in the west who started off as pioneers of a new kind of design, but then collapsed under the third reich. the creator of the new typography, jan tschichold, forgot himself and finally worshipped at the altar of the new classicism, which soon turned out to be prestigious enough to guarantee the new dictators an appropriate display of power. mussolini too was in sympathy with futurism at first, but later he found himself better accommodated in a copy of roman antiquity than in a building with a rational basis. i was familiar with western examples but the fact that almost the whole russian avant-garde gave up their experiment themselves, in order to chum up with state monumentalism, did come as a shock, and gave me a great deal to think about. in the meantime i have got cleverer. i see in so-called post-modern architects the same escape into an historicizing style, into styleaesthetics, into formal composition, into symbolism, into aesthetic myth. what has been forgotten is this century's attempt to reconcile technology with human beings, by opening ourselves up to it. refuge is taken in style, in metaphysical aesthetics, in form, in historical models, in quotation. palladio is the most quoted architect, even if he is built in steel and glass. the hard years of the industrial revolution, the civil war, collectivization and industrialization were obviously so burdensome in terms of internal politics that the people was offered the kind of art it liked. that is, or so it is thought, the art of palaces, of splendour and of gold, art for art's sake, decoration for decorations. this is then at the same time the art of the state, with which the state makes visible its existence as power and superior power. the people, so it is believed, needs adoration. in a similar way we are also served with the enjoyment of life today. the post-war period is over, the revolution of '68 is over, the period of social movements is over. we set ourselves up in beauty itself, even if we are suffocating in rubbish and the world is falling apart. gone are the utopias of a new society, new education, new ways of getting on with each other, new relationships between the sexes, gone are the movements for a life without death by chemicals, for food without additives, for natural nature. we are back to spraying our hair with cfc's and all the colours of the rainbow. we wear things that make us look good and for a service society the greatest services are those of beautification, styling and design. we have come to live in a society of design for superficial covering. design and architecture are in a profound crisis. they are in danger of becoming the dogsbodies of fashions. they are no longer derived from argument and good reasons like science and technology, but from whim, from aesthetic chance, according to which art can be worshipped and cannibalized. this is to a large extent caused by the fact that there is no profession concerned with the theory and history of design, in the way that the art historian has his firm place in present-day culture and science. the industrial archaeologist, the man who deals with the history of technology and technological theory is not yet part of our academic establishment. and therefore building orientated towards design and technology has no intellectual accompaniment or analytical presentation. the few exceptions only confirm the state of affairs. in goethe's day artistic beauty was discovered alongside natural beauty and art historians were appointed to look after it. design beauty, technological beauty has not yet been discerned, and so no theoretician of technical artefacts has been appointed. it has turned out to be disastrous that the theory of design and architecture is looked after by art historians. design is quite different from art. design and art are related in the same way as knowledge and faith. there may be scientists who are religious. but in principle science is different from religion. design must rest on the same foundations as science and technology. it too draws life from argument. art and metaphysics lie beyond argument. here statements are made, rather than reasons given. even though st. thomas aquinas says that faith and knowledge cannot contradict each other, faith is still so subjective that it is possible to believe anything that does not represent a contradiction. essentially there are as many religions as there are individuals. design relates to states of affairs, it is related to language. language too is worth as much as its ability to reproduce states of affairs. its achievement lies in also being able to reproduce those states of affairs that it has so far not exoressed. its yardstick is its sureness of aim. attempts to handle language without content as in abstract art may be assumed to be doomed to failure. design consists of developing products appropriately to their factual content. and above all this means adapting to new states of affairs. in a changing world, products must change as well. but what is the measure of design, new states of affairs or art? today design has gone downhill and degenerated into applied art. post-modernism is a new faith. it is not design, but a kind of religion or, as it defines itself, dedicated to myth. what myth? the myth of the 20th century, the myth of archetypes, the myth of prehistoric social structures? one may choose between c.g. jung and claude lévistrauss and should not be surprised to arrive at Alfred Rosenberg and his way of shaping the world. there is no bridge of reason from the architecture of post-modernism to the noeclassicism of stalin and hitler, no bridge of argument, though there probably is a bridge of myth. mussolini's relapse from futurism into the architecture of ancient rome is the way of myth, and corresponds with leon krier's relapse into a film city made up of old bits of scenery. it is not possible to quarrel about myth. but it is possible to quarrel about design, just as it is possible to quarrel about science, technology, about economics and politics, about everything that drives the modern world and holds it together and forces it apart. design must have its reasons. i know that many people cannot accept this. magnago lampugnani says that today chairs are close to being works of art. and that for this reason a certain amount of discomfort has to be put up with. at any other time this would have been seen as pure nonsense, drivel. in our pluralistic society thinking seems to have become pluralistic as well, uncritical, conformist, balanced. the little two-times-table has been replaced by the great not only but also. a chair that is not good to sit on is not a good chair. perhaps it can become a work of art if it is hung on the wall, where it doesn't actually belong, or can be a psychic stage prop. it will never be good design. it is clear that the simplest states of affairs have been displaced, distorted, disjointed, dismembered, destroyed. it does not seem to suit thinking, particularly thinking about simple states of affairs, if it withdraws into myth and sees the phenomenon as a symbol. today there is no homeric laughter, no homeric mockery, otherwise a new philosophy like this would be swept away by the breath from the roars of laughter that the programme caused. no, we carry on solemnly sitting on an uncomfortable chair, even when it is only a work of art in embryo. a chair that is not good to sit on is a bad chair, even if it would be suitable as a work of art. it is bad design. a statement of this kind has rarity value nowdays. anyone who argues the other way round, and says precisely that today chairs are on their way to becoming works of art and that as a consequence a certain amount of discomfort has to be put up with, is made the new director of the frankfurt museum of architecture (like magnago lampugnani). the former director, art historian heinrich klotz, has now been appointed to set up a new centre for modern media, art and design in karlsruhe. this was commissioned by lothar späth, the regional prime minister with the brightest ideas, who wanted to give his land a “new future”. lothar späth has read the signs of the times. while franz josef strauss wanted to give his land new economic input with nuclear energy, nuclear science, nuclear technology, and a new industrial estate from oberpfaffenhofen, ottobrunn, wackersdorf to erlangen, lothar späth has climbed a storey higher, and arrived at silicon valley, computers and computer art. both land prime ministers have cocked a snook at the liberal state with its market economy and introduced economic policy, research policy and cultural policy as mercantile planning and control elements. to the good of their citizens. however, they both asserted that they had no time for state intervention, and lothar späth said that nothing was more stupid than a politician trying to get involved with culture. neither franz josef strauss nor lothar späth was directly involved in cultural, research or economic policy as such, but they distributed the funds, the subsidies, every mark and every pfennig, that the public purse makes available for culture, business, science and research. is this not planning and direction? a year after his death, the policies of franz josef strauss, with the end of wackersdorf, are a graveyard. that's how quickly mercantilism runs against its own walls. nobel prizewinner mößbauer, the boughtin advertisement for new research in bavaria, would rather have left the country anyway. lothar späth remained as prince in residence. he gave complete freedom to culture, economics, research, as he had said. but there was money for those people who produced the culture, the business and the science that the father of the land wanted. this made lothar späth the caring father of everything that was happening in the land. he made the culture, he made the business, he made the research, just as every princely house determines the well-being of its people. it was the dukes of württemberg and the electors and margraves of baden who built the palaces of ludwigsburg, stuttgart, solitude, mannheim and karlsruhe, and who encouraged the commercial zeal that made the allemanic lands into flourishing industrial states. this may all be an historical swindle, as it was the craftsmen, the cities, the guilds who produced a flourishing country, before it was brought down by absolutism. the princes raised taxes and squandered them on buildings and other things, then had to sell the sons of their soil for cash to foreign rulers as cannon fodder. and yet this pattern, let us say “flourishing baroque”, is still the model for modern culture in this country. culture in baden-württemberg is state culture. two examples: one is ulm and the closure of the private hochschule für gestaltung by the state. the other is the new art and media centre in karlsruhe, also a state initiative. lothar späth said himself that it was he who closed the hochschule für gestaltung in ulm, although it was on behalf of filbinger, the then prime minister and hahn, his minister of culture. unfortunately the school acquired an international reputation with hindsight. it could no longer be covered up by intentional forgetfulness. lothar späth even went as far as to say that closing this school was one of the most stupid things he had ever done. he went even further, and said he would like to found a successor institution. at least this is how the centre for art and media technology that is being established in karlsruhe sees itself. heinrich klotz, who is responsible for this centre, says: “the dessau bauhaus and the hochschule für gestaltung in ulm can serve as models. the bauhaus was the first to direct art from the craftsman to the machine. the hochschule für gestaltung in ulm continued the work of the bauhaus by combining art and industrial products. the centre for art and media technology relates the arts to digital techniques, appropriately to the possibilities of the late 20th century.” as far as ulm is concerned this is just plain wrong. the opposite is the case. the reputation and working results of the hochschule für gestaltung are not based on combining, but on separating art and industry. we refused to have artists' studios. lack of prior training meant that artists and art were not in a position to influence industrial civilization. we had to develop a new view of a new, technically orientated design, design that could think from technology for technology, and that was competent enough to use its knowledge of products, technical procedures, manufacturing processes and economic organization to bring about more humane design of industrial products, better social acceptability and enhanced usefulness. you could ask art about this through the length and breadth of the land, but it wouldn't be able to come up with an answer. it is interested in the next world, not this one. heinrich klotz is an art historian. it does not say much for his academic methods when he states the precise opposite of what was actually the case. there was no artistic model for the design of braun radios and electric equipment. there was no artistic model for the corporate identity of lufthansa or the munich olympics. on the contrary, whenever anyone said that there were general artistic criteria for design, we had to go our separate ways. we thought things out from the matter itself. many of the teachers had originally worked as artists for a time, but their life experience was precisely the opposite: art is not suitable for purpose-directed design work. it only gets in the way. consequently it is possible to say even now that the painters who are now intended to use new digital techniques will very soon abandon their computers because they do not know how to use them. i have enough practical experience with computers myself to know how difficult it is to use them when you want creativity from them. the swabians, who are not bad technicians and not bad workers, call them “blechesel” - tin donkeys. tin donkeys because you have to tell them everything they have to do and because they only listen to people who speak their language. a designer must be at home in the categories of technology and science. syllabuses in the hochschule für gestaltung in ulm were models for new concepts of responsible handling of technology and its moral and cultural mastery. here painting was definitely too little, and it was not possible to hold a conversation with an engineer or an economist on the basis of aesthetic sensibilities. even the aesthetic dimension had to be developed from use and technology. all right, this school no longer exists. it was strangled, closed, just as the bauhaus had been closed thirty years before. then by a dictatorship, now by a democracy. but it is quite impossible, without demonstrating one's own lack of understanding, to take it over as a centre for art and media technology with an integrated design school. ulm would be a warning. modernism developed, and this is perhaps most clearly seen in the works of the engineers of the last century, from uninhibited handling of technology as an open system. this concept was fully demonstrated by the crystal palace in london, built by joseph paxton in 1851. art itself was not involved in this, at that time it was clinging to copying historic models, which was an embarrassing rather than a creative process. this attitude of modernism is seen again in constructivism, although technology was often material that could be used expressively for art in this case. this is visible again today in the buildings of rogers, foster and hopkins, who cite buckminster fuller, prouvé and wachsmann. modernism has integrated technolgy, it can be defined as a creative expression of technology even in its responsibility to human society. to come back to the chair. a modern chair in this sense can only be a structurally intelligent chair, a chair that is cleanly thought through in terms of manufacturing technology, showing the criteria of scientific ergonomics. but this chair can only be designed by someone with the technical perceptions of a charles eames, who put as much hard thought into his work as a surgeon does for an operation. visions are not enough here, they can even be harmful, however artistic they may be. the crisis of modernism lies in the fact that thought and criteria concerned with making are replaced by an aesthetic vision. a vision of this kind produces a chair made of a mixture of “up-todate” materials like perforated metal, beech wood and plastic, brightly painted, a spectacular object, but not very nice to sit on. this would bring us back to the motto of the new wave, which admittedly is a fashion like every other wave; objects become art, life becomes art. the relationship of art and technology is irreversible. technology has a technical beauty of its own. but the reverse is not true, art does not have a technical dimension. the material technical significance of a van gogh is precisely zero in comparison with its artistic value or even its value on the art market, quite apart from the fact that contemporary art has started to use cheap material, rubbish and scrap as a protest. we are dealing with two worlds here, one that is not interested in technology and one that processes functioning technology aesthetically. a computer used for artistic purposes does not have to achieve anything and produces as many aesthetic structures as you like, but they are always the ones that you put in. a sculpture that achieves something is no longer a work of art but a machine or a device, and its aesthetics relate to its use. but art wishes to eschew mere effect. art is syntax without semantics. it has nothing to say. otherwise it would be a piece of information. it is closer to being a symbol than a statement. it is devoted to redundancy. and anyone who attempts when faced with this state of affairs to transfer art to technology ends up with icing, whether of the stalinist kind or the postmodernist persuasion. art moves in the realm of the symbol. a circle, a square is interpreted symbolically by Kandinsky, and so are the colours red, green or blue. outside the world of the symbol a piece of felt or a piece of margarine would be felt or margarine. in art it is meant to be something different. perhaps this is what we call zeitgeist, something higher in other words, that makes us think of hegel's “weltgeist”, or world spirit. it is just that we have become suspicious of worldreason. truth lies within a thing, not above it. i interpret the crisis of modernism like this: the ingenious constructivism of the 19th century, documented by names like paxton, eiffel or maillart, has been overtaken by art and seized, monopolized. this dominance by art is a contradiction. it would not exist if there were not authorities able to play politics with this kind of aesthetic metaphysics, cultural politics, but still robust interest politics, state policy to secure the status quo. the world is in a strange condition. we discover that our forests are dying, do all we can to prevent it, and it continues to increase. we discover atmospheric pollution, we do all we can to prevent it, and contamination continues to increase. we discover a hole in the ozone layer, we forbid the use of hydrofluorocarbons and the hole in the ozone layer gets bigger and bigger. we produce any quantity of rubbish and poisonous by-products, we do all we can to prevent it, but grow mountains of poison and rubbish that we can scarcely get rid of any more. we try to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, but global warming increases. we burn dioxin containers and the minister of the environment resignedly discovers that everything is contaminated with dioxin. design should be called for here, as we are talking about products that are exclusively produced by man. design should be called for here that is critical, that can question things, that is analytical and can uncover roots. instead design is constantly encouraged by the state as a way of making even more beautiful packaging, of stoking consumption with even more products that nobody wants, of making the surface of things that are often superficial even more brightly coloured and attractive and of reducing existence to merely working our way through constantly changing fashions. the state is interested in a contented, tranquil society and in the sort of icing-sugar culture with which power has always tried to get out of critical situations. the more dubious the state of the world becomes, the more beautiful it is to be. there have never been so many museums built as there are today, shrines of transcendent aesthetics. the state can always find someone to fight alongside it. there is money available. no individual can found a school today. all design schools, all architecture schools, belong to the state. it pays all their teachers, it approves all their courses. it pays for all their buildings and equipment. it has its say in the most fundamental way, without even needing to raise its little finger. design degenerates, runs the official definition, into sales promotion. it becomes the elixir of consumerism in an information society. design centres shoot out of the ground one after the other. we are experiencing culture being ruined by state monopoly. the state does not even have to make an effort to make its influence felt. the fact that it fills the feeding troughs has tamed even the wildest beasts. the citizens are domesticated once and for all. the state pours out the wine of patronage. the state destroyed my youth. i was twelve when hitler came to power. the state destroyed the hochschule für gestaltung, and i was one of its founders. this was under a democracy that sees itself as representative, a führer democracy. the state is destroying a critical and analytical culture before our very eyes and creativity is degenerating to the manufacture of beautiful façades and beautiful packaging. the show has to be even more colourful. the principle of progress means increasing turnover by ever more beautiful consumption. mercantilism in this country is culturally as active as the builders of palaces of ludwigsburg, the solitude or karlsruhe. the state has been seized by a baroque building frenzy. everywhere it is building the new temples of edification, museums. modernism is finding its way back to buckled shoes and wigs, to silk, hooped skirt and powder, to a new corporate identity, to a new culture of surface and superficiality. we have bread, we have circuses. we feel better than ever before, however loudly the clock is ticking. enjoyment is the content of life. the hands and face of the clock are getting so smart and so pretty that we can't read them any more, because we are not intended to read them any more. that is what modernism has to do today. stop us finding out what the bell is tolling.