# DOING WITHOUT SYMBOLS numerous german towns and cities are trying hard to put up memorials to deserters in the world wars. i cannot summon up any enthusiasm for this. people think that because i wrote an anti-war book, a deserter's book, that i would be for the idea. i don't even really know why i am so sceptical about monuments and memorials for the victims of national socialism. auschwitz is beyond memorials. i advised someone working in the neuengamme concentration camp museum to replace symbols with information and symbolic memorials with elucidation. everyone should know what the people in concentration camps had to eat, what work they had to do, how they lived together, how they were treated, what punishments there were, what legitimacy, how high the death rate was. the cooler information of this kind is, the less memorial rituals slip in, the more powerful it will be. fact is more powerful than interpretation. there used to be monuments to the german kaiser in all german cities. they have disappeared. no-one would know the difference between a kaiser wilhelm the first and a kaiser wilhelm the second any more. there are still bismarck monuments standing. even a socialdemocratic chancellor or the publisher of a german news magazine can be an admirer of bismarck. it is precisely here that we see where replacing information with symbols takes you. the germans ought to know more about bismarck. they ought to know that the prussian defence budget was seven times higher than france's, that bismarck quite consciously saw his political approach as one of blood and iron, they ought to know how he held democrats up to ridicule, they ought to know how systematically he set out to seize territory, how he overran peaceful towns and countries. they ought to know that he was one of the outstanding politicians of violence, the might of the stronger, the politics of fear. bismarck did not become the famed master of realpolitik until he had everything he wanted and had to tell himself that he would be bending the bow too far if he went any further. bismarck hides behind his figure. and so german historians do not dare to touch bismarck as a topic. the symbol hides it. the monument distorts reality. certainly symbols are more than knowledge in german thought. the world that cannot be fathomed rationally appears in the symbol. the unsayable becomes manifest. no enlightenment managed to shake the role, the position of the symbol in the hierarchy of thinking in germany. we have remained devout, even in politics. in france, marianne as a symbol of the grande nation is an allegory. but an allegory is not a symbol, it is an image, a comparison, a circumscription. and human communication is based on images. images are often more precise than scientific definitions. there is much that cannot be described or grasped rationally. not everything that is is reasonable and not everything that is reasonable is real. the identification of reason and reality is inadmissible in principle because rational definition is a product of culture, just as the division of the earth into degrees is a product of culture that does not occur in nature. knowledge is created. thus a great deal that is remains outside knowledge. the only question is, does it remain in principle outside that which can be grasped rationally, and thus always outside, or is it simply still undiscovered. for the french, who are still in the tradition of the enlightenment, it is still inaccessible. for the germans there is a knowledge that is above rationality. it appears in symbols. it appears in faith and it appears in art. religion and art are irrational, they are symbols. will, nietzsche's will, will in history. will in politics is also irrational. it appears in symbols. it appears in the image of the antichrist, the superman, the lord of castle and palace, in war and in triumphal arches, in parades and imperial party conferences. there are fundamental experiences of reality, there are fundamental experiences of one's own ego that are not at the disposal of the rational. we turn to the image. language has hundreds of images for the state of the heart, from stonehearted to chickenhearted. but here the image remains information, like the definition as well. pictorial statement and scientific statement are on the same plane, are contingent upon each other. they want to be precise, even if by different means. symbols are something else for germans. the symbol opens up other worlds. it makes being accessible and opens up the actual. symbols have depth, reality is only there. all any ruler can do in a monument is sit on a horse. there has never been one who has sat on an ass. bismarck stands there as an upright figure, leaning on a sword that comes up to his chest. he has the figure of a knight, and yet he destroyed the old empire, a man of campaigns and raids, who threw the former leaders of austria out of the imperial club in order to secure the predominance of prussia, a predominance that was to be rich in consequence. a cult of symbols broke out. in germany the concept of metaphysics was shifted to the great and deep hereafter, to which no path of reason led. metaphysics is what cannot be grasped, only interpreted. metaphysics is apprehension between life and death, is apprehension of the reason for the world. böcklin, also an admirer of bismarck, created the metaphysical painting “the isle of the dead”, which it is not difficult to recognize as a symbolic vagina. in an age of victorian morality, where one cannot speak about such things, it is for this area in particular that symbols tend to shoot out of the ground. german metaphysics works on the basis that the world is governed by a spiritual principle. here it is in the tradition of Greek philosophy. but this spiritual principle, whether idea or world-reason, is distorted by facts. for this reason knowledge of facts can be an obstacle to discovering the world-reason. we need cognition that goes beyond reason. and this cognition manifests itself in the symbol. thus germans are not content with living in a state and organizing this state according to their needs and ideas, they need a fatherland that is so great that they are also prepared to offer their lives for it. it is only this fatherland as a higher essence that gives meaning, gives direction, to their lives. in the fatherland history's demands become effective. working for a state that guarantees the best possible life for all its citizens is too little for the germans. history itself, according to hegel and marx as well, is world revolution. in the mean time the french have also discovered the symbol in their own way. this in the form of symbolic existence and symbolic action. structuralism is the discovery of the symbolic in history and society. we do not do what we want but what we should. we are driven by a hidden structure, a codex of customs and prescriptions. the meaning of the actual has a higher meaning. and this gives the higher meaning the possibility, as in postmodernism, of replacing the actual. the door is replaced by the portal. even in the country, family houses are built with portals, framed by a column on each side and a pediment. the columns may not have doric, ionic or corinthian capitals any more, they are derived from the formal language of the bauhaus. but they represent a symbolic, a representative existence. whether the column bears a load or not is of no importance. the romans, who originally built in brick, took the column over from the greeks. they were concerned to look not just like lords of the state or lords of war, but like lords of educational distinction. banks and stock exchanges in the last century took over columns from the romans. no-one wanted to present himself as a mere businessman or factory owner, and so the classical column was used as a sign of culture and education, whether it was cribbed from the romans themselves or its more recent renaissance version. the modern column is smooth as a pipe, without base or fluting, but it is no less a sign of higher things. it goes beyond function, purpose, rational definition, justification in reason, it is a pointer to history and culture. it is a quotation. it maintains a dialogue with the architecture of yesteryear. at the same time it shows solidarity with the conservative bourgeoisie of the last century. post-modernism is a modern justification of the historicism with which conservative society camouflaged its business. we too have business to camouflage. big business has turned out to result in poisoning nature and the environment, excessive consumption has turned out to produce rubbish and trash. our wonderful mobility has turned out to be something that blocks up our streets and is the meaning of frustration when on holiday. the comfort of new furniture is the fruit of an artificial wood whose manufacture produces gases that make the forests die. the class struggle, ruinous competition, manchester capitalism, the exploitation of the weak took place in the 19th century among the symbols of humanistic education, before a background of neoclassical architecture. the consequences of excessive consumption require a similar concern with education, historical awareness, classical aesthetics and openness to the world. the world needs symbols. thus art is flourishing as almost never before, as in the courts of princes. museums are being built almost as never before, and the works of the poor impressionist and expressionist painters find their way into the vaults not of the state, but of insurance companies and concerns that are taking a cut of the new prosperity. art is what cannot be understood. if you understand what a picture is showing then it is no longer art. thus art turns away from all forms of the comprehensible, it turns towards the actual domain of the irrational, towards aesthetics as such. religion used to be belief in a doctrine, in a revealed truth. today religion is belief in religiousness as such, in religiousness in any form, in the appearance of the world as symbol. art used to be the ability to represent something. art today is the aesthetic of the unrepresented, the aesthetic of aesthetics itself. the picture of what is depicted becomes the symbol of what cannot be depicted. warlords spoke of nothing more frequently than peace. nothing concerns the head of a company, other than his business, more than art. man as a symbolic existence is the prerequisite of a society that no longer lives on what it needs but consumes what is produced. consumption itself has to be given symbolic value. the social state once wanted to abolish poverty. the welfare state came into being. at the moment we are in the act of abandoning even this again. we are turning things round. we fatten ourselves up with excess production. growth must grow. we are moving from need consumption to the consumption of symbols. it seems that this calculation has worked out. an advertisement for one of the biggest car manufacturers quotes goethe: kunst bleibt kunst, art remains art. it does not tell us anything about the car, its performance, what it costs. such figures could be alarming. it also offers no information about the relationship between car and environment. it raises the car to the status of art, makes it into a higher idea. anyone who drives a car lives in the lofty places of the west. a distinction has to be made between symbol and sign. human culture is one of signs. even material was translated into signs, into weight and mass, into mark and pfennig. signs stand for something, point to a thing or a set of circumstances. a symbol wants more. it reaches beyond the thing. it looks behind it. a sign cannot offer more than an equivalent to a thing and state of affairs. a symbol tries to remove this distinction, wants to look behind things. it is not content with truth as correspondence between signs, statement and state of affairs. admittedly, no truth is exhaustive. behind every answer there is a question. but can we, instead of asking more questions, do without answers and be content with seeming and appearance? in fact not just be content, but seek the real truth precisely in this, in seeming? the world is turning upside down. ultimately it is all appearance. only an appearance of appearances. things vanish anyway. things used to have to be manufactured. today they come from the factory, made by automization and robots. work is no longer the manufacture of things. this means that the experience of making is lost. knowledge becomes theoretical knowledge. appearance now takes the place of experience. things are no longer designed. design is stuck on to them retrospectively. as design in inverted commas, as form of appearance, as a symbol. things no longer have a purpose to fulfil, they are produced for us to consume. they exist in terms of the meaning we put on them, they have symbolic value. the prospect that a car could turn back into a vehicle again today is very slight, however. any objective representation of cars, traffic and its consequences would be tantamount to condemnation. and noone can afford that, neither the manufacturers nor the politicians, who think in national economic dimensions, and certainly not the customer, who has been offered a taste of an alleged new freedom by the car. he believes in this freedom, even when he is stuck in a jam several miles long. symbolic use of things presupposes belief in symbols. and anyone who believes in symbols rescues the economy of symbols. our civilization drives us out of every kind of work, whether it be manufacturing things, picking fruit or carrying out services. the only work that is of real economic use is that done by machines, automated devices and robots. people's own work is a disruptive factor in the modern national economy. it is getting closer to black market work. the only sphere of activity left to human beings is that of making decisions. decisions at the computer, decisions in offices. in this way we lose our relationship with things and affairs, our understanding of cause and effect, of plan and result. all reasons and purposes, all causalities and relations are fleeing from our world. what remains is enjoyment. enjoyment comes in two forms, first as physiological satisfaction and then as mental satisfaction. the symbol is to be, say, as strong as schwarzenegger or as clever as al capone or as successful as frank sinatra. and not the symbol as a sign, but as a dream, as transcendence. arno schmidt thought that in a future world there would be nothing left but surfaces, no essence of things any more. in the mean time we have already taken it a little further. we no longer buy things because of their appearance, because of their form, we buy them as symbols. they no longer represent themselves, but what has been breathed into them as transcendence. economy today is the manufacture of secular transcendence, the production of dreams. woe betide anyone who still talks about the actual, who talks about purposes and functions, who talks about sense and nonsense. he will not get a foothold in the market, unless he is in a position to create his own market. nothing is itself any more. everything points to something else, has to be like that and this. a chair isn't a chair any more. it has to look like a sculpture, like a work of art. otherwise no market growth can be guaranteed. otherwise no additional purchasing power can be generated. otherwise there will be no more expansion of production. otherwise there will be no growth in the gross national product. the symbol guarantees power of disposal over the market, over the consumer. the transcendence of control manifests itself in the symbol. that is one world. the other is that in fact we are destroying symbol after symbol. since woodstock all the scenery is burning. stage sets consist of scaffolding and spotlights. light as appearance, as the mood of the hereafter has gone out. simulation of sunset and the twilight of the gods has glowed into darkness. light is electric light. it comes out of spotlights that you can see. staging the hereafter has been replaced by technical hardware and its operational use as a game. a spotlight produces a beam of light, a colour filter produces coloured light, a dimmer creates light and dark, and miniature motors produce rotation. and all that before the eyes of the assembled public. nothing is “hidden”. one is reminded of a marionette theatre that is all the more convincing the more you can see the strings and operating bars. one is reminded of bach, for whom music consisted of sounds. what is, one is permitted to see. that too is a message of our century, the second, if the first was: nothing is real, everything is a symbol. what is, one is permitted to see is a principle that does not allow anything to be taboo any more and penetrates into the holy of holies of power mechanisms, into the secret storehouse of the practice of power. a spotlight is a structure made of metal cylinders, of cones, a mirror, a lamp, screws, holders and fasteners. one is permitted to see it. the light that it produces is different from natural light. it is technical light, not sunlight, light from a bulb. since the invention of the spotlight we have had earth-bound light, light without symbolic value. light, once the symbol of metaphysical twilight, has become a manufactured technical medium. the aura of the symbol is glowing into darkness. richard wagner, the master of metaphysical light and metaphysical music, is being carried away by the electric engineer.