## AESTHETIC EXISTENCE everybody cooks what he plants, says a mexican proverb. translated for european conditions it could mean something like, everybody thinks what he makes. and what does a bank clerk make, or an economist, or an official in the federal statistics department, or a spares manager at BMW, or a genetic researcher for la roche in basle? he operates a computer. what does a european make today? he doesn't make anything any more, he makes decisions. he sits in front of his screen and if the computer doesn't know anything else and offers this or that possibility the european says let's try it this way, then that. something will work. we do not craft our own furniture any more, we don't sing our own songs any more, we don't dig our own gardens any more, we don't make our own toys any more, we don't cook our own soup and food any more, we don't write our own letters any more, we don't clean our own rooms any more, we even get rid of our own communication. everything comes from the refrigerator, the television, the selfservice shop. in this way man has probably achieved the most difficult of all difficult existences. he no longer needs to work, he no longer needs to think, he no longer needs to make anything, he is free. all he has to do is switch on programmes. but the human in the human being cannot be suppressed. nothing is more important to him than his real freedom. he is himself through selfdetermination. but what can he determine when there is nothing left to be determined? something that is indeterminate. that is aesthetic phenomena. no-one can stop me wearing a moustache like kaiser wilhelm the second. no-one can stop me wearing a tailcoat like stresemann, noone can stop me keeping my hat on while eating, no-one can stop me painting pictures in which all the people are standing on their heads. the realm of freedom is increasingly being reduced to the realm of aesthetics, and there all freedoms are allowed. in aesthetics there are no bans, no standards, no rules. something that is posited as an aesthetic fact exists, is legitimate, is legal, is inevitable, is there. thus today true human existence is aesthetic existence. so far, so good. but now the question arises: which aesthetic do i set for myself, which do i choose, which do i slip into. let us leave aside the fact that many slip into the aesthetic of the beach boys or of udo lindenberg or of mother theresa or of madonna or of karl lagerfeld or katherine hamnett. everybody lives on orientations and objectifications. one assesses oneself while assessing others. the aesthetic that one chooses oneself is not only a problem for the individual person, making one's own aptitudes and talents agree with something objective. today aesthetics shows which class you belong to. communism, socialism, we read in the paper every day, is finished. we live in a classless society. probably true. reason enough to rediscover class, to set class up again. not economic classes this time, this time aesthetic classes, representative classes. economic classes had crude distinctive features: wages, honorarium, salary, the monthly income. this alone distinguished capitalists from the proletariat. the distinguishing mark of the new classes is more sublime. it is based on the choice of aesthetic. an example: a football trainer is usually somewhat older than his players, because he is more experienced. in training he kicks the ball around in the same tracksuit as them. he must not play worse than his pupils, but it is agreed that he probably wouldn't last through a whole game any longer. during a game the trainer sits on the reserve bench with his substitutes. now the game of aesthetics begins. one trainer sits there dressed the same as his players. the other doesn't sit, but stands, and he doesn't wear a sports top, but a jacket, and he doesn't have training shoes, but elegant street shoes, and he doesn't have an open neck, but a tie or bow tie. his trousers have creases, which no sports trousers have. his shirt is buttoned up, the opposite of what sportsmen usually go for. his trousers are tight-fitting, something taboo in sport. sport was a revolution against common decency. you didn't play in jacket and plus-fours, but in vest and underpants. this has led to the casual colourful world of strips that is appropriate to the game and also practically made it possible in the first place. a team manager cannot be involved in this, it would be the wrong aesthetic for him. he needs a jacket and tie. he needs shoes and trouser creases. why? because only someone who can afford to wear useless, impractical, unsporting things while others are wearing things that are useful, practical and sporting has authority. the aesthetic of the fine man was always the aesthetic of the impractical, the purposeless, the unmotivated, the functionless. it is only possibly to make oneself distinct from the world of purpose and order by nonsense, or putting it somewhat more modestly, by not-sense, by senseless-ness. that is why functionalism has been pronounced dead and buried today. things that are sensible, purposeful, useful, reasonable have no place in the class of the sublime. in them the opposite is true. the manager, the director, the chairman and the representative only identify themselves by demonstrating how unreasonable they are, whether it be in their dress, their homes, their cars or even their thinking. why stand around on the wet grass of a football stadium in town shoes that are only suitable for walking from the car to the office? why be the only person in the stadium with a buttoned shirt? that man has authority. he stands above the matter in hand. he may well say: it was the players' fault, when a game is lost, and when the players have won a game he says that they followed his strategy. even now we don't really know: who is playing football, the players or the coach? it is clear from appearance, from aesthetic existence. you have to know how to make an exhibition of yourself. art has always made an exhibition of itself. today the following conclusion is drawn from this: anyone who makes an exhibition of himself is making art, is a work of art. only what is different is striking. this is the real reason for the present-day liaison between art and business. the only person who can do business is the one who is as different as art. art is the domain of the completely different. what is normal is not art. what is sensible isn't art either. art is legitimized by the claim always to do everything differently. anyone who paints in the way that people have always painted is unoriginal. for a time there was an attempt to combine the creative with the useful, the creative with the reasonable. it was thought that useful things could be well made and look good as well. like a training shoe or a bicycle. those days seem to have gone. design too is concerned today to make art or at least to convey art. design today consists of making structures that look as though they are by dalí, mondrian or kandinsky. you can't sit on a modern chair, it isn't there for sitting on. it contributes to the aesthetic ambience with which one demonstrates one's superiority. conversely, anyone who wants to demonstrate superiority, who doesn't want to be like the others, has to become involved with art. no manager today can afford not to understand art. no concern can afford not to support art. of course we all know that the world is different. if aeroplanes were built according to aesthetic criteria of whim they would all drop out of the sky. if engines were constructed according to aesthetic criteria they would never run, if traffic regulations were made according to aesthetic criteria there would not be any more traffic. because there is consistency, the world is legality and reason, even walls would not remain standing if they were not built functionally, skyscrapers would fall down if they were not constructed according to calculations and logic, and all soup would burn if it was cooked according to aesthetic criteria alone. reason and functionality are nothing more than insights into the way in which the world works. and this totally and completely. nature knows no aesthetic opposed to reason. we all know that. nevertheless people do have an aesthetic existence, a form of existence that is against purpose and reason. and this has probably always existed. two hundred years ago the man standing on the grass was not wearing a tie and trousers with creases but buckled shoes and a wig. the man of privilege, the important man in the absolutist state, the nobleman, the king, the emperor showed himself in the size of his artificial wig. and the highest of all was the man who was condemned to inactivity by his wig, because otherwise it would have dropped off his head. the more distinctive a power is, the more aesthetic extravagance it develops. this is the same in the case of the dome of st. peter's as it is for the hall of mirrors in versailles or the moscow underground. the greater the despot, the more beautiful the world becomes. it used to be said that knowledge is power. in very early times they might have said: ability is power. today we say: beauty is power. only someone who can offer beauty has a chance of dominating the market. only someone who has slipped into an aesthetic existence has leadership qualities. admittedly this will only be true for as long as aesthetic is understood as something beyond purpose and rational explanation.