## BAUHAUS AND ULM when walter gropius made us the offer of calling the hochschule für gestaltung “bauhaus ulm”, we refused. i am almost surprised by that myself today. in our contemporary civilization, in which packaging often means more than content, lateral connections, designations and relationships carry greater weight. but someone who had just come back from the war and was trying to build up a new school was in a different environment. so little substance had remained, either materially or politically or culturally, that thinking in terms of relationships, borrowings or interplay made little sense. of course we were aware at the time of the cultural and political aura that a school would gain from being called “bauhaus ulm”. but “esteem” was something of a negative word. we wanted to do what was right, without speculating about public effect and recognition. it was not our intention to make a second bauhaus, we wanted to distance ourselves from it, consciously. when i say “we” i need to make distinctions. max bill thought quite differently about this from walter zeischegg, tomás maldonado, hans gugelot or me. max bill did not want repetition either, but he did want a kind of new bauhaus, he imagined that there would be artists' studios for painters and sculptors as there were at the bauhaus, workshops for goldsmiths or silversmiths. for walter zeischegg and me this was unthinkable. (tomás maldonado and hans gugelot came later, but also shared our point of view.) walter zeischegg and i had both been active in the field of art at first, but had soon left the academies, he vienna and i munich. principles lay behind this break. we came home from the war and were now supposed to work on aesthetics for aesthetics sake at the academy. that was no longer any good. anyone who had ears to hear and eyes to see had to recognize that art was a flight from the diverse tasks, affecting culture as well, that arose when nazi rule lay shattered. we had to ask ourselves whether culture and art did not expose themselves if they ignored the real human problems of a post-war period. was art not overall an alibi for leaving reality to those people who were in control of it? was not art a bourgeois sunday attitude of obfuscation so that greater control could be taken of everyday matters? were not the people who were interested in control those who had done most for art? at the time i was not able to answer this conclusively, but our interests had been completely reversed. we were interested in designing daily life and the human environment, in industrial products and social behaviour. we were no longer prepared to accept that creativity should be classified by objects. would the peak of human creativity continue to be pure aesthetics without a specific purpose, while practical matters and things for daily use were of second-class significance? on the principle that the spiritual is superior to the physical? dualism of this kind is outdated today as far as psychology, medicine or philosophy are concerned. but a poet's word is still worth more to us than a journalist's, and the aesthetics of museum objects likewise more than that of the street. we still divide ourselves into spirit and matter, and need art to vouch for this. in my opinion what we needed to do was not to enrich art by the addition of a few more works, but to show that culture today must have the whole of life as its subject. yes, we even believed that we had recognized a trick in traditional culture of distracting from those everyday things and aspects of daily life that were prone to commerce and exploitation. art is written in capital letters by people who earn money from trash. eternal values are trumpeted by those who do not want to be caught out at their dirty business. we did not want to be part of this idealism. culture should turn to reality. we discovered the bauhaus, constructivism, de stijl and found what we were looking for in malevich, tatlin and moholy-nagy. shaping the everyday, the really real, design had become the platform of all kinds of humane creativity. and if someone was working with squares, triangles and circles, with colours and lines, then these were sensible aesthetic experiments, and nothing loftier than that. on the contrary, it was intended to prove its value by coming to terms with reality, however brokendown, dirty and desolate that may be. max bill was a bauhaus survivor, and had partially rescued in the schweizer werkbund things that had been forbidden and eradicated in germany and austria. for us he was the authentic bauhaus that at first we could only get to know from books. but bill had another world of experience as well, for him, art remained what it was, while we began to see it as something endangering design. design should develop its results from the object. the danger lay in design becoming an applied art and borrowing its solutions from art. charles eames' chairs had just become familiar, convincing models for the unity of technology, functionality and aesthetics. this was design on the basis of the task set, design without formal borrowings from art. conversely, rietveld's constructivist chairs were unmasked as mondrians to sit on, unsuitable art objects with the handicap of trying to be useful. for plato and even for aristotle the material concealed the spiritual. the world would be ideal if there was no matter. the spirit would be free if there was no body. love would be great if there was no sexuality. this view, from which bourgeois society derived its culture business, was generally shared; at that time almost no-one opposed it. the most likely candidate to do so was the dada movement: kitchen stools, lavatory bowls, bicycle wheel rims and broom handles found their way into museums as a provocation. now all that was valid were statements to the opposite: anyone who has nothing to communicate looks for style, anyone who lives by materialism honours the spirit, anyone who does business is furthering culture. hugo ball was the first initiator of the dada movement in zurich. but he was also the first to get out of dadaism. rejection of the bourgeois was too little for him. he consistently condemned the bourgeois element in dada and its flight into spirituality. in 1919 he took up an antithetical “philosophy of productive life”: “an order of things in which an enormous concern for productivity provides the basis of morality can result from respect for and recognition of our nearest, love of our nearest.” hugo ball built up a philosophy of the humane shaping of concrete things, a kind of philosophy of design, against the art of pure spirituality. he developed doubts about kandinsky's decorative curves. adolf loos also thought that in architecture style and construction were no longer divided like body and soul, and karl kraus no longer allowed language to break down into content and form. form was a form of the propositional content. at that time in ulm we had to get back to the matter in hand, to things, to products, to the street, to the everyday, to people. we had to turn round. it was not for example a question of extending art to the everyday, to application. it was a matter of counter-art, civilization work, civilization culture. we discovered architecture in particular in factory building, form in the construction of machines, and shape in the way in which tools were made. i got to know walter zeischegg when he was visiting a handle research institution near ulm from which he wanted to use material for an exhibition called “hand and handle” in vienna. i made posters myself. my principles were only confirmed when shortly after leaving the academy one of my posters was hung next to a picture by paul klee in the museum of modern art. i was creating for the street what others were creating for the museum. as i signed none of my work, the poster in new york was labelled “artist unknown”. that suited me as well. while others were looking for a name and presenting themselves in the market place of appearances, i was happy to be anonymous. craftsmen, constructors and engineers do not sign. the bauhaus had gone through various internal mutations, internal revolts, like the change from craft design to industrial design, from painting by people like hölzel and itten to that of someone like van doesburg, from a werkbund ideology to a de stijl ideology. it never managed the leap away from art. on the contrary. the true princes were the princes of painting. kandinsky, klee, feininger and schlemmer. and as ever they were concerned with the spiritual. kandinsky's theoretical work is called das geistige in der kunst (the spiritual in art). kandinsky and mondrian were devotees of theosophy, a doctrine of pure spirituality, which aims to overcome materialism by becoming one with the absolute spirit, with god. for both men, painting was a means of access to pure spirit, and the path to nonrepresentationalism was a farewell from the concrete, from the material world. malevich in russia was looking for pure space, pure surface, pure colour with claims of the kind that were usually addressed only towards icons. the aim was a remote aesthetic of pure form, of squares, triangles and circles, of lines and colour. klee talked about the cosmos, about prehistory and primeval movement. for kandinsky objects became energy tensions and line complexes. in his painting he sought for purely abstract beings as citizens of the abstract empire with equal rights. everybody was looking for spirituality, something beyond reality, beyond the individual. but does the world as it is not consist solely of the individual, the concrete? is the spiritual, the general, not just a part of man's conceptual world, to make it possible to come to terms with the world in terms of language? even william of ockham, an early forerunner of modern analytical philosophy, would have confirmed that. but it would not be correct to see the bauhaus just in terms of this spirituality of its painters. there was a tendency to the concrete from the beginning. the first programme demanded a return to craft, a new guild of craftsmen, work from the spirit of the workshop. it demanded unity of the arts in building and explained art as an intensification of craft. the craft diction of this programme is discernible in the last sentence of the first manifesto of 1919: “let us put up…the new building of the future…that will some day rise to heaven from a million craftsmen's hands as a crystal symbol of the coming of a new faith.” is it possible to make any sense of this sentence if it is intended to express that the craft age had a lofty working ethos? things were made for their own sake. industry that is locked on to profit and a service industry locked on to profit essentially make use of the delusion that presentation is more important than the thing presented. architect walter gropius kept the bauhaus open for secular things as well, for buildings, tables, chairs and furniture, however not as such, but as elements of a new faith. the painters found this faith in elementary geometry, in squares, triangles and circles and the primary colours red, yellow, blue, black and white. that set the programme for the conflict: is design an applied art, does it therefore appear in the elements square, triangle and circle, or is it a discipline that draws its criteria from the task it is set, from use, manufacture and technology? is the world the individual and the concrete, or is it the general and abstract? the bauhaus did not resolve this conflict, could not resolve this conflict as long as the taboo was not removed from the concept of art, as long as it remained trapped within an uncritical platonism of pure forms as world principles. certainly individual opposing voices were raised. younger men like josef albers, mart stam, hannes meyer and marcel breuer in particular objected to subordination to an ideal aesthetic. they saw the results of their work as products of their working methods, qualities of materials, technology and organization. as empiricists, they were opposed to the idealists of pure form. hannes meyer had to leave the bauhaus. he risked making the statement that art is composition and therefore inexpedient. he said life was nonartistic, that aesthetics was a result of economics, function, technology and social organization. for the bauhaus the dominant factor was still a geometrical style derived from art. with this it influenced art deco more than modern industrial production. the bauhaus was reflected more in museums than modern technology and economics. geometrical design principles could perhaps still just be used for furniture and in typography, but even for chairs such formal handicaps become questionable, and certainly so for cars, engines or appliances. industrial production followed other paths, and it was only designers like charles eames who showed what it means to develop products from their purpose, from materials and manufacturing method, from use. we all had our reasons to make reservations about the bauhaus known. and also about bill's intention to set up artists' studios. neither zeischegg nor i were economists, who would have seen aesthetics as a waste product of purely technical manufacture. it seemed sensible to us to identify aesthetic categories like proportions, volumes, juxtapositions, interpenetrations or contrasts and to address them experimentally, but not as an end in themselves, and definitely not as a superordinate, predominant and spiritual discipline, but as a kind of grammar, a syntax of design. the result of a design had to be appropriate to the task, its criteria were use and manufacture. aesthetic experiment was an important thing for us, and the conceptual control of aesthetic processes was additionally as exciting as it was necessary, but we did not consider newtonian physics more important than nature itself. hans gugelot brought a technical and inventive mind into the development group, and maldonado was a theorist and designer who had dropped out of painting. gugelot created an ingenious technical basis for product design training, maldonado organized the academic structure of the curriculum. bill seemed to go along with the classification of art and design for a time. the critical point was whether he could agree to our view that painting or sculpture were experimental disciplines for determining colour and volume, thus without superordinate significance. for gugelot the point of the question was the hierarchy of engineer and product designer. was the designer above the technician? gugelot had never been concerned with art and could make an unbiased decision here. for bill the technician remained subordinated to the designer. for gugelot that was a pseudo problem. both, the designer and the engineer approached a problem from different angles, one from the point of view of technical efficiency, the other from that of use and appearance. gugelot took engineers so seriously that he could not imagine them as subordinate, just as he expected technicians to take the designer so seriously that he did not appear subordinated either. he no longer saw the world as above and below, but as an association and network of different, equally ranked activities. additionally technology released too many aesthetic qualities for him to have wanted to raise himself above them in principle. for this reason he became a technician himself, in order to be able to enjoy the aesthetic reserves of technology. zeischegg moved in a similar direction, and now read more books about mechancis and kinetics than art. he satisfied his intellectual curiosity more at technical trade fairs than at art shows. at the same time he worked his way into the mathematics of bodies and positions in order to come to terms with the laws of volume and topos. he could not place in hierarchies something that for him was a result of different starting points and angles. maldonado and i were concerned with mathematical logic, ultimately to find out that the answers we received to questions about the world depended on the method we used to formulate the questions. here too a vertical world order collapsed. spirit was a method, but not a substance. we experience world orders as thought orders, as information. one of the first books i bought for the hfg library was charles morris's sign theory. classification of objects as semantics, syntax and pragmatics also gave us a theoretical basis for defining design criteria and interpreting art as a syntactical craft. this had the kind of meaning for us that sigmund freud had for many people, when he explained the psyche as an organization form of the physical. i learned once more how dangerous a purely syntactical art of squares, circles and triangles could become if it was not aware that it withdrew from the semantic dimension of information. my posters had got into the formal field of so-called “concrete art”, and i had to ask myself whether they still served communication first. christian staub, who was in charge of the teaching of photography, made me aware of the danger in my photos that they could become a formal “artistic” end in themselves, and i should not confuse syntactic exercises with information. where had the message gone? four years after the school opened, max bill resigned. without him there would not have been a hochschule für gestaltung in ulm. we were looking for his experience at the bauhaus. his views on design seemed to us to point the way forward. but fundamentally he remained fixated on the bauhaus as far as we were concerned. he remained an artist and retained a special status for art. i found myself unable to relate to bauhaus typography and design in any way that might have useful applications. on the contrary, in the field of typography the commitment to the basic geometrical elements of square, triangle and circle, in the design and evaluation of typefaces for example, was nothing short of disastrous. a clearly legible type does not need a circular o or an a based on an isosceles triangle. geometrical type is a regression into aesthetic formalism. a legible and thus functional type tries to do justice to people's writing and reading habits. things are similar in photography. the bauhaus did pioneering work in terms of the syntactical aspects of photography. but photography as communication was not very popular. it was all about perspectives, light and shade, contrasts, structures, points of view. photography as a means of communication was developed by other people, the reportage photographers associated with the great illustrated papers. by felix h. mann, stephan laurant, erich salomon, eugene smith, robert capa or henri cartier-bresson. photography by man ray or moholy-nagy was primarily formal aestheticism, an aesthetic and formal end in itself, at best syntactic experience. reality was reproduced as a signal, which certainly was an advantage to the meaning of this photography for advertising and graphics. the fact that these photographs are now dealt as art only underlines this appraisal. their formal claim was in inverse proportion to their communication function. finally contemporary post-modern design can cite the bauhaus. again, as happened in rietveld's day, furniture is degenerating into cubes, cones, cylinders, and all this in the colour schemes of elemental design. the bauhaus's spherical coffee pots and cylindrical flower tubs are immortal for as long as elementary geometry is sold as art. vide aldo rossi. it will not be possible to avoid indicating that people have discovered today the extent to which kandinsky can be exploited for commercial purposes. his lines, rods, waves, circles, points, segments of circles, half moons and triangles are consumed today as the latest fashion, since mondrian had become too cold and klee too poetic. kandinsky provided forms for today's visual fashion. even architects' plans exploit his syntactical repertoire. the times are again attached to the lofty and the general. art is in higher favour than answers to a state of affairs, than the result of a case study, than a solution to a situation. art makes us a present of eternity. this brings us back to the dadaist dispute. they fell into two camps: the aesthetes and the moralists. hugo ball pulled out as a moralist and left the aesthetes to get on with it. marcel duchamp, who was already getting fed up with his expressionist painting, stopped fabricating provocative objects to frighten the middle classes. the moralists also did not want to evade the accusation that the world is made up of trash, lies and deception. the principle of the modern market was based on profit, and neither factory goods nor chemicals nor the products of the food industry sprang from responsibility towards the product and the matter in hand. the moralists had to leave the aesthetes in the lurch. and actually this situation has changed very little to the present day. the world has not got very different from what it was. most designers have gone over to the camp of the stylists and aesthetes in order to present products appropriate to the aspect of aesthetic sales promotion. presentation is still everything. pity there isn't an ulm any more.