## THE SIGNATURE assume that you have a picasso hanging up at home, a genuine picasso. you could have been a friend of the painter's. that would have meant you might have got hold of a picture by one of the world's most expensive painters, even if you hadn't enough money to buy it. and then you discover that picasso forgot to sign it. the entire picasso would be worth nothing at all. as good as nothing. even if you could show correspondence with him to prove it was genuine, the picture would not be worth anything. it would seem that it is not longer quality that decides the status of art, but the signature. it is the same with banknotes. they have to be signed by the correct offical in the state bank. according to this, art is not a value in itself, just as little as a banknote. it has a market value. it has, and certainly you have to add: today, a value that is determined by demand from collectors, i.e. by demand from the art trade, by the art business. seen like this, a picasso is a banknote from the art world. of course this is not an exhaustive answer. there have been periods in art when those who produced art did not sign their work. indeed most artistic epochs did not know the marking of work by appending a handwritten signature. this is relatively new, actually as old as the history of capitalism, which is also a history of the art trade. in earlier times art was made for a purpose, a person and a particular place. today we are experiencing a blossoming of painting, because it is more mobile than sculpture. painting is as mobile as a banknote, and the principle of trade is not that something is allotted a definitive place, but that it is mobile and can find its way to the place where most is being offered for it. whether it was an egyptian painter, a greek sculptor or an early medieval wood carver they were creating something for a specific purpose and did not sign their work. occasionally there were marks of origin, of the kind that we know from stonemasons or ancient makers of pottery. designation as personal work, the artist's signature as creator, was not known. moreover, the signature today is less to identify the creator as a proof of uniqueness, of the original. only originals awaken the passion of the collector. if there were to be a copy of a picture and even if it was by the same painter it would scarcely be worth half. the signature authenticates the original, something genuinely unique. the fact that this has led to a new branch of criminalistics only underlines the new significance of the signa-ture. design is not signed. let us say carefully: not yet. if it were, the inventor of the first electric fan could have become a rich man if he had signed, say, a thousand of the things and marketed them with the care that makes art dear and rare. but even from its mental attitude design is free of the personality cult of art. design is there for everyone, not for the few and certainly not for individuals. design is intended to be reproduced, duplicated. design hates original and élitist market value. it is looking for the largest possible number of pieces produced and the widest possible distribution. it is the same as in nature. sunflowers are like sand by the sea. they carry so much seed that their very appearance documents a call for distribution. every bird that distributes their seed is within the meaning of their existence. a painter who conjures a sunflower on to a canvas makes it into something unique, reverses its nature, makes it into an individual piece. and even if the painter who painted it was primarily painting for himself, even if he was on the breadline, he created the requirement that an individual sunflower is now being traded for millions and millions. it is a requirement that the painter too is an original that indeed van gogh was, that he had a unique brushstroke, so that there can be only one individual who isolated the sunflower in this way. design is for everybody. it intends to provide optimized useful objects for the largest possible number of people. what sense would it have made if charles eames had signed his chairs, and gugelot the kodak carousel, nizzoli his lettera typewriter or giorgio giugiaro his fiat uno? design is anonymous in terms of substance, even if its creators are extremely famous and traded with like couturiers. it is therefore not surprising that there is great design by designers whose names are not even known. i admire charles eames as a designer. he had his eye on seats as something to sit on, and liberated design from artistic control. today the whole world knows the rietveld chair, which is more like a sculpture by mondrian than an object to sit on. charles eames liberated us from this. and yet i have an armchair, a recliner that moves easily within itself, that is the best that i know in this sector, better than an eames armchair. i do not know the designer's name, and i could not trace it. and i should not necessarily like to drag him into the daylight. anonymity is noble. i value service to humanity, even if it has remained anonymous. i value the inventor of the bicycle, the pincers, the soup plate, the door latch, lace-up shoes, the steamer, the beer bottle top and the aeroplane propellor. even though we do not know who it was. and ultimately, who knows who built the city of sienna? he doesn't exist. cities like bern, cultural landscapes like the moselle valley, appenzell farmhouses, english canals and japanese gardens are collective achievements, but for this reason also not less fundamental of human culture than the writer of a national anthem. the most human feature of humanity, its creativity, only has a name in a few cases, and only in the very smallest number of cases can it be identified by signature. we do not even know who built stonehenge, if they existed anyway, and the temple of monte alb n is as anonymous as the shrine of ise. of what interest is it to us who made the rose window at chartres, the city gate at lübeck or the vladimir dmitri cathedral. human culture is more co-operative creativity than individual performance (even if victors in battle were always individuals). compulsion towards a cult of personality comes from the culture of dominance, where subjects were conditioned by veneration, if not worship, of individuals. who, even, is the creator of our language? it is only through this that we are allowed to think. who changes it, who develops it further? nobody. nobody, because everybody. if you suddenly come across a designer like johannes potente, and take pleasure in him, and keep finding his tracks, good ones and bad ones, and see how he made his mark on the fifties in particular, then it is not with the intention of dragging him out of the anonymity of history and even making him part of the history of design. he should remain what he always was, an anonymous designer. in brakel they have only just found out what design is. johannes potente was surprised that he was supposed to be a designer. he was a worker, made models for door handles, because they were needed and he was that way disposed. anyone who works for a firm works differently from a designer who would like to have his products shown in the museum of modern art in new york. johannes potente thought about door handles, not about cultural history. he stayed with the thing, and behaved as trivially as the object deserved. not as though door handles were all the same to him. he lived for them, but only in the context of their use, their construction, their fabrication, not their reputation. it may be that there are a number of things that he would not have done if he had worked on the basis that humanity, at least its cultural elements, was looking at him. thus he retained uncontrolled casualness. but this very thing is a component of his keenness and evidence of unremitting dealing with the thing itself, not its effect. it is possible that his dialogue with door latches could have been cut off if he had suddenly not been on his own any more, but had design critics looking over his shoulder. it was not the worst pianists who said they couldn't play in front of big audiences. but they dug the pit of oblivion for themselves. which certainly did not matter to them, for everyone dies one death. an anonymous designer does not cultivate his style. he does not have one. he is like a craftsman alone in his workshop. he is interested in what comes out. human culture is based on this attitude. the attitude of power, interested not in the thing but in the effect, and above all in the sublimation of might and influence, does not occur here. the birth of cities, commerce, traffic, science, technology is based on this concentration on things. cities were built up by many anonymous individuals of craftsmanlike persistence. they were destroyed by great individuals calculating their effect on history. books in academic libraries were written by exponents of hard work and concentration on a subject. they were set on fire by people who wanted to make a name for themselves. johannes potente from brakel is an example of a designer who put his trust completely in his work. he is not concerned with the problem of what value it has as design as an economic object. he is not responsible for that. he is not even concerned with the fact that in modern industrial society, in our market economy the person who collects all the glory from a product is the person who sells it, not the person who makes it. modern design is the thing itself. design is a cultural demonstration against decoration, artificial creation of value and historicizing categorization through world style. it emerged from the struggle against 19th century historicism. adolf loos' guiding light was “ornament and crime”. he meant that ornament was a turning away from things, betraying the product in favour of appearance and name. there is something fundamentally incompatible in design and art. each excludes the other, like fire and water. the creative intensity of design is not less than that of art. on the contrary, making a thing not just beautiful but right as well requires additional creative abilities. art does not have values. art is senseless. in the sense that it does not need to be sensible it is sensefree. design is measured by things, by their meaning, their social tolerability, their technical function and their economy. art can do without all that. for this reason mondrian, tatlin, duchamp and even warhol have at one time proclaimed the end of art. life itself was supposed to be the subject of art. they wanted to get out of the culture of sunday into everyday work and invest more creativity there. instead of forcing mankind to worship a cultural heaven they wanted humanity in human beings, pleasure taken in work for its own sake. they remained prisoners of their industry, of the art trade, that kept them on a financial lead. with the exception of tatlin and duchamp. duchamp saw not just the end of fine painting, trying to keep the theme of “l'art pour l'art” alive with paint and canvas, but the end of art itself. at first he discovered aesthetic reality outside the studio. he used objects of industrial triviality. then he rejected art altogether and reduced the energy of shaping something to the subject itself, to the control of one's own life, of everyday humdrum existence, and remained as poor as an ascetic. the art trade had not got him on the lead. but the art trade will have its revenge. it will have a turnover of millions from the few objects that marcel duchamp left behind, because they fulfil the first requirement for high prices, they are rare. however, nothing has come of the end of art. there would be nothing wrong with that, humanity should paint for as long as it feels like painting and the state should build as many museums for the new freedom as it likes. if it could only continue to be recognized that art and design are two different things. but the zeitgeist wants to have it differently again. it is bringing design back to art. the value-creating ornament is back on the scene again. bill paints porcelain plates and the backs of clocks. the value-creating factor in art is seizing design. warhol painted cars, and so did calder and lichtenstein. industry has successfully got itself out of the clutches of not just making and selling products but also of being responsible for them. for this reason it has called for design. products are to be correct, viable, good and beautiful. design had a morality. design's claims are being repulsed, with the aid of a convincingly simple strategy. products are being artistically garnished again. seldom has the economy done so much for art as today. care for the eternally good, true and beautiful is its greatest success in fighting off threats from all sides. it simply cannot be excluded any more that mankind could suffocate in the rubbish of industrial society. perhaps we are getting close to a day when there will be no more wars. this is then less a triumph of reason than of the fact that we are compelled to disarm because we need money for the fight against rubbish and the destruction of nature, the destruction of the bases of our own life. everything and everybody is to blame for this state of affairs, not just those who cause them, industry and the principle upon which it exists, maximization of profit. what is permitted is anything that increases capital. the economic strategy of promoting art, supporting festivals, symphony concerts and art exhibitions, building museums, setting up galleries, making cultural tourism possible is effective in two directions. on the one hand it distracts from the cause factor, which is that industry, principally the chemical industry but also the motor industry and even the holiday industry, is the first source of the poisons and rubbish of our contemporary civilization. its constant series of new products not only create new waste matter, but also produce a compulsion to consume more and more of more and more industrial output. then the promotion of culture by industry has an effect that is perhaps even more significant, namely that it makes someone who does something noble seem noble himself. when cortez conquered mexico, an operation that according to hegel cost six million indians their lives, as many as the jews killed under the third reich, he took monks with him as well as soldiers. they preached the gospel, baptised the natives for a new redemption and consequently sanctioned genocide, power politics and imperial violence. power has always used art to have itself justified and to be sublimated by it. large parts of culture have always been power culture, whether in the interest of secular power, of the roman empire for instance, or of spiritual power, the vatican church. why should that be any different today. there is a work of art outside every respectable bank, every respectable office building. artists usually have a naïve disposition and hardly any of them notice the game that is being played with them. it would not be as easy to do this with sociologists. they still have a sense of the double bookkeeping that is done to history. artists like to interpret the role that is played with them as recognition of their art, as confirmation of their mission and as an award to themselves as creative personalities. it doesn't even make them suspicious that people are prepared to spend any sum of money for art. tom wolfe says that art has become a new religion today. the object it worships is wealth. art sanctions wealth and is itself a source of wealth. art creates capital and secures capital. one is always overcome by a strange feeling if something that is one of the central issues of history and the writing of history suddenly becomes reality. one does not know whether reality is a dream or the dream is reality. we are all together in the midst of the vortex caused by the dance around the golden calf. we are part of the art frenzy that has grown up around capital. it is the very cigarette company that is one of the principal causes of the spread of cancer, the very car firm that is considerably involved in atmospheric pollution and the death of the forests, the very chemical concern that has contaminated ground water for generations with its artificial fertilizers, the very major bank that directs the policies of these firms that sets itself up as a patron of the arts, as a sponsor of culture, as a champion of great and pure values. both are interdependent. anyone who produces rubbish needs art. society and politics seem paralysed in the face of the damage that we have done with our technical civilization. after the nuclear accident, scarcely after it has been cleared up, the hole in the ozone layer comes along, which, scarcely before it has been correctly diagnosed, is overshadowed by the death of the seas. this has scarcely been registered when we discover the chemical contamination of food. everyone says: it is five to midnight, we must do something. then a new tax is discovered, for the little man, for the purification of his sewage. industry, which tips poison into the sea by the shipload, is warned, closely followed by thanks for all the good things it is doing for art and culture. alongside the seals that are washed up as corpses on the beaches of schleswig-holstein can be heard the sounds, sponsored by a few large companies, of the greatest music festival that has ever taken place. design is in a difficult position. it is increasingly betrayed and abandoned by those who were its spokesmen, the representatives of a new, more humane culture. bestowing a professorial chair is enough to make a critic of official culture into an admirer of the new sovereignty of capital. artists can be bought as well. today's chair is a work of art in bauhaus colours, cut to shape according to the cultural pattern chart of circle, triangle and square. furniture is trimmed to size as a work of art, buildings are chopped down into squares or triangles. the foundation course with scissors and coloured paper has moved into design offices and studios. a chair to sit on is too trivial to be permitted a place in the golden dance. a house to live in is too unimportant, cutlery for eating too superficial, a bed to lie on too rational. everything that is has to become a symbol, a symbol of the higher, the deeper, leading beyond comprehensibility, beyond reason. anyone who can invests his money in art. a number of art magazines leap forward to give advice. art is the best of all value-enhancing currencies. although this is only for as long as there is a market for it, as along as there is some interest. and so museums are built. art is displayed at fairs as only cattle, building materials and machines used to be. sales must be promoted. artists are quoted and offered like shares. the magic flourishes. everyone buys, collects, and offers in exchange. the branch is booming. the only requirement is that the signature is not forged. people who have to know say that a third of modern art is forged. we now have better noldes than nolde painted, better braques than braque painted. if one takes the judgements of the art world seriously. and so the person who has a genuine picasso at home, but without a signature, could quite well forge a signature. in this case it would only confirm the genuineness of a picture. in this case forgery would actually be the truth.