## INTELLIGENT BUILDING modern architecture is based on a programme of social reform. its intention, so it was said, was to bring light, air and sun into every home. people were opposed to dark street gorges, back-yard architecture and bourgeois windows with so many layers of curtains that the rooms were in semi-darkness. le corbusier's pavillon suisse in paris in 1930-32 clearly set out the counter-position. its entire south side consists of a glass façade, of large windows reaching from floor to ceiling and occupying the full width of the rooms behind it. my first visit to paris, shortly after the war, was to see this building supported by a very few central piers. i sensed that this architecture was proclaiming a new age. there was one disappointment still to come. in the rooms behind the windows the air was warmed up far too much by the sun and had become stuffy. it was too bright to work in when the sun was shining. everything was light and shade, there were no transitions. on the basis of this experience le corbusier later added a brise-soleil to his buildings, protruding concrete sunshades, intended to let light, but not direct sunlight into the interior. but the view out of the windows seemed to be enclosed in blinkers. mies van der rohe's farnsworth house also fell victim to an ideology. it consists of glass panes reaching from floor to ceiling. the light and shade are controlled by curtains. but interior curtains produce a great deal of accumulated heat, which can only be tackled with enormous air conditioning plants. anyone who knows the desert knows that the southern sun can be a murderous enemy, like the biting cold of the north. an enlightened, time-conscious denizen of the north wears shorts in the desert and a short-sleeved shirt. the experienced camel nomad wears a robe reaching to his feet and also covers his face and head with a cloth. and this is not because he is losing his sense of nudism. we each have a different relationship with the sun, according to where we live. and it makes sense that even prehistoric settlements in italy had narrow alleyways and tall houses, to create shade. narrowness is not just an evil. it can be intentional. the northern house is a thick-walled climate castle with incised, rather small windows. this encourages awareness of a dualist world. in terms of insulation technique this is a successful solution, but probably only in this respect. was it good to divide the world into strange and one's own, into object and subject, into outside and inside? in contrast a japanese house is a house without dividing walls to the outside. inner world and outer world are one. whether it rains or the sun shines, the house guarantees movement to and fro between house and nature. on the dividing line there is a fluid transition in the form of a surrounding, raised balcony under a broadly protruding roof. if it is necessary to close the house up because of heat, light or people looking in, paper-thin screens are used. this is the basis of a unique way of perceiving and seeing the world, a personal interpretation of what there is. for example, it became part of zen philosophy, with a particular understanding of dialectic and polarity. for the west there is always the highest, the unique, the only truth, the supreme being, the primeval force, the world formula by which everything can be explained, the state as the crown of society. in japan reconciliation predominates, the balance of opposites. the art of allowing diversity to develop predominates. the traditional japanese house is open from the inside outwards and from the outside inwards. it takes and gives. it is transparent. obviously the old masters of modern building had something similar in mind, a dissolution of the division between inside and outside, when they started to realize façades as glass walls. but at first there were only ideological solutions, and none that were also technically and physiologically satisfying. windows as a potentially intelligent solution appear in embryo and as successful solutions to parts of the problem, but not yet as a satisfying whole. in individual cases there is ideal protection from the sun, like variable awnings, there are wonderful opening systems for sliding, tilting or swing windows, there are adjustable slatted blinds that can be raised as sight screens, and also as protection from the sun if they are outside. we still do not have the window façade as a totally variable system for all window functions to this day. there are only initial attempts. the need to abolish the gulf between outside and inside has been recognized. but let us assume that we want a space that is open to the outside in the sense of a world feeling of transparency, in the sense of a philosophy of interconnection and balance. the borderline, the window façade cannot be a façade of large shop window panes as in the work of mies van der rohe. it is a highly complex structure that has to do justice to a wide variety of requirements. it would almost have to be a machine. three parameters have to be fulfilled. first, this structure must be flexible enough to let sunlight into the space and also protect it from the direct rays of the sun. then there has to be screening. sometimes you might not want to be overlooked, sometimes you might want to see the full panorama outside. human activities assume different levels of intimacy. this means that light itself, even when it is raining, should be subject to control. it's not just the person who likes a lunchtime nap during the day, people who are working should be able to alter and control light as a stimulus to work. slatted blinds, corresponding to the bamboo rolls of the far east, are almost ideal for this. the only thing is that light control must be separated from the provision of shade, otherwise conflicts occur. if you have only one slatted blind or one extended sunshade or one awning to control, clashes occur if at the same time you require an open view but shade from the sun, or an open sky, but protection from being overlooked. if i use a slatted blind to make shade, i can't look out any more, if i use it to prevent being overlooked i do not have any unbroken light. a window façade as an operational object affords both protection from the sun, ideally from outside, so that there is no accumulation of heat, and also protection from being overlooked, ideally also suitable for varying the interior quality of light, from dark or half-dark via subdued to full light. if one thinks of controlling light with slatted blinds, two zones should be used from the point of view of height: one up to door height and one closer to the ceiling. these zones should be open to variable control by separate blinds. protection against being overlooked is sufficient to door height, above that you may want things completely open from time to time. sensitive activities, like designing or writing, require light qualities that can be controlled. to this extent the various layers of curtaining in middleclass drawing rooms, including brocade curtains producing complete darkness, were not a show of pomp. people were in a position to regulate the light in the room in accordance with light moods in the course of the day. this can be done better today. we are becoming increasingly aware of the fact that light, like air, has a broad spectrum of qualities. different countries even have different light. the light of greece has always been recognized as having a specific quality. it is different from the light of ireland or egypt. the lighting scenario in a forest also gives us an idea, especially in the differentiated play of light and shade, that light does not equal light. and morning has a different light from midday or evening. awareness of light is growing, and with this the need to control it. the third parameter is ventilation. fundamentally a room without windows that can be opened is a physiological cage. air from an airconditioning system is like air from a tin. air is a high-quality stimulus factor. an airconditioning system can never produce the fresh, tingling air of rain in the country or the dry working air of a summer morning or the soft air of an august evening. it would be ideal if the whole window façade could be opened, either on to the garden or, if you live in a higher storey, out on to a balcony or a terrace. for this you need folding doors. often wings opening above the height of the parapet are enough. but wherever possible opening windows should go right down to the floor. the space becomes freer, outside and inside can correspond better, even if you don't have a balcony or a terrace outside the window façade. even in new york the window reaching from the ceiling to the floor is legitimate. even when it doesn't have opening wings the size of doors. then you just have normal-sized opening windows. even in the case of very tall skyscrapers where extreme wind conditions can occur and people are inclined not to tolerate any opening windows at all, i would not go without at least a few, to make me aware of air as a fluid. even if windows are kept closed for reasons of temperature people want ventilation that can be adjusted by using window vents. it must be open to sensitive regulation in bedrooms, for instance. anyone who sleeps very awarely has his cult of ventilation regulations according to climate and season. even in cold weather he needs an opening, even if it may be only a tiny slit to freshen up the air he breathes. the zone between door height and ceiling is best suited for regulation of this kind. as today even middlerange cars have electric windows, it should be possible to devise technical equipment that would ensure suitable variability for both tilting and sliding windows. this technical comfort must also be right for slatted blinds. it is not a good sign of technical civilization if control technology is to be found only in the world of industrial work or on the dashboard of a car. this technology would not have to deliver more than was done by hand in a traditonal japanese house, and that is to provide complete flexibility as far as protection from the sun, protection from light and ventilation are concerned, but today an approach in the direction of making the window façade into a three-sector aggregate is no longer excessive. seen in this way, the window façade changes from a twodimensional pane into a three-zoned apparatus staggered in terms of depth. outside is protection from light and sun, that can be completely withdrawn, but also guarantees protection from direct sunlight. for reasons of insulation technology the actual window façade is a multilayered structure to protect against cold, but against heat as well. integrated into it are opening mechanisms for tilting, sliding or wing openings. a third zone within the space houses light protection and light quality and light intensity controls. the division of this zone must guarantee that individual windows or doors can be opened without having to move something like a closed sight protection device upwards or to the side. the apparatus produced for this will contain numerous mini electric motors, like a car, justifying a little control console of their own. building technology is far from advanced in this respect. there are already programme consoles for artificial light that control when where and which lights should go on and off. daylight and ventilation of the space present even more justification for a similar effort. as i have said, i do not yet know a working example of a window façade of this kind, to say nothing of the appropriate control devices, but starts have been made on individual items. if one considers the high standard of insulation technology today, it is possible to achieve the status of the japanese house even in colder climates and nevertheless be able to tuck oneself away, as in the traditional western house. while architecture is concerning itself with problems of this kind it is possible to talk about intelligent architecture. this as a kind of counterposition to so-called modern architecture. modernism was ideological but not intelligent. the cry for light, air and sun was interpreted formalistically rather than technically after the first world war, when this architecture came into being. the one thing the living machine was not was a living machine. the 19th century had established technical architecture with its engineering buildings. with the so-called modern architecture of the 20s an attempt was made to work more in terms of art, to combine technology with aesthetic doctrines like that of circle, triangle and square. this architecture was still familiar with the bourgeois requirement of autonomous art, superordinate laws of pure aesthetics. thus it also saw technology more aesthetically, as a new freedom to fulfil old needs with new means and new materials. buildings had to look like pictures by piet mondrian or amédée ozenfant. they had to be cubes like suprematist art. flat roofs were an aesthetic requirement. seen in this light the hour in which intelligent architecture was born was norman foster's sainsbury centre, which curves a flat roof just enough to allow the rain to run off. our much-praised post-modern architecture on the other hand, which only concerns itself with window divisions and bars in the spirit of mackintosh's aesthetics, is regression to naïve formalist playing around. an architect like oswald mathias ungers reduces the problem of the window to pure bar distribution. the distance from solutions that are physiologically and technically satisfying has increased again. if you go into one of the fashionable glass spaces you are often flung back by the enclosed air and greenhouse atmosphere. glass and frameworks are in, the dernier cri of fashion. controlling the climate inside won't bother architecture. lighting technicians, airconditioning experts and heating engineers are there to do that. the architect slips away from it all into the realm of beauty. and so we are still waiting for more humane, intelligent building, that finally distances itself from glossing things over, priggish handwriting and gestures that are merely pretty. the architecture we need today has still to come. for it technology is an instrument, not just a storehouse of up-to-date aesthetic structures.