# MY WORKSPACE DOES NOT YET EXIST i know what a kitchen should look like. i have written a book about it. but i am only slowly becoming aware what my workspace should look like. so far architecture has only provided general spaces for work, well lit, well ventilated, big spaces, small spaces, but no specific spaces. i know a specific working space from my own neighbourhood. it is an old mill, now an inn. the entire mill was a large space with built-in galleries fitting into the overall space as mezzanines. sacks of corn used to be brought up by lift. then the corn went through various working stages of threshing and cleaning to the millstone, and finally, in the form of flour, down into the waiting flour sack, which itself was also at a height that meant it could be easily loaded on to a cart. the miller had to have comfortable access to every piece of apparatus for the vertically arranged working stages, and this produced a tissue of platforms and galleries placed in the larger space like bridges and pulpits. the mill produced a sense of space that has only been found since in accommodation by le corbusier. it is wonderful to live in a space in which you can look up and down as well as out. large libraries sometimes have similar galleries and bridges and separate workspaces within the overall space, which make it possible to be within a whole and yet to have an individual, separate workspace. in office buildings by richard rogers and norman foster similar working landscapes embracing several storeys have come into being, usually grouped around an internal hall, and allowing individual working zones within a whole. they have none of the features of the many-storeyed large-scale offices that i hate, in which you can only see beyond the dividing walls to a little bit left over below the ceiling, which seems to be far too low, even if it is high. in the distance there are sliced windows. in the corners there are rubber plants. the howling end of modernism. i work only in large-scale offices, seen in a working technical sense. my profession requires me to work with other people. and so i want to be in the same room as them. anyone is permitted to see and hear what i am doing. this is the only way to produce the correct network of work and workers. i want to be in sight of them and not to have to open and close doors to get to them. everything is there for everyone, and everybody works with everybody else. the only thing that can be respon-sible for the crackbrained idea of creating individual spaces for everyone and everything is the inferiority complex of officialdom, afraid of a hierarchy of scrutiny. with the exceptions of toilets and darkrooms i cannot think of a single room that absolutely has to be separate. a separate room for talking about money and personal matters will not be needed in our offices. even if it may be understandable that there is one for this purpose. and why shouldn't my colleagues be aware that i am cursing on the telephone or being especially forthcoming with somebody? there is no secret that may not be known by everyone. i presume that this is the secret of a socially and psychologically intact place of work. when workspaces start to be split up and sealed off then squabbling and bickering begin, privilege, prestige, hierarchy, power, authority. the result is a working world that functions according to the principle of regulation, according to the principle of the military and the state. but if you want to work in an open working landscape you are faced with real problems. for example people like to have a sense of their own working space, indeed their own working niche that allows them to think as an individual as well, to write, to design and to dream. i myself have three quite different spheres of activity. i am in charge of an office. this means that i have to hold conversations, either at my colleagues' workplaces, or mine, or around a larger table if several people are involved in the same conversation. i am an entrepreneur. this means that i do business. i usually work this out with my secretary, who is responsible for business arrangements. she keeps a record of my appointments, deals with telephone calls and handles correspondence. her working apparatus is telephone, computer and writing equipment. we even need to be able to see each other. if i hear that yet another journalist wants an interview or to make a film or someone is trying to book a lecture, all to feed a stultified information society, then a wink has to be enough to help her to give the right answer. it's just possible that tom wolfe might be making an appointment. if i want to get on with my own work i don't want to be disturbed by every telephone call and everything the fax machine spits out. my secretary keeps an eye on this, usually by eye contact. if it is at all possible i avoid speaking to her on the telephone. she would bother me by ringing all day long, i should have to keep picking up and putting down the receiver, when a small gesture that she can see says everything. additionally i always have questions to ask her. and i don't want to telephone or to have to open a door for that either. telecommunications have made business easier in many ways, but i would be a slave to them if i were to abandon myself up to them completely, as they do not take account of what i am doing at any particular moment. my secretary protects my creative powers against the pathological desire of new technology to be able to get hold of everybody anywhere and at any time. we must have the right to protect ourselves against progress as well. finally, and this is my third sphere of activity, i am also a designer. i draft, think, draw, write, read, phantasize, develop ideas, reject them and look for new solutions. a work-place for this must have something of the monk's cell about it. a great deal is pure meditation or concentrating on being stimulated. but at the same time my monk's cell would have to have something of the viennese café about it, in which a man of letters fabricates a text in the middle of the bustle of the city. the greatest concentration often requires the stimulus of being busy, the internal needs the noise of the external. not always. but the enclosed cell is good only if it has an exit to a garden and a cloister. for me a space in which creative work is possible is not an enclosed space. it can be created by a bookcase or even a lighting track in a room combined with a storage shelf. we have designed such room dividers, principally to create psychological structuring to produce a more private work-place. an office like ours is a complexly structured thinking workshop. we are a combination of control centre, post office, university institute, monastery and small printing works. this jumble could be better structured spatially, broken up, without breaking or cutting communications. today i can only imagine an architecture appropriate to this on two levels. a single office on two levels, at least two levels. i was not a little surprised when making studies for office organization of this kind to come across a project by norman foster in which he has foreseen offices like this on two levels: a large space extending over two floors, in which a bridge area had been fitted. the bridge, fixed free in a two-storey space, is for me the space for thinking, the place for phantasizing, playing, living and working in space, bathing in the dimension of intelligence. i like looking from the organ gallery into the nave of a church, from a bridge into the docks, from a tree into a meadow. the circle, not the front row is my favourite place in the theatre. the captain works on a bridge above the ship. on the ground or on an office floor you work in two dimensions. a bridge raises us into a consciousness that is richer by an extra dimension. this is the dimension of outlooks and broad views. a bridge in my office would be a light, articulated platform in the space with several work-places for all creatice activities and all colleagues whose principal activity is thinking. here people search, write and sketch. any drawing produced here is a sketch, it is executed and perfected on the drawing board or the plotter, on the floor below. the ideas formulated here are hand-written. they are carried out and edited on the floor below. up here the telephone buzzes rather than rings. there are books up here, but only those that are needed for work in hand, the library is down below. the secretaries are down below as well, in visual contact. one of my greatest discoveries in the last few years is the pencil. the longer and the more i work with a computer the more i discover a new world, the world of the pencil. in our day the computer has produced two classes of people that are strictly separate. some people work with computers and do what their programmes suggest. they sit casually in front of the monitor, key in a question and wait to see what the monitor says. usually this involves an instruction about what key to press next in order to get any further. this continues until you arrive at a result. this is the way that bankers and production engineers, but also professors in institutes work. the other class are based at the other side of the computer. they work in pencil. they are allowed to draft, think, phantasize, enquire, ask questions and sketch out possible answers. this class does not work in a digital world, its members live in an analogous world of things, images, links, thought landscapes and they move as freely as the owl of minerva. they are content with a pencil. their achievement is to formulate a sentence, not its communicative processing. it can be written by hand. their achievement is finding an idea. it can be captured in sketches. it does not have to be captured in a fair copy of the kind necessary for production. they concern themselves with concepts, programmes, drafts, they check and reject on the basis of evaluations of which a computer is not capable. they operate in a free landscape of questions, openness and outlooks, and they examine problems, cases, possible solutions. a piece of paper and a pencil are sufficient for this. of course they provide feedback for the class of exec-utors, realizers, statisticians, those who prepare and assess production, the people in front of the monitors. but they cannot work to a programme. their advantage and also their destination, their use, is to be free. because without them the computer would run out of programmes. is the new office an image of this two-class society? are there thinkers and doers on the upper level and servants of the service sector, the stokers of the information society, employees of the computer and administrators of automation on the lower level? a cynical picture. but perhaps my office is also a bridge over the gulf that divides the two classes. perhaps there are only a few spiral staircases from the upper level to the lower. but we are all working in the same space. as well as a horizontal structure for the office there is also a vertical one. those on the upper level are dependent on what people do below, they see each other, they talk to each other, vertically as well. and the people below see what the people above are doing. they move up and down. i think that architecture can contribute in its way to healing the diseases of our times. it needs transparency instead of division, association with colleagues rather than isolation. but architecture also has to structure the undifferentiated, structure the unit organization. in architecture consciousness becomes concrete. the condition of the times is demonstrated in built form. my office is a three-dimensional garden with various levels, separate workplaces. the dividing walls have fallen. the various activities take place on various platforms. but the space is an open structure. you can see the people you want to see and hear the people you want to hear. general and public things take place on the lower level. here there are drawing tables, desks, telephones and computers. special things develop on a higher level. here there are ordinary tables, pencils are enough. there are books, everything that you need for thinking.