## DIFFICULTIES FOR ARCHITECTS AND DESIGNERS building and design in the twenties aimed to overcome all style and get back to the matter in hand. at first jugendstil began to replace historicism, particularly neogothic and the neo-renaissance style of the imperial period, with an up-to-date style, then style as such became questionable. adolf loos, otto wagner and josef hoffmann built the first bare-walled buildings in vienna, whereupon the battlecry went up: ornament is a crime! le corbusier applied amédée ozenfant's naked cubist forms to building, and gerrit rietveld followed the principles of the de stijl movement. but it was always formalism. square, circle and triangle were seen as fundamental aesthetic values, whether for lamps, buildings or new typefaces. they were forced into the straitjacket of elementary geometry and were thus supposed to be closest to truth. even constructivism turned out to be style, under closer scrutiny. it was only gradually, through the initiatives of the werkbund and the later bauhaus that functional points of view moved into the foreground. design became more open. a typeface is easier to read if it has oval characters rather than circular ones; it is better for the reflector of a lamp to follow a parabola than a circle. and a building does not have to have a flat roof at any price, simply to look like a cube. the architects and designers of germany, russia and the netherlands in particular turned to the programmes and needs of the workers' movement and attempted to use industrial production methods as an economic advantage for building reasonably priced housing. new materials like steel, sheet metal, plywood or concrete were intended to secure better quality whilst at the same time reducing costs by series production. the image of a new society was seen in relation to a new technical culture, and building and design were related to practical problems and concrete tasks concerned with social change. a building built by an architect in present-day new york in the tradition of constructivism, in imitation of le corbusier for example, no longer has anything to do with this. it would still have a few superficial things in common like a love of right angles and the colour white. today cost is no longer a factor, and so rational production or industrial manufacture are not either. the building is an aesthetic end in itself. you can also live in it. when el lissitzky visited le corbusier's first buildings in paris he was horrified by the luxury that was an essential part of the architect's new building. as a designer of kitchens amongst other things, el lissitzky saw new design as directly related to social programmes, to improving living conditions, overcoming poverty and inequality among human beings, securing the individual living space, application of advantages of industrial production to social progress. design was motivated by the image of a new society, often a utopia. art was no longer necessary because design of the things of everyday life and life itself were intended to achieve a quality that was also aesthetic, as was otherwise customary only in art. the museum was the street, the factory, the house. le corbusier and charlotte perriand designed expensive armchairs in chrome and leather when what was really needed were ordinary chairs. thorstein veblen had exposed aesthetic luxury as part of the class struggle, the most refined weapon in the fight for power and privilege. aesthetics for its own sake he considered to be the most noble representation of power. so from the very beginning modern building and design were split into a new aestheticism and formalism, and a functionally orientated social programme. one group saw circle and square as elementary aesthetic form, the other as the result of industrial means of production. even karl marx had defined rotation (the lathe) and translation (milling, rolling) as form-determining basic movements of technical production. it is not meant that one group built for the rich and the other for the poor. what is meant is that one group stopped at the bourgeois cultural perception of élitist aesthetics and the other group derived their design from industrial production conditions and tasks of a new nature for making a life worthy of human beings possible for everyone. their functionalism was related to production, materials, construction, use, but also to the nature of tasks and social aims. this functionalism was a tangled web of impulses and aims, always connected with the claim of achieving something ultimately valid in aesthetic terms as well. the frankfurt kitchen was another product of this attitude. it was not simply intended for the subjective satisfaction of women, but also applied to their new social role as someone increasingly involved in the business and working world. it was produced not as a marketable range by a kitchen manufacturer, but as a challenge from architects and town planners who were concerned about new forms for city estates and integrating the peripheral groups of the 19th century into society. if one disregards trivial things like rectangular, sharpedged dishes with handles, there are no elements of the kind of art deco used by the middle classes and the nouveau riche in their interiors that express allegiance to a better culture of circles and squares. the functional aesthetic was open and receptive to appliances like the gas oven and the revolving chair. in the thirties this ingenious aesthetic was then able to develop fully after formal games with circles and squares had been dropped from the field of vision for a little while. gerrit rietveld's cubist chair was no longer in evidence, and seating models emerged that from marcel breuer to charles eames brought a breakthrough of real functional and technical understanding, and at the same time an aesthetic that came from the factory and not from an ideology, convincing and yet new, severe and yet natural. there was no need to take this aesthetic back to some sort of formal code. no such code existed. its source was the thinking of engineers, from now on bound into a demand for proportion, order and law. today we live in an affluent society, indeed a society of excess and overproduction. our life instinct is put on the same level as consumer instincts and advertising wishes. this means binding the subject into an economic cosmos whose principle of profit maximization has produced an extreme concentration of power. but power is suspect. and the best way of concealing power is still aesthetics. building and product design are again almost exclusively a question of style and thus also a question of fashion. fashions always emerge when form is arbitrary and does not present the information value of a state of affairs. where it does not represent anything it is interchangeable. nowadays formal concepts of this kind change like the years. architecture in the sense of commitment to its subject matter and for the people who have to use it, as commitment to the correct use, the right application of materials and production methods has become extremely rare. it is part of the declared, rather than the subliminal programme of so-called post-modern architecture to build scenery, dummies and set pieces. no-one talks about kitchens any more. that would be too trivial a thing in a society that represents, rather than presents itself. art is an industry as well, and just as subject to manipulation and speculation as trading in goods. after the war the swedish kitchen was still a kind of up-to-date completion of the frankfurt kitchen. the unit wall became complete, division from the rest of the accommodation was reduced by the serving hatch. sliding doors and roller drawers took account of reduced space. kitchen lights with naked bulbs gave way to the fluorescent tube, which developed further into the concealed working light. current contributions by architects to kitchens are restricted to the occasional kitchen bar, applications of the occasional experience of a hard or long drink in the home area. the best people occasionally have a bar for visitors who enjoy shakes, snacks or drinks. contemporary architecture is no longer interested in solving problems, it wants to create appearances. like programme music, today's architecture intends to express something, to communicate semantic content. this includes all sorts of indications, but none about the building itself, its content, how it came about and the way it was constructed. architecture is not information about the interior of a building, it is correspondence with other architectures like those of schinkel, vitruvius, palladio or le corbusier. the architect does not see himself as the custodian of a building, but as part of architectural history. his building cites architecture, or is a polemic. fin de siècle games were always like this. perhaps it is also true that concern with kitchens has been taken from architects by designers. or even by manufacturers. the latter now have marketing departments and know what the market wants. nevertheless the question of the relationship of the kitchen to the living space, what its status in a modern ground plan would be has remained unanswered until today. on this subject robert vorhoelzer, walther schmidt and hanna löw made the last intelligent statement: they tried to use a glass partition to separate cooking and living. for designers kitchens have become a big thing, for appliance designers as well as system designers. but our designers are in a bad way. technical civilization has so split up the world of work in contrast with the craft age that the person responsible for research does not bother what marketing is doing, and marketing is not responsible for materials or manufacture. the sales person knows nothing about design and and the designer is not familiar with the way in which the businessman builds up his calculations. in bygone days a wheelwright was still responsible for the technical quality of his product, the way it was processed, the materials, its appearance and for organizing the workshop. the designer has become a specialist in form who is the highest court of appeal under the compulsions of the marketplace. he is responsible for the appearance of a kitchen, not for its programme and technical quality. he is there to optimize the market, with others but in his own way, using colour, materials and arrangement. designers have made food processors, coffee machines or bread slicers look good, they have brought refrigerator and oven to the correct working height, they will also solve the problems of ventilation and lighting, which until now have been the poor relations of kitchen development. but where is the designer who could allow himself to question the cutting mechanism in his food processor or the coffee machine as such? the evenly cut pieces of lettuce that come out of our modern kitchens seem not to be standardized goods only to someone who has never yet prepared lettuce for friends, one finely cut, the other torn by hand. or sliced, diced, chopped, grated, a different approach for every kind of vegetable. and anyone who loves coffee above all else and has perhaps learned in the arab world to distinguish what is really good coffee, no longer uses a coffee machine. what should a designer do - criticize appliances that precisely he has brought into the kitchen and made an integral part as the custodian of technical progress? electrical appliances are a blessing. but which is and which isn't is no longer a question of design. if there is reincarnation and everyone has had a previous life, then i was an engine driver in my earlier life. i love machines, i love technology, i see my life as a construction draft. but i do not like technology for its own sake. i don't use pliers to pick flowers. and how many designers are not still dreaming today about a kitchen with a control panel. on a panel choosing the best kitchen design the following criteria are used: – use value (ergonomics, technology), – design quality (function, construction, innovation), – integration into the kitchen ensemble (design coherence, appearance). does this context produce the question of whether it is viable in terms of working psychology that in principle only one person can work in modern kitchens? the working medium and means of leadership of a top manager is conversation. they are rarely seen alone. bricklayers always work in a team, a bricklayer without a labourer and an apprentice is a cripple. where possible people work in groups in the car industry. only kitchens are seen in principle as a one-man business. this has hurt neither architects nor designers. it is only when the question whether a computer kitchen with a fixed seat as a vantage point would be worth aiming for is asked that the thought crops up that occasionally there is more than one person in the kitchen. otherwise the doctrine of the frankfurt kitchen remains untouched. in my interviews with chefs from top restaurants i usually found designless chaos, only large-scale kitchens in factory canteens and hospitals were drawn up according to the requirements of modern design. since then i have seen a link between order and boredom and improvisation and initiative. contemporary kitchens with their design clarity exude an aesthetic of passivity and representation. they are beautiful, but actionless. the aesthetics of action lead to order of a different kind, that of flexibility and mobility. it has the charm and stimulus of chaos: just beware if anything is in the wrong place. order to help initiative and thus improvisation is not a subject for today's design. design is identical with a static aesthetic, with an awe-inspiring appearance that is now appropriate only to art. ## afterword it is certainly possible to think about whether the autonomy of doing things oneself that has been won back in kitchen work possibly releases more freedom than all the great avowals of freedom we bandy about. possibly freedom is nothing large or small. perhaps it is an aggregate condition that comes about through doing - in contrast with speaking of the kind that hovers above the ground - so that freedom begins everywhere where someone begins to touch. there is a lot of talk today about the freedom that an ecological movement is supposed to bring us. i distrust this too. i do not wish to join in with the great chorus of those who preach against waste but have our rubbish taken away by turks as the new slaves of civilization. ecologists are too good to take away the rubbish they have produced themselves, even if it is only part of it. i mistrust people who attack a cynical industry in the name of nature, but unthinkingly help themselves from it where food is concerned. and it is by no means difficult to strike fear into the heart of the food industry: don't buy ready-made soups, cook them yourself. it is the same with the state: everybody grumbles about it and feels that it restricts his freedom. but everyone expects it to look after us. they all come running when it hands out honours, and the intelligentsia crowds around with embarrassing vehemence at places where professorships are handed out. almost nobody is too proud to do without state support and get his own provisions for the winter together. everyone expects that a perfect system, a perfect bureaucracy will set up cribs with food everywhere. if there is one word today that has been worked down to the bone then that word is freedom. so let us not say that even cooking brings a little freedom. let us say that it is fun and can - if done correctly - bring satisfaction to us, our nearest and dearest and our friends.