## APPEARANCE if a business develops a product or can offer a service, in the end a designer is called in to make the thing more beautiful. in one case he may be a product designer, in another perhaps a graphic designer. let us call this an additive design. it has something to do with arranging clothes. animals are always dressed. human beings are naked and add working clothes, leisure clothes or evening dress. in a similar way entire businesses have started acquiring clothes. a cigarette manufacturer buys a symphony orchestra, a bank acquires a collection of modern painting, a car manufacturer runs an art gallery. the mantle of culture that one adopts has advantages. it is attractive to the outside and it covers up on the inside. it remains to be seen whether this is questionable, reprehensible or useful (probably it is all three). it is different in the case of companies like ERCO or braun. there design is part of the purpose of the enterprise. the product would not be what it is if it had not been seen as a design object from the outset. design is a drafting principle and its demands, criteria and methods determine the product as a whole, not just its surface. since the renaissance we have considered the world predominantly in terms of perspective, as a phenomenon. in doing this we have lost the thing itself to some extent. when an architect designs a building he has to draw geometrically, not in perspective. he has to catch the structure, articulation and construction of his building. in the last resort appearance is something that comes out, that emerges. it is a result, and has perspective only as a result. there is such a thing as surface design, cosmetic beautification, and perhaps design is more and more interpreted in this way. at ERCO design goes into the product, use and aesthetics are developmental criteria alongside technology and usefulness from the beginning. they are not dealing just with the product itself. any work is at the same time a general test of whether one is on the right lines overall and whether technology or design should not be further developed as a whole. one sees oneself as a workshop in a world-wide cultural, technical and economic context. any business that is design conscious in this way, and aware that design is more than a pretty dress, and at the same time also aware that its own design is an element in general design development, profits from it and gives it impetus, a company of this kind also has its own perception of what is known as visual appearance, its corporate identity. it is not just the visual image of the entire company in the sense of a suit, it is an attitude, just as reagan and gorbachev show a different attitude whatever they are wearing. character and personality have a visual appearance as well. and additionally, the visual appearance of ERCO is an object of reflection. it is related to similar efforts elsewhere, and it is related to the question of what a company is at all today. one can ask oneself: mustn't businesses today think an ecological size bigger, just as they once had to learn to grow a social dimension bigger? in the same spirit one can also ask: is the company of today not dependent on a culture of self-presentation, emerging from itself? companies originally saw themselves as “mercantile” enterprises. they have grown into a social balance. today they have to expand by adding the horizon of ecological morality. will they not have in principle to develop further to be companies with their own culture of what they do and how they appear? corporate identity is booming. in fact, everything that is has shape, and why shouldn't institutions as well have a face. as early as the fifties there was a wave of concern about outward appearance and outward manner in the name of image and imagemaking, but this was more from the point of view of cosmetics and tailoring, conscious style-making and finery. “image” soon adopted the negative connotation of cultivating a trendy appearance. and when even politicians talk about how they should do more for their “image”, and when financial institutions expect a colleague's appearance to be appropriate to the concern and not so much to the person, there is not much to it. in fact, everything that is has its shape, its gestalt. even something as amorphous as the wind is revealed as an artful current when you see its cloud picture in the satellite photographs that are daily put before our eyes. even something as intangible as feelings develop their own gestalt. you can see whether someone is griefstricken or contented. unlike aristotle, who distinguished a thing's substance, which is essential, from its accidence, which is casual and external, we have to see the external as a picture of the internal. in reality there is no outside and no inside. you can tell from any child's face whether it is lying or telling the truth. usually the first impression of a person is the clearest as far as assessing character, attitude and nature are concerned. shape is no longer to be seen as external appearance, but as a picture of the whole. daisies and sunflowers are what they are, in their picture. bull and cow reveal their nature in their appearance. man and woman are also in essence as they appear. if we leave aside the fact of camouflage or mimicry in nature, where it is a matter of making oneself invisible to an enemy by adapting oneself to one's surroundings in colour and shape, man is the only creature who is given the opportunity to give himself an artificial shape, in analogy with his ability to make tools and project an enlarged personality into his surroundings by means of artefacts. he not only shapes his tools, his prostheses, his extensions, but also himself. shape is not just picture and outline, shape is also, in the dimension of time, manner, gesture, behaviour. one looks like one is and one acts as one is. this relationship is so close that the converse is also true: people take on the character of their manner and become the picture that they make of themselves. you can even adopt model pictures. but they are not so much a likeness, a mere appearance for behaviour worthy of imitation, but a guiding principle for orientation, attitude and character. model pictures are the first orientation towards finding oneself. people are as they show themselves and as they show themselves so are they. the visual image is not just external, although it is seen as such by many according to classical philosophy. it is the actual thing. one cannot exist without showing oneself and as one shows oneself so one is. this makes the question of the visual image first and foremost a philosophical and moral problem. it does not lead first to the problem of clothing, of fashion, of manner. it leads to the question of existence. who am i? this is the crucial question of self-presentation. thus we are dealing with three phenomena – there is appearance, gestalt as a presentation form of character, thing, content, appearance and thing are identical. – there is a conscious shaping and change of this basic gestalt in the sense of mimicry, of diving down into environment and surroundings. shape is extinguished. – conversely there is accentuation of appearance in the sense of introducing symbols, of seeking to be striking and attract attention. this is served by such established institutions as fashion or advertising. the problem arises questionable when point three starts to become independent and no longer relates to point one, when shape as symbol starts to move away from shape as thing. in a world of perspectives and views, of surfaces and façades, of manner and show this almost becomes the rule. world theatre becomes the theatre world. in the fifties, not altogether stupidly, after bad experiences with the concept “image”, we introduced the concepts “visual appearance” and “projected appearance” as a pair of concepts to be allotted. anyone talking about his visual appearance should also talk about projected appearance. projected appearance is the image of how one would like to look oneself. visual appearance is the visible form of projected appearance, its concretization in gestures, behaviour, attitudes, profiles, lines, styles, in colours and figures, in actions and achievements, in products and objects. projected appearance helps people to come to terms with themselves, today people would say that they had found their identity, were at one with themselves. the basic problem of morality. the visual appearance is the shaping and development of this coincidence. the aicher office, which has existed since 1946, was probably the first german graphic design office to concern itself with visual communication in the sense of visual appearance. instead of offering elaborate advertising, it attempted to derive aesthetic qualities from the fact of communication, and to create for the subject that wanted to communicate itself those semiotic elements that lead to its presentation, to its self-presentation. the aicher office is an office that sees advertising not as an aesthetic business, but as part of a company's selfprojection. this can thus be only part of a comprehensive visual appearance for a firm or an institution. originally the office produced advertising like any other advertising agency. this meant attractive, interesting, effective advertisements with the aid of particular attention values. certainly this is a craft in its own right requiring special creative abilities, but unfortunately it is usually a matter of self-extolment, which certainly isn't too keen to test itself against credibility. advertising is usually brought in from a distance and often talks past the thing to which it is referring instead of addressing it directly. how is credible advertising to be achieved? by seeing advertising as part of a firm's self-presentation. in this way the idea of the visual appearance of a firm became our actual field of work. distinctive visual appearance has the advantage of making a very strong effect outwards without having to resort to verbal selfextolment. we had found a new field of work alongside advertising and graphics, even though we had no concepts for it at first. the visual appearance of the firm of max braun is still a classic today. they produced their first new radios, kitchen appliances and electrical appliances in 1954. with the exception of the industrial design element, the design of the appliances themselves, the aicher office controlled all the visual elements, which of course meant that individual elements of the appliances also had to be defined, like colours, instructions for use, labelling, position and look of the company mark. in addition it was a question of choosing and specifying the use of typefaces and colours, typographical guidelines, design of printed matter, definition of pictorial communication, exhibitions and exhibition systems, displays and display windows, appearance in the press and in public. the image of this firm has remained substantially the same until today, of course shaped above all by the design of the appliances, which came into being in correspondence and agreement with the graphic design and was based on the same principles. this was largely mental work. it was conducted in intensive and permanent discussion with the company, design management and the designers. in the course of this the company men crept into the philosophy of the designers and the designers into the philosophy of the company. the outside came from the inside and the inside from the outside. as philosophy was applied to the product, making became philosophy and philosophy became making. both an image and an attitude emerged. this is manifest in the friendships between those involved, which have lasted until today. the success of the enterprise has now long rested on other shoulders. our task was to create a platform. design is company philosophy made concrete. it shows the company not as capital, possession or labour, but through its products and services. so far it has been said of a firm's products that on the one hand they have a technical function that determines their performance, and on the other hand a formal function that determines their appearance. this is wrong thinking. just as human beings no longer allow themselves to be divided up into soul, body and mind, the technical element as such is always also an appearance form, a dimension of the technical element. design puts the technical and economic philosophy of a firm into the picture, and the visual image of the firm at the same time becomes its character, determines its mentality. the designer is the philosopher of the company, who, however this may be, brings about its perceptible appearance. this is certainly something different from what we understand by corporate identity today. critically formulated, corporate identity is looking for useful application of aesthetic fashions and current trends in the interest of market advantage. people also wish to make use of the zeitgeist subservient to economy and harness it to achieve the aims of the business. but the zeitgeist is external. what would have to be made visible is what is inside, in the company itself. now every firm is there to achieve economic goals. turn of the century economists, like werner sombart, for example, called this aim maximization of profit. this can definitely still stand. the question is only how and to what end does one achieve this maximization of profit? and then design is immediately at the centre of entrepreneurial decisions and discussions. another key project of mine was the visual image of the german airline lufthansa in the late fifties. in this case the design process was not conducted in the boardroom. the firm was too big for that and subject to the traditional system of division of labour. it was not joint intellectual and speculative work as it had been with braun. the board ordered, decided and had things carried out. this showed in the result as well. this did turn out well and essentially still exists today, but it was not the best it could have been, although they established an outstanding design department of their own. the board's decisions were, as board decisions tend to be, outside its own competence and dependent on the inclinations and whims of the board members. this actually means that original design, original visual appearance can only be developed to full maturity in small and middle-sized firms, even though individual board members may have more competence. this is a structural problem. businesses can be run to plan like a railway or public services. other businesses have a digital decision-making structure. they live on figures and manage on figures. there are figures as data and figures as guidelines. the consequence is that qualities are also expressed in quantities. the quality of an enterprise shows in figures on growth, turnover, profit. the performance of an employee is indicated by his salary grade, or the salary grade is an assessment of his performance, whether this is right or not. The quality of a product is determined by its sales, whether this is true or not. this digitial system is the currently accepted economic management system used by large firms. the introduction of computers and the introduction of mathematical models into the economy should have led to certain prognostication of economic processes, as was initially believed. it was a disappointment. economic management too is an analogous process, a process of assessment. decisions are not made on the basis of logical conclusions, of rational compulsions and deterministic calculation, but by assessing positions. decisions do not mature in a linear fashion, but by considering a field, in comparing the most different magnitudes that perhaps cannot all be reconciled. relationships and references are drawn, links recognized, and a balanced, not a financially balanced, judgement has to be made. we have all once believed in logic, but had to learn that it is use that releases useful insights. this was also brought home to us by the branch of science known as cybernetics. cybernetics is a science of control, not of planning. perceptions ripen in the closed loop of cybernetics. in middle-sized and small businesses there is no bureaucracy in the real sense. bureaucracy is the institution of digital economic management. analogue management is based on perception, on assessing states of affairs as complex situations on one's own authority. only the analoguous way of looking at things is comprehensive and diverse enough to understand and evaluate complex situations. lufthansa was too big to make design an in-house object. they bought it in, and also made decisions in the way you make decisions about things you have bought in. nevertheless the result was acceptable. as far as its visual appearance was concerned the company was in a dreadful state, on the level of homemade utility graphics. the aircraft was more like a vehicle for advertising and in visual terms was dressed like a fairground salesman. our idea was to make the aircraft itself as a technical apparatus and its technical appearance the object of a company presentation. we used only lufthansa'a two house colours, eliminated all decorative colours, ornamental lines and emblems. instead of a combination of lettering and a trade mark we found the lettering, the logogram, was enough. the sign was not to be used, but the board did not support this. the blue appeared in a technically orientated band that held the aircraft's row of windows together. the whole tail unit was yellow. this opportunity to establish an unambiguous colour specific to the company at airports was also not taken. they ended up with a blue tail with the yellow sign, the “fried egg” was born, and this is still an embarrassment today. our notion that confidence in an airline should come first of all from the aircraft and the projection of technical competence, which would also have contained a clear marking of the services and the organization, was only accepted to a limited extent. how long does visual appearance of this kind survive? the braun appearance is still in place today after almost three decades. lufthansa's also still exists. as in this case no unambiguous concept had been reached and we had been subjected to whims over the matter of decision, competitors reached our own standard and even exceeded it. in the late seventies we made suggestions for a modification of the overall concept. it would have been possible to take just a few measures to freshen up the visual appearance and to make the company younger and more competent. we returned to the initial philosophy. later i read extracts from this philosophy in the press as statements by a new company chairman who found a change in the previous visual appearance acceptable to identify new activities. new brooms sweep clean, and so he got himself a new design team. corporate identity businesses sprang up like mushrooms in the seventies. advertising agencies found a new sphere of activity here and approached our concept that advertising could only be one aspect of a comprehensive representational and visual appearance for a company. economic journalists, who like dealing with art and aesthetics, spun the subject out and everywhere people were talking about corporate identity, company culture and corporate design. but this was perceived as a kind of accoutrement, like a visit to a couturier or a hairdressing firm, that also provides toupees. the whole thing degenerated into cosmetics, encouraged by a new design concept that saw form as a decorative addition according to the spirit and taste of the times. the product was intended to be a symbol of the times. but what are the times? lufthansa too was to have a new costume. a kind of canary was born. there was a rebellion, the whole thing was called off. nothing became of the freshening up project. what now remains is a lack of concept, and the company is losing its profile, as can be seen. this too is a pointer, and this is why the example is being named, that visual appearance needs a content concept, its own concept of the firm's philosophy, the development of a projected image. being measured for a new suit doesn't make you a better person. for this reason we once refused to design a new visual appearance for BMW, because here the product philosophy of the super-fast, super-powerful car, the sofa as a rocket, would have been in the way. for this we would have had to have thought of something just as pubertal and trendy, but it wouldn't have fitted in with the realities of today's traffic. divergencies showed in preliminary thinking about the car of the next decade. additionally the car is an object of worship that also needs a kind of altar design. these are a few cases. it would be possible to say something in principle about every design that we have developed over the years, which may make it clear that the visual appearance of a company in all its recognizable forms is more than beautification or involvement in current cultural trends. it is never possible to superimpose visual appearance, it has to be developed from the thing itself. we gave a publishing house clear and effective design and layout in this way by thinking intensively about what typography is today. in some cases investigations of this kind have taken on the scale of books, some of which were even published. there was a book about cars, one about cooking and one about typography. we have been working for ERCO for over a decade. in our own judgement the result reflects the fact that it too is a middle-sized company, a family firm with a management for whom design and form have even become the crucial economic motivation. the company earns its money with its immense activities for design and uses design not as decoration and an attractive covering. the form of the products is identical with their technical function. or is intended to become so. there is no end to this if high standards of making form and technology identical are set. the company and its circle of partners is so manageable that it is possible to hold a conversation where otherwise instructions are issued. the classic allocation of authority is abolished. entrepeneurs, engineers, product designers, architects and graphic designers sit down at the same table, this is not to be understood in terms of simultaneity, although the circle often is quite large, but in the sense of inner involvement. every subject affects everybody, even if responsibilities are different. the crucial thing is not departmental authority, but better arguments, better suggestions, better reasons. the highest court of appeal, taken quite literally, the highest institution in the entire factory complex, only to be reached by a flight of winding stairs, is a round table. this round table is older than the one invented by the poles. not even the entrepreneur has status authority, he owes his position to his argument and his ability to evaluate. it corresponds with the passion with which he approaches the matter in hand. i know german industry, its managers. there are worlds of difference in the kinds of leadership one finds. for me, as far as the result of my work and my working methods are concerned, the key is that i am only as good as my partners. the munich olympics would never have been what they were, despite terrorist activity and blood baths, if there had not been an extraordinary president of the organizing committee. i never expected him to tell me what means would be available for our use. that was our affair. but we defined what the aim of the whole thing was in constant dialogue, going to the stage of formulating concepts and theses about what general intentions should be developed, what projected image was to be striven for and what experience content we should communicate. sporting facts, said willi daume, are soon forgotten. the experience is what counts. expressed in my philosophy: the olympic games are an analoguous, not a digital event. you take away with you what you see and what is determined by your own evaluation, the form of the experience. the figures you forget. we quoted ludwig wittgenstein and william of ockham to make it clear that reality is a communicative achievement. it is no longer valid to say: here is reality, here are things, here is technology and there are words, images merely as copy-images. things exist, and are there in their appearance itself. thus choosing colours for this colourful event was not a question of taste or following a trend, but a question of argument. we could say precisely why the colour range should look like this and no different. we had developed a philosophy. translating this into concrete designs was a thing in itself, but it was not thinkable without a comprehensive working hypothesis and a comprehensive programme. but here too it is true that: huge though the event was, the team that realized it was very small. it was a manageable enterprise, somewhat patched together and perhaps not as closely knit as in a company like ERCO. klaus jürgen maack was asked what he thought about corporate identity. not a lot, nothing, he said. and he knows what he is talking about. he doesn't say it critically because he has objections to dressing-up methods, but from the experience of an approach that has been put into practice. in the case of an enterprise in which there is so much thinking and considering, sketching, developing and rejecting, i ask what colour could stand for this enterprise. and i ask my colleagues in discussion if they dream in colour or in black and white, whether they think in colour or black and white. the nature of light also leads me to a contrast of black and white, of light source and shade, of bright and dark. in the colour climate of the enterprise we agree on a scale of grey, between black and white. this too, although white light is the source of all colours we perceive, through the refraction of rays of light. occasionally we also allow colour to carry some weight. in another case, where we had also agreed on a grey series, for an insurance company, we cut out colour altogether, not even colour photography was used which in the case of the olympic games for instance was the only form of pictorial representation we permitted, something absolutely new, and not just that, but highly demanding. since then all tourist office prospectuses have been in colour. meanwhile we enjoy the clear winter landscape and intelligence landscape of science and technology. intelligence and morality are colourless. i have invented a few colours in my lifetime. of course i did not invent them as such. all the colours that we see are there. but we see only those colours that we have in our consciousness, that we can name. we see only that which we know and can name communicatively as an object of information. the colour turquoise has existed only since the empire. it was not known in the middle ages, even though matthias grünewald almost achieved turquoise in the halo of the risen christ. in the field of grey we have invented two colours. one went into the language of colour as greige, and is used in department stores for things like describing the colour of women's stockings. it is a mixture of grey and sand colour. there are countless colour shades in the field of grey, more than among the bright colours. you can get enthusiastic about it, and you do not have to be afraid of disrespectful bleak and dreary grey. the other grey is called vlau. the word has not yet become established. i am certain that it will come, as this colour is the most exciting colour in the late twentieth century. recently i wanted to see a high-rise office block in tokyo in this colour. but the american firm supplying the cladding could not manufacture it. both these shades of grey played a part in the visual image of ERCO. the company sees light and lighting in strict relation to modern architecture, to the lighting of spaces in general. this was originally an architecture of classical modernism from mies van der rohe down to harry seidler, who is still working, or the representatives of a formal, geometrical design concept. mies van der rohe was very interested in radiation from his architecture, at night as well. he did not simply install light, but had walls or floors illuminated as light areas. a shade of brown was appropriate to his world of travertine and bronze, in the seagram building for example. in the early stages of our work with ERCO we preferred a brownish grey, our greige. this was used in places where we needed a general background for pictorial accounts, for photographs or drawings of products. this grey has died out in the meantime. perhaps this has struck noone outside. but we are entirely convinced that this would be the wrong colour for a firm like ERCO today. architecture, if one ignores its occasional fashionable appearances when everything is pink or sky-blue, is nowadays much more speculative, constructive, technical, rational, functional than the art architecture of simplicity and aesthetic reduction of circle, square and triangle. piet mondrian is no longer a stimulus for architecture. it is more likely to be a crane, a suspension bridge, an engine. today architecture, at least we hope, is thought out, designed, constructed, not felt first, or related to historical aesthetic models. this means that we have to alter our scale of grey, from greige to vlau, from feeling to thinking. vlau is a combination of violet and grey. blue and violet are a spiritual realm. the sky is blue. twilight is blueish like longing and dreams in perspective, beethoven writes music in full colour, mozart in tones, and often in a grey-blue mood. the grey we mean is not neutral. it is electrified. so now ERCO has a different scale of grey, arising from an effort to bring form and process into line. the firm has changed. the relationship of light and architecture is different. architecture exists at night and during the day through light. there is no dark architecture. what light and what lamps does contemporary architecture need? that is a problem that ultimately leads to the decision that we now have to use vlau rather than greige. and it is by no means out of the question that in looking for an adequate correspondence of wanting and obligation we will invent a new grey. for the time being we are content with vlau and see our attitude confirmed over a large area. in a similar way we are constantly thinking about everything. the logogram is a simple aesthetic phenomenon. a simple response to a major, complex demand. we wanted to translate light into typography. and to a certain extent in real terms, not symbolically. a symbolic solution would have been to look for something representing a kind of light source, a lamp, the sun, as many people do who have to find an image for a lighting firm. no, we wanted light as a structure, and we wanted light in its manifestation as typography, in the sequence of letters. we wanted to recreate the medium in its communicative form, light as a typeface. in specialist jargon one would say: we were looking for a syntactic, not a semantic solution. syntactic means looking for structural affinity rather than a symbolic pictorial comparison dragged in by the scruff of its neck. neither dürer's praying hands nor heaven-storming gothic architecture is a symbol of religion. kierkegaard would have been more likely to choose a symbol of loneliness. we think that the ERCO logo is a clear statement. we can see no reason to question it, simple though it is. in design one should not be afraid of the simplest solutions, if they fit the bill. only ornament and decoration are excessive. the most important example of an emblem for graphic designers is the red dot on a white field that is the sign for japan, there is nothing to be taken away, nothing to be added, even though it could not possibly be simpler. here we are moving in the realm of signs and sign functions. but language does not consist of words, but of sentences, the proposition is the smallest unit of thought. you have to put together a correlation of at least two elements to be able to make a statement, a single word is dumb. the world consists of states of affairs, they are represented in propositions, in sentences. and a company does not just wish to show itself, it wants to speak. it wants to articulate itself. above all, if it does not just sell products that exist as such, but products that do something, achieve something, are used as part of processes, have dynamic status. if one is trying to provide space for a company that wants to put itself over, to articulate itself, then it is not enough to make only words available, only to develop signs. one has to create a linguistic form, the visual and verbal language of the company. and it is also not enough for verbal expression to think only about proper language. in the field of visual language we are moving in undiscovered territories. what is the sign language of a company like? here we feel like adam in paradise, giving names to things. the company provides information about products, about their use, their components, their equipment, their effect, about the reliability of their effect, about expense and use, about application limitations, about side effects, about consumption of energy and ultimately about price and cost. ## how does one say that? thinking about this leads to an independent corporate language. it is as individual and autonomous as aramaic compared to turkish. fortunately, visual languages are more internationally comprehensible than verbal languages, which means that images gain priority over words, in complete contrast with our modern information culture. this language presents itself in different media. ERCO even has a house magazine that appears periodically. this language presents itself in various layouts. the layout for a report is different from that of a catalogue, and this language presents itself in a certain kind of photography, a certain philosophy of pictorial representation. only a limited number of photographers have access to the company. four criteria for the selection of photographs: – it should not be possible to tell that a photograph is posed, structured or manipulated. it can only be credible if the photographer withdraws from the picture. – a photograph should not try to be a work of art, and so not appear as an end in itself. what counts is the approach to the matter to be presented. – a photograph may not alienate. photography is communication. it must make itself precise, by capturing the moment. – a photograph is a representation of states of affairs. it must show a thing in its behaviour. it must catch processes, procedures, developments, evolution. these premises do not sound particularly demanding. however there are only a few photographers who meet them. making something that should be taken completely for granted is here again turned into art. in this way our world has taken on such remarkable traits that it becomes difficult to get hold of a good bottle of wine or good black bread. or a good picture. most photographs are forced, ambitious, show off, strike attitudes, make themselves beautiful. developing a visual language is a complex process, and discussion about it has not yet been concluded within the firm. we are fairly sure how statements about a particular product have to look, but we are open in the question of how a product should appear in advertising, in public. opinions differ. but insights develop from the articulation of various points of view and assessments. and this is not a struggle for position, it is a discussion about questions to which there is not yet an answer. a company can be in the front line of cultural development as well, for instance as far as the question of the visual languages to be developed in order to convey what cannot be said in words is concerned. the main thing is to avoid false overtones. the man responsible for visual langage at ERCO is from the ruhr, and can tell when any of his mates is pushing, showing off or shooting a line. our office has provenly done a great deal to develop new visual languages. the pictograms at frankfurt airport and for the olympic games have become an international sign language that is now taken for granted. a few decades ago it did not exist. information had to be acquired mainly through reading. these can only be indications of the terrain into which one is moving if a company is trying to agree on what should happen and how it might look, what has to be said and the question of how it comes over. but the visual appearance of a company cannot avoid the question of the internal impression it makes. usually all that people look at is the external impression. perhaps nobody will believe it, but it is a fact: all ERCO's machine tools have been or are being repainted. a new world of work has come into being. away from the factory and moving towards the laboratory. away from force, on towards intelligence. the company does not provide striking solutions for light sources, beautiful lamps, something like technical suns or technical monstrances, but intelligent solutions for lighting requirements. and so the employees have to work in an environment of intelligent stimulation as well. ERCO's workrooms no longer belong to the old factory, not even to the beautifully colourful one in which people were said to like working so much. this also leads to the question of harmony of architecture, the firm's own buildings, with company culture. the ERCO factories date from various periods and company concepts. every time a new building was needed the question recurred: what should it look like? of course you can call in an architect and ask him to provide his own best solution, analogous with his reputation and methods, to capture the spirit of the age. this will not do for ERCO. the question is: what appearance is appropriate to the company culture at this moment, what appearance is appropriate to the design concept, the communication culture? architecture is part of visual appearance. and so the most diverse people discuss criteria for appropriate selfrepresentation in buildings at the round table at the highest point of the company, possible architects are selected, they are asked to present their thoughts and they are confronted with the programme for both the building task and the appearance of the building. the chairman formulates some premises, explains the expected attitude. in the most recent case he thought of the formulation that his building should be an “overall for a technical centre”. this is an attractive and appealing formulation from the company's point of view, which is even suitable to fertilize contemporary architectural theory, which has more to do with suits and pin-stripes. in the mean time, with building work concluded, the architect too has become a friend of the family, not just the receiver of the commission to whom the company has said thank you. he has been seen as someone who thinks with them, thinks in terms of company scale: what architecture is appropriate to the status of the firm? conventional consideration of the concept of corporate identity would now ask about graphic elements like lettering and typography. this can be ignored here, as even a typeface is not the application of the latest fashion. it is a considerable subject in its own right for thought outside matters of design fashion. in the mean time the problem has been so thoroughly worked over that new typefaces have been developed because type as well could be a manifestation of an advanced design position. this is in flux. perhaps ERCO will appear with a new house typeface tomorrow. design is the life procedure of a company if intentions are to be concretized into facts and phenomena. intentions are to become appearance. this needs technical provision, but also the form in which this will appear. design is the substance of the company alongside the bare economy of numbers. it is not a little coat. it is the centre of company culture, of innovative and creative concern with the purpose of the company. the workshop in which this is achieved is also the medium from which company philosophy grows. it was a bold stroke to arrive at the formula: “we don't make lamps, we make better light”. this means that if so far lighting firms have made beautiful lamps, from the chandelier to the tulip lamp or spots styled in a modern way à la hollein or sottsass, ERCO claims to manufacture lamps that fulfil lighting tasks, not just as a made up technical product but in terms of a technical aspiration that would not even have to be afraid of the emperor of japan's reception room. better light, not lamps. or lamps for better light. that is a company concept. it would also be, appropriately reformulated, a concept for industrial production overall. it is not the product that counts, it is its performance, its development, its use. and the product should not be an end in itself in terms of appearance, but the picture of its task. finding this is a piece of culture. the modern designer's dream is to make a car. but are cars thought of as objects that evolve from their purpose? as elements in a traffic system? they are still highly-styled prestige demonstrations that are evaluated outside their function in the present traffic network. they are dreams. their appearance is not the appearance of their self, because this would be the appearance of their task. they are symbols. to hell with symbols. back to things. the word symbol may be eradicated from our vocabulary. art may turn to the symbol. a more humane world with the range of intelligence that we have to offer has to abide with the things.