## GRAPHIC DESIGNERS' SPACE TO BE THEMSELVES graphic design is one of the last free professions that is not forced into the corset of a career structure and thus inhibited by standards and guidelines. there is no career structure upon which the state could accompany designers with examinations and checks, and of course also with certificates and prizes, with awards and titles. a graphic designer is a graphic designer. he is what he can. even for architects this is different. an architect does not just want to build well, he wants to become chief architect, district architect, government architect or professor. and he can only achieve that if the state says how architecture is to be seen as a profession. today the profession of architect as such is protected, only those bearing the title architect are permitted to build. and this title is bestowed by the state. twenty years ago anyone could build his house himself. he had to prove that it complied with building regulations and wouldn't fall down. at that time i was allowed to draw the rotis buildings myself. the district master builder approved them without any fuss. recently, when i had to enlarge one of the buildings, in the same style as the one in which they are built, i had to use an architect and the planning application went through town and district to government level. the whole thing was turned down, went through all the levels of appeal again and was finally passed, having taken a year in the process. graphic designers are graphic designers as a result of their abilities. graphic designers have no titles, just as writers or rock-stars don't. there are no junior writers and chief writers, no doctors of writing, and a professor of writing is, at least so far, preposterous. the converse is more like the case: anyone who wanted to quote any title, on a letter-head, a business card, the title page of a book or a front door would not be taken seriously. he would be suspected of needing to put rank before ability. even thomas mann, who paid some heed to rank and name, just had plain thomas mann on his front door. classification of a writer by the state still seems to us to be a mockery of cultural freedom. a writer with a state title would be a ridiculous figure. but let us be careful: the state has already reached the point of influencing the classification of literature, with honorific titles as a first step. and there could be the one or the other writer who would allow himself to be declared chief or government writer within the framework of state hierarchization in the form of a career structure, because then all his financial problems would be solved. he could become a civil servant. in music the interconnection of profession and state is very much closer than in architecture. who is still a freelance musician? the piano teacher round the corner, just. why should this be out of the question in literature? there would then be salary scales that could be calculated accurately, as for district architects, city architects and government architects or professors. why must writers, the minister of culture would say, write on the minimum necessary for existence, driving themselves to the verge of suicide like rilke, musil or trakl? in the mean time it has gradually become a custom that authors no longer print just their names in their books, but their titles as well, friedrich schiller was professor of history, but he would have made himself a laughing stock if he had presented his maria stuart under the name of “professor friedrich schiller”. he would not even have been able to permit himself a hint at an academic teaching activity without arousing the suspicion that as a free-lance poet he was in someone's service as well, (which he really was, look at his development from die räuber to wallenstein.) painters as well, artist painters, as far as their letterheads are concerned, no longer present themselves by name, but under their full title. but what would professor michelangelo or professor picasso mean for us. le corbusier refused the title of professor because he must have sensed that his antiacademic architecture, his architecture of free personal design would thus have had the blessing of officialdom and would have become second rate, in fact academic. in these fields titles reduce the dignity of autonomous making and the independence of creative drives. certainly it is not a particular merit of graphic designers if they do not yet have a career structure made official by the state and so do not have certificates and titles. probably they have simply been forgotten so far. and a lot of people are already working on changing things. another reason to drink deeply of the freedom one is given if one works only in one's own name. however, it is not just a question of cultural dignity, namely to do his work as a free, independent, non-dependent, non-organized person without ties, following only his own criteria of thinking and feeling, it is also a question of efficiency. my doctor, to whom i have been loyal for many years, recently made a bitter complaint about the undermining of his profession. he is a respected man in a hospital. formerly, he said, he had been able to devote himself entirely to his patients. he was able to see illness as a problem for people, of individual fates. today half of his professional life is taken up with proving that he is measuring up to standards and guidelines, he is a slave to a constant flow of new directives and has perpetually to be reading his way into the language of new forms. as a respected doctor he has to permit employees of a medical insurance scheme to tell him that he has to fill some forms in again because he hadn't done it correctly. my profession is dead, he says. i have advised none of my children to become a doctor. medicine has become a perfect system of standards and conditions, performance and assessment, transformations and translations, a supermachine in which the doctor, who was once the crown of medicine, is only a very small cog. certainly he still has some latitude, but that is used for conforming, not for creativity, initiative and problem solving. this says two things. one is that, seen quite superficially, one has less time for the thing for which one is there. and the second is that the quality of the actual work has changed. one is no longer a free doctor, but someone who is observed, about whom checks are made. and this is not a phenomenon only in the state health service, it is not very different in the universities, and anyone who knows his way around largescale, centrally managed commercial organizations can tell you a thing or two about where bureaucracy can lead. graphic designers are still free. they live in the free air of real ability. the stimulus of their work comes from what they do themselves. even a master painter, a decorator has training standards, is obliged to prove performance, has to document the stages of his professional development with examinations and official proofs of performance, which incidentally necessarily makes the examiners appointed as organs of state administration seem far more important than the decorator himself. it is possible that the painting trade would flourish of its own accord, without organs of state supervision. in the mean time pretty well everyone can paper or paint his own room. but where would that leave the officials? where would be the claim of the modern state to order everything by regulation, down to our awareness of history? graphic designers are still not hemmed in by forms, books of standards, job descriptions and the appropriate regulatory personnel. at the moment they do not have to belong to a professional organization, not yet. anyone can call himself a graphic designer. our profession is open to anyone. this is almost an uplifting feeling. where can you still find that? but the state already wants to know if you are a qualified graphic designer if for instance you try to get yourself classified as a free lance for tax purposes. and this is where the problems start. the state does not believe that you are a graphic designer if you say yourself that you are. it goes without saying that it has no idea what a graphic designer is and also does not want to have an idea. it could only believe it if you had passed an official examination or can produce some official confirmation. if you present the official with books in which people write about your work as a graphic designer they do not accept that. the state does not want to understand, it wants to be correct in evaluating its regulations. and where there are no regulations you cannot form a judgement about the way they have been interpreted. fortunately the state too has recently also appointed professors who teach what graphic design might possibly be. when they pronounce a judgement for an authority it is just accepted, usually in association with the remark that this is more or less a subjective judgement. so where is the state-attested career structure? and indeed not only the state has an interest in there at last being guidelines for graphic designers as well. even professional organizations and associations promise themselves enhanced value if they are allowed a say who is and who isn't a graphic designer. and of course there would then be professional ranks and professional titles to satisfy that most human of weaknesses that no-one could possibly condemn, and that is vanity. and then, after a system of this kind has been introduced, it will be possible, like government architects, to rest more or less from a certain stage, because you don't have to keep on having ideas as you reach a ripe old age. but, at the moment anyway, you don't even need to have been at a state school as a graphic designer. a graphic designer is someone who can translate the world and what happens in it into signs and pictures, who can make visible what is not visible. this is a high cultural activity. it is possible to assess its status if you follow how ludwig wittgenstein for instance placed the distinction between “sagen” (say) and “zeigen” (show) at the centre of his philosophy. The word “zeigen” contains the word “zeichen” (sign). and graphic designers are concerned in a concrete way with the difference between saying and showing, between digital and analoguous information. is it not a wonderful state of affairs that, in order to work at the centre of modern cultural problems you do not even have to have attended a state college? what can one say, what can one show? in rotis there are graphic designers who have enjoyed graphic training in a college, alongside those who have learned only writing and arithmetic we also know that schools can be a great help. but not necessarily. on the contrary: they can also destroy. being a graphic designer is indeed a rare privilege. who is still as free and has so few ties that he can develop the whole of his profession out of himself? in order to reach this right royal condition one must of course not step into the traps that the state has laid in order to make this profession as well conform with its official guidelines. we are hurrying with rapid steps into a new form of the total state, which regulates the entire lives of its citizens like a deus ex machina. it is this kind of leadership that is made possible by computer technology, total intelligibility of the world around us from a centre. the paths to this state are not called compulsion and dominance, but title and income. the traps that are set for all who can still take off under their own steam, are delicate, but effective. who wants to withdraw from state honours? the state distributes honours, professorships, honorary doctorates. who would want to see that as a trap? who would not like to be a professor? the sociology of honours is not always seen through. the joy of public recognition, satisfaction of vanity are so dominant that one can hardly spare a glance for real intentions and the mechanism of effects. why does the state need heroes? because otherwise it can no longer fight wars. an individual soldier gains nothing if his country conquers new territory. he goes home after the war, does his work. war as such gives him nothing. but if he brings home a decoration… but how do you make heroes? by giving them honours. but how? with a decoration, a little piece of secular tin, with a certificate, a handshake, above all with a public citation, with promotions and titles. all things that don't cost anything. many a soldier has behaved bravely without consideration of his life, sacrificed himself for his comrades and his unit. but he only remains in the best memory of those who know his story if he is accepted into the circle of those who allot a higher meaning to war, into the circle of heroes of the fatherland. the honour and dignity arising from it are something of the highest that a person can acquire, the ceremonial expenditure is nothing. it costs the state nothing to make heroes, but it gains the readiness of others to become heroes as well. it gains people for the ends of its war. there would probably soon be no wars any more if states rewarded their heroes in material terms, a pension for life, for instance, corresponding to the intended honour. and the state certainly awards professorships from the ministry of culture partly to honour achievement. but if you look more closely at who recovers this kind of honour you will be surprised how much method there can be in the distribution of honours. often the person giving the honour distinguishes himself more than the person honoured, and then every person honoured becomes more obliging as far as the person who has honoured him is concerned. the state would be a mere purpose-orientated administration like the postal service if it had not taken upon itself the right to distribute titles and honours. in this way it becomes a dignity, an authority that sets values. the state has also crept into the guild of graphic designers with titles and honours. clearly the present state does not like it if people do something they want themselves. everything is supposed to serve the public good. the prerequisite here is that there is only one court of appeal that can say what the public good is. to this extent the state would like to say what is right for all professions, and for graphic designers as well. we graphic designers are still fair game socially. we don't fence ourselves off. and we enjoy that. we find out by our own means what graphic design is, and try to work out for ourselves the direction in which it can develop. this autonomy of making is like mountain air. it is probably even a prerequisite of real creativity, of creativity that is sensed as natural growth with a passion for our own, undirected developments. and this freedom of doing is seen as a prerequisite for gaining one's own certainty and self-trust, elementary prerequisites of being able to do things. it can be proved that designers, when they take over an academic activity and are thus bound into modern adminstrative pedagogy, begin to flag in their creative achievements. the concept “civil servant” is synonymous with noncreative behaviour, with burnt-out fire. even fear of critical students forces conformity. freedom is stimulating. it is not just that an enormous amount of time and energy is absorbed in sustaining the apparatus in administered academies and colleges. there is also a lack of administrative scope which stands in the way of imagination and uninhibited design. we know that our freedom is in jeopardy. and so it is also recommended that no-one joins any of the professional associations, who in their way want to present proof of their right to exist. normally one pays contributions for secretaries and a board. the money is usually not sufficient for more than self-representation of these organs, perhaps just for the free participation of these organs in congresses at which the other members have to pay for the pleasure of seeing someone again out of their own pockets. such associations enjoy the favour of the state and like to join in with making graphic design an official profession. such associations often came into being as a result of high joint cultural aims. but they too need money. and alongside awards and honours the state has another seductive method for drawing everything to itself: from the taxes that we pay to it, it pays subsidies as the fancy takes it. and what association, what institute, is still working without state subsidy today? we in rotis guard our freedom like the apple of our eye and have developed a sixth sense for checking whether declarations of love are not lime-twigs to tie us into the dirigisme of the modern state. our little institute does not accept professorships or state funds. we are not saying that we have to do with a wicked state, outside any qualification the state as state is an evil if it interferes with free spaces where creativity means as much as undisturbed and uncontrolled making. once on the same morning two offers of appointment to illustrious professorships came in. it is good to live in a working atmosphere where such impudent requests can be wafted away like paper in the light of dawn. recently a light aircraft flew once round the earth without refuelling. the three people who developed and built this aircraft over four years also declined all state subsidy. they found the money themselves. that shows spirit. it is intellectual sportsmanship. we decisively, determinedly, unyieldingly reject any state authority as far as graphic design is concerned. every one of us knows more than it does, every one. it is an abstruse idea that the state might have anything to do with our work. and as the state loves only those that it can embrace, we reject any acts of kindness. this has disadvantages. the master decorator of whom we spoke is allowed to train apprentices. it has been confirmed that he works along lines laid down by the state, we do not have any such guidelines and confirmations. and so we are not allowed to train. this state is as perfect as that. on the one hand it offers us the federal cross of merit first class for just a single one of our projects. on the other hand we are not allowed to train anyone. of course with the exception of those who can afford to go without proofs of achievement. and who can do that today? people who rely on themselves. and they are not the worst.