## A NEW TYPEFACE why do we need a new typeface? this question is justified. with the replacement of hot metal printing by photosetting the number of typefaces has increased by leaps and bounds. it is an easy matter to put any number of typefaces into a data base and then expose the individual letters on photographic paper or film. and photographic or film material is sufficient for most printing processes today. so why increase this typeface inflation by yet another face? typeface asceticism, limitation of diversity should be what is demanded. on the other hand typefaces can also be seen from the point of view of whether the development of type is finished, has come to a standstill today. whether one should, as is said in architecture, withdraw to quotations. typefaces can be seen from the point of view of their use, the optimization of their reading quality, instead of, as usually happens today, that of their formal quality, their aesthetic satisfaction. if one thinks like this and gives priority to the quality of use it is certainly easy to come to the conclusion that most modern faces are nonsensical because they are not suitable for printing a novel. it would be too difficult to read, one would be too quick to put the book down. and at the same time you would come to the conclusion that even good typefaces cannot be the last word. their quality is not adequate any more. to find that out one needs a precise definition of the assessment criteria. faces have to be analysed, they have to be tested in use. the belief is long past that typefaces are good if they are built up on formal basic elements like circle, square or triangle. that was the way the bauhaus thought, and this basic principle is still dominant in renner's “futura”. all one has to do is make the attempt to reshape one's own handwriting on this principle. and handwriting, as a used script, is still an outstanding testbed for finding out what makes typefaces good or bad. it is a good idea to abandon any formal code if one wants to test what a typeface is worth. one should not overtax the old masters either. people of the calibre of claude garamond or giambattista bodoni were not concerned with optimizing legibility, simply because that was not a question at the time. they unquestioningly possessed a feeling for a manageable face, they did not think much of analytical criteria. at that time people read folios, not paperbacks. e

abcdefgh ijklmnopqr stuvw xyz semigrotesk semigrotesk semigrotesk antiqua abcdefgh ijklmnopqr stuvw xyz grotesk abcdefgh ijklmnopqr stuvw xyz the development of typefaces is more interesting in the context of the development of great newspapers. even in the 19th century many faces were drawn and cut to meet the demand of accommodating the maximum of text in the minimum of space without affecting legibility. one of the best modern faces, “times”, came into being as a result of a newspaper commission. it would be worth working through this epoch of typeface development, which has remained a stepchild of a more artistic way of looking at things. it produced as much for typography as the iron structures of engineering architecture for the development of new building. it is not the beautiful book but the daily paper, not beautiful calligraphy but everyday handwriting that are the testing ground of reading and writing, and thus release the crucial criteria of evaluation. and if you are in a situation to ask the right questions you are also close to the right solution. there is no way of avoiding thinking. you will not get very far with typefaces with an aversion to rationalism. developing a new typeface in the sense of a further development begins with the setting up of an evaluation catalogue. it begins with the question of what is to be asked. we no longer read as we used to. we lack time and leisure. additionally we have seen that visual media often inform more quickly and comprehensively than verbal ones. there is a growing number of people who never pick up a book, but instead acquire their insights from the television. is there a typeface that can be read more easily and more rapidly than the existing ones? how can one increase recognizability, legibility, reading speed? to answer these questions the printing firm of maack in lüdenscheid has set up a studio in rotis to pursue these and related questions. modern electronic techniques cannot design themselves, but they are particularly suited to modifying faces that are fed into them. thinking is the investigation of differences. so it is better to think about typefaces if one quickly has the modifications of a typeface to hand. for this purpose a computer with a plotter is good either as a setting apparatus or as a special device for electronically controlled typeface development. it is a relatively long process to feed the co-ordinates of a letter along its contours into a computer. but then it is easy for the computer to make it thicker or thinner, more slender or broader, to place it straight or obliquely, to make it larger or smaller. but this does not allow you to get away from the fact that before this every letter has to be drawn by hand before it is digitalized in the computer. designing it is an analoguous procedure, finishing a digital one. plotters are drawing geniuses. in seconds they draws the outline of a letter on paper or cut it two-dimensionally out of plastic foil with a high-grade knife. it does this with the highest degree of accuracy, although only the larger letter sizes. letter shapes in reading size are achieved by reduction in reproduction. and it is only in reading size that a letter reveals its qualities in the context of other letters. we do not read letters, but word pictures. in this way something comes into the design of a typeface that one cannot draw at all: distance apart, free space. determining the distance between letters is of great importance as far as reading quality is concerned. to this extent the person who says that designing a typeface is a matter of getting the black and the white into the right balance is on the right lines. the positive is defined by the negative, the negative by the positive. black and white have the same meaning. the computer is called fritz. we have known him for a long time. first he helped monika schnell to draw structures for gift wrapping paper. now she can pursue her former activity of working with barbara klein on drawing typefaces, giving the right balance to black and white.