# THE WORLD AS DESIGN the world can be seen as a constantly predetermined cosmos, a given condition into which we are bound. this is how the ancients saw it, both in their idealistic and realistic schools. this is how the christian middle ages saw it, and the british empiricists as well. the world can be understood as a process of development into which one is born. then a static model is replaced by a kinetic one. this is how we have learned to see the world since lamarck and darwin, and how we like to see it today under the influence of behaviourism and behavioural research. and the world can be seen as a design. as a design, that is to say as a product of a civilization, as a world made and organized by men. then it is, even in the case of predetermined nature, a world of designs and also bad designs, and nature becomes part of this world and has to fall into line with it. for goethe the world was still one of nature and history, and the philosopher from königsberg would admit only two domains of philosophy: the domain of nature and the domain of freedom. if you open a newspaper today it is full of talk about cars and rockets, aeroplanes and transit tunnels, factories and production lines, perfumes and harmful chemicals, football stadiums and multistorey car parks, clothes and clinics, satellites and mountain bikes, nouvelle cuisine and rubbish mountains, atom bombs and museums, festivals and wars, butter mountains and film premières, groundwater contamination and fashion shows, cfcs and ozone, artificial ice and rat poison. the world in which we live is the world we made. everyone was shocked when darwin explained that man descended from monkeys. but that was more the shock of saying that men and monkeys were equal. and indeed it is possible to take offence at that. darwin suffered from condemnation of a formulation that he did not make in that way. in reality darwin came to conclusions that were far more provocative but which did not give offence. darwin reversed the entire principle of explaining the world as it came down to us through the ancients, christianity and the west. as far as he was concerned there was no longer a plan in the world, no law of cause and effect in the sense of causal drives, no spiritual principle to guide and control, no god as creator, no spirit that rules the world. there was no longer any point in looking for causes for particular effects, the effects themselves are the cause of world development. what confirmed itself in practice is the selective principle of forms of appearance. no reason of any kind controls the development of the world, its way is determined by the selective principle of effect, of effectivity. just as everything arranges itself in the interplay with other things. nature is not logical, it is not determined. nature plays and leaves what is to survive to proving in life, to the fact, to the effect. how does nature play? you do not need to make the effort of wanting to understand the principle of mutation in order to recognize the game character of nature. it can be seen in the very fact that almost all living beings exist in two sexes. precisely speaking the human being as a human being does not exist, it only exists as man and woman. sexuality is the methodical basis by which the world does not constantly repeat itself, constantly reiterate, but changes and develops. reproduction of man and woman always produces man and woman, but in the greatest possible variety. the prerequisite for the development of nature is variation. variations require a world with two poles. variants mediate progress by being exposed to proving themselves in life, and what is better survives. development is based on dissolution of being into two elements. in philosophy, in understanding the world, people have always looked for the great unit, the being. but the world of units is a monumental world, it is frozen into a single condition. it is not until there is interconnection, the dissolution of units, and also through death, that the world becomes creative. it develops models that constantly bring about new variations and new constellations. the world plays and leaves decisions about victory and defeat to the judgement of the factual, of effect. what is left over is called expedient. even today we are still hardly aware what a reversal that means. law, order, planning, reason, previously seen as the basis of the world, are questioned. and thus also the thing we call spirit. legalities and principles of order are not fundamentally rejected, but tolerated only in the same way that one can discover the thread running through a person's biography only when his life is over. even in the last year of his life he can do something that gives a new meaning to that life. it is only in retrospect that consistency can be perceived, but we should not define this as purposefulness, but as a result. even mathematics, the most logical of all sciences, was shaken in its belief in logical consequence. alan turing addressed david hilbert's, kurt gödel's and john von neumann's problem of how mathematics could be proved in its correctness and competence in the abstract, by logical conclusions and evidence. he did not produce his proof through a new chain of logical reasoning, but by the working method of a machine that could operate mathematically, i.e. carry out processes and achieve effects. this calculating machine became our computer. the effect explains the law. that was pretty much the end of mathematics as theory. mathematical assumptions cannot be proved conclusively, their correctness cannot be definitively grounded in logic. today, mathematics are created and confirmed by computer. this is not the end of mathematics, but the end of a kind of mathematics that justifies itself by consequential logic, by compelling conclusions. quantum mechanics had already given a hint of this development. we cannot say what form an elementary particle has, whether it is a corpuscle or a wave, and at the same time state the place where it is to be found. determinism is statistical. it occurs, but it cannot be defined. it can be detected, but not predicted. if there is a reason for the world, it is that of its functionality. this shows in the way in which purposes are fulfilled. ever since men have existed they have perceived themselves as part of the cosmos. they have defined themselves from the explanation of the world. the philosophical tool of this self-definition was epistemology. what is the world for human beings, how do they acquire it, what is their bond with it? how is cognition possible? this was an attempt to answer how we are linked to the world. cognition was the bond between subject and object. the traditional understanding of cognition was that it was the representation of the world in us. as painting creates pictures, so reason creates copies of what exists. but for a long time there has been painting without copies, and, just as there is constructivist painting there is a constructivist theory of cognition. it leads to the conclusion that human cognition is selfeffected, a technique of forming concepts and definitions that at best yields a model of the world, but not a copy. the mind as a combining substance between world and human being, as a medium of participation, is increasingly seen as intellect, as an instrument for the production of information. mind is reduced to information and the processing of it. fifty years ago a philosophy of technology hardly existed. today we no longer perceive man as a natural creature drawing his strength from being, but as the maker of an autonomous technology that can on the one hand fly to the moon but on the other hand is in a position to extinguish life on earth, by means of either nuclear physics or chemistry. we are becoming aware that man, whether for good or bad, has stepped outside nature. he is bound to it, but he builds a second world over it, that of his own constructions. our world is no longer nature embedded in the cosmos. in a pubertal rush of self-decision we have detached ourselves from alliance with universals and follow our own ends. these turn out to be as daredevil as they are fatal and we would have to accept it if, because of our constructive autonomy, mankind were to cease to exist in the next century. humanity still has no morality of technical, scientific, economic development. perhaps because we were not intellectually prepared for such a powerful termination of old connections and old truths. to this day man's new situation is acquired less by insights than by fear of an autonomy that possibly can no longer be controlled, which is at the same time hectic, blind and also breathtaking. we continue to philosophize about the world as “being” and overlook the fact that it has become a design, a fabricated model, that even includes nature. even immanuel kant introduced “one additional principle” into philosophy that did not rest on causal conclusions. it is a reflective principle. in contrast with reason and understanding he called it “urteilskraft” (power of judgment). the “reflective power of judgement” does not wish to find the cause of things, but their purpose, what they are good for. he moves from a causal explanation to a teleological one. things are no longer determined by a principle of reason, but by their purposiveness. for nature, this is their viability. with “reflective power of judgement” and the “imagination” associated with it we think of the world from the point of view of the concrete, the special, and no longer on general principles. something is purposive if it is in agreement with itself. for kant that criterion of purposiveness is not use, but an idea towards which something is directed, its finality. it was not until the next century that efficiency itself became the measure of purposiveness. this happened in the natural sciences. and it was not until the 20th century that use (gebrauch) was raised to the status of being a central concept, even in philosophy. (today though it seems to have been replaced by “consumption” [verbrauch]). the mathematician hilbert also doubted whether it was true that two times two equals four. he doubted whether the laws of mathematics permitted conclusions concerning the laws of reality. but it is beyond dispute that it was the enormous explanatory culture of mathematics and the sciences that made a great brain out of the earth, a great traffic network everywhere, an industrial landscape and a single market of products, information and services. the discipline of thinking occasioned by logic and algebra, the expansion of thinking space through formulae and abstract algorithms has caused the emergence of structures that reduce the existing planet to an agricultural plant. and between building sites and rubbish dumps we enjoy hitherto unknown leisure time and freedom of consumption. and where do we get our knowledge that goes beyond the application of the laws of the natural sciences? there is no longer an objective reservoir from which we could take it. the eternal verities may have been true until yesterday, today we must derive the criteria of our doings from the doings themselves, from the effects of our making, from the fact of the result. today we no longer experience humanity as bedded into the forces of nature and belonging to nature; but even the laws of nature have left nature. the laws of nature are the basis of technology, applied in machines and production methods, the manufacture of products and the determination of their use and consumption. a few generations before us the purpose of nature was seen as being to produce human beings. today nature is degraded to being a mass at the disposal of man and the only problem is how far we can go in exploiting and taking advantage of it without detracting from or destroying the basis of our life, where it is still provided by nature. the world in which man lived hitherto was the nature that surrounded him, the cosmos in which he stood. and philosophy was the question of how we are connected to this cosmos. it is only for a little more than a century that philosophy has been concerned with the organizational forms of social life, including the economic conditions of its existence. there is a philosophy of labour, a philosophy of production. there is no philosophy of technology, no philosophy of how technology comes into being, is designed, organized and marketed and subjected to our responsibility. we enjoy practising a philosophy of cognition and of knowledge. a philosophy of making and designing has yet to appear. man is no longer surrounded by nature and world, but by what he has designed and made. nevertheless making is disparaged. a thinker is looked upon as something better than a maker, someone who organizes is better than someone who produces, the manager is more than the engineer, the university is more than the technical college, a banker is more than a manufacturer. a craftsman is nothing anyway. and someone who grows his own vegetables is laughed at. you can buy them. the general awareness today that man only becomes a member of society through his actions and activities may go back to marx and hegel. but there are essential differences between activity, working and making. most people only have a job, not work any more. and it is not obvious of someone who works that he makes something. making is an activity for which someone is responsible, in which someone is involved with concept, design, execution and checking. what he makes is under his control and responsibility and is part of himself. making is the extension of the self into the self-organized world. the person is fulfilled in making. and this to the extent that one's own concept, one's own design is involved and perceptions for the correction of concept and design are acquired in constant feedback from making. only creative making is real work, is development of the person. design is the mark of creativity, and only through it activism and job become humane. a humane world presupposes work and making characterized by design because a person's motive appears in the design. for hegel all history is the history of an idea, all development that of reason, of global reason, all development the development of a principle. this philosophy, a dangerous philosophy, is firmly anchored in our heads to this day. we abandon ourselves to the way things run, and a person who sees himself as the spirit of the world has the say. designs make one autonomous, designers are dangerous, dangerous for any sovereign authority. the aggregate condition of our civilization is that of determination. everything is determined, determined by the highest authorities. in consequence our thinking culture too is taught as one of a supreme principle, that of reason. reason as a principle of exclusiveness was raised to the status of a preferred intellectual culture in order to secure the principle of authority. the principle of purposiveness on the other hand knows no exclusiveness. much is purposive and much is purposive in different ways. the aggregate condition of a purposive world would be plurality. reason clings to the general and universal, the purposive is different from case to case, from subject to subject. in purposiveness the subject reaches agreement with its position, its situation, its case. the purposive needs special initiatives, special designs, it is not general. according to kant, the purposive is orientated towards the particular, not the general. a culture in the aggregate condition of purposiveness as against a culture of reason would make a thousand initiatives, a thousand concepts, a thousand designs from a supreme idea, a supreme principle. it would take back authority from a supreme principle to the individual. instead of living from definitive causality, instead of living in logical necessity we would live from a “reflective power of judgement” and thus bring about an individual balance between us, environment and world. in a culture of designs a process comes into being that could be called the decentralization of the truth claim. general reason would return to individual reason, to personal view and power of judgement. the word reason is often handled in a very contradictory and dubious way. sometimes reason is an organ, sometimes it is a principle. sometimes it is an organ by which we process information in our heads, sometimes it is the principle of conclusiveness and determined causality that even soars up to global reason - be it that of the french revolution or hegel's prussian state. as an organ of information collection, processing and storage seated in the brain, reason corresponds with our intelligence, as a principle of causality and logical precision it rules the universe, becoming the principle of those who believe they have to rule the world. in the end people will see that there can be no reason other than the reason in our heads. but by appropriate celebration general reason was raised so high that it exceeds reason in our heads. and this only to rule not only over men, but over heads. eternal truths, supreme principles, absolute reason, higher insights, general ideas, eternal laws in general do not have rational bases, but social ones. any society based on authority, and this includes the society of industrial civilization, must have, in order to stabilize its substructure, to keep its workers hard at it, a justification in principle. superordinated power is glorified. where the main thing is to paralyse human subjectivity and direct it only towards a general will, whether it be the will of a state, a church or a commercial enterprise, one clings to the world order that there is a supreme reason that drives everything forward. and all the workers get on solidly with their work and collect their pay, all the employees put their ability at the disposal of an employer and draw their salary for that. as soon as they show signs of developing a need to live according to their own ideas, make their own designs, carry out work according to their own notions, proceed according to their own conceptions, that would be the downfall of those authorities we are all told are necessary for the development and survival of the world. there are cultural spheres in which creative anarchy is anticipated. given that reason is an organ of information processing and part of the human body, with its seat in the brain, then it must be permissible for eating to count as a human domain with a cultural dimension as well. today it is impossible not to recognize a trend towards industrial simplification and economic generalization in our nutrition. nevertheless eating and drinking, harvesting and cooking are a cultural sphere that still largely survives without the one great truth. the entire world is concerned with it. chopping, cooking and seasoning are major cultural achievements. we associate great moments in life with eating. it was at banquets that the dialogues came into being through which man recognized himself as a subjective entity. at the centre of the rituals of religion there is something to eat and drink. this culture has countless traditions and countless initiatives. we involve ourselves in them every day with requests, evaluations and experiments. and yet there are no authorities. there is no truth of cooking. there are as many cuisines as there are ovens. and the grandmother is no less an authority than the gourmet pope from the city of lyons. but there are dialogues, there are conversations, there are revelations, if you ignore the industries that have their standard recipes laid down by statistics. how should we feed ourselves? this has become a subject for humanity, also a design subject, a draft subject. and yet there is no central court of appeal that could be said to be in possession of the valid truth. the aggregate condition of this culture is as loose and light as a piece of pastry, yet is still in a position to resist the junk production that has come into being under the banner of maximized profits, and to found a morality of food. the truth of eating comes from the kitchen. this means that it comes from execution, from doing, from making, from use, just as the individual of the future comes from the decision to live his own life, which first of all means not someone else's life. not that the other life is a heresy. it can be as legitimate as one's own. but the crucial factor of truth is subjectivity, one's own agreement instead of the identifications with general principles. in the whole human culture of eating there are no initiatives other than those of one's own oven. this is neither intellectual stubbornness nor aristocratic affectation, it is a fundamental requirement. the effect explains the law. the case determines the rule. the use is the truth. like our food, our behaviour as human beings towards each other and with each other is an open field, an indeterminate relationship. one could arrive at a consensus by pragmatic means. provided that you accepted each person as autonomous and original, like a cuisine. if everyone could trust his design. the authorities know better. they pronounce ex cathedra. they promulgate decrees. they issue titles and orders to those who support authority. they provide textbooks and make money available for those who can prove the necessity of their existence in every form of pronouncement, in science, also in research, in doctrine and in faith. there are no professors, no doctors, no recipients of honours in cookery. if there were, it would probably be the end of it. in terms of behaviour outside the kitchen things look different. here truth is not justified, it is rewarded. those people are rewarded who not only support the official truth, the official doctrine or whatever one might call such generalized truths, the general ideology, as beneficiaries, but justify it by pronouncement. in science, karl popper said, a truth is true until it is replaced by another truth. in the case of design it is different. every design for which responsibility is assumed is true. what cuisine is more true than another cuisine? what life is more true than another life? what species, to stay with darwin, is more justified than another species? this is not a question of pluralistic tolerance, it is a question of play and its diversity. no science is a pronouncement of truth. science is the pronouncement of a hypothesis. it is a model. and the criterion of a model is not that it is true but that it proves itself. designers think differently from administrators. the adminstrator speaks for a truth, for an authority, priests for the church, professors for the state university. designers know nothing. all they have to make an approach to something is tools. that makes them suspicious. they need, as jargon has it, a duty book. it is not until they have designed the overall conditions that they apply methods and tools. the same applies to education. formerly people knew how to bring up children. today we don't know that any more. and that is not because we do not have the appropriate knowledge, but because education is always an individual case. everyone is different. everyone is unique. the principles literally turn full circle. formerly there were educational principles that had to be applied. now the principles arise as subsequent insights into individual cases. it becomes permissible to arrive at generalizations from the individual act of education. the educator himself is well advised to abandon all general principles and address specific cases. he may certainly take general experience as a guideline, so long as he is prepared to see that his case can contradict all experience. education too is a constructive activity, is the production of development models. instead of existence, which was the subject of philosophy from parmenides to martin heidegger, we are now faced with the concept of the model. we perceive both what is and also what should be in models of concepts and definitions. access to reality, to the world opens up through a model, a structure of statements, concepts and conceptual operations. and a leap into the future, into a new, possible world, also needs speculation, work on the model. cognition is agreement on the model and future is development of the model. designing means constructing models. perhaps the mind is more than merely the processing of information. processing is a kind of administrative procedure, linear, onedimensional. when we speak of mind we mean something different. we mean the ability to form concepts, the ability to develop designs, to “throw something out”. then the concept of mind would be justified as the ability to develop concepts, which means creating multidimensional structures. multidimensional in terms of place, time, method, economy, those involved together with their psychology, and also in terms of aims, purposes, causes, drives. a design is the most complex structure produced by mental activity. a design is analytical and synthetic at the same time, specific and general, a concrete matter and one of principle. it keeps to the matter in hand and to demands, it goes back to facts and opens up new thinking spaces. it “counts the peas” and opens up perspectives. it calculates and opens up landscapes of possibility. in designing people come into their own. otherwise they remain civil servants. people are inclined to see freedom and individuality as a status, as a condition. people think that a human being is free if he lives in conditions of free decision-making. but he does not become free until he realizes freedom, manufactures it. in the most free of societies there can be slaves if people see freedom as habitual behaviour, not as concretization, development, design. design is the creation of a world. it comes into being at the point at which theory and practice collide. but these do not cancel each other out. they both find ways of developing. design becomes a new intellectual dimension in its own right alongside theory and practice. human culture can no longer be reduced to thinking and doing. design intervenes as a methodological discipline in its own right, the emergence of something that does not already exist, in either theory or practice. in design both emerge as fundamentals. design transcends theory and practice and not only opens up a new reality, but new insights. in design, man takes his own development in hand. for human beings, development is no longer nature, but self-development. this is certainly not beyond natural requirements, but does transcend nature. in design man becomes what he is. animals have language and perception as well. but they do not design.