## AFTERWORD in critical situations it can emerge how little our knowledge and our actions still relate to each other, how much our actions have been disconnected from our insights. we know more than ever about our world and about the threats it faces, threats to nature and climate, threats that come from our civilization, and yet we act and behave in a way that ignores any better knowledge. our intellectualism and rationalism go so far that we even discuss this contradiction in culturally and socially critical terms, display and debate it in terms of public information. but we do not react. we are aware that we are sawing off the branch we are sitting on without limiting our selfdestruction. self-alienation is on the increase. we know all too well about the consequences of over-consumption, about the gulf between capital and work, about the balance of resources and waste, about the link between war and profit, but we are no longer capable of getting out of the paralysis that the prosperity of industrial civilization has brought with it. to that extent the person who reminds us that we should take responsibility is no longer credible. responsibility degenerated into a mere response. speaking and doing have become detached from each other. morality is an echo. this is linked with our educational culture, which is one of knowledge, of reason, down to the belief that our reason could be part of a global reason, participate in the objective spirit that guides and regulates the world. accordingly, history is the history of a continuing development towards better and higher things, and it is no longer mankind who is murdering and destroying, plundering and exploiting, but the mechanics of the mind. reason is looking for totality. it will not tolerate anything unreasonable beside it. truth is detached from the concrete and individual to become the general imperative. anyone who is not deluding himself will see a link here between the claims of knowledge and totalitarianism. wrong thinking, here in the tradition of hegel, produces its fateful consequences. we are all the victim of institutions who know better. the essays in this book are not antirationalist criticism. there are already far too many people involved in the witch-hunt against reason. these essays are based on the experience that there is a reason of acting and making that produces results other than logical derivation with its claim to total truth, and that there is a perception that requires acting and making in the sense that it cannot be acquired without acting and making. it develops by acting and making. a cathedral is not the application of static knowledge, is not academic cleverness, it is the product of a culture of making, of designing, of reason in action. technology is not mastered by the person who knows about it and therefore prescribes structural conditions for it in the awareness of moral responsibility. technology is mastered by the person who can handle and control it as technology. there are other sources of cognition than understanding and reason. even kant tracked down a third cognition alongside understanding and reason, which he called urteilskraft, the power of judgement. this aimed not at the general, but at the concrete in its circumstances, which is the same thing as changing it. this book is concerned with the dimension of design itself. here design is not seen as refinement, beautification, presentation. the notion of drafting is to be found in the original meaning of the word. design is first of all drafting, blueprint, even though the word has come predominantly to mean aesthetic cosmetics in the mean time. a design culture can be seen as a culture of coming to terms with this world, rather than taking refuge in compensatory aesthetics. then design moves into the proximity of active reason. many of the essays are polemical in their prevailing tone. this is not literary in motivation, it is not style, but derives from excitement. the world is becoming more beautiful and pleasant to the extent that we are destroying it. this also has an effect on language, especially at points where it deals with given causes. some of the essays refer to subjects from an institution called “institute of analoguous studies”, and these studies are derived from a way of thinking that is aimed not at knowledge, but at judgement, meaning that it includes decision. a judgement of this kind refers to states of affairs and situations. thinking of this kind is not content with generalizable insights. it is concerned with cases and situations. its judgements are statements on a topic, taking up a position. in such cases thinking in pictures, imagination, an analoguous approach is particularly important. work at the institute moves in the context of visual thinking and visual language and lives from the experience of creative activity.