# Imaginings of War: Posters and the Shadow of the Lost Generation

n<sup>et</sup> <sup>me</sup> <sup>open</sup> <sup>this</sup> <sup>set</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>refl</sup> <sup>ections</sup> <sup>on</sup> <sup>images</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>war</sup> <sup>with</sup>the assumption that what people see affects them more the assumption that what people see affects them more than what they read. In wartime, images overwhelm words. This simple fact dominated the most powerful and widely disseminated propaganda campaign to date, elements of which are preserved in collections of poster art in different parts of the world.

Collections of World War I posters provide a window onto a world that has largely vanished, but it has left behind so many iconic images that when we see them, we conjure up an entire set of representations of war. It is these that frame what Samuel Hynes has called our “war in the head,” our mental furniture on which perch our images of war. These images are not memories—we were not there—but they are representations of the memories of others who were there. Many of those who designed posters brought to the task personal experiences and recollections. Many of those who viewed them during the war certainly linked them to memories of a personal kind. Now all we have are the traces of those memories, fi xed onto canvas and paper, deposited in libraries and archives from the Hoover Institution in Stanford to the Bibliothek für Zeitgeschichte in Stuttgart and beyond. They conjure up second-order memories, our understandings of how the men and women of the Great War imagined and remembered the upheaval through which they lived.

Like all representations, posters have a life history. Their meanings are never fi xed for all time. I want to offer an interpretation of some of these documents fi rst in terms of a semiotics of solidarity. Posters were, I believe, a refl ection rather than a cause of national unity in the First World War. I then describe a number of other ways in which societies at war, civilians and soldiers alike, imagined war, conjured up its dimensions and texture, and by and large justifi ed its continuation, despite casualty levels the world had never seen before. Given the rich trove of images we fi nd in World War I posters, I want to turn to a puzzling question. What happened to this grammar of consent in subsequent years and decades? Why, in the Second World War, were such images generally absent from poster art or indeed from broader imaginings of war? I propose an answer to this question, and thereby conclude that many poster images help us see aspects of the disenchantment of the twentieth century—the progressive retreat from these representations of war and warriors into more complex and compromised images. And this is not even to broach the topic of what images of Auschwitz and Hiroshima did to representations of war. In sum, what we of a later generation are left with is a mixed and shifting landscape of imaginings of war: some still heroic, others negative, troubled, unresolved, unsettled. And so it is bound to be, since that moral conundrum—how to imagine war without glorifying it—is with us still.

## Social Representations of War before 1914

Posters are social representations of combat, combatants, and causes. As such in Britain they drew upon popular ideas of combat in a country with a formidable naval tradition but nothing remotely resembling what on the Continent is called “militarism.” Militarism is the elevation and celebration of military virtues and values as admirable principles of national life. Generals on horseback stride across Europe throughout the nineteenth century and beyond, but they had virtually no place in British political culture in 1914.

Militarism was alive in British culture, though not primarily in Britain. The scarcely veiled iron fi st of British power was evident in India, in Egypt, and, though battered by a relatively small force of Boer farmers, in South Africa. British power was a force of repression closer to home, too. In Dublin, the second city of the British Empire, the British Army was a force resented by a small but stubborn Republican movement. When Home Rule for Ireland became a real possibility, Protestants in the British Army made their displeasure known, but as usual, what applied to Ireland had little bearing on popular attitudes in mainland Britain. Ireland was always a world apart. And no one in Britain clamored for the army to clean up the stables of domestic politics as in Germany; no one in Britain juxtaposed the honor of the army to the right of an individual to justice, as in the France of the Dreyfus affair.

Militarism, if it existed at all in pre-1914 Britain, was isolated in small pockets of conservative thinking, voiced in London clubs or Oxford common rooms fi lled with pessimists gloomy about cities, about the working class, about everything that had happened since the industrial revolution. Such reactionaries wanted nothing of the twentieth century, and a reverie for Wellington and the armies that defeated Napoleon took the place of systematic political thinking.

The voice of Empire, though, was not at all unknown in prewar Britain. It was there in virtually every household that had a volume of Kipling on the shelves. Here was the source of many pre-1914 representations of warfare. In this quintessentially

Victorian rhetoric, combat had distinctly positive and gendered attributes: it was individual, heroic, and intensely masculine. This mixture is what gives Kipling’s powerful poem “Gunga Din” its force as a distillate of military values. Riddled with bullets while warning through his trumpet of a sneak attack on a British garrison in India, Gunga Din earned the respect— indeed, the love—of his British superiors: “Though I’ve belted you and fl ayed you / By the living God that made you / You’re a better man than I am Gunga Din.”

Such notions about heroism and war were at the core of images of masculinity.<sup>1</sup> This linkage was evident in one extraordinary public display of mourning for fallen heroes before 1914. It followed the failure of Commander Scott’s expedition to the South Pole and the death of Scott’s team in 1913.<sup>2</sup> They had waged war on the Antarctic, and the elements had won. Through their effort the imperial assignment was sanctifi ed. The Royal Geographical Society sponsored the voyage. The society chairman, Lord Curzon, formerly viceroy of India, affi rmed that exploration was an imperial duty. It was a task British men had to do.

The fact that Scott’s mission was a failure did not diminish its glory. The story was one of masculinity confi rmed. You may recall the team seeing that they were not the fi rst to arrive at the Pole. On the way back they were trapped in a snow storm, with no chance of escape and little hope of rescue. One of the team, Captain Oates, a good Cambridge man, was ill. He decided one morning to take a walk in the snow. He never returned. And then there was Scott himself—writing painfully with frozen fi ngers in his last letter, begging that something be done to provide for the families of the men who were dying. Here were the quintessential warriors before the war. They embodied what being a man entailed: stoicism, individual initiative, an acceptance of hardship—even death—without complaint.