life, those peculiarities and idiosyncrasies of ordinariness that brought home to millions what being British was all about.

## Front and Home Front

The second level on which to understand the meaning contemporaries attached to or derived from poster images is in terms of the maintenance of ties between front and home front. These works were not produced as accurate or realistic images but rather as visual codes of solidarity.

Historians are coming increasingly to the view that what kept the Great War going for so long was not just a rough balance of material power but also a rough balance between front and home front. That is, the reason men put up with the harsh conditions of military life was their love of their families, their towns, the simple rhythms of their way of life. Again “Your Country’s Call” provides a case in point. Posters were small “snapshots” of these affi liations; they preserved elements of the prewar world soldiers had gone off to defend, each in his own way.

These posters had counterparts on the stage and in song. To some soldiers, music hall, popular songs, and theatrical displays were like ambulant posters. They did tend to trivialize the war and the hardships men faced at the front. But millions of other soldiers knew why they fought in part because their instinctive loyalties were touched by the sentimentalities of these voices and images. The message they took from songs and posters was clear. They could (and did) put up with the awfulness of trench warfare in part because of their commitment to the world they had left behind, a world conjured up in vivid terms by popular entertainments and in shorthand by poster art.

Here is the key to the history of popular culture in wartime Britain and among that part of the nation in action on the

Continent. A civilian army brought its civilian entertainments with it.<sup>4</sup> Music hall entertainments celebrated a code of ordinary life reminding soldiers that they were in uniform only “in parentheses,” as it were.<sup>5</sup> In song and stylized stage buffoonery millions of soldiers saw the “before” and dreamed of the “after.” Posters did the same; they were advertisements of continuity. The vast majority believed that this period in uniform was a hiatus in their lives, a period with a clear end: victory and demobilization. Defeat hardly entered their minds.<sup>6</sup> After the war they would return and resume the course of their lives. These men in effect never left home; they brought it with them in their imagination as cultural baggage that saw most of them through the worst of what they had to face.

From this perspective, prewar images of war were not discredited by the confl ict as long as the war went on. Those prewar notions about combat and combatants were allusive rather than accurate. “Your Country’s Call,” with its picturesque hamlet and its landscape dotted with English cattle, illustrates, as many posters did, a stylized world, an idealized world, one remote from the trenches; one soldiers believed they were fi ghting to preserve.

## Images of War in Cinema

Sooner or later ambivalence would replace acceptance as the dominant motif within representations of war. We can see this process beginning to unfold during the war itself. Cinema was the premier form of popular entertainment in wartime. It also had the capacity to capture the “reality” of the momentous events occurring just across the English Channel.

This power of verisimilitude lay behind the creation of one of the fi rst fi lm documentaries ever made. Remarkably, it was produced and aired during the Battle of the Somme, which lasted miserably from July 1 to November 30, 1916, and in which over one million men died while the line effectively moved not at all.

In London in September 1916 the fi lmic Battle of the Somme premiered while the real Battle of the Somme was still under way. Filmed at times under great personal risk by two cameramen, G. H. Malins and J. B. McDowell, The Battle of the Somme gave home audiences an unprecedented chance to see their troops in action. Intended as a morale booster, this pioneering fi lm was a mixture of real and recreated events. Perhaps the most famous image of the war, showing soldiers going over the top and then disappearing into the fog of war, can be found in this fi lm. It was staged.

Not that fi lm goers knew—or cared—at the time. Audiences turned out by the hundreds of thousands, riveted by images on the screen that would be considered quite tame today. “I really thought that some of the dead scenes would offend the British public,” confessed Malins. Theatre operators showing it questioned whether women should be submitted to the “actual horrors of warfare.” One theatre manager refused to show the fi lm altogether, declaring: “This is a place of amusement, not a chamber of horrors.” While the fi lm avoided the gruesome realities of the war, for people with little direct knowledge of the violence and vast scale of modern war it was as close a glimpse as they would ever get, and the fi lm brought them out in droves, playing to thirty fi lm theatres in London alone. “It was not a cheerful sight,” another fi lm goer wrote, “but it does give a wonderful idea of the fi ghting.” In one London cinema the orchestra stopped playing when the subtitle announced “The Attack.” One woman in the audience could not help screaming out, “Oh God, they’re dead!” In the fall of 1916 the fi lm ended its run, having been seen by an estimated twenty million people.<sup>7</sup> It was the most successful British fi lm of all time. Perhaps half the population saw it in six weeks. Nothing before or since has matched it.

This fi lm contains evidence of a critical change in the cultural history of the war. Until the Battle of the Somme, the British volunteer armies had formed and trained against the backdrop of conventional notions of the nature of war. After 1916 those representations of war began to fragment. This is one among a number of reasons why it is fair to say that Britain has never recovered from that battle. It is not only the lives thrown away but also the sense that something else was lost; something located in the symbolic universe those soldiers brought with them, which was blown apart and scattered in the wet soil of Picardy.

This loss of bearings about what war was did not occur at once, and not without countermovements shoring up older attitudes. Here the commercial fi lm industry managed to undo some of the damage to heroic representations of war that documentary fi lm had caused.

By the middle of the war the fi lm industry emerged as the most important vehicle for projecting the meaning of the war as a struggle of Good against Evil. This cinematic effort took many forms, from comedy to melodrama to tragedy. Much of this fi lm output was neither inspired nor organized through governments, though state funding was frequently involved. To be sure, the censor was active; but here again the private sector took the lead. On the screen, kitsch and popular entertainments came into their own, broadcasting messages with evident mass appeal about the Virtues of one side and the Villainy of the other. Music hall, melodrama, and the gramophone industry all chipped in, selling (at a profi t) anodyne or uplifting images and songs to increasingly fatigued, anxious, and irritable populations.

No wonder fi lm was so popular during the war. It satisfi ed longings for the mundane at an extraordinary moment: it lampooned the dreariness of military life, and it added a large dose of outrage directed against the source of all the troubles—the enemy.

It is evident that the collision of representations of war began before the Armistice. As we have seen, the outlines of prewar notions about war began to change while the war went on. The fi lm The Battle of the Somme was screened to intense public interest in what war was like. There was much more information available on the home front about combat and the awful conditions in the trenches than historians have hitherto assumed. There was the telephone; there were letters, irregularly censored to be sure, but fi lled with more than just Kipling-esque bravado. There were photographs. Many of these were taken without supervision and in remote corners of the war. They show the odd juxtaposition of the mundane and the bizarre—images of what Samuel Hynes has called “Battlefi eld Gothic.” And if the telephone, letters, and photographs did not do the trick, there were the wounded, scattered throughout the country, convalescent images in their own right of the fact that war was no longer a contest between individuals, nor was it adventurous, nor even a test of masculinity. It had become very different from what contemporaries had been illustrating just a few short years before.

To return to the statement with which I began, that the visual mattered more than the written in wartime culture: there was a hidden advantage in this preference for images. Written propaganda was much more tied to a language riddled with assumptions about social class. The visual touched on these but frequently superseded them. When soldiers were shown, they were usually men in the ranks. A largely working-class army was represented not by its middle-class offi cers but by its working-class privates. Representations of home front work,