though, had many more associations with class position. Appealing for women to do their bit by entering war factories thus described an innovation for middle-class women but a much simpler shift along the spectrum of manual labor for workingclass women. By and large this meant that appeals on behalf of the army emphasized the classless character of the forces; appeals for solidarity at home were less universal. But whether directed at identifying the cause abroad or at home, visual propaganda escaped from much of the high-minded snobbery that riddled the countless pamphlets and sermons written on behalf of the Allied war effort. The written language brought out social class differences in a way that visual imagery usually managed to evade.

## Postwar Representations

I have tried to identify the meaning and symbolic function of posters in terms of the ongoing engagement of front and home front in wartime. A question arises about the fate of these representations once the Armistice had been signed and demobilization had begun.

To fi nd an answer to this question we need to elaborate a range of ambivalent wartime representations of the nature of war. Soldiers and their families accepted a prewar notation to describe the harsh conditions of their lives in part because they had no other choice. In wartime representations there endured prewar elements that soldiers recognized perfectly well as stylized and inadequate but that they did not succeed in either purging or transforming. The exceptions were the war poets, but their words were known to only a handful of people.

Once the war was over and the reckoning had come, there was little reason left to justify perpetuation of a code when its usefulness had come to an end. That is one reason why war poetry became iconic in the interwar period. It was the effort of men who tried to liberate language from the wartime codes that had constrained it during the confl ict.

“Have we forgotten yet?” Siegfried Sassoon asked readers of his poetry as early as 1919. I wonder. But in part because of war poetry, our common ordinary language has not forgotten; our everyday speech carries traces of the Great War in a myriad of ways—“some desperate lie”; “the old lie”; “the bloody game.” How far we have come from prewar representations of what John Keegan has called the face of battle.

## Postwar Imaginings

It is important to recognize that alongside such subversive imaginings of war, there were others that preserved “the old lie” and affi rmed that it was still an old truth. The long-term effect of the Great War on representations of combat is best conveyed not by pacifi sm or irony but by ambivalence. This ambivalence made it impossible for the notation of wartime posters to be used in the same way again. But elements of that code of solidarity never fully vanished.

This specifi cally British point of view is different from that evident in France and Germany after the war. In all three countries there were common elements. Here is French historian Antoine Prost’s commentary on the subject of representations of war in postwar France:

In the new representation of combat, death takes pride of place. Prior representations never denied the possibility of death in combat, but one did not dwell on it. After 1918, death is at the core of representations: the objective, even the very defi nition of combat. To make war is not to capture prisoners, take cities, conquer territory; it is to kill and to be killed. The semantic landscape is arranged around terms such as: “killing,” “butchery,” “carnage,” “bloody horror.” This set of representations is in war memoirs, in soldiers’ stories, in war memorials and in the ceremonies on 11 November, culminating in a vast funerary cult and pilgrimages to war graves cemeteries at the front.<sup>8</sup>

This was bound to affect the image of the soldier too. “To boast about his courage, his initiative, is to praise death,” writes Prost. “His bravery, his tenacity, his sacrifi ce are not denied, but what war does, without his knowing it, is to insert inhuman instincts within these very qualities.” The soldier is a death-giver, an agent of slaughter, par excellence.<sup>9</sup>

It is but a short step, Prost argues, from this kind of representation of war to a kind of paralysis. War must never happen again, French veterans said, because it is inhuman; but when in the 1930s war clouds returned, the likelihood of war was both recognized and rejected. That the phrase “entre-deuxguerres” was used so easily in the 1930s gives it away. War must not come, and yet war was coming. Is it at all surprising that successive French governments, and the electorate that put them in power, failed to prepare for war and failed to stand the course when it came? Representations of war had turned so negative that preparing for a war and fi ghting one became virtually impossible.

It is obvious that such a construction of representations of war had no purchase in postwar Germany. Militarism survived the transition to democracy, and disgruntled veterans provided the core of a movement that toppled the Weimar Republic in 1933. But what about Britain? Its political culture was remote both from that dominated by the pacifi st veterans of France and that dominated by the bellicose veterans of Germany.

Instead of “never again” or “Germany arise”—representations of war with enormous signifi cance in France and Germany—a different set of notions about war have dominated British cultural life. The term Lost Generation captures the British way of recasting nineteenth-century representations of war in a twentieth-century context.

One way to understand the images in poster art is to see them as symbols of a Lost Generation. That term has taken on a meaning at the heart of British notions of national identity in the twentieth century. The phrase has a life history, which opened in the war years and was then enshrined in commemorative ceremonies throughout Britain in the decade after the Armistice. Over time the term has wound up in normal language, in the notions that schoolchildren pick up from clichés, from comedy, from many sources obscure and mundane, about what being British means. In other words, different generations have constructed their own Lost Generation of the Great War from a set of icons that have changed over time but that still bear some resemblance to images drawn and painted and sculpted in wartime.

By attending to these cultural confi gurations, we can understand much about how in Britain, the 1914–18 confl ict was converted from a victory into a disaster or, more precisely, into the iconic debacle of the twentieth century. Pre-1914 representations of war faded away, just as Britain’s standing as a world power has faded too.

To be sure, the term Lost Generation describes something particular, something inescapably linked to the personal tragedies of three-quarters of a million truncated lives. But it is important to recall the second level I have evoked, a level on which the term operated powerfully in the two postwar decades. It was a phrase at fi rst associated with the commemoration of the victory these men had paid for with their lives, with the obligation the living owed to the dead, and with the need for some kind of symbolic exchange to mark that irredeemable debt. Soon enough, though, the term took on a bitter taste, linked to the disappointments of the survivors as to the kind of world they had fashioned after 1918. What was lost to this generation was hope, the sense that history was moving forward to something better, the sense of a brighter future. The interwar depression and the renewal of international confl ict in the 1930s put paid to such aspirations. By then the question had become: for what, if anything, did the Lost Generation die? This use of the term Lost Generation suggests a lack of closure, an unhealed wound in the survivors, a betrayal of trust between the living and the dead, an unbuilt future for their children. Here the second cluster of meanings of the term emerges, locating it in the divided, embittered postwar history of those who survived the war.

Paul Fussell and Samuel Hynes have captured this ironic turn in the remembrance of the Lost Generation. Both have spoken not only of monuments but of antimonuments, of the literary and visual forms through which the war was remembered. What marks these works is a sense of anger, of the betrayal of the young by the old, who sent young men off to fi ght and who stayed on to ruin the postwar world. Fussell has privileged the term irony as the emblem of this literary moment, when millions entered the long wartime journey from anticipation to outcome, from innocence to experience, from beauty and hope to ugliness and disillusionment. In the memoirs of Graves, Sassoon, Blunden, Mottram, and Ford, and in the poetry of Owen, Rosenberg, Sorley, and Gurney, this ironic vision has been preserved as the property of the nation as a whole. Through them it has become much more than a British vision; it is one we all share.<sup>10</sup>

There is a third level of usage for the term Lost Generation, which brings us to more recent times and adds one more dimension to what we glimpse in British posters from the Great War. On this third level the term moves away from the initial stages of mourning, and from the tone of postwar disillusionment, to take on a more general, metaphoric coloration. The Lost Generation is a term that has enabled people born long after the confl ict to see the Great War as the moment when grand narratives broke down, when—in the words of the comic classic 1066 and All That—history came “to a full stop.”<sup>11</sup>

The sting in the tail of the joke should not be missed. Yes, the authors were having fun with the tendency of school textbooks to grind to a screeching halt in 1914, for purposes of convenience alone. But the authors of this parody—themselves veterans of the Great War—have disclosed something else about British cultural history. They suggest that what matters most about a nation’s past is often concealed in its humor. And here it is a very special kind of gallows humor that has entered the language of everyday life, in the form of a set of jokes about insane generals, sardonic offi cers, and trapped infantrymen going over the top. Everyone growing up in England in the 1990s knew this scene—immortalized in the bbc comedy series Blackadder.

Why does it matter? Because it takes a tragic use of the term the Lost Generation, located in collective mourning earlier in the twentieth century, and turns it into an emblem of a shared catastrophe that defi nes what it means to be British in the later twentieth century, an emblem in the form of paper poppies that people wear in their lapels for a few days in November every year. This elision brings the loss of life in 1914–18 into contact with the loss of power and national independence in recent decades. The early disaster somehow stands for what was to come after. What Samuel Hynes has called the “myth” of the war—its narrative character—has thus become the myth of the decline of Britain in this century as a whole.

The late British poet laureate Ted Hughes once remarked that growing up in interwar Britain, he developed a sense that the Great War was a defeat around whose neck someone had