these containing a stylized image of fast advancing cavalry. While German soldiers, usually alone, sit in trenches or stand guard, their American counterparts, often pictured as a group, march, charge, leap out of trenches, or walk purposefully to enlist, donate, or board ship. Likewise, American posters favor kinetic portrayals of technology while German technology is usually stylized or symbolic.<sup>7</sup>

## The German Situation: “Should an Army Be Raised by the Same Means as Customers for Jam?”

In August 1914 the Supreme Command of the Army did not acknowledge posters as either an appropriate or a necessary means of propagating a confl ict that Germany’s decision makers perceived in almost mystical terms. The war was interpreted as an event uniting all social classes in enthusiasm for German historical destiny and therefore required no further announcement. Advertising methods used for enlistment in Great Britain and the United States were criticized in Germany as not corresponding to the dignity of the goal: “Should an army be raised by the same means as customers for jam?” asked one commentator.<sup>8</sup>

Even if German offi cials had attempted to use American-style advertising, they lacked the commercial experience needed to market a product. The authorities “contented themselves with proclaiming the law from their specially reserved places.”<sup>9</sup> The posters lacked the avant-garde boldness of the best achievements in German commercial graphic art from before the war. Although their creators contributed propaganda posters, with their stylistic innovations clear in certain designs, military censorship limited their thematic and aesthetic choices. Propaganda posters simply reverted to the “strict typographic sobriety” that was popular before the turn of the century.<sup>10</sup> Additionally, the invasion of neutral Belgium in August 1914 put

German propaganda almost instantly on the defensive, both at home and abroad. Its tactics relied heavily on the rational explanation of war goals, played down the expansionist character of the war, and stressed the historic mission of superior German culture. In expectation of imminent victory, Durchhalten (fortitude), obedience to authorities, and unity during diffi cult times became the dominant themes of propaganda on the home front. In the United States, a small, informal but well-fi nanced pro-German organization went about affecting American public opinion, primarily through rational defensive arguments in the press.<sup>11</sup>

The “turnip winter” of 1916–17 with its worsening food crisis marked the turning point in German public opinion. Calls for further sacrifi ces—advertised by posters promoting war loans, saving food, and recycling raw materials—were no longer proving effective. To support the morale of both soldiers and German civilians, in July 1917, a few months after the United States entered the war, the Supreme Command of the Army launched a program of “patriotic instruction.” Although propaganda methods differed slightly from the formulas employed before 1917, the program nevertheless continued to attach great importance to national sentiments and the value of obedience to the emperor and military leaders.<sup>12</sup>

## The American Situation: “The World’s

## Greatest Adventure in Advertising”

Although offi cially neutral until April 2, 1917, the United States was in reality anything but neutral. The country’s elite favored the Allies from the war’s fi rst weeks, with this sentiment rapidly growing under the infl uence of highly effective British propaganda.

American private loans and steadily increasing munitions shipments made it possible for the Allies to continue waging war in Europe, while at home the call for military preparedness, passionately championed by former president Theodore Roosevelt and often justifi ed by arguments of the imminence of German invasion, was gaining in infl uence. Although popular opinion on entry was still divided, the infl uence of the president’s advisors on a leader leaning in favor of the Allies—in spite of public commitment to pacifi sm and neutrality—made American entry into the confl ict inevitable.

This pervasive pro-Allies attitude among the country’s most powerful forces manifested itself as a media profusion of anti-German rhetoric: spy hysteria gripped the nation, as espionage headlines and often entirely fabricated stories of German atrocities found nationwide dissemination through oratory, books, and fi lm and especially in the press, which at the beginning of the war favored the Allies by a ratio of fi ve newspapers to one.<sup>13</sup>

While enlistment posters for various agencies were produced before 1917 in the United States, more important was that the period saw the crystallization and distribution of narratives describing Germany as barbaric and militaristic, its leader as a demonic despot, and its army of blood-thirsty rapists as a direct threat not only to American ideals but also to U.S. soil. These narratives are highly signifi cant to poster production after April 1917, as they provided ready-made, emotionally charged propaganda themes to make visual—as well as a mass audience already familiar with them.<sup>14</sup>

Specifi cally American realities made greater demands on American propaganda than was the case for the other belligerents. Politically, war involvement constituted a radical departure from the isolationist traditions of recent American diplomacy— a fact that needed obscuring. Further, the United States lacked the close geographical proximity to the peril of war that galvanized public opinion in the other combatant nations. Socially, in contrast to the relatively homogeneous societies of Britain, France, and Germany, the American population was an ethnically diverse mix of divided and often confl icting loyalties, dispersed over a vast area and lacking both a common history and the developed mythologies and iconographies available to propagandists in the European countries.

War entry saw those already actively engaged in Allied propaganda, notably the National Security League and the majority of the press, intensify their efforts, while President Woodrow Wilson, formerly so committed to neutrality, set about marketing the war in terms congenial to the American sensibility: this was “a war for democracy, a war to end war, a war to protect liberalism, a war against militarism, a war to redeem barbarous Europe, a crusade.”<sup>15</sup> He created the Committee on Public Information (cpi) to churn out propaganda through every available medium. Its head, George Creel, later wrote of the agency, “In all things, from the fi rst to the last, without halt or change, it was a plain publicity proposition, a vast enterprise in salesmanship, the world’s greatest adventure in advertising.”<sup>16</sup>

Part of the cpi, the Division of Pictorial Publicity (dpp) responsible for poster production, had at its disposal the nation’s most talented illustrators and top publicity experts. Submitting seven hundred designs in total over the period from April 1917 to November 1918, the dpp contributed signifi cantly in terms of both quality and quantity.<sup>17</sup> However, two thirds of the posters produced came from outside its jurisdiction, with the army, navy, marines, and Department of Labor all producing large numbers of their own. Many other designs were the product of competitions hosted by various patriotic societies. As Anne Classen Knutson suggests, poster production was probably less centralized than scholars have traditionally acknowledged.<sup>18</sup> Nevertheless, overall production proves consistent in