the expression of the most salient features of American propaganda during the First World War: the active employment and further development of advances in advertising and an aggressive campaign of enemy vilifi cation. (For more on depictions of the German enemy as the “Hun” in American posters, see Nicoletta Gullace’s essay in this volume.)

## Comparative Analysis of Poster Language

German posters of the First World War stress the need to defend Germany’s past cultural and economic achievements. The lone warrior, whether mythological barbarian, medieval knight, modern soldier, or blend of these, embodies (often literally) the German imagined community, a community whose unity and consensus are givens. By contrast, American poster language, visual and textual, stresses progress and expansion.

## 1. We Stand Alone in Defense of the German Nation

One striking characteristic of German posters is their preoccupation with the past, which is imagined as a source of ideal societal organization models and ever-valid gender roles. While American propaganda portrays the German soldier as a beast, a “Hun” in the kaiser’s military uniform (see fi g. 11, chapter 2), German posters present a positive barbarian imaginary.<sup>19</sup> Icons of Germanic fi ghters are incorporations of values originating in Germany’s tribal past but stretching continuously throughout its history.

The poster “The Last Blow Is the 8th War Loan” shows a man’s fi gure posed as a half-naked ancient warrior, brandishing his sword.<sup>20</sup> The sword, the central element in the picture, constitutes a dominant sign in many German posters. In “3rd Army: 7th War Loan,” a bare-breasted fi ghter swings to cut off the four heads of a dragon, each head representing one of the enemy allies.<sup>21</sup> The poem below him promises triumph over “lies and deception,” provided that “wallets be opened.” In both posters Germanic warriors, through visual and textual presentation, are put into a contemporary context.

The presence of Germanic motifs in these posters is not coincidental. According to Michael Titzmann, the images of ancient Germanic societies developed in German literature and the fi ne arts in the nineteenth century—such as the images originating in the rediscovered medieval heroic epic Nibelungenlied (Song of the Nibelungen)—promoted the identifi cation of contemporary society with an imagined ancient community. The identifi cation justifi ed the anti-democratic decision-making process of Wilhelminian Germany and helped the citizen to fi t into the monarchical governmental system. The preservation and defense of the homogeneous social group became the central value. The imagined ideal way of decision making was by consensus reached only through unconditional obedience to the leader.

The utopian picture of a disciplined community, with a lonely hero as its most exposed representative, however, contradicts the sociopolitical reality of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. The norm and value system expressed by the Germanic iconography of many posters obscures modern war, dominated by technology and a reduction of the role of the individual on the battlefi eld. By adopting the image of Germanic community as the ideal of societal order, the posters reject the social changes caused by the industrial developments of the nineteenth century, regressing into mythical, premodern tribal organization. German posters exhibit a fondness for weapons requiring the close physical proximity of the opponent and a “fair fi ght,” and a relative absence of modern war technology in comparison with American designs: the sword, medieval armor, lances, and cannons fi guring prominently in German designs.

The knight of the Middle Ages, also a popular fi gure in German design, expresses the same ethos. Here too, the possibility of keeping individuality in the conditions of “material battle” is expressed through regression into an idealized past (see also Stefan Goebel’s essay in this collection). The armored defender and the series of medieval votive fi gures are realizations of the same collective dream that contributed to the creation of the ancient dragon slayer: a man of action characterized by Treue (loyalty to the community) and Ehre (honor derived from the community’s confi dence in him).

By connecting the Germanic and medieval worlds and wartime Germany, the posters establish the image of a strongly militant, anti-democratic, and hierarchical social order. A strictly prescribed function of each member of the society results in the fi xing of roles that cannot be questioned or subverted: the authoritarian leader is ever present, his position never threatened. Hence, in contrast to Uncle Sam, the fl exible central leadership fi gure in American posters, little possibility exists for socially recontextualizing the German military leader (e.g., Hindenburg or Friedrich the Great). German posters stress his presence and the purpose of his existence, whether through reinterpreting the war loan as the best personal birthday gift for the leader or through his portrayal as a supportive halfreal father fi gure pointing out to the young soldier the meaning of battle.<sup>22</sup>

From the concept of complete unanimity within the group derives the understanding that any differences of opinion are potential threats to group integrity. Therefore the confl ict of 1914–18 manifests itself as an attack on the group. The peace of the group must be restored; its unanimity—the warrant for peace—must be reestablished through the fi ght against an enemy who is easily defi nable: the enemy is the trouble maker, the line crosser. However, in contrast to American posters, German defense is not defi ned as a preemptive “defensive strike,” an oxymoron that allows America’s war involvement to be justifi ed in terms of progress and universal law, but rather through securing the peace and status quo of the community. Durchhalten (fortitude), stressed by the military authorities in the diffi cult war months, can be seen not only in terms of physical survival but also in terms of keeping and strengthening the shared values of the group. German soldiers in posters, unlike their American counterparts, do not “defend democracy” by fi ghting its opponents in order to educate them and thus integrate them into the democratic order; they do not “spread freedom” over state borders but rather secure the community against corruption, fi ght off the aggressor, and guard the border. In one of the most popular posters of the time, “Help Us to Win! Sign Up for the War Loan,” a static soldier stresses the moment of tense silence and expectation of attack, keeping watch for the enemy, standing guard.<sup>23</sup> The border line, the barbed wire, is broken, and the gap has to be replaced by a human defender who watches over its continuity; his body marks the line of defense (as in the trenches), anticipating attack but not engaging in it. The concentration on the integrity of the group and on presenting the group and the hero as the center of interest has another consequence for German propaganda art: in comparison to American posters, the enemy is featured far less frequently in German designs. The visual language of German privately published postcards, in contrast to offi cial posters, is much more aggressive in its treatment of the enemy, who is frequently humiliated, laughed at, and disparaged.<sup>24</sup> One possible reason could be the unwillingness of the German military commanders to vilify the opponent in government-authorized publications, as the Haag Convention of 1907 prohibited this.<sup>25</sup> The almost complete absence of the enemy from German posters suggests the importance of the relationships within the community over the hostile relations with the opponent.

Consistent with the dominant anti-modern imaginary, when German posters do show the effects of violent confrontation with the enemy, they mostly depict destroyed enemy technology or provoke the viewer with apocalyptic images of the adversary’s technology devastating the peaceful German landscape. Physical encounters between soldiers are rare. Interesting in this context is the poster “We Beat Them and Sign Up for the War Loan!”: it is unclear whether the pronoun them refers to the advancing enemy tanks or the enemy himself.<sup>26</sup> Modern war technology and the opponent (British soldiers) are identifi ed with each other: dehumanized, they force Germans to defensive measures.

In contrast to this kind of metonymy, the bodies of German soldiers are pictured in both mythic and realistic ways. The nation is often identifi ed with the physical shape of its members. Analyzing the development of national identity in history, Ross Poole notes that the concept of “person,” of a self-conscious being who acknowledges a social role with its responsibilities, has usually been viewed in philosophy as privileged and subordinating other concepts of human self-understanding, among others the “man in a physical sense” or “natural man,” understood as a form of organic life.<sup>27</sup> The idea of defi ning the organic existence of the individual from within the concept of national identity is manifested in German posters. The individual soldier is identifi ed with the German nation—in a synecdochical process of fi guration, in which the one (the soldier on the battlefi eld) stands for the whole (the collective of soldiers and civilians describing themselves as a nation) as well as for the space inherited by the collective. The individual assimilates the nation to the extent that its geographical limits (as drawn on the map) are the limits of the human body: the skin becomes the German border, the blood metamorphoses into the rain and river water, the railways change into body nerves. When the group interprets the attack on its values as an attack on its physical existence, an act of violence against one member of the group is interpreted as an act of aggression against the whole nation. One bleeding German soldier means a wounded Germany; physical pain becomes one of the most prominent characteristics of national identity, but the sacrifi ce of health or life and the fulfi llment of patriotic duty offer in reward the transcendental feeling of belonging to the Fatherland.

The incorporation of the Fatherland, where the whole country takes the bodily form of an individual, appears also in Luis Oppenheim’s series of “comparative” posters from 1914. The portrayal of Germany’s expenses on education, production of electric machines, new book editions, and international trade show the apparent material/physical domination of the Wilhelminian state over its enemies. The fi gures in these posters are the embodiment of Germany: Germany as factory worker, farmer, university teacher, writer, wife of a wealthy citizen, and child. Once again, the greatness of the nation is expressed in the form of the human body and the size of its members: Germany appears as a bigger man, both literally and metaphorically. Ironically, the direct relationship between numbers and body shape and size did not always correspond with the aims of offi cials, resulting, if the context were not considered, in subversion of the intended propaganda message. One poster presenting three soldiers from the belligerent nations for comparison asks, “Who is the militarist?” The fragile German is overwhelmed by enormous French and British statues.<sup>28</sup>

Oppenheim’s posters also use national and gender stereotypes in order to solidify the roles of German citizens. The professions portrayed are exclusively practiced by men; even