# Epilogue

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Pearl James：《Picture This World War I Posters and Visual Culture (Studies in War\Pearl James：《Picture This World War I Posters and Visual Culture (Studies in War\Pearl James：《Picture This World War I Posters and Visual Culture (Studies in War\auto\Pearl James：《Picture This World War I Posters and Visual Culture (Studies in War.md

## Epilogue

n<sup>olitical</sup> <sup>posters</sup> <sup>serve</sup> <sup>as</sup> <sup>a</sup> <sup>bridge</sup> <sup>between</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>new</sup> <sup>pub-</sup>lic sphere constituted by mass communications and the lic sphere constituted by mass communications and the streets and squares that are the theaters of modern mass politics. They were (and in many developing countries they remain) among the visual protagonists of the industrial metropolis, layered many high and many deep on kiosks and walls like the strata of a sociopolitical geology in which plate-tectonic shifts are measured in weeks rather than millennia. Pointing backward to the broadsheets of the eighteenth century and forward to the fl ickering pixels of late twentieth-century television advertising, these agents of mass persuasion come into their own with the widespread diffusion of industrial chromolithography at the conclusion of the nineteenth century.

The emergence of posters as a dominant feature of the early twentieth-century cityscape cannot be explained by invoking technological factors alone. Aloys Senefelder’s discovery of lithography dates back to 1798. Godefroy Engelmann patented chromolithography thirty years later. By the mid-nineteenth century, a wholesale mechanization of paper production was under way, and the costs associated with color printing began to diminish due to the accelerated drying times obtained through the blending into printing inks of solvents like benzene.

However signifi cant, none of these developments guaranteed the rise to prominence of posters in general and of political posters in particular. Rather, posters triumphed within the broader setting of that second industrial revolution, which saw an explosion of new forms of mass communication in response to the cultural, sociopolitical, and economic needs created by industrialization, by the growth of literacy rates, and by the extension of suffrage to ever greater sectors of the population in modern nation-states. Sellers of goods, providers of services, entertainment venues, publishers, the state, protest movements, and labor unions—to mention but a few social actors—all required an inexpensive, fast, and effi cient conduit to the multitudes: multitudes equipped with highly variable degrees of visual and verbal literacy; multitudes who could not always be counted upon to read daily newspapers; multitudes on foot and riding public conveyances, distracted and on the move. Before the advent of radio and television, that conduit was largely provided by posters.

As the essays in this volume amply demonstrate, World War I marks a key threshold with respect to the role assumed by political posters. The reasons are adduced by every contributor: the distinctive challenges that the fi rst fully mechanized war posed to the governments of modern nation-states; their need for recruitment campaigns to enroll ordinary citizens into mass armies; their reliance upon bond campaigns launched on the domestic front to support the war effort; their struggle to maintain the public’s faith in the face of the sheer scale and brutality of the war’s carnage. These challenges were shared by the governments of every combatant nation. (The addition of Italy, Austro-Hungary, Canada, Australia, and Japan to the book’s mix would leave the picture unaltered.) Yet behind these global challenges there are local stories to be told: stories of how specifi c artistic traditions infl ect or defl ect the messages of political poster art, of how the soldier-heroes whom posters celebrate are inscribed into genealogical myths stretching back to the nation’s beginnings, of how enemies are not just dehumanized in the generic sense but also transformed into an Other that is irreducibly opposed to the national Self. Within these local stories are embedded tales more local still: of visual or verbal twists and turns added by individual artists, of works produced by independent groups and communities in tension with more mainstream state-sponsored messages.

The concept of propaganda does little to capture the complex layerings just evoked. If propaganda aims to “paralyze thought, to prevent discrimination and to condition individuals to act as a mass,” then the corpus of works examined here surely qualifi es as propagandistic.<sup>1</sup> Yet to reduce it to mere propaganda, assuming (which I do not) that mere propaganda even exists, would be to miss the nuances, ambivalences, and even artistry that the essays are careful to tease out. Some things are beyond dispute—that World War I posters were weapons in a battle for public opinion, that they were deployed to propagate myths of collective redemption and damnation, that the artists who created them operated under sometimes severe ideological and artistic constraints. To acknowledge this instrumentality, however, is not to deny the need for carefully drawn distinctions between effective and ineffective, imaginative and hackneyed, mainstream and less-than-mainstream iterations of poster art. Nor is it to diminish recognition of the inaugural role, for instance, that posters performed in contributing to the formation of a new verbal-visual language of mass persuasion: a language that had to communicate effi ciently in already semiotically oversaturated urban environments as well as compete with both rival media and commercial counterparts. Interpreting World War I posters means grappling not only with overarching instrumentalities but also with subtler textures of form, detail, and meaning.

The media landscape of the Great War was distinctive in three ways that directly condition the roles performed by posters. First, it was characterized by the increasing importance assumed by large-format illustrated news weeklies that were differentiating themselves from daily newspapers through an emphasis upon photographic features. Second, as mentioned in Jay Winter’s contribution to the present volume, it saw the birth of the documentary cinema in the form of pioneering works like G. H. Malins and J. B. McDowell’s 1916 Battle of the Somme: a cinema that, within three decades, would transform the very concept of “news.” Third, it consecrated the triumph of telegraphically relayed forms of newspaper reportage, which claimed readers’ attention based on the pretence of providing information that was increasingly “live,” “fresh,” and “direct from the front” (a cult of eyewitness reportage that found its natural prolongation in the unprecedented outpouring of war memoirs, testimonies, and war novels—written by everyone from footsoldiers to generals—gobbled up by home front readers even as the war was being fought). All three developments point to the beginnings of a documentarist, photo- or cine-journalistic model of mass communications that would transform the language of 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s posters. In the 1910s, however, this model still stood at a remove from poster art.

The World War I poster is typically a work that, for all its rhetoric of urgency and effort to achieve immediate impact, has little interest in staging effects of “liveness.” Accordingly, it has little if any use for photography, not to mention fi lm, drawing its models and sources instead from cartooning, commercial illustration, and the fi ne arts. Its communicative strategies are based on melding an act of the visual imagination—a painting or illustration—to a hortatory verbal/typographical message— a banner headline—rather than on the manipulation of realia carried out, for instance, in the photographic features of illustrated weeklies or in 1920s and 1930s posters based on the practice of photomontage. All of this places World War I posters squarely on the mythmaking (rather than on the documentary) side of the media divide: entrusting them with the elaboration of idealized images, allegories of the nation, and stereotypes of the soldier, citizen, or collectivity; or of monstrous doubles— the enemy combatant, the foe as faceless horde.

This mythmaking role infl ects both the visual language of the posters and their iconography. They become sites for the development of hybrid pictorial languages that borrow from folk traditions or outsider art (for instance, from children) in order to dismantle dominant canons of representation and give rise to nativist redactions of the modern. They become staging grounds for prospective/retrospective myths like those of the technobarbarian (viz., the Hun) and the soldier-knight, analyzed in several essays.

Let us muse for a moment over the signifi cance of the ubiquity of medieval knights in European World War I posters. Knights fi gure prominently less as an icon of revolt against the present or as a nostalgic evocation of a (mostly imaginary) past than for the same complex reasons that medievalism informs so many nineteenth-century debates concerning modernity, from Romantic nationalist efforts to locate the origins of modern nation-states in the Middle Ages to critiques of alienated labor, like those variously put forward by the Arts and Crafts movement, utopian socialists, and anarchosyndicalists, for whom medieval models of production and social organization provide a potentially radical alternative to their industrial-era descendants.

As interpreted by the graphic artists of the 1910s, the medieval knight is a composite fi gure. He conveys the defi ning values of a given (modern) national identity: composure and obedience (Germany); observance of a higher moral calling (England); the defense of Civilization (France). He places an ennobling veil of individual heroism, hand-to-hand and face-to-face combat, and warfare bound by laws of civility and even politesse over the harsh truth of faceless, lawless, mechanized, mass trench warfare. Yet he does so in a manner that merges retrospective with prospective fantasy. He is not dressed in actual fourteenth-century battle attire but instead in a gleaming steel version of display armor in what amounts to the creation of a distinctively contemporary type: the man of steel—a hyperbolically literal-minded counterpart to the armor-plated, blasé urbanite who, bombarded by the stimuli of the modern metropolis, builds his identity like a bullet-proof shell.<sup>2</sup> The realities both of mental life in the industrial city and of mechanized warfare have been displaced onto the surface of the warrior’s body and transformed into an impermeable shield: a projectile able to pierce the armored surface of other modern warriors even as it fends off the storms of steel produced by automatic weapon fi re, aerial bombardments, and barrages of artillery.<sup>3</sup>

It was once fashionable to situate such hybrid formations outside the mainstream of modernity: to exile them to outlying domains bearing labels like “reactionary modernism,” “eclecticism,” or “state propaganda” or simply to peel away “progressive” elements from “regressive” ones as if the latter were little more than the residue of history, soon to be cast asunder in the course of modernity’s inexorable march toward the overcoming of myth and the triumph of reason. More recent decades of cultural historiography have cast doubts on such linear narratives and utopic hopes, fi nding instead eclecticism in even the most avant-garde expressions of culture; exploring blurrings between left, right, and center; uncovering hitherto unsuspected continuities between high and low cultural forms. In keeping with this overall drift, political posters have moved from the sidelines to the center of contemporary attention. And they now make demands upon the contemporary viewer that transcend the discourses of collectors, historians of the graphic arts, and political historians. They demand a gaze that at once contextualizes and interprets, a gaze that looks from the standpoint of both surface and depth, a gaze that reads in the qualitative sense. Such is the gaze that the present collection casts on the posters of the Great War.

