# Consummate Fashion ## W H HERE does fashion begin and where does it end, in the era of exploding needs and proliferating media, mass advertising and mass leisure, stars and "hits"? What is left that fashion does not rule, at least in part, when the ephemeral governs the world of objects, culture, and meaningful discourse. and when the principle of seduction has profoundly reorganized the everyday environment, news and information, and the political scene? The fashion explosion no longer has an epicenter; it has ceased to be the privilege of a social elite. All classes are caught up in the intoxication of change and fads: the infrastructure and the superstructure alike are subject. although to different degrees. to fashion's rule. We have reached the era of consummate fashion. the extension of the fashion process to broader and broader spheres of collective life. Fashion is not so much a particular peripheral sector. now. as a general form at work in society as a whole. Everyone is more or less immersed in fashion, more or less everywhere, and the triple operation that specifically defines fashion is increasingly implemented: the operation of ephemerality, seduction, and marginal differentiation. Fashion has to be delocalized. It can no longer be identified with the luxury of appearances and superfluity; it has to be identified with the trivalent process that is thoroughly overhauling the profile of our societies. With the extraordinary expansion of this tripolar structure, modern societies have undergone a major shift that radically separates them from the type of society that developed in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. A new generation of bureaucratic and democratic societies has come into being: their dominant tone is lightness and frivolity. The coercive imposition of disciplines has been replaced by socialization through choice and image; revolution has given way to infatuation with meaning. Communication via advertising has replaced ideological solemnity, while the seductiveness of consumption and pop psychology has displaced rigorism. In a few short decades, we have shed the primacy of rigid ideologies and the disciplinary schema characteristic of the heroic stage of democracies; contemporary societies have recycled themselves in kit form and as express service. This does not mean, of course, that we have broken all ties with our roots. Frivolous society does not leave the competitive bureaucratic universe behind; rather, it carries that universe forward into the flexible, communicative stage. Nor does it leave the democratic order behind: it achieves that order in the frenzied passion for the spectacular, in the inconstancy of opinions and social mobilizations. The supremacy of the fashion form must not be mistaken for a form of decadence that would characterize Western societies given over to private pleasures and stripped of all faith in higher ideals. The fashion form has nothing to do with posthistorical “snobbery," the Hegelian-Marxist end of history as Kojève analyzed it in the late 1940s.¹ Consummate fashion does not imply the disappearance of social and political content in favor of a pure, snobbish, formalist gratuitousness lacking in historical negativity. Rather, it implies a new relation to ideals, a new investment of democratic values, and at the same time an acceleration of historical change. a greater collective opening to the challenge of the future, even if this opening comes by way of present pleasures. The end point of fashion entails the fading away of the great prophetic references, the end of the traditional forms of socialization, the permanent circulation of things and meanings. It brings about a decline in social resistance to change, and it mobilizes more consciously historical human beings who are more scrupulous in dealing with the requirements of democracy. There is no cause for alarm: I am by no means purporting to define all Western societies in terms of a homogeneous and unique supersystem. It is perfectly clear that essential aspects of collective life have very little to do with the fashion form. Economic spirals, the escalation in war technology. terrorist attacks, nuclear catastrophes, unemployment, the distribution of labor, xenophobia—widely disparate phenomena such as these lie at the opposite pole from a frivolous image of our time. The euphoria of fashion is certainly not omnipresent: the age of seduction coexists with the arms race, with lack of personal security in daily life. with the economic crisis and the subjective crisis. The point warrants reiteration: postindustrial societies are not unified entities that can be understood solely in the light of the fashion process. Science, technology, art, conflicts of interest. nations, politics, social and humanitarian ideals are based on their own specific criteria and have their own autonomy. The fashion form only encounters them in passing; it can sometimes rearticulate them, but it does not absorb them entirely in its own logic. My aim in this book is not to homogenize disparate entities, but to grasp a dominant historical tendency that is restructuring entire areas of our collective universe. The idea that contemporary societies are being organized under the laws of imperative renewal, planned obsolescence, images, spectacular solicitation, and marginal differentiation has been advanced for a long time, at various levels and with considerable skill, by such writers as David Riesman, Vance Packard. Daniel Boorstin, Herbert Marcuse, and later in France by Jean Baudrillard and the situationalists. Starting in the 1960s, the perception of a “new society," governed, as it were, by the fashion process, was presented by the theoreticians most attentive to modernity; however, their analysis remained confined to the conceptual framework inherited from an earlier, revolutionary mentality. The hegemony of fashion was denounced with a sort of critical overkill, while the denouncers failed to notice that the radical-subversive perspective was itself becoming a fad in use among intellectuals. No theoretical leitmotif can be seen more plainly: the trajectory of fashion in our societies has been identified with the institutionalization of waste. with the large-scale creation of artificial needs, with the standardization and hyperregulation of private life. Consumer society entails the programming of everyday life; it manipulates and regulates individual and social life rationally in all its aspects; everything becomes artifice and illusion in the service of capitalist profit and the dominant classes. In the "swinging sixties," critics went all out to stigmatize the empire of seduction and obsolescence, alleging the rationality of irrationality (Marcuse). the totalitarian organization of appearance and a generalized alienation (Debord). global conditioning (Galbraith), terrorist society (Henri Lefebvre). a fetishist and perverse system leading back to class domination (Baudrillard). The supremacy of fashion has been read in the light of the schema of class struggle and bureaucratic capitalist domination. Behind the ideology of the satisfaction of needs, the conditioning of existence. or "augmented survival," has been denounced (Debord). along with the rationalization and extension of domination. Shored up by the conceptual tools of Marxism, the classic reflex of condemning appearances and seduction has played its hand fully; it has found its ultimate expression at the level of the social body as a whole. The dossier needs to be thoroughly reexamined. In their feverish haste to denounce, these theoreticians have fundamentally misunderstood the historical work of the reign of fashion. Its real long-term effects lie lightyears away from those that critical thinkers and, in many respects, common sense itself have castigated and continue to attack. With total fashion, the ruse of reason is convoked as never before to the podium of history. Behind the scenes of seduction. the Enlightenment is at work; underneath the escalation of the ephemeral, the centuries-old struggle to conquer individual autonomy is under way.