# The Seduction of Things VE cAN cHARACTERizE “consumer society” empirically by listing some of its features: a higher standard of living, an abundance of goods and services, a cult of objects and leisure, a hedonistic and materialistic morality. However, the generalization of the fashion process is what defines consumer society in properly structural terms. A society that hinges on the expansion of needs is above all a society that reorganizes mass production and consumption according to the law of obsolescence. seduction. and diversification; this is the law that tilts the economv into the orbit of the fashion form. “Every industry tries to emulate the women's fashion industry. This is the key to modern marketing."! What Louis Cheskin wrote in the 195os has not been contradicted by the subsequent evolution of Western societies; the fashion process has not ceased to extend its sovereignty. The organizational logic established in the sphere of appearances in the mid-nineteenth century has in fact spread to the entire array of consumer goods. Everywhere, specialized bureaucratic agencies define objects and needs; everywhere, the logic of precipitous renewal and the diversification and stylization of models prevail. Manufacturers take independent initiatives in developing merchandise; forms of merchandise vary regularly and rapidly; models and series proliferate. These three major principles. which were introduced by haute couture, no longer belong exclusively to luxury clothing; they constitute the very core of the consumer industries. The bureaucratie-aesthetie order governs the consumer economy that has now been reorganized by seduction and accelerated obsolescence. Light industry is structured like fashion. ## Objects the Way You Like Them The fashion form is manifested most radically in the accelerated pace of product change, the instability and precariousness of industrial objects. Economic logic has simply swept away any idea of permanence; the rule of the ephemeral governs the production and consumption of objects. The reduced temporality of fashion has engulfed the universe of merchandise: that universe has been transformed. since the Second World War, by a process of renewal and "planned" obsolescence suited to an ongoing restimulation of consumption. I am thinking less about all the products that are designed not to last—tissues, disposable diapers, paper napkins, bottles, lighters, razors. cheap clothing-than of the overall process that forces companies to innovate, to keep on introducing new articles that are sometimes truly new in conception. but that sometimes (most often) simply incorporate minor refinements of detail in order to give the products an edge in global competition. In fashion's consummate stage, its abbreviated time span and its svstematic obsolescence have become characteristics inherent in mass production and consumption, following an inexorable law: a firm that does not regularly create new models loses its market penetration and weakens its image of quality in a society where consumers spontaneously hold that the new is by nature superior to the old. Scientific progress. the logic of competition. and the dominant taste for novelty all contribute to the establishment of an economic order organized like fashion. Supply and demand revolve around novelty; our economic system has been propelled into a spiral in which innovation is sovereign whether on a large scale or a small one. and in which obsolescence is accelerating: specialists in marketing and innovation can assure us that within ten years 8o percent to 9c percent of our current products will be outmoded; they will appear in new forms. with new packaging. “It's new, it's a sony." All the ads emphasize novelty: "New Pampers,”“New Ford Escort,"“New Egg Pudding. Franco-Russian Style." Newness appears to be the categorical imperative of production and marketing: our fashion economy advances in a forced march. as it were. with the indispensable seduction of change, speed, and difference. Gadgets symbolize the frivolous economy. Electric oyster knives, electric window washers. electronic razors with three cutting positions: we are swimming in overkill and a profusion of automatisms, in an environment of instrumental fairyland. During the 196os and 1970s, this neokitsch economy devoted to waste, futility, and the “pathology of the functional" was widely denounced.2 Gadgets—utensils that are neither truly useful nor truly useless—could appear as the essence and truth of the consumer obiect. Every area is potentially open to gadgetry; from the nine-position electric toaster to the sophisticated stereo system, all our objects are handmaidens of fashion, of more or less ostentatious technological gratuitousness. With the hegemony of gadgetry, the material environment comes to resemble fashion: the relations we entertain with objects are no longer utilitarian but playful in nature.3 What we find seductive above all are the games for which gadgets provide the opportunity; we like the play of mechanisms, manipulations, performances. Without in any way calling into question the place of play in our relation to the technological environment, we may wonder whether this sort of analysis is still in touch with the contemporary universe of consumerism. Is it legitimate to consider gadgets as the paradigm of the consumer object? Behind the denunciations does there not lurk one of the typical forms of the antimodern attitude which holds that programmed innovations are futile, inauthentic, and artificial compared to the age of artisanship? Not everyone is willing to see that beyond some of the ridiculous new manifestations of preciosity we find an ongoing process of objective progress, increased comfort. and efficiency. "Functional uselessness" is not emblematic of our technological universe. That universe is propelled more and more in the direction of high tech, high fidelity, and computerization; gadgets are giving way to “intelligent terminals," flexible videocommunications, autonomous and on-demand programming. The intellectual triumph of gadgetry will doubtless turn out to have been no more than a reflection of the inaugural moment of mass consumption intoxicated with the sparkle of technology At the moment, attacks on gadgetry are muted. Gadgets are less objects of scandal than amusing trinkets; we are going through a period of reconciliation with our material environment. Consumers are less dazzled by the pretensions of utensils; they are better informed about product quality: they compare advantages and disadvantages: they look for optimal use value. Consumption does not rule out a heightened desire for functionality and individual independence. The cult of gratuitous manipulations has yielded to the cult of comfort and livableness: one wants dependable objects, "cars for your life-style." Fashion in objects has found its cruising speed; it is accepted as a not-so-tragic destiny. a source of well-being and of welcome small excitements in the humdrum routines of everyday life. The industrial imperative of newness is currently embodied in a coherent politics of products, the diversification of production. The fashion process destandardizes products. lt multiplies choices and options: it manifests itself in policies that consist in offering a wide gamut of models and versions constructed on the basis of standard elements and distinguished at the end of the assembly line only by small combinatorial differences While mass production, at least in the automotive sector in the United States, began to put into practice the principle of full product lines and annual renewal of models as early as the 192os,† the process did not reach its full magnitude until shortly after the Second World War. With the proliferation of lines, versions, options, colors, and limited series, the sphere of merchandising entered the realm of personalization. The principle of marginal differentiation,"" long a specialty of clothing manufacture, was generalized. 'The fashion form became sovereign. In every realm, alongside the growing individualization of tastes, we find diversity substituted for uniformity; nuances and small variations replace likeness. All sectors have been conquered by the fashion processes of variety and secondary di-tinction The Renault supercing came in twenty-two different versions in a -ngle year. If we inchude color choice- and optional accessories and take all model- and option- into account. we can -ay that Renault produced about two hundred thou-and different car- that vear. Nike and Adida- each offer seseral dozen model- of running shoes in various colors. In 1o8b. -os propo-ed nine new compact-disc players. and dozens of speaker-. amphfier:. and ca-eue plaver-. Soft drink- have gotten on the bandwagon. Coca-Cola ha-created a whole range of sodas-Classic Coke. New Coke. Diet Coke. Caffeine-Free Coke. Caffeine-Free Diet Coke. Cherry Coke—old in different packaging and bottles. Consummate fashion entail- the generalization of the --tem of small differences multiplied to exce.. Along with the proces of technological miniaturization. the fashjon form generate- a universe of products organized in terms of microdifferences. With the exten-ion of the policy of product lines. the opposition between model and -erie. which wa- -till quite obviou: during the early phases of ma- con-umption. no longer determines the status of modern objects." although there i- -till a di-junction between luxury items and massproduced article.. A-embl -line objects have been contrasted with luxury model- in term: of iwo major features: on the one hand. the "technological defict" that con-ign, the azembly-line object to functional mediocrity and to more rapid abandomment: on the other hand. the "stvlistic deficit that condemn- the mas-produced object to bad taste. to a lack of formal integrits. -tsle. and originalinv. But how can we fail to see the changes that have taken place in both the technological and the aesthetic qualities of ma--produced objects? The widespread idea according to which mass production work, svstematically to reduce the life span of a product by deliberately introducing manufacturing defects and lowering the produrt', quality need, erious reexamination." While the observation may be accurate for certain appliances. it does not apply to others that have a :table or even an increa-ing life span e.g.. television sets and automobile engine..A 1983 survey -howed that 29 percent of all refrigerators owned by the re-pondent, were more than ten years old: one-fourth of the coffee mill.. hairdrvers and vacuum cleaners were also more than ten years old. Ma»-produced objects are not condemned to see their reliability and their durability keep on declining: technological degradation is not an inexorable destiny. There is, rather a tendency to add an "edge." in the form of fini-hing touches or "zero-defect" products. The same reservation applies to the aesthetic qualities of objects: the increased number of designers and the policy of creating a whole gamut of products has led to increasing number: of mass-produced items of undeniable formal quality. The age of the Citroen Deux-Chevaux. a robust vehicle entirely lacking in sculptural pretensions. is over: one automobile may cost 5c percent less than another that has precisely the same outward forın. As much care is taken with the external appearance of mass-produced articles as with top-of-the-line versions; small cars are models with elegant aerodynamic silhouettes, not very different in their formal conception from big cars. Our society is not carried away by the kitsch logic of mediocrity and banalitv. The difference that matters is less and less one of formal elegance and more and more a matter of technical performance, quality of materials, comfort. and sophistication. Stylistic originality is no longer reserved for luxury items: the aim of seductive appearance presides over the rethinking of all products: the opposition between model and series has been blurred, has lost its hierarchical and ostentatious character. Industrial production pursues the democratic project of equalizing conditions in the sphere of objects: in place of a system made up of heterogeneous elements, a graduated system made up of small distinctions and nuances is emerging. The extremes have not disappeared, but they no longer proudly exhibit their incomparable difference. ## Charm by Another Name Is Design With the systematic incorporation of the aesthetie dimension in the development of industrial products, the expansion of the fashion form is finally complete. Industrial aesthetics and the world of objects are henceforth subject to the design system and the rule according to which appearances must have charm. The decisive step in this advance goes back to the 192os and 193os, when industrialists discovered. after the Great Depression in the United States, that the outward aspect of consumer goods could play a crucial role in promoting sales: "Good design makes for good business. Increasingly. a new principle took hold: manufacturers grasped the value of doing aesthetie studies of the shape and presentation of mass-produced articles; they learned to embellish and harmonize their forms so as to seduce the eye, in keeping with R. Loewy's famous dictum: "Ugliness doesn't sell." A revolution in industrial production ensued: design became an integral part of the conception of new produets; the industry at large adopted the perspective of elegance and seduction. With the predominance of industrial design, the fashion form no longer refers simply to the whimns of consumers: it is a constitutive structure of industrial mass production. The frequent alterations imposed on the aesthetics of consumer products correlate with the new position attributed to seduction. By periodically introducing changes in model shapes, the consumer industries aligned themselves openly as early as the 195os with the methods used in women's fashion: they shared the same formal inconstancy that allowed a product to become outmoded through a simple change in style and presentation. The consumer age coincides with this process of permanent formal renewal, a process whose goal is the artificial triggering of a dynamic of aging and market revitalization. The frivolous economy that ensues is oriented toward the ephemeral and the latest fads. Vance Packard's description of it is ferocious, but highly characteristic: cars, domestic appliances, dishware, bedding, furniture—the whole world of objects waltzes to the rhythm of "styling," with annual changes in color and shape.'0 It would not be at all difficult to show how much still links us to that universe of the "fashion plot." The initial appearance of a product and its stylistic renewal always occupy a crucial place in industrial production; the way objects are "dressed" is always a crucial element of their success in the marketplace. In France at least, advertisements are strangely similar in their insistent references to the fashion look. Some three decades ago. we might have read about "the best-dressed car of the year" (De Soto), or "the latest thing in fashion" (Ford). Now we see “a haute couture style, a ready-to-wear price" (Peugeot), “the hit of the year, the Fiesta Rock, the look of a star" (Ford). Whereas the major automobile manufacturers regularly propose models with new lines, the most varied products enter into the endless cvcle of fashion operation and design. Even food products are beginning to be subject to the industrial aesthetic: the Italian designer Giugiaro has developed a new form of pasta. More and more small items—clocks. eyeglasses, cigarette lighters, pencils, pens, ashtrays, notebooks—are losing their traditionally austere character and are becoming cheerful. playful, malleable accessories. The watch industry has succeeded particularly well in its fashion aggiornamento: Swatch brings out some twenty fanciful models a year in colorful plastic presentations; we have entered the era of the clip watch, which “is worn anywhere except on the wrist." or the gimmick watch, whose hands move backward. Whatever the contemporary taste for quality and reliability may be, the success of a product depends largely on its design, presentation, and packaging. If in the 194os R. Loewy succeeded in restimulating Lucky Strike sales by renovating their presentation, Louis Cheskin gave Marlboro a new lease on life more recently when he invented its famous red-and-white hard package. It is said that packaging can improve the distribution of a product by 25 percent; often a new wrapper is all it takes to bring back a product that has been losing ground. Now, as before, clients make up their minds in part on the basis of outward appearances: in makeup and fashion, design still has a bright future. This does not mean that nothing has changed since the heroic era of consumerism. The age of the “art of waste," of the automobile as reigning queen of fashion, the era in which all General Motors automobile bodies were altered every year, the era in which variations followed the rhythms and the eccentricities of fashion and in which technological quality seemed inexorably doomed to deteriorate, did not come into being without some significant transformations. The present moment places more value on comfort, naturalness, maneuverability, security, economy, and performance. “The new Escort has arrived! A new look, new technology, new performance. More efficient, with new suspensions on four independent MacPherson wheels; extraordinary handling and comfort. More appealing, with a completely redesigned interior: a highly readable dashboard. ergonomic seats for the ultimate in comfort, very practical shelves and compartments, a huge adjustable trunk, not to mention record-breaking livability." Values less dependent on the intoxication of appearances have been imposed on a massive scale. In Europe at least, it is no longer possible to maintain that household appliances can become outmoded by the introduction of simple, small innovations in form or color. In many sectors. such as mass-market electronics, household appliances. or furniture. a formal classicism prevails. The form of electric razors. television sets. or refrigerators changes very little; no stylistic innovation manages to make them obsolete. The more technological complexity increases. the more the external aspect of objects becomes sober and streamlined. The ostentatious forms of automobile fenders and the gleam of chrome have given way to compactness and integrated lines; stereo systems. VCRs. and laptop computers appear with serious, streamlined forms. The frivolous complication of forms has been superseded by a high-tech superfunctionalism. Fashion is embodied less in decorative gaudiness than in the luxury of precision, of striking perceptible touches. Incorporating less formal play and more technical aspects, fashion tends toward a kind of upscale chic. At the heart of the fashion-oriented redeployment of production. there is industrial design. There is a paradoxical element here. if we think of the initial intentions of the movement that was articulated and implemented early in this century in the Bauhaus and later in the positions of "orthodox design." From the Bauhaus on, in fact, design has been directly opposed to the fashion spirit, to the gratuitous play of the decorative, of kitsch and aesthetic superfetation. Hostile in principle to superfluous elements and superficial ornamentation, design in the striet sense is basically looking for the functional improvement of products; it is a matter of conceiving of formal economie configurations defined above all by their semantic or semiologie richness. Ideally, design does not assign itself the task of coming up with objects that will please the eye, but rather with finding rational and functional solutions. Design in this respect is not a decorative art but informational design,"11 aimed at creating forms adapted te needs, functions, and the conditions of modern industrial production. In practice, the opposition to fashion was not nearly so radical. For one thing, in the United States, where industrial design developed most rapidly, its chief aims were the embellishment of objects and the seduction of consumers: styling, prettifying, dressing up, or making over through design. Then too, once they had moved beyond the intransigent, puritanical approach of the Bauhaus, designers took on less revolutionary tasks. Purist efforts to perfect the design of industrial products were supplanted by the more modest project of "resemanticizing" the sphere of everyday objects, that is, of incorporating into that sphere the rhetoric of seduction.12 The functionalist program was humanized and relativized; it opened itself up to people's multiple needs—aesthetic, psychological, emotional. Design abandoned the purely rational viewpoint in which form was to be rigorously deduced from the material and practical requirements of the object alone: "Aesthetic value is an inherent part of function."13 If the supreme ambition of design is to create useful objects adapted to essential needs, its other ambition is to "humanize industrial projects; the quest for visual appeal and formal attractiveness must have its place. In this sense, design is not opposed to fashion: rather, it institutes a specific fashion, a new elegance. an abstract beauty consisting of rigor and architectonic coherence. This is fashion of a special sort, in that it is unidimensional and functional (at least with the exception of recent “new design" fancies). Unlike "fashion." characterized by perpetual stylistic reversals, design is homogeneous: it restructures the environment in a consistent spirit of simplification. geometry. and logic. The design process does not keep objects from being presented in styles common to a given epoch or from eventually becoming unfashionable. In its reaction against the irrational sentimentality of objects, in its use of raw materials. in its consecration of orthogonal streamlining and aerodvnamics. design does not leave the order of seduction behind; instead, it invents a new morality for this order. Staging and artificiality have not disappeared: they have become accessible via the unprecedented pathway of minimalization. letting the “truth" of objects speak for itself,14with the discreet charm of simplification, economy of means, and transparency. After the seduction of caprice and ornamental theatricality, we have a cold, univocal, modernist seduction. With design, the world of objects is purged of reference to the past; everything belonging to collective memory is abolished in favor of a hypercontemporary presence. In creating contemporary forms that exclude relationships with other times (copies of ancient models) and places (floral motifs inspired by nature), design becomes a paean to rigorous modernity; like fashion, design connotes and valorizes the social present. The design object appears to lack roots; it does not arouse the imagination through allegorical or mythological references; it offers a sort of absolute presence without the slightest allusion to anything other than itself, without any temporality other than the present. The design object functions in the here and now; its attraction stems from the constitutive charge of pure modernity that it legitimizes. Hostile to futility, design is nevertheless subtended by the same temporal logic as fashion: the logic of the contemporary. Thus design appears as one of the figures of the sovereignty of the present. Nevertheless, design is by no means wedded in its essence to the geometric and rationalist aesthetic. For one thing, an artisanal design style of warmer, more intimnate forms has prevailed for some time (Scandinavian design, Habitat, and so on); furthermore, in the late 197os, new design trends began to rehabilitate emotion, irony, unpredictability, and fantasy, along with the misappropriation of objects and heterogeneous collages. Reacting against the rational and austere modernism inherited from the Bauhaus, the Nuovo Design (Memphis, Alchimia) presented improbable. provocative, almost unusable "postmodern" objects; articles of furniture became toys. gadgets, playful and expressive sculptures. With the trend toward poeticization and postfunctionalism, design displavs its fashion essence all the more openly even as it enacts a spectacular change of direction. Fantasy, playfulness, and humor, which are constitutive principles of fashion, have won a place in the modernist environment: they have managed to become inseparable from design itself. Hence the juxtaposition of stylistic contraries, the coexistence of ludic and functional forms. On the one hand, we encounter increasing fantasy and irony: on the other. increasing minimalist functionality. And the process is only beginning: in the world of objects, uniformity is not on the horizon. The rift introduced by design and the Bauhaus may be compared to the rift opened up by haute couture: design and modern fashion both participate, paradoxically, in the same historical dynamic. By refusing gratuitous ornamentation, by redefining objects in terms of combinatorial and functional arrangements, the Bauhaus sanctioned the autonomy of creators of objects, in a context of rigorism and formal asceticism: it established in the realm of objects what the couturiers had achieved, in a different way. for clothing: the demiurgie freedom of the creator, now independent—at least in theory—of the client's spontaneous tastes. Even if. unlike the Bauhaus (which was completely committed to a funetionalist and utilitarian rationalism), haute couture perpetuated the tradition of elitism and ornamentation, in structural terms design is to objects what haute couture was to clothing. At the core, we find the same modern projeet of wiping the slate clean, the same wholesale reconstruction of an environment freed from tradition and national idiosyncrasies, the same institution of a universe of signs attuned to the new needs. Haute couture remained faithful to the tradition of luxury, gratuitousness, and artisanal work, while the Bauhaus accepted the challenge of being “useful" and took industrial constraints into account. But together they helped revolutionize and denationalize styles; they helped promote the cosmopolitanism of forms. The radical nature of design prevents it from being reduced to a class ideology. It cannot be viewed purely and simply as an effect of the new conditions of capitalism oriented toward mass consumption and the marketing effort. A whole literature of Marxist inspiration has delighted in demystifying the creative and humanistic ideology of design by stressing its subjection to the imperatives of mercantile production and the profit motive. This criticism is partly warranted; however, it leaves unexplored the historically complex factors involved in the emergence of design. While the impact of the new technologies, the new conditions under which articles are produced and marketed (industrial mass production of standardized articles). must not be underestimated, they cannot account on their own for the appearance of the functionalist aesthetic. Design is inseparable from the work of modern plastic artists and, less obviously, from democratic values. The debt the design aesthetic owes to the work of avant-garde painters and sculptors—cubism, futurism, constructivism, de Stijl—can hardly be missed.1 Just as modern art achieved formal autonomy by freeing itself from faithfulness to models, so the Bauhaus movement was committed to producing forms defined through their internal coherence. without reference to any standard but the way the object was to function. Modern painting has created works valued in and for themselves: the Bauhaus for its part has extended that gesture by imagining strictly combinatorial objects. The functional style exalts the process of paring down, stripping awav: it glorifies right angles and formal simplicitv. This stvle is in fact the end result of the modern artistic spirit in rebellion against the aesthetics of display, emphasis, and ornamentation. The functional environment only brings to completion the essentially democratic modern artistic revolution that was inaugurated around 186o, jettisoning majestic solemnity and strong idealization. Seen as a negation of convention and a rehabilitation of the prosaic, all of modern art is inseparable from a culture of equality that dissolves the hierarchies of genre, subject, and material. Thus the functionalist aesthetic is subtended by revolutionary and democratic modernist values: it wrenches objects away from ornamental uses. abolishes the poetic models of the past, uses “vulgar" materials (projectors and table lamps in chrome or aluminum, Breuer's 1925 chairs and stools made of metallic tubes). The movement toward equality has eliminated signs of ostentatious difference; it has legitimized the new non-noble industrial materials; it has facilitated the promotion of “authenticity" and “truth” as values attributed to the object. The celebration of functional beauty owes little to the diverse social strategies of distinction; it is rooted in the industrial techniques of mass production. the effervescence of the avant-garde, and the revolution in aesthetic values characteristic of the democratic age. ## The Consuming Passion, or Ambiguous Rationality Among the theoretical works that have analyzed the extension of the fashion form in contemporary societies, those of Jean Baudrillard occupy a special place. Baudrillard deserves credit for being one of the first to see the fashion form not as an epiphenomenon but as the backbone of consumer society. Bv analyzing fashion and the process of consumption as part of the open logic of society and not as a manipulation of consciousnesses, he unquestionably helped overturn Marxist dogmas and succeeded in restoring vitality and theoretical nobility to the issue. Baudrillard coupled his radical hypothesis with close attention to concrete details; his texts remain an important contribution to the theory of fashion in Western societies. The challenge to Marxist dogma and the desire to understand novelty have included the keystone of all problematics in fashion since the nineteenth century: social classes and their competition for status. Baudrillard's analyses are based on an effort to demystify the ideology of consumption as a utilitarian behavior on the part of an individual subject whose goal is pleasure and the satisfaction of desires. In Baudrillard's eves. this ideology is deceptive: far from being rooted in a logic of individual desire, consumption is based on a logic of performance and social distinction. Veblen's theory of conspicuous consumption as a social institution charged with signifying social status becomes a major reference: in its wake, consumption is seen as a social structure of segregation and stratification. In this view, one never consumes an object for its own sake or because of its use value, but only by virtue of its signifying value in a system of exchange, that is, by virtue of the prestige. status. and social rank that it confers. Beyond its role in the satisfaction of needs. consumption has to be recognized as an instrument of the social hierarchy. and objects have to be seen as loci for the social production of difference and of status values.1º By the same token, consumer society. with its orchestrated obsolescence, its marks of greater or lesser value. its product lines. is nothing but an immense production process for "sign values“ that serve to connote rank and reinscribe social difference in an egalitarian age that has destroyed hierarchies based on birth. 'The hedonistie ideology that subtends consumption is only an alibi for a more fundamental determination: the logic of social overdifferentiation. The race to consume and the passion for novelty are not rooted in the pleasure principle; they are driven by competition for status. According to such a theory, the use value of merchandise is not the principal motivation for consumers. whose primary concerns are social standing and rank. Objects are merely "class exponents," social signifiers and discriminants; they function as signs of social mobility and social aspirations. 'This logie in which objects are signs is what drives the accelerated renewal of objects and their restructuring under the aegis of fashion: systematic ephemerality and innovation exist only in order to reproduce social differentiation. Thus, the most orthodox theory of fashion has come galloping back: the ephemeral is based on symbolic class competition; the bold, bizarre novelties of fashion serve to recreate distance, to exclude the greatest number—for the masses are incapable of assimilating them right away—and on the contrary to set apart, for a time, the privileged classes that can appropriate these novelties: "Formal innovation in the realm of objects is not aimed at an ideal world of objects; it is aimed rather at a social ideal. that of the privileged classes. which involves a perpetual renewal of their cultural advantage."1? Novelty in fashion is above all a distinctive sign. a "luxury of the well-to-do." Far from undermining social disparities in terms of objects, fashion “speaks to everyone, the better to put everyone in his or her place. lt is one of the institutions that most successfully restitutes cultural inequality and social discrimination—it establishes them under the pretext of abolishing them."18 What is more fashion contributes to social inertia in that the renewal of objects can compensate for an absence of real social mobility and a disappointed desire for social and cultural progress.1º As an instrument of class distinction, fashion reproduces social and cultural segregation; it participates in the modern mythology that masks the inaccessibility of equality. These classic analyses raise endless questions. However interesting they may be. as I see it they have missed the most important aspect of the explosion of consummate fashion: they have been blind to the new type of social regulation based on inconsistency, seduction, and a surfeit of choice. I would not dream of denying that objects may on occasion be social signifiers and signs of ambition. Rather, I am contesting the idea that mass consumption is governed chiefly by a process of status distinction and differentiation. that it is fully identified with the production of honorific values and social emblems. What is strikingly original, in historical terms. about the rise of needs is precisely that it inaugurated a trend in which consumption has been desocialized, in which the age-old primacy of the status value of objects has given way to the dominant value of pleasure (for individuals) and use (for objects). This reversal of direction is the distinguishing feature of the work of consummate fashion. We acquire objects less and less in order to acquire social prestige, in order to set ourselves apart from groups of lower status and to affiliate ourselves with groups of higher status. In acquiring objects, we are aiming not so much at social legitimacy and social difference as at a personal satisfaction that is less and less concerned with the judgments of others. Consumption, by and large, is no longer an activity governed by the quest for social recognition; it is undertaken in an effort to achieve well-being, functionality pleasure for its own sake. Consumption has very largely ceased to be a logic of status display; it has shifted into the order of utilitarianism and the individualist quest for privacy. It is true that in the early stage of the rise of mass consumption, certain objects—-the earliest automobiles, the first television sets—-could be elements of prestige, more heavily invested with distinctive social value than with use value. But it is perfectly obvious that those days are past. Today, we feel we have a natural right to new objects; we know nothing but the ethic of consumption. Even the new goods that appear in the marketplace (videocassette players, microcomputers, laser-disc plavers, microwave ovens, the Minitel in France) have not won recognition as articles charged with connotations of social standing; they are more and more rapidly absorbed by a collective avidity not for social differentiation but for autonomy, novelty, stimulation, information. To interpret the rapid infatuation of the middle and lower classes with videocassette players or sailboards in terms of the social logic of difference and distinction is the worst of misreadings: social pretension is not at stake. What is involved. rather, is the thirst for image and spectacle, the taste for autonomv. the cult of the body, the intoxication of sensation and novelty. The purpose of consuming is less and less to impress others and to earn social consideration; we consume more and more for ourselves. We consume for the objective services that things afford us: this is the path of narcissistic individualism, which corresponds not only to the development of the craze for psychological and bodily well-being, but also to a new relation to others and to objects. It is no more accurate, now. to represent consumption as a space ruled by the constraint of social differentiation than as an unbridled mimetic rivalry" and the envious war of all against all.20 The unleashing of waves of imitation and the equalization of conditions do not lead to more interpersonal rivalry and competition; quite to the contrary. what others think matters less and less in our acquisition of things. We are witnessing a pacification, a neutralization, of the universe of consumption. Neonarcissism has reduced our dependence on social norms and our fascination with them; it has individualized our relation to social status. What counts is less the opinion of others than the made-to-order management of our own time, our own material environment, our own pleasure. This obviously does not mean that objects have no more symbolie value, or that consumption has nothing to do with competition for status. In a good many cases, the purchase of a car, a second home. or top-of-theline designer articles signals an explicit desire to set oneself apart socially, to display one's rank. As we know, luxury products have not suffered from the economic crisis. They continue to be sought after and valorized; among other things, they reflect the persistence of the code that relates differences in social status to the consumption of specific products. But prestigious consumption must not be viewed as a model for mass consumption; the latter depends much more on the personal values of comfort, pleasure, and practical use. We are living in an era in which use value is getting its revenge over status value; private enjoyment is winning out over honorific value. As evidence, we can cite not only the emergence of contemporary consumerism, but also advertising itself, which puts greater emphasis on an object's qualities, on dreams and feelings, than on the values of social status: "Own the road, rule it, triumph over it, thanks to the engine's terrific power, and even more to its fantastic intelligence. . . . Touch the steering wheel, caress it and feel the reaction of a fine, impetuous and docile beast. . . . Glide into space with the superb serenity of total pleasure. All that and more in the Golf GTI." Baudrillard's critique of Marx's critique of the political economy has been misguided: far from initiating the "relegation of use value." consuinmate fashion brings that process to an end. The fetishism of the sign-object belongs more to the past than to the present: we are on equal footing in the age of use value, reliability. use warranties. tests, reports on the relation of quality to price Above all. we want appliances that work, that ensure good quality in terms of comfort, durability. and ease of use. This does not keep consumption fron being associated with anv number of psychological dimensions and images. But images of the product are at issue rather than signs of class. which constitute only one feature of the product image among many. When we purchase an object with a brand name we are consuming dvnamism. elegance. power. defamiliarization, masculinity, femininity, age. refinement. security. naturalness—all these images may influence our choices, and it would be simplistic to write them ff as indicative of social class alone, at a time when tastes are becoming increasingly individualized. With the reign of heterogeneous, polymorphous, proliferating images, we leave the primacy of class logic behind and enter the age of intimate and existential motives. psychological gratification, personal pleasure. and product quality and usefulness. Not even the success of products with designer labels can be explained simply in terms of the constraint of social standing: that success also attests to the neonarcissistic tendency to please oneself, to a growing appetite for quality and aesthetic value in broader social groupings. The materialism of contemporary societies is widely deplored. But why do the critics not stress that consummate fashion also helps detach human beings from objects? Under the regime of use value, we no longer become attached to things; we readily trade in our houses, our cars, or our furniture. The age that imparts social sanctity to merchandise is an age in which people part from their objects without pain. We no longer love things for themselves or for the social status they confer, but for the services thev render, for the pleasures they provide, for a perfectly exchangeable use value. In this sense, fashion makes things less real; it takes away their substance them through the homogeneous cult of utility and novelty. What we own we will replace; the more objects become our prostheses, the less we care about them. Our relation to things stems now from an abstract, paradoxically disembodied love. How can we continue to talk about alienation at a time when, far from being dispossessed by objects, individuals are dispossessing themselves of objects? The more consumerism advances, the more objects become disenchanted means, mere instruments: so it goes, as the democratization of the material world proceeds. These phenomena contribute to the adoption of an entirely new perspective on the historical role of consummate fashion. Far from being a vector for the reproduction of social differentiations and segregations, the expanded fashion system more than anything else has facilitated the pursuit of the age-old quest for individual autonomy. The fashion system is an instrument for the individualization of persons, not for the reintroduction of social distance. By institutionalizing the ephemeral. bv diversifving the range of objects, the consummate stage of fashion has multiplied opportu nities for personal choice. It has forced individuals to inform themselves. to embrace novelty, to assert subjective preferences: each individual has become a permanent decision-making center. an open and mobile subject viewed through the kaleidoscope of merchandise. Whereas even the everyday environment is increasingly conceptualized and configured from the outside by specialized bureaucratic agencies. under the reign of fashion we as individuals function increasingly as subjects of our own private existence; we are free operators of our lives, owing to the surfeit of choices in which we are immersed. The empire of fashion indeed signifies a universalization of modern standards, but in a process that promotes an unpreeedented emancipation and destandardization of the subjective sphere. Absorbed by the project of demystifying the ideology of consumption. the critical tradition has been blind to the power of individual autonomv that has been ineluctably encouraged by mass hedonism. that cultural epicenter of consummate fashion. To see hedonism merely as an instrument of social control and manipulation is a serious error: in fact it is above all a vector of the affirmation of private individuality. Mareuse could write, without hedging, that "the scope of society's domination over the individual is immeasurably greater than ever before. . . . 'The produetive apparatus . . . obliterates the opposition between the private and publie existence. between individual and social needs."21 just when a hyperindividualist explosion was about to occur that would affect all areas of private life. His analysis was particularly blind to the movement of social modernity. if we can judge by the extraordinary process of personal emancipation of individuals today in the sphere of sexual relatious, family life, women's behavior, procreation, dress, sports, and interpersonal relations. The goal of realizing one's potential, of deriving immediate pleasure from life, cannot simply be equated with the training of the homo consumans: far from lulling people into a stupor with programmed entertainment, hedonistic culture stimulates us all to take greater charge of our own lives, to assume more self-mastery, to achieve self-determination in relationships with others, to live more for ourselves. The euphoric assimilation of programmed models is only one manifestation of fashion; on the other side, there is a growing indeterminacy of existence, the morality of "fun" working toward the individualist assertion of personal autonomy. The frivolous economy has definitively uprooted traditional standards and behaviors. It has generalized the spirit of curiosity, democratized tastes and the passion for novelty at all levels of existence and in all social ranks. The result is a fundamentally labile type of individuality. To the extent that the ephemeral has invaded the everyday, novelties come on the scene more and more rapidly and are more and more readily accepted. The fashion economy has engendered a social agent in its own image: the fashion person who has no deep attachments, a mobile individual with a fluctuating personality and tastes. Such openness to change on the part of social agents requires a rethinking of the classic charges brought against frivolous society. accusing it of organized waste and bureaucratic-capitalist irrationality. The arguments are familiar, and examples are legion. Why have ten different brands of identical detergent? Why spend money on advertising? Whv so many models and versions of cars? Lofty souls mav lament the fact: an immense irrationality lies at the heart of the technocratic universe. But the critics are tarred with their own brush: critical intelligence is the paradoxical victim here of what is most superficial. The critics fail to see the forest for the trees. How, indeed, can one evaluate all the implications of the development of a flexible ethos for modern society? Or the implications of a new tvpe of kinetic, open personality? Is this not what societies in perpetual motion need most? How could our societies fall into step with constant change and bring about the requisite social adaptations if individuals were wedded to intangible principles, if novelty had not won broad social legitimacy? Innovative societies engaged in international competition have an urgent need for flexible attitudes, for nonrigid outlooks. The reign of fashion leads precisely in this direction, as much by way of the economy of objects as by way of information. We have to move bevond moralistic vituperation against fashion. Its irrationality and its apparent wastefulness aside, fashion contributes to a more rational edification of society because it socializes human beings to change and prepares them for perpetual recycling. Capable of softening rigidities and resistances. the fashion form is an instrument of social rationality, an invisible rationality: while it cannot be measured, it is irreplaceable for a rapid adaptation to modernity, for the acceleration of transformations in progress. for the constitution of a society equipped to face the endlessly variable requirements of the future. The system of consummate fashion puts civil society in a state of openness with respect to historical movement; it creates receptive mentalities characterized by fluidity that are inherently prepared for the voluntary adventure of the new. It is true that consummate fashion is also at the heart of certain difficulties in social adaptation, certain more or less chronically dysfunctional aspects of the democracies. Individuals brought up in the hedonist ethic are not much inclined to give up the advantages they have acquired (salaries, retirement benefits, working hours), to accept sacrifices. or to see their standard of living decline; they tend to make demands or to seek benefits in terms of their own social category alone. By exacerbating individualist passions, consummate fashion has followed the path of indifference to the public good. It feeds the propensity of individuals to look out for themselves; it gives the present priority over the future: it promotes special interests and corporate interests; it undermines the sense of duty or debt toward the surrounding community. The promotion of corporate interests corresponds unmistakably to the context of economic crisis, but also to the new era of individualism reshaped by the fashion form. The most challenging social struggles that are emerging in France in our dav are no longer those concerning global objectives of general interest. but those concerning the conquest or defense of highly localized advantages: they reflect the fraying of class consciousness and class ideologies. the preponderance of group self-interest over the search for overall social progress. The neoindividualist aspiration threatens group identities and class solidarities; it turns its back on macroeconomic constraints and leads to the defense of factional interests at all costs, to status-linked protectionism and the denial of mobility. In France. in some sectors of the economy. entire facets of national life can be paralyzed: consumers and society can be taken hostage in the name of narrow demands. Neocorporatism on the part of wage earners coupled with corporatism on the part of professions protected by long-standing legislation: we must not underestimate the capacity of such manifestations to block the dynamics of change, to perpetuate sameness, to slow down the unavoidable transformations required by the modernization of democracies and international competition. We must take note of the contradictory nature of the historical work of consummate fashion: in one respect it generates a positive attitude toward innovation, while in another respect it freezes the ductility of the social body. Fashion society at once accelerates and rigidifies the tendeney toward social mobility; paradoxically, it gives impetus to modernism and conservatism alike. The contradiction is perhaps not absolutely insurmountable, if we look at it in terms of different levels of historical temporality: the cultural and social effects of consummate fashion appear in different lights according to the temporal reference points selected. No doubt in the short run fashion does contribute to immobility, defensive attitudes, and the reinforcement of archaism. 'The same does not hold true for the middle run and the long run. On the deepest level, the frivolous age of free societies loosens up behavior; it legitimizes modernization, adaptation, and mutability on a massive scale. The general acceptance of different levels of severity in efforts to scale down the work force in industrial sectors in decline reveals, grosso modo, the "wisdom" of contemporary nations, the relative lucidity of the social actors involved in the economic crisis, even though this consciousness may be somewhat belated. While various blockages and resistances continue to appear. consummate fashion permits democracies to accelerate the dynamics of modernization. At the national level, the problem is that, given the mobility required for international competition. nations do not all start with the same weaponry: they are not all equal in their capacity to take the offensive in the new form of warfare that is a war of time. the speeding-up of time. Corporate interests. the aspiration to personal well-being, the demand for security and state protection do not carry the same weight everywhere; they do not impede change in the same way everywhere. In theory, the fashion form points contemporary societies in the right historical direction; in practice. it allows some nations to get bogged down in the immobility of special interests and acquired advantages; it institutes a delaying action that is fraught with consequences for the construction of the future. Political agencies have the responsibility of managing the effects of consummate fashion. in an effort to optimize its modern potential, to reduce its conservative aspect. In nations without a strong liberal tradition, the state has the historical responsibility of bringing off this vital enterprise in as short a time as possible: the trick is to control the deficit of modernity by using the powerful sense of the legitimacy of change that coexists with the collective fear of change. Western European governments need to move as quickly as possible from the stage in which modernization is both desired and feared to the stage in which modernization is actually carried out without major social disruption; indeed, that is their most important task, if we do not want to come out last in the war of time, if we want to stay in the running in the competitions of the future. In strongly individualist societies focused on the cult of the present, such a modernization clearly cannot be carried out in a forced march, or decreed by fiat from above. Public power must prepare for the future while taking present aspirations into account (these are necessary, moreover, in the long run, for the growth of our societies): it must find a social equilibrium between the necessities of the future and the demands of the present. Destined inexorably to accelerate the flexibility and the competitiveness of our societies, the state, in the European context, has a chance to succeed in this task only if it can handle the various resistances of the collective body with flexibility but also with firmness, while imagining new ways of resolving the conflict between the need to position oneself advantageously in the war of time and the requirements of life in the present for individual citizens. On the one hand, the task is to forge a united Europe, to strengthen the competitiveness of our industries, to encourage investment; on the other hand, it is necessary to negotiate social peace, to invent reasonable compromises for the partners in the social enterprise. A difficult and uncertain task, but not an impossible one, for it is collectively subtended by the revolution in subjectivities embodied in consummate fashion. ## The Power of Novelty On the "supply" side, the reasons for the boom in the fashion economy are not hard to fathom. The acceleration in scientific progress. combined with the system of economic competition, clearly underlies the world of generalized ephemera. Driven by the profit motive, industrialists create new products, innovating continually in order to increase their market penetration, gain new clients, and revitalize consumption. Consummate fashion is indeed the daughter of capitalism. On the "demand" side. the problem is more complex. As soon as people stop settling for a mechanical determinism that functions via production and advertising of the "revised sequence" type (Galbraith), the evolution of fashion desires calls for closer attention. Why do the countless little novelties "hook" consumers? What brings them acceptance in the marketplace? What permits the economv to function on the basis of rapid obsolescence and tiny combinatorial differences? The prevailing sociological response at least has the merit of clarity: class competition and strategies of social distinction sustain and accompany the dynamics of supply. This type of analysis underlies Baudrillard's earliest work as well as that of Bourdieu. For the latter, it is hardly astonishing that novelties always find a clientele. Neither a matter of conditioning nor of adapting production to publie taste. the "almost miraculous correspondence" between the products supplied and the field of consumption results from the "objective orchestration of two logical structures that are relatively independent" but functionally homologous: on the one hand, the logie of competition inherent in the field of produetion, and on the other hand, the logie of symbolie struggle and strategies of class distinction that determine consumer tastes.22 Both supply and demand are structured by competitive struggles that are relatively autonomous but strictly homologous; together they ensure that consumption is adequate to production at all times. If new products, as they are developed, are immediately adapted to needs, this does not result from a topdown imposition, but from "the encounter between two systems of differences," the encounter between the logie of conflicts internal to the field of production on the one hand and to the field of consumption on the other. Fashion grows out of this correspondence between the differential production of goods and the differential production of tastes, a correspondence that finds its place in symbolic class struggles.23 Even in conjunction with capitalist production processes, the strategies of class distinction do not suffice to explain the workings of an economy restructured by the fashion form. Can we account for the thousands of versions of automobiles. the endless varieties of soft drinks, stereo sets, cigarettes. skis. or eyeglass frames through the mechanics of class distinction? Can we explain the proliferation of pop idols and pop music through the dynamics of social distinction and pretension? The explanatory effort can hardly fail to involve some acrobatic contortions. To which dominant or subordinate faction will a given color correspond, or a given engine, or product line. or category of cigarette, or high-top shoe? The logic of distinction provides a crude map of the fashion economy; it is incapable of accounting for the endless escalating diversification and industrial surfeit of choice. The permanent installation of consummate fashion in our societies will never be understood until we restore cultural values to their rightful place, a place continually obscured by Marxisı and sociology alike. No economy of the ephemeral can exist without the synergistic action of major cultural objectives such as comfort, aesthetic quality, individual choice, and novelty. The innumerable improvements in large and small home appliances could hardly have proliferated so rapidly if those improvements had not also responded to individual desires for well-being, to the modern taste for material comfort. to the satisfaction of saving time and doing less work.2+ We cannot understand the success of color television, hi-fi, or compact-disc plavers without relating this success to a widely shared desire for quality images and music. We cannot comprehend the politics of product lines without taking into consideration the democratic value attributed to personal choice, the individualization of tastes, the desire to have made-to-order articles adapted to the consumer's own idiosyncratic preferences. Even if all these mechanisms and meanings were initially embodied at the higher levels of society, they have acquired their own autonomy, a diffuse legitimacy in all social strata. The fashion process that governs our economy is less dependent, in the last analysis, on class oppositions than on orientations shared by the social body as a whole, and these orientations taken together open up the social possibility of an endless dynamic of renewal and diversification. The impact of symbolic class rivalries is secondary with respect to the power of these imaginary significations that have penetrated all classes and have taken on a life of their own. In the empire of fashion, what amounts to the cultural power of novelty requires special emphasis. Class rivalry is insignificant compared to the effects of the social signification that single-handedly generates the taste for difference, that precipitates boredom with anything repetitive, that makes people love and want anything that changes, almost before the fact. The “planned” obsolescence of industrial products is not simply a result of the capitalist technostructure. It has been grafted onto a societv that has been converted in very large measure to the incomparable thrill of newness. At the root of the demand for fashion, the imperative of setting one self apart socially is less and less operative, while the thirst for novelty comes increasingly into play. Consummate fashion, like the first historical manifestations of fashion at the end of the Middle Ages, is essentially dependent on the emergence of a certain number of social meanings: in the foreground of these meanings we find the exaltation and legitimization of novelties. While the ethos of novelty may have been the exclusive property of the aristocratic and bourgeois social elites for centuries, it is henceforth applicable at all levels of society. And while there is no doubt about the contribution of mass production to developing the desire for novelty, other factors have made major contributions as well. The code of the new in contemporarv societies is inseparable, in particular, from progress in the equalization of conditions and from individualist claims. The more individuals keep to themselves and remain absorbed in themselves. the more different tastes there are, and the more room for novelties. The value of the new proceeds apace with the appeal to the private personality and per sonal autonomy. At the end of the Middle Ages, fashion was already intertwined with the aspiration to individual personality. with the assertion of individual uniqueness in an aristocratic social and ideological world. The process was simply exacerbated with the reign of equality and democratic individualism. Tocqueville stressed this point: democratic individualism is the burial ground for the reign of the past; all people recognized as free aspire to shed the constraining and compulsory bonds that attach them to the past. Submission to the tacit rules of tradition is incompatible with individual mastery of the self. "Those who have gone before are soon forgotten": whereas the ancestral legacy is discredited in the era of homo aequalis, the present and the changing standards that are offered as optional behaviors are correspondingly elevated in status: they prevail not by authority but by persuasion. In submitting to the new decrees, "the modern man flatters himself that he is making a free choice of the propositions that are made to him."25 While obedience to the ancient prescriptions is antithetical to the assertion of individual autonomy. the cult of novelty promotes a feeling of independent individuality: one is free to choose; one no longer makes decisions on the basis of a preexisting collective legitimacy but on the basis of the impulses of one's own heart and mind. With modern individualism, the new receives its full consecration: on the occasion of each shift in fashion, there is a feeling, however tenuous, of subjective freedom, of liberation from past habits. With each novelty, some inertia is shaken off. a passing breath of fresh air becomes a source of discovery, of subjective positioning and availability. In a society of individuals committed to personal autonomy, it is clear why what is new offers such a lively attraction: it is experienced as an instrument of personal "liberation," as an experiment to be undertaken, an experience to be lived, a little adventure of the self. The consecration of the new and modern individualism go hand in hand: novelty is in phase with the aspiration to individual autonomy. If consummate fashion is shored up by the logic of capitalism, it is equally sustained by cultural values that find their apotheosis in the democratic state.