# Advertising on the Offensive dvERTisınG has grounds for optimisım. The overall amount of money spent on it keeps rising, and advertising itself keeps invading new spaces: state-owned television channels, colloquia, artistic events. sports events. and movies, as well as consumer goods of all sorts, from T-shirts to windsurfer sails. Brand names appear on virtually everything in our everyday environment; today's advertising knows no bounds. We have seen campaigns for “generic" items, products without brand names: we turn to advertising to “have fun" on Minitel or over telephone lines: places for prayer are set aside in supermarkets: spot ads fill the gaps between numbers in recorded music; campaigns are organized to sell stock in denationalized enterprises on the open market. Publicity is in its hevdav. This expansive logic is enjoying something like a state of grace: children love it, older people condemn it less forcefully than they used to. and people in general in growing numbers look on it more or less favorably. A socially legitimate form of communication, advertising has been consecrated as an art form as well. Museums make room for it: retrospective poster exhibits are organized; prizes for excellence are awarded: advertisements are featured on postcards. The age of mere advertising is dead: long live creative communication! Advertising conspires with art and cinema. and dreams of embracing history. Political parties, major government agencies. and even whole nations are adopting it freely: as early as 198o. in France. the state could be viewed as the number one advertiser. Brand-name advertising is increasing, matched by publie-service and general-interest advertising. Major campaigns have been launched on behalf of traffie safety, employment. women's issues, energy-saving measures, and the elderly. Railway and telephone systems, the Paris subway, and the postal service all enjoy the plugged-in delights of communication. Advertising as a strategy is coming into its own. Advertising, not propaganda: these two forms of mass communication have too often been amalgamated, when they are actually poles apart. With advertising, communication takes on an entirely original profile; it is caught in the net of the fashion form. At the opposite extreme from totalitarian logic, it is immersed in superficiality and frivolous seduction, in fantasy and gimmickry: at the opposite extreme from the total control that is rather too readily attributed to the unreasonable forms of commercial and political reasoning, advertising embodies a new deal whose fundamentally democratic position and effects we are only beginning to comprehend. ## Advertising: Chic Value and Shock Value One of advertising's key weapons is surprise. At the heart of advertising, we discover the very principles we have seen at work in fashion: originality at any price. perpetual change, ephemera. Anything is better than lulling the audience to sleep: nothing is worse than becoming invisible through familiarity. In France. a poster campaign lasts, on the average, seven to fourteen davs. It is essential to keep on creating new texts, new visuals, new spots. Even when slogans or jingles are repeated, the scenarios and images change. Brand-name competition and industrial standardization lead to an endless race for unprecedented effects, for difference; it is a race to capture consumers attention and memory. The requirement of novelty nevertheless respects the inviolable rule according to which messages must be immediately readable and the conventions of the moment must be followed. This in no wav prevents advertising from cheerfully upsetting a certain number of conventions, from pushing back limits, from getting carried awav. intoxicated by hvperbole. “In the long run, all fashion is excessive." as Paul Poiret used to say. For its part, advertising does not shy away from excess; indeed, it manifests a wild imagination (witness Grace Jones swallowing a Renault CX) and an inclination to overstatement (witness the Cinzano slogan, “Time is on our side,” or “the Pepsi generation"). Advertising is a form of communication based on controlled excess in which the superlative is alwavs counterbalanced by playfulness and humor. "Tomorrow. I'll take the bottom off"; and there are the Wrangler skeletons, or the Visa cards that take off from an aircraft carrier. Advertising uses the discourse of fashion, and like fashion it is fed by shock effects, minitransgressions, spectacular stagings. It depends entirely on “getting noticed" without ever tilting too far toward aggressive provocation. Advertising's tendency toward excess does not rule out less outrageous campaigns designed explicitly to persuade consumers through the credibility of the message. For a long time, advertising has tended to make apparently plausible statements that assert the unparalleled quality of a product (“Omo washes whiter"), sometimes calling upon the testimony of well-known stars or ordinary individuals in “slice-of-life” sequences. This sort of ad has led Daniel Boorstin to maintain that advertising is situated beyond truth and falsehood, that its register is one of “credibility"' rather than truth: in advertising, it is less a matter of delivering verifiable facts than of making declarations that seem plausible, that are more or less credible. We see this with claims backed up by plausible arguments:2 "When you're Number Two, you try harder" (Avis); "We've been in the business for thirty-two years" (Bis). Still, the evidence suggests that this trend is declining; at the moment, advertising is less interested in convincing than in amusing, astonishing, getting a laugh. Boorstin's cherished "self-fulfilling prophecies," declarations that are neither true nor false. have been replaced by associative plays on words and short circuits of meaning, in increasingly nonrealistic, delirious, preposterous, and extravagant communications. This is the era of creative. spectacular advertising: products have to become stars, they must be transformed into "living beings"; humanized brands have to be created, with their own style and character.3 It is no longer a question of checking off anonymous performances and flatly objective qualities, but of communicating a "brand-name personality." Seduction through advertising has shifted to a new register: seduction is henceforth invested in the personalized look. Brand names have to be humanized, given a soul and a psychology: the calın Marlboro man; Dim's liberated, sensual, humorous woman: Eram's mischievous. carefree shoes; the with-it Parisian subway system: the Perrier craze. Just as fashion individualizes the appearance of each human being. advertising aims to personalize each brand name. If it is true, as Jacques Séguéla says, that "real" advertising has adopted the methods of the star system. it is even more accurate to say that advertising is communication structured like fashion, more and more under the sway of the spectacular. personalized appearance, pure seduction. The apotheosis of seduction. Previously, advertising's appeal had remained subject to marketing constraints. Advertisers had to make concessions to rational argument; they had to be able to justify their basic promises. Under the regime of "copy strategy." seduction had to be reconciled with reality, in terms of the merchandise: the product's advantages its excellence, had to be demonstrated. With advertising's redundant and explanatory slogans, the empire of seduction was limited by the preeminence of plausibility, quantitative measures, and other "objective" virtues of things. Today, creative advertising takes the high road. It gives priority to the realm of a virtually unadulterated imagination. Seductiveness can now be freely exploited for its own sake; it shows off as hyperspectacle. displaying the magic of artifice in stagings indifferent to the reality principle and to the logic of plausibility. Solicitude, warm attentiveness, and gratification function less and less as tools of seduction: instead, we find a playful Hollywood-style theatricality, a superlative gratuitousness (Citroën's AX model billed as “Revolutionary!"). For too long, the essence of advertising was thought to lie in its power to distill communicative warmth; it supposedly won us over by becoming a maternal agency full of little attentions for us.\* To be sure, even today the affective card may be played ("You love Channel One, Channel One loves you"), the note of solicitude may be sounded ("We put everything we have into the details so you won't have to. For us. a business trip has to be a success all along the line"—Air Canada). However. we are also starting to see ads that adopt a cynical tone: thus. in the "U.T.A. for U.S.A." campaign, in case you have not caught on, you get this: "Consult your regular doctor." There is also the Epson computer commercial: “Inhuman, our PC A.X.? One hundred percent!" What seduces is not the effort to seduce or cajole or valorize the consumer (compare Kipling toilet water, “for the men who move the world"). but rather the original, spectacular, fantastic aspect of the ad. Seduction proceeds by suspending the laws of the real and the rational. by lightening the seriousness of life, by celebrating artifice. Even if we have entered the era of “concepts" and creative communication. even if making beautiful and attractive posters is no longer enough, aesthetic considerations remain primordial in the work of advertising. The sculptural valorization of a product, retouched photos, luxury interiors, refined decors. beautiful bodies and faces—by such means, advertising poeticizes products and brand names and idealizes the ordinariness of the merchandise. However important humor, eroticism, or extravagance may be. the most classic weapon of seduction-namely, beauty—continues to be widely exploited. Cosmetic products and perfumes in particular depend systematically on refined, sophisticated ads that feature sublime creatures, the profiles and makeup of one's dreams. But many other ads—for women's underwear. fashion clothing, alcohol, cigarettes, coffee-—strive just as hard for the chic effect. High-precision technology is joining the bandwagon: Sharp and Minolta have launched poster campaigns with streamlined designer images. Just as fashion is inseparable from the aestheticization of the individual, so advertising fulfills a cosmetic function for communication. Like fashion, advertising appeals first and foremost to the eve: more than information, it promises beauty, the seductiveness of appearances, an idealized ambiance. Advertising takes its place alongside industrial design, neighborhood renovation, antenna disguises, shopwindow dressing, and landscape renewal, in the generalized process by which we aestheticize and embellish everyday life. Everywhere we turn we encounter reality cosmeticized, value added in the fashion mode In addition to aesthetic charm, seduction exploits the fanciful paths of untrammeled creativity. Word plays (“Fran-Choix Ier"—Darty), alliterations and childlike repetitions of syllables ("Qu'est-ce que tu bois, doudou, dis donc"—Oasis), shifts and displacements of meaning (“Do you want to sleep with me?"—Dunlopillo), appeals to emotion (a weeping statue—BASF audiotapes), fantastic or surrealist imagery (a little girl walking on water—Schneider): advertising does not seduce homo psychoanalyticus, but homno ludens. Its effectiveness has to do with its playful superficiality, with the cocktail of images, sounds, and meanings it offers without any concern for the constraints of reality or the seriousness of truth. “There is Urgo in the air, there is air in Urgo": nothing needs to be deciphered, everything is right there in the simplicity of the wordplay, in the lightness of the complicitous wink. Profundity is dissolved and surfaces are celebrated; advertising is the luxuriousness of game playing. the futility of meaning, creative intelligence at the service of superficiality. If it is true that advertising can help launch fashions, it is truer still that advertising is fashion itself in the realmn of communication. More than anything else, it is frivolous communication, a communication in which the “concept" is the gimmick: “Paris-Baghdad: 12oF" (Eram). And if fashion is the fairyland of appearances, advertising is without question the fairyland of communication. People in today's advertising world delight in stressing the radical novelty of their methods. No more claimns, no more copy strategy: communication and the creative idea are everything. While we should not underestimate the changes that are under way, it may nevertheless be useful to point out how much still links the new with the old. It is true that today's advertising wants to be seen as "conceptual." This does not keep it from being an extension of an earlier logic, one that is constitutive of modern advertising: the logic of fantasy and play. Before, there were slogans like "Dubo, Dubon, Dubonnet," or "Le chausseur sachant chausser": now. we see "Mini Mir, mini prix, mais il fait le maximun." Above and beyond the difference of register, advertising still remains a matter of insights. clever ploys, playful combinations, games with meaning. Lacking any other mainsprings but lightheartedness and superficiality of meaning. advertising remains in the realm of superficial and euphorie communication. No wholesale mutation in advertising has occurred. but rather an inflection of its trajectory, in a process that works continually to make communication more flexible, to eliminate the solemnity and ponderousness of discourse. to promote the frivolous world of signs. The current aggiornamento of advertising has to be understood in the context of the profound transformations our era is experiencing in its mores and its dominant personality. The phenomenon echoes the metamorphoses of the contemporary individual, who is less concerned with displaying external signs of wealth than with fulfilling his or her ego. By turning away from spelling out the anonymous qualities of products, creative advertising registers its own neonarcissistic sensibility. a sensibility detached from the ethic of social status, absorbed by personal subjectivity. by "hunger for life" and the quality of the environment. Advertising filins and slogans seek less to prove the objective excellence of the products involved than to provoke laughter and emotion, to trigger aesthetic, existential, and affective resonances. This spiral in the realm of the imaginary corresponds to the profile of the postmodern individual. To come into play, it requires the combined action of the code of novelty and the hedonistic and psychological values that have fostered extremism in the search for the absolutely unprecedented. The age of pleasure and self-expression requires a decrease in tedious repetition and stereotyping, an increase in fantasy and originality. Advertising discovered very early on how to adapt these cultural transfornmations to its own ends. It has succeeded in constructing a system of communication in harmony with contemporary tastes—for autonomy. personalitv, quality of life—while eliminating the ponderous. monotonous. infantilizing forms of mass communication. Wrangler features skeletons: the Avenir-Publicité agency promises that "tomorrow. I'll take the bottom off." Creative advertising has an emancipated appeal: it is addressed to adults who are not particularly conformist, who are largely indifferent to the major taboos, who are capable of enjoying a commercial on more than one level. All this still does not allow us to imagine (as Séguéla does) that advertising is taking the place of a faltering cinema as a mechanism for mythmaking. By its very rhythms and the perceptions it invites. advertising constitutes an obstacle to dreaming and prolonged evasion. It has no subjective resonance; it elicits no emotional involvement. Like fashion. it is made to be forgotten at once; it enters into the growing gamut of products without residue in our biodegradable culture. Still. it is undeniable that, reoxygenated in this way, advertising succeeds better in its mission, which entails establishing a positive brand image for products while retaining the public's attention, limiting the practice of channel hopping. Is that not the real dream of everyone in advertising? Advertising's new directions cannot be separated, however, from the self-promoting desires of advertising people themselves. In a society that sanctifies novelty. imaginative holdness works better than anything else as a way to assert oneself in the field of culture and communication. For someone in advertising, there is no better image than a hyperspectacular superproduction—no matter how effective it really is in commercial terms, for its effectiveness is not always in proportion to its creative qualities. The future of advertising is in large part the work of the logic of advertising itself, of the fashion imperative that imposes the search for an artistic image. Alongside ready-to-wear designers and business leaders who have become “creators," hairdressers who call themselves “facial designers," artisans who see themselves as artists, advertising people have plunged into the immense wave of social valorization characteristic of democratic societies: they are recognized as “creative types." So it goes, in the age of equality: business gains a supplement of soul. Lucrative activities never come into their own more fully than when they succeed in hoisting themselves up to the level of expression and artistry. ## A Tranquil Force Advertising is communication in the fashion mode: that does not make it any less representative of the modern process of bureaucratic control. As a message of persuasion developed by specialized concept engineers. for some theorists advertising is linked with the logic of bureaucratic power that characterizes modern societies: even though it uses gentle methods. it is always in the process—as are all disciplinary institutions—of guiding behavior from the outside, of penetrating society in its innernost recesses. An exemplar of the benevolent management of human beings. advertising broadens the rationalizing work of power. It reflects the extension of the modern bureaucratic organization that is defined by the way it produces, reorders, and programs the collective whole from an external and scientific viewpoint. This analysis is now a classic one: with the development of the revised sequence,5 needs are directed and manipulated: the consumer's autonomy is eclipsed in favor of a prepackaged demand orchestrated by the technostructural apparatus. The impetus of bureaucratic power toward rationalizing and planning makes a leap forward here: after production, demand itself turns out to be a target for global planning. Advertising produces needs that are precisely adapted to the supply: it allows produe ers to program the marketplace, to subvert the freedom of consumers Society as a whole tends to become a circular system. without exteriority. without difference, without randomness. By scientifically designing tastes and aspirations, by conditioning private lives, advertising only hastens the advent of a fundamentally totalitarian society." In its determination to subject society through and through to the standards of bureaucratie power, to reorchestrate a daily life that has been stripped of all depth and all autonomy, advertising reveals its complicity with totalitarianism, a totalitarianism that is compatible, moreover, with free elections and the party system. These arguments have had their dav. They continue in considerable measure to provide background for our understanding of the advertising phenomenon," even though society's rejection of advertising is on the decline. As I see it, the entire field of problems needs an overhaul. It is exemplary of the speculative slippage that hypocritical thinking can produce. For my part, I shall register a serious objection to the wholesale identification of the advertising order with the totalitarian order. The disjunction is in fact considerable. Advertising has nothing in common with the efforts of political power to absorb civil society and the unlimited project of changing men and women. Nor has it anything in common with the process of tenuous control of the "disciplines" (military service, for example) that are equally totalitarian in essence, in their goal of standardizing and programming bodies. According to Foucault's analysis, the disciplines depend structurally on totalitarian logic:8 the agencies of power work toward a thorough reconstitution of the movements of bodies; they think in the place of subjects: they direct them "rationally," orchestrating the most minute details of behavior from without. Advertising does nothing of the sort. In place of hit-or-miss coercion there is communication; in place of regimented rigidity there is seduction; in place of mechanistic training there is plavful entertainment. Where the disciplines categorize bodies according to fixed grids and block the initiative of subjects by minute regulations. advertising opens up a space of broad indeterminacy. It always leaves open the possibility that one can evade its persuasive action: one can change the channel. turn the page. The fashion form has no relation to panoptic totalitarian logic. Advertising integrates individual freedom and the randomness of subjective movements into its own order. With advertising. a new level of control is in place: it is no longer a question of illuminating every dark corner, of controlling every aspect of life, but rather of influencing a collective whole while leaving the individuals who constitute that whole free to opt out of its action. Advertising acts on masses, not individuals: its power is not mechanical but statistical. 'The discipline of the infinitesimal has given way to a mode of action that ignores the universe of the minuscule. Neither a form of “political anatomy nor a technology of subjection, advertising is an agent of stochastic stimulation. The totalitarian enterprise. as we know, acquires its singular historical identity only in relation to its goal of complete absorption of civil society by the agency of the state. As collective life becomes an object for the state to control and organize down to the smallest details, all elements that appear foreign to the standards of the party-state are subject to limitless domination and repression. Everything that exists independently of the power structure, anything that weaves links of sociability arising fromn earlier states of humanity, has to be excluded and destroyed. As Hannah Arendt put it, totalitarianism is rooted in the phantasmagoric helief that everything is possible; its aim is "the transformation of human nature. Human beings and human societies are experimental fields, blank slates, pure amorphous matter inherently subject to shaping by the unlimited power of the state. A new spirit, a new human being, must be formed and educated. This truly demiurgic project has nothing in common with the much more limited enterprise of advertising and the “revised sequence." Only through an insidious analogy has it been possible to see the \*programming" of daily life and the creation of needs as a totalitarian manifestation of power. Advertising does not aim to reform people and mores: in reality, it takes people as they are, attempting only to stimulate a preexisting desire to consume. By continually establishing new needs, advertising settles for exploiting the common goals of well-being and novelty. It is not a utopia; it is not a project for transforming minds: advertising considers human beings in the present, with no vision of the future. It is less a matter of reconstituting humanity than of making pragmatic use of existing tastes for material enjoyment, well-being, and novelty. Whatever the critics of generalized conditioning may argue, the management of demand and the creation of desire still remain within a libertarian horizon in which power is in fact limited. The individual is subject to many pressures. to be sure—but always within the framework of autonomous choice and the possibility of refusal or indifference, always within the context of enduring human aspirations and ways of life. This is a critical point. Advertising is a renunciation of total power. It does not attempt a wholesale re-creation of thoughts and attitudes; it acknowledges a human spontaneity that eludes dominating schemes of overarching power. The bureaucratic administration of everyday life stands out paradoxically against an irreducible human background with which advertising quite knowingly coexists. Advertising can of course serve purposes other than consumption. It is called on more and more often in an effort to make citizens more aware of the great problems of the day, and in an effort to modify various behaviors and inclinations: alcoholism, drug use, reckless driving. selfishness. irresponsible procreation, and so on. Advertising does sometimes seek to change certain attitudes, even moral or existential ones: still, nothing justifies our seeing it as a manifestation of totalitarianism. Advertising campaigns are intended to "sensitize" rather than to indoctrinate. Using humor and catchy phrases, they have nothing to do with central planning or the platitudes of the tribunal of history. Advertising does not promulgate truth and justice from on high. It offers gentle advice; it addresses adults who are capable of grasping the seriousness of the problems that underlie its games and speetacles. Advertising does not resort to invoking traitors, plots, or the sweep of history: it does not call for denunciation, social violence, or self-sacrifice. lts register is not dramatization but goodwill, relaxation, and seduction, in keeping with a peaceful society that valorizes supple dialogue, personal autonomy, and private interests. Advertising influences, but it does not threaten; it suggests, but it does not seek doctrinal domination; it functions without invoking Manicheanism or inducing guilt, in the belief that individuals can correct their own behavior almost on their own, once they are aroused to responsible awareness by the media. As with brand-name advertising. public-interest advertising— contrary to appearances—does not seek to invent a new human being ex nihilo on the basis of ideological and political requirements running against the tide of spontaneous mass desires. Rather, it seeks to diffuse standards and ideals that are actually accepted by everyone but are not always put into practice. Who does not agree that alcohol has harmful effects? Who does not care about babies? Who is not outraged by world hunger? Advertising does not take on the task of completely redefining the human race; it exploits embryonic tendencies that are already present by making them more attractive to more people. Far from signifying an exponential race toward total domination, the spread of advertising reflects the reinforcement of a modality of power with minimal ideology and with strictly limited goals. A good deal has been said and written about the diabolical power of advertising. And yet. if we consider the issue more closely, if we ask what is affected by advertising. it is hard to think of a power whose impact is as modest. At most it succeeds—not automatically and not systematically, moreover—in getting people to buy one brand as opposed to another: Coca-Cola instead of Pepsi, the Renault 205 instead of the Supercinq. That does not add up to very much. Vital for the growth of businesses, advertising plavs an insignificant role in individuals' lives and their most important choices. The power of advertising is paradoxical: crucial for businesses but without major consequences for individuals, it acts effectively only in the sphere of the inessential and the irrelevant. Conforming to the superficiality of its own messages, advertising itself is only a surface power. a sort of zero-degree power as measured by the standard of individual existence. It undoubtedly carries some weight in individual decisions, but only in the state of relative indifference that tends to be generated by the expanding universe of industrial hyperchoice. Things have to be put back into perspective. The influence of advertising does not abolish the reign of human freedom. Rather, its action is exercised at the lowest level of that freedom, the level where a state of indifference reigns, where there is an excess of choice among scarcely differentiated options. In the cultural sphere. the situation is in the last analysis quite similar. Of course the highly concentrated offering of the latest hits on radio stations means that records are sold. Of course movie posters and top billings draw the public en masse toward dark rooms. But these things always happen with a large measure of unpredictability and they meet with decidedly uneven success. Of course media-based promotional techniques manage to beef up book sales, and they have some influence on the choices made by buyers. Still, does that justify the charge of brainwashing? What is it that the media actually have the power to do? To get people to read some hastily pieced-together autobiography rather than a novel etched in gold? In what respect is this a scandal for democracy? Is it because the media lend their authority to some trivial essay or some telegenic author rather than to a major work? But we need to be perfectly clear about one thing: the power of advertising, whether it is used directly or, as in the case in point, indirectly, is only short-term power: its resonance is basically superficial. The public at large absorbs the latest success like anvthing else: out of curiosity, in order to be in the know, in order to have seen. Nothing more. Its reading is empty, devoid of effect and certainly devoid of major or lasting intellectual impact when the work itself is onlv a dazzling facade. Advertising is anything but a force for the totalitarian forma tion and direction of consciousness; it is a power without consequences. It may lead to big sales, but not to intellectual repercussions: media coverage may be in stereo, but its effects are inaudible. for thev are drowned out at once in the baffles of the next new best-seller. If the nonspecialist public is susceptible to the loud voice of advertising, this does not mean that there is no space for public reflection, for the propagation and collective discussion of new ideas. More or less quickly, more or less indirectly. counterfires are lit, and new titles and new evaluations appear. raising doubts in readers' minds or directing their curiosity elsewhere. Nothing impedes this process: the real questions, the great works, inevitably bounce back onto the media stage; they can never stay very long in the shadows, by virtue of the very bulimia of advertising and the fashion spirit. It is permissible to deplore that our era puts trash on its pedestals, but it is not legitimate to denounce the destruction of the democratic public space where in fact intellectual reference points are merely becoming more complex and less firmly anchored. Media effects are only skin-deep. Advertising does not have the power with which it is widely credited. Promotional techniques do not destroy the space of critical discussion. Instead, they put intellectual authorities into circulation; they multiply references. names, and celebrities; they blur reference points by treating a piece of hackwork and a masterpiece as if they were equivalent, by failing to differentiate between the superficial and the serious. As they continue to heap praise on second class works, they undermine the old aristocratie intellectual hierarchy; they place academie values and media values on the same plane. They offer a thousand thinkers, ten thousand contemporary works to be reckoned with: we may smile condescendingly, but a systematie process of desacralization and an accelerated rotation of works and authors is inaugurated in this way. lt is not true that the great names are obscured by cultural impostors; it is only that media harassment and the proliferation of names causes the great ones to lose their aura, their unchallenged authority, their sovereign, untouchable position. In this sense, the marketing of "thought" carries out a democratic task; even if it regularly pays homage to insignificant starlets, at the same time it dissolves absolute figures of knowledge and attitudes of immutable reverence in favor of a space of interrogation that is undoubtedly more confused but also broader, more mobile, and less orthodox. "Advertising makes everyone want the same thing": few ideas are more widely accepted than this one. Advertising is accused of making tastes uniform, of laminating individual personalities; it is seen as brainwashing, the rape of the masses: it is held responsible for the atrophy of individual judgment and personal decision making. It would indeed be hard to deny that advertising succeeds in increasing sales volume and in directing pub lic taste toward certain products on a massive scale. But if we fail to look beyond this process of standardization, we miss the other facet of advertising's work. a much less obvious but much more crucial one with respect to the future of the democracies. As a strategic vector of the redefinition of life-styles centered on consumption and leisure, advertising has helped discredit the ethics of saving in favor of the ethics of spending and immediate gratification. Thus we must render it its due: paradoxically, from the standpoint of the hedonistic culture that it inseminates, advertising must be seen as an agent of human individualization, a force accelerating the quest for personality and individual autonomy. Beyond the real manifestations of social homogenization, advertising not only promotes objects and information. it also works to emphasize the principle of individuality In the here and now. it generates mass phenomena; in the longer run, and less visibly. it produces destandardization and subjective autonomy. Advertising has a role to play in the progress of the democratic social state. Can we do better if we apply the psychoanalytic grid to the effects of advertising? In what respect, for example, is its originality illuminated if we acknowledge that it manifests a logic of perversity? One can always maintain, of course. that advertising alludes to desire while proceeding at once to cover up the constitutive absence of desire; one can always say that advertising allows lack of desire to be masked by proposing an escalation of fetish objects.1º But if we were to do that, we would lose sight of one of advertising's much more significant effects, namely, the way it systematically destabilizes and galvanizes movements of desire even in the sphere of evervday needs. Advertising helps stir up desire in all its states, helps institute it on a hvpermobile base. It detaches desire from the closed and repetitive circuits inherent in traditional social systems. Along with mass production, advertising is a technology of disconnection and acceleration of the displacements of desire. We have moved away from an order in which one whole sector of desire was largely stationary into an open, mobile, ephemeral register. Advertising has given rise to a broad-based fashion desire, to desire structured like fashion. In the process, the social significance of consumption has been transformed on a vast scale: by glorifying novelty, by removing the element of guilt from the act of purchasing, advertising has taken the tension out of consumption, has rid it of a certain seriousness that went along with the ethics of saving. Consumption as a whole now operates under the sign of fashion. It has become a casual practice that has internalized the legitimacy of the ephemeral and of permanent renewal. ## Politics Takes the Top Off Politics, in turn, has jumped on the bandwagon. All things considered. it has made a fairly rapid accommodation to advertising and image making. In the United States, since the 195os, political communication has come increasingly to resemble modern advertising: it uses the same principles. the same techniques, the same experts. Electoral campaigns are orchestrated by publicity agents and media advisors; one-minute spots modeled on commercials are produced; methods derived from motivational research are applied to speech writing and image building on behalf of political figures. After commercial marketing comes political marketing: it is no longer a matter of ideological conversion of the citizenry. but of selling a product in the best possible package. The austere heavy-handedness of propaganda has given way to the seduction of contact. simplicity. and sincerity; prophetic incantations have given way to the enticements of personalized shows and the transformation of political leaders into stars. Politics has shifted to a new register; it has been annexed in large measure by seduction. Everything possible is done to give our leaders an image of warm and sympathetic competence. Private lives are exposed in intimate little interviews or two-way tussles: no holds are barred in the effort to reinforce or correct an image, to arouse a response of emotional attraction that transcends rational motives. Seduction works through intimacy and proximity: political figures participate in variety shows: they appear in jogging clothes; they no longer hesitate to get up on stage. Valéry Giscard d'Estaing has played the accordion in publie; Lionel Jospin has sung "Les Feuilles mortes"; François Mitterand has tried to look trendy. The political scene is veering away from pompous detachment in favor of glitter and variety: screen and stage stars are trotted out for electoral campaigns; funny T-shirts, stickers, and other gimmicks are offered as props. Political meetings are festive occasions complete with confeuti and euphoria: supporters see film clips and dance to rock musie or cheek to cheek. Posters, too, have been transformed by the appeal of advertising. Aggressive, solemn, heavily symbolie posters have been replaced by posters featuring smiling political personalities, ties flapping in the breeze, figures exhibiting all the innocence of children. Advertisers have carried the day: political expression has to be "with it." Entertainment and creative communication are indispensable; the new posters and slogans, emotional and psychological in tone. appeal to feeling ("La force tranquille,” “Vivement demain," "Nayons pas peur de la liberté"). Telling the truth is not enough now. The truth must be told without boring anyone; it must be told with imagination. elegance, and humor. Hunorous complicity and pastiches are coming to the fore: President Carter hired a gag writer to make his speeches more appealing. The spirit of "fun" continues to spread, in lighthearted political campaign literature published on posters or in newspapers in the form of comic strips ("Help! The Right is coming back!" "What big teeth you have. Grandma Right!"“The Great Disillusion: an exclusive twelve-month run"). The fashion process has restructured political communication: no one who is not seductive and casual makes the grade. Democratic competition takes the course of flirtatious games, passing through the artificial paradise of entertainment, looks, and media personalities. Political seduction has unleashed a cross fire of more or less indignant condemnations. The refrain is familiar: hypnotized by star-leaders, mesmerized by the names of personalized images, artifices, and pretenses, the citizenry has been transformed into a community of passive and irresponsible spectators. Politics functioning as spectacle masks fundamental problems. offers charming personalities in place of programs, numbs the capacity for reasoning and judgment in favor of emotional reactions and irrational feelings of attraction and antipathy. With media politics, citizens are infantilized: they no longer participate in public life; they are alienated. manipulated by gimmickry and images; democracy is “denatured" and "perverted."1 Show-business politics does not stop at anesthetizing citizens through entertainment; it transforms the very content of political life. Because the widest possible electorate must be targeted, political speakers have a tendency to gloss over the most controversial aspects of their programs. to look for a painless platform that will satisfy more or less everyone. Discourse on the right and left alike becoınes more and more homogeneous, in a process of uniformization and neutralization that is “perhaps sapping the vitality of politics, or even doing it in altogether."12 Under the spell of the show-business approach, communication renders collective debate anemic; it is fraught with consequences for the health of democracy. If we measure the effects of spectacle-politics on democratic elections, we mav conclude that not all those criticisms are unfounded. Indeed, it is no longer possible to maintain intact the well-known thesis that the influence of the media is weak, that it is less important than interpersonal communication, that only opinion leaders are really exposed to the action of the media. Since this theory was formulated in the 194os, the importance of leaders, of the family, and of ideologues has declined considerably. In all the democratic nations we note a destabilization of voters behavior: citizens identify less and less faithfully with a particular party, and voters' behavior tends increasingly to resemble that of an inconstant, pragmatic consumer. While we have known for a long time that the media have trouble influencing citizens with firm convictions, that the media tend to reinforce opinions rather than challenge them, we also know that the media play a non-negligible role with respect to the category of undecided voters, individuals who are not particularly motivated by political life. It is in this range of potential voters that the seduction process has full sway. Some surveys have shown that during one election campaign the intentions of undecided voters were significantly modified: a shift was noted among uncommitted voters, precisely the ones who determine the final outcome, electoral victory or defeat.13 In a society in which the role of the mobile electorate has a good chance of growing. the role of political marketing is likely to take on increased importance. Far from being a peripheral manifestation, political seduction now has a significant and problematic impact on the trends of political life. Why do so many analyses look at issues from just one side? Paradoxically, the denunciation of the fashion form in the political arena is limited to its most immediate, most superficial aspects. Its critics do not see that seduction also helps maintain democratic institutions. helps then take root in a lasting way. By adopting a spectacular forn, political discourse becomes less boring, less "foreign"; people who have not cared much for politics may come to take some interest, if not in polities per se then perhaps in a tug-of-war between two leading figures, or the spectacle of the man thrown to the lions."Major electoral debates and other live television performances by political figures are widely followed by the public. even if these events are perceived as belonging to the world of play and distraction. On such occasions the public is clearly in a situation of receiving and taking in information; publie familiarity with the various political positions is thereby increased, however unevenly. Contrary to what opponents of the spectacle-state maintain, no sharp line of demarcation between information and entertainment can be drawn; the fashion form, far from being antithetical to an opening to polities, makes polities possible for a growing segment of the population. Seduction makes the debate that involves the collective whole less off-putting: at the very least it allows citizens to listen, to be better informed about the parties' various programs and lines of argument. lt is more the instrument of a democratic mass political life than a new opium of the people. Moreover, it is not true that the seduction process tends to neutralize content, to homogenize political discourse. The program of the French Left in 1981 was very different from that of its adversaries. Today, the political spectacle has not prevented the theses of the far-right National Front from being defended on the public stage. Hard-line neolibertarian programs have been deployed in countries like the United States in which the star system in politics is the most highly developed: the talents of the 'great communicator" Ronald Reagan did not keep him from being the symbol of a different politics. If seduction tends to unify political communication in the direction of cordiality, simplicity, and personalization, it leaves intact the fundamental divisive issues, and maintains very broad possibilities for referential divergence. Does this process entail a perversion of democracy, or a historical realization of one of the paths inscribed in its most fundamental dynamics? By acknowledging the collective will as the source of political sovereignty, democracy leads to the secularization of power; it turns the political agency into a purely human institution detached from any divine transcendence. from any sacred character. As a corollary, the state gives up the symbols of its own preeminent authority that it has unfailingly displayed in older systems. The state. having become an expression of society, has to resemble society more and more; it has to give up the signs, rituals, and mechanisms of its archaic dissimilarity. In this sense, the contemporary political spectacle only prolongs the process of political desacralization begun at the end of the eighteenth century. By showing off their hobbies by appearing in turtleneck shirts and on television talk shows, the representatives of power take a supplementary step toward the secular path of dissolving the otherness of the state. Power has come down from its pedestal: the powerful are made of flesh and blood like other human beings, and their tastes and evervdav interests are similar. What is involved is not a "cultural desecularization" that would reintroduce the underlying irrational and emotional components of traditional power,1⁴ but, on the contrary, a paroxysm of the democratic process of political secularization. A spectacle-state? So be it. Nevertheless, the analogy between the contemporary political scene and the star system has its limits. Whereas the star system sets up "sacred monsters," the political spectacle brings the leading figures down off their pedestals; it brings power closer to individual citizens. The star system produces dreams; the political spectacle produces disenchantment. The more media politics is developed, the more the political element spills over into the consumable, into mass indifference, the floating mobility of opinions. The more seduction there is, the less Manicheanism, the fewer great political passions: one listens attentively or distractedly to political broadcasts, but the masses are not carried away. On the contrary, fervent militancy is discouraged; citizens are less and less inclined to invest emotionally in political causes, which are not “worth it" in their eves. This is where the great democratic efficiency of the new communicational register comes in. Incompatible with aggressive hysteria, with the appeal to violence and hatred, “fashion" politics favors the selfdiscipline of speeches, the pacification of political conflicts (no matter how ferocious some negative advertising may have become), the respect for democratic institutions. Humor, variety shows, and the plav of advertising all undermine the crusading, orthodox spirit; they discredit authoritarianism, excommunications, the exaltation of the values of war and revolution. In political conflicts, campaign slogans have to adopt a moderate tone; television adversaries have to be relaxed and smiling, have to acknowledge each other and talk to each other. Seduction is an instrumnent of civil peace that reinforces the democratic order. The spectacular only appears to lead to the dominion of the passionate or the emotional register: in fact, it works to reduce passion and to deidealize the political space. to expurgate its tendencies toward holy war. Is it lamentable, then, that hard-line propaganda has been replaced by one-man shows and creative advertising? Should we despair because politics no longer sends out calls for militant mobilization, no longer generates mass effusions? On the contrary. we might see the new situation as creating unparalleled conditions for the stability of democratic institutions and the legal alternation of power. By substituting seduction for the discourse of war. the new communication only reinforces public hostility to violence; it supports the predominant inclination of contemporary societies toward fair plav. calmness. and tolerance. Certain manifestations are unquestionably worrisome. for example the political spot ads that occasionally drag down the level of political debate and that may also throw democratic competition out of balance because of their excessively high costs: in that respect. regulations are highly desirable. Yet considered as a whole, the frivolous process is not a threat to the democratic order; rather, it grounds the democratie order on a footing that is more serene, more open, broader but also smoother. The explanation for the growth of seduction in polities only appears to be a simple one. It is shortsighted to view this phenomenon as merely a result of the television boom, an outgrowth of polls and advertising, as if the decor of the current political scene could be deduced directly from the new media technologies. But while the development of television in particular has undeniably played a crucial role, television is not responsible for everything. Political marketing corresponds in fact to the installation of the democratie societies in the era of fashion consumption: the values inherent in this order-hedonism, leisure. play, personality, psychology. cordiality, simplicity, humor—are the driving forces behind the restructuring of political performances. Polities based on advertising is more than a media effect; it has come into its own along with the new cedes of democratic individualist sociability. Less distance, more evidence of cordiality and relaxation: how can we fail to see that these transformations are inseparable from cultural referents inherent in the frivolous age? The political class and the media have simply conformed to the new aspirations of the public at large. Consummate fashion has made human relationships less rigid in form: it has given impetus to tastes for the direct, the natural, the distracting. The intimacy that reflects the emergence of psychological values in the domain of human relations must also be related to the historic terminus of fashion, inasmuch as it has deepened social atomization while fostering subjective aims, the taste for self-knowledge and contact. This cultural upheaval has provided the background against which spectacledemocracy could be perceived.