# Culture, Media Style Hits in Stock IVass cuLTuRE is even more representative of the fashion process than is fashion itself. All of mass-media culture has become a powerful machine controlled by the laws of accelerated renewal, ephemeral success. seduction, and marginal differences. A culture industry organized according to the sovereign principle of novelty is coupled with a situation of exceptionally unstable consumption, where inconstancy and unpredictability in taste run rampant. In the 195os, a full-length feature film ran. on the average, for about five years; now, the average is one vear. The average life cycle of a hit song varies from three to six months. Best-sellers with a life span of more than a year are rare, and many bookstores no longer carry books published more than six months earlier. Certain television series have had remarkable longevity, to be sure: Gunsmoke lasted twenty years and Dallas ran almost as long. But these are exceptional cases in comparison to the quantity of new series introduced each year in the U'nited States. very few of which manage to survive past the first thirteen episodes. New means of distributing audiovisual products have increased the life span of cultural products, too: films in particular can now be screened at will. independently of their first run and their availability in theaters. But what is true for movies is not true for music or books: every month, one record ing drives out another, one book supplants another. Obsolescence reigns supreme. At the heart of cultural consumption lies mass infatuation. In the span of just a few months, sales of a hit song can reach several hundred thousand copies, or even a million or more: dozens of platinum disks (a million copies) have joined golden ones (five hundred thousand). In 1984, twenty million Michael Jackson albums and ten million Prince albums were sold worldwide. For a few weeks, everybody is crazy about the same recording; radio stations play it ten times a day. The same thing happens in cinema, where seats sold for a successful new hit are counted in the millions. In Japan, in fewer than ten weeks, E.T. drew ten million spectators: in Buenos Aires, one spectator out of four saw that film. Fashion is translated in an exemplary manner by the scope of such infatuations, the mass success evident in hit parades, charts, and best-sellers. Cultural infatuations have a peculiar character: they upset nothing; they violate no taboo. For some critics, fads are a subtle form of transgression; they offer the pleasure of sidestepping norms and conventions. In this view, every new craze presents itself as "daring." and seeks to violate some social or aesthetic taboo.' While some fads are indeed freighted with a certain subversive charge (the miniskirt, for example. or early rock music, or avant-garde fashion). the subversive element cannot be seen as an essential feature. Where would we locate the transgression in the wave of enthusiasm focused at one point on a Michael Jackson recording, a moment later on Madonna or Sade? Hits are original precisely because they generate crazes that in most instances do not challenge any institution, any value, any style. Hits do not express the pleasure of disturbing; they offer a pure manifestation of the tranquil passion for small differences without disorder. without risk: the ecstasy of "change within continuity." They arouse instant emotion linked to recognizable novelty, not to subversion. The culture industries are characterized by their highly random aspect. Promotional techniques notwithstanding, no one can predict what wil appear at the top of the hit parades. In France each year only about 2o record titles sell more than 50o.coo copies. The charts include only 7 percent of the total production: of 24.ooo numbers recorded over a three-year period only 32o singles made it to the hit parades.2 In the United States, an estimated 7o percent of the musical titles produced each year run a deficit; the losses are compensated by the huge profits realized by a small number of others.3 The movie industry is not exempt from randomness either: the number of seats sold for films released in Paris varies from fewer than ten thousand to two million. The same thing happens in book publishing: the data are hard to verify, but it is estimated that a majority of novels published in France sell between three hundred and four hundred copies. This uncertainty. which is part and parcel of the cultural marketplace, has the effect of stimulating continual renewal. The multiplication of titles is a way of insuring against risk, of increasing the chances of getting a hit or a best-seller that will compensate for the losses incurred with the bulk of the production. Thus a French record producer earns 50 percent of his profits from just 3 percent of his records.† Even if the big recording studios or publishing houses do not live exclusively on “big hits" (there are the backlists, the classics, and so on), they all look for hits by taking on new titles. authors, and creators. All the culture industries are orchestrated by the logic of fashion, by the goal of immediate success, by the race for novelty and diversity. There were nine thousand recordings a year in France in 1970, twelve thousand in 1978. Even though record sales were dropping, the total number of registered recordings still increased slightly between 1978 and 1981. And even though production in the major American filmn studios went down sharply—from 5oo to 138 full-length films a year— between 1950 and 1976, their production is once again on the rise: the overall number of films produced went from 175 in 1982 to 318 in 1984. 515 in ig86. Then there is the enormous output of television series, miniseries, and specials that add up to thousands of hours of programming. There always has to be something new. In an effort to limit the risk of launching new programs and in the hope of winning the ratings wars, trial balloons proliferate: a great many pilots are produced; test episodes are sent out experimentally" to U.S. television screens before the decision to produce an entire series is made. In 198ı, 23 completed programs were preceded by 85 pilots: for the 1983–84 season, 31 pilots were offered by NBC alone." The culture industries are fashion industries through and through: accelerated renewal and diversification count among their strategic vectors. To protect themselves against the uncertainty inherent in the demand for their products, the culture industries keep on raising their promotional and advertising budgets. In this area, book publishing is still lagging behind, at least in France. In the United States, however. the cost of promoting a book like Judith Krantz's Princess Daisy, which sold more than six million copies, can come to more than \$2oo.ooo. In other areas. too. advertising costs are skyrocketing. It can cost as much to introduce a new record as to produce it, if not more, and the trend can only intensify with the development of MTV. Todav in France it costs between 25c.coc and 450,ooo francs to produce a record, but the cost of a video clip to promote it can range from 100,000 to 400,000 francs. Thriller cost \$500.000." The average budget for an American-made movie is now estimated at \$io million (before postproduction costs); advertising expenses alone amount to \$6 million. Star Trek cost \$4 $\$ 45$ million to make, \$o million to promote. Midnight Express cost \$3.2 million to make, while its advertising expenses came to \$8.4 million. Furthermore, it may be argued that production expenses already include costs related to advertising in the form of fees paid to the stars; the inflation of marketing budgets parallels the spiral in stars compensation. A paradoxical development: at the very moment when the great stars are fading, the fees they can command climb out of sight. Sean Connery, who earned \$17,ooo in 1962 for playing James Bond in Doctor No, later made \$2 million for Cuba. Marlon Brando got \$3.5 million for ten days of shooting in Superman; in the late 197os, Steve MeQueen was asking \$5 million per film. More than any other industries, the culture industries are dependent on the fashion form, on advertising and the various vectors of seduction and promotion. The very escalation of budgets has a seductive effect: that a film or a video clip is the most expensive ever produced becomes a selling point, a factor in the product's success. The new so-called multimedia strategies not only make it possible to spread the very high risks inherent in the cultural marketplace over various subsidiaries, but they also make it possible to promote products that are multimedia by vocation. Thus the multimedia conglomerates are organized in such a way that the growth of one activity benefits others: a successful film leads to a television program; a book gives rise to a movie or a TV series; movies are inspired by comic strips. "The characters of Warner comics have turned up in countless filns, starting with the three Superman movies. which in turn have led to new Superman products, including an Atari game. dolls made by Knickerbocker Toys, and the franchising of the ‘Superman' logo by Warner's Licensing Corporation of America."7 Multimedia promotional operations are proliferating: a film, a record, a book, and a toy. all in the same family, are introduced simultaneously, and each benefits from the success of the others. The book that came out after the showing of Holocaust in the United States sold more than one and a half million copies. and the record froın the movie Saturday Night Fever sold thirty million copies.8 Each product adds to the notoriety of the others and gives them additional impetus. reinvigorating the current fad. Manufacturers no longer have to wait until a character becomes as famous as Mickev Mouse to bring out derivative products: the release of a film or cartoon is immediately accompanied by the sale of licensed toys and clothing. The Dr. Slump cartoon gave rise to eight thousand different derivative products in a six-month period: toys, dolls, and publications drawn from the Marco Polo series brought the R.A.I., the Italian state television organization. more than 1.4 billion lire:º in France, toys produced under licensing agreements in 1985 represented 1 percent of the profits of the entire sector. With multimedia operations, a certain "rationalization" of fashion is at work: not because fashions are to be thoroughly directed and controlled from this point on—that would be an absurd contention—but because each production functions as advertising for another; everything is "recuperated" synergistically in order to enhance and accelerate the phenomenon of success. ## Culture Clip The requirement of renewal that characterizes the culture industries is completely different from the “tradition of novelty" that characterizes modern art. Instead of obeying the avant-garde imperative of radical novelty, cultural products are shaped according to already tested formulas. As Edgar Morin aptly put it, industrial culture synthesizes the original and the standardized, the individual and the stereotype.10 At bottom, this culture conforms to the fashion system in being an adventure without risk, a variation on the style of an epoch, a logic of small differences. The product always offers a certain individuality, but this distinctiveness is always contained within a standard framework. Instead of avant-garde subversion, we find novelty within clichés, a blend of canonical forms and some unprecedented element. Certain works undeniably succeed in innovating, in departing from the beaten path, but the general rule is one of minimal variation within the known order: a hundred Westerns develop the same good guv/bad guy scenario, a hundred cops-and-robbers dramas stage the same type of confrontation in urban settings—each time with small differences that determine the success or failure of the product. Dynasty offers a different version of Dallas; each episode of a police series or a family saga exploits a recognizable style, an unchanged and repetitive fornula that defines the image of the series. As with clothing or advertising. novelty is law, so long as it does not overtly disturb the public, so long as it does not upset the audience's habits and expectations, so long as it can be read and understood immediately by more or less everyone. Complexity is to be avoided; readily identifiable plots and characters must be offered: interpretation has to be provided. Today, television series go to great lengths to ensure maximum, effortless comprehension: the dialogues are elementary: feelings are expressed and insistently repeated through facial mimicry and background music. Mass culture is a culture of consumption. wholly constructed in view of immediate pleasure and mental recreation. Its seductiveness stems in part from its simplicity. By cutting down on multiple meanings, by targeting the broadest possible public, by introducing “instant" products to the marketplace. the culture industries have brought into the sphere of spectacle the primacy of the temporal axis characteristic of fashion, namely, the present. Like fashion, mass culture is completely present-oriented, indeed triply so. First of all, because its explicit goal lies more than anything in immediate individual leisure. It is a matter of entertaining, not of educating. uplifting the mind, or inculcating higher values. Even though ideological contents clearly do turn up, they are subordinate to the goal of entertaining. Next. because mass culture retranslates all attitudes and discourses into the code of modernity. For industrial culture, the historical present is the measure of all things. It does not hesitate to adapt freely. to introduce anachronisms, to transplant the past into the present, to recycle the old in modern terms. Finally, because mass culture is a culture without traces, without a future, without a significant subjective extension, it is designed to exist in the living present. Like dreams and jokes, mass culture for the most part resonates in the here and now; its dominant temporality is the very same one that governs fashion. The gulf that separates us from earlier times is obvious. During a major part of our history as human beings, higher-order works of the mind were constituted under the aesthetic authority of the ancients; they were produced in order to glorify heavenly or earthly sovereigns, the hereafter, or … tion, the emotion of the syncopated cadence. Rock culture, advertising culture: since the 1950s, rock has been displacing the sweet nothings of the crooners. Now American programs and serials are waging a merciless war on slowness:" in police dramas (Starsky and Hutch, Miami lice). in the personal and professional dramas of family sagas, everything happens at high speed, as if media time were nothing but a succession of competing instants. Music video—MTV—is only an extreme embodiment of this express culture. It is no longer a question of evoking an unreal universe or of illustrating a musical text; it is a matter of displaying an overstimulated parade of images, of changing in order to change faster and faster. less and less predictably, with increasingly arbitrary and extravagant combinations. We are now dealing with IPM rates (ideas per minute) and seduction-by-the-second. In video clips, each image is valid only for the present: all that counts is its capacity to stimulate and to surprise. Clips consist in nothing but disparate and precipitous accumulations of sensory impacts producing fashionable surrealistic effects in Technicolor. The video clip represents the ultimate expression of creativity in advertising and its cult of surfaces. The fashion form has conquered media imagery and media time; the rhythmic force de frappe is putting an end to the universe of depth and daydreaming. Only pure stimulation remains. without memory: reception in the fashion mode. So why do critics continue to argue that mass programming serves the ideological function of "national and worldwide consensus."12 when such programming only puts images into temporary circulation and transports them nowhere? After the age of contemplative adoration, we have entered the era of the video trip. Viewers do not absorb the program's contents but rather unload their own; they explode in an excess of images, intoxicated by an overcharged sequence of images: no extrinsie purpose is served, only the pleasure of instant change, as in a mental stock-car race. Even soap operas, which are built around psychological continuities and clearly identified characters, are not taken seriously. 'There is no residue: everything is stirred together in perpetual combinatious and recombinations. Verisimilitude is no louger a major concern: characters may change faces (as in Dallas or Dynasty), but the drama pursues its course. The narrative progresses at a very rapid pace; highly contrasted sequences and situations are presented in rapid succession with no transitions.13 The point is to ward off boredom, to move quickly along to something else: identification with characters is blocked, ideological inculcation is neutralized, pulverized by the very speed of the video presentation. The rhythmie mode of televised products has short-circuited the alienation of spectators in favor of noninvolvement and amused detachment. Everywhere, frenzied rushing is the rule: this is as true of pornography as of soap operas. Porno films also banish slowness in favor of "live" libidinal transmissions; nothing counts but the immediate plays of combinations, the speeded-up permutations of sex. It has been noted that pornography eliminates all ritual, all depth, all meaning; we might add that it is inseparable from a specific temporality: fast sex, instant sex. Unlike striptease. porno films and peep shows offer few mediations: they function in the mode of "evervthing. all at once." The overexposure of organs is accompanied by sustained haste. as in a sort of racing-car rally. The excitement induced by a zoom lens and the excitement of using a stopwatch are of the same nature. Pornography is an erotics of immediacy, of operational action and repetitive renewal: there is an endless stream of new positions and new partners in view of the unbridled mechanics of organs and pleasures. In this sense. pornographic films are sex clips. just as MTV clips are music-video porn. Each instant has to be filled with a new image, a spectacular libidinal spot. The fashion form and its discontinuous temporality have taken over even media sex. ## Stars and Idols Another reason mass culture is immersed in fashion is that it gravitates toward stars and idols. prodigiously successful and attractive figures who inspire infatuation and adulation in the extreme. Since the early decades of this century. the movies have continuously fabricated stars. Featured prominently on advertising posters, stars are important drawing cards to whom the faltering movie industry owed its reinvigoration in the 195os. With stars. the fashion form shines in all its glory; seduction is at the height of its magic. The stars luxurious and frivolous life-style has often been described: sumptuous villas. gala evenings. elegant receptions, fleeting love affairs, a life devoted to pleasure, eccentricities in dress. The stars' role in fashion phenomena has also been stressed: they managed very early on to dethrone the preeminent women of the world where appearance was concerned. and they succeeded in gaining recognition as fashion leaders Garbo started the trend to medium-length hair, along with the wearing of berets and tweeds: the vogue of the “platinum blond" came from Jean Harlow; Joan Crawford seduced the public with her elongated lips; Marlene Dietrich was all the rage with her plucked eyebrows. Clark Gable succeeded in making men's undershirts unfashionable after It Happened One Night. People imitated the behavior of certain stars on a massive scale: the way they made up their eyes and lips, their posture and facial expressions; in the i93os there were even contests to find Dietrich and Garbo look-alikes. Later, Brigitte Bardot's ponytail or “bird's nest" hairstyles, James Dean's casual look and that of Marlon Brando, were widely imitated models. Today, young teenagers try to look like Michael Jackson. Stars are not only foyers of fashion, they are even more figures of fashion in themselves as beings-for-seduction, modern quintessences of seduction. Stars are characterized by the unique charm of their appearance, and the star system can be defined as the enchanted fabrication of images of seduction. As fashion products, stars have to please; beauty, even if it is neither absolutely necessary nor sufficient, is one of their principal attributes. Their beauty requires staging, artifice, aesthetic refabrication: the most sophisticated techniques—makeup, photographs with studied viewing angles, cosinetics, plastic surgery, massages——are used to create their incomparable image, their bewitching seductiveness. Like fashion, stars are artificial constructions, and if fashion is the aestheticization of clothing, the star system is the aestheticization of actors—not only their faces but their entire individuality. More than beauty, personality is the star's ruling imperative. Stars shine and conquer the public essentially by the type of man or woman they succeed in conveying on the screen: Garbo incarnated the inaccessible and haughty woman, Marilyn Monroe the innocent, sensual. and vulnerable woman; Catherine Deneuve projects a glacial sensuality. Clark Gable exemplified the virile, complicitous, and impudent man: Clint Eastwood is identified with cynical, efficient, hard men. "Show me an actress who isn't a personality and I'll show you an actress who isn't a star."1\* Katharine Hepburn used to say. The star is the image of a personality constructed on the basis of a physique and made-to-order roles. an archetype of stable or little-changing individuality that the publie encounters over and over in all his or her filmns. The star system manufactures superpersonality. that is. the brand name of the divas of the silver screen. Given this construction according to a principle of permanent identity, we might take the star to be at the opposite pole from fashion and its ineradicable versatility. 'To suppose this, however, would be to forget that the star system is based on the same values as fashion, on the sacralization of individuality and appearances. Just as fashion is the apparent personalization of ordinary human beings, so the star is the personalization of the actor; just as fashion is the sophisticated staging of the human body, so the star is the media staging of a personality. 'The type" personified by a star is her identifying mark, just like a couturier's style: the cinematographic personality proceeds from a surface artificiality that is of the same essence as fashion. 'The same effect of personalization and individual originality is targeted in each case; both stars and fashion are constituted by the same work of spectacular staging. The star is a fantasy of personality just as fashion is a fantasy of appearance; together they exist only by virtue of the double law of seduction and the personalization of looks. Just as the couturier creates a design from start to finish, the star system redefines, invents, and elaborates the profile and features of the stars. At work is the same demiurgic-democratic power, the same ambition to recreate everything, to reshape everything with no preestablished models, for the greater glory of the image, of artifice and radiant personality. Stars may be media synbols of personality, but they are by no means foreign to the system of small differences characteristic of fashion. That phenomenon became manifest in the 195os when a whole series of female stars appeared. enbodying variations on the theme of the child-woman: Marilyn the innocent, Brigitte Bardot the sexy little animal, Baker the doll Audrey Hepburn the mischievous young woman. Something similar happened to male stars who embodied the theme of the tormented and rebellious young hero: Marlon Brando and James Dean were the prototypes, followed by Paul Newman, Anthony Perkins, Montgomery Clift, and Dustin Hoffman. The cinematographic consecration of personality is accomplished according to the fashion process, according to a logic paralleling that of the combinatorial production of marginal differences. Invented by the film industry. the star system quickly invaded the universe of song and the music hall. Singers with charm had crowds swooning at their feet just like the movie stars; they attracted the same excitement, the same curiosity. the same adoration. Tino Rossi, Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra. L. Mariano each received thousands of letters from their unswerv ing fans. The explosion of rock music combined with the LP revolution and the pickup mike transformed the landscape of idols to some extent The proliferation of successful singers and groups triggered a significant increase in the rate at which stars rise and fall. Although a few great rock stars seem to have resisted the test of time, most of them have entered the age of mobility and obsolescence. By producing more and more mini-idols who are quickly eclipsed. show business has democratized the star scene as it were. It has removed stars from the realm of the immortals: there are fewer pinnacles and divine altitudes, there is less immutable adulation. Most idols have come down from Mount Olympus; in a way, they have been conquered bv progress toward equality of conditions. And while the idols are being annexed by the capriciousness of fashion, their looks are simultaneously taking on heightened importance. The phenomenon was not created overnight: for a long time, popular singers sought to fix their image visually by exhibiting some originality in stage dress: Maurice Chevalier's straw hat, Trenet's rumpled hair, Piaf's little black dress. But the spectacular dimension remained limited: the image did not institute a real break with the everyday. What is more, the image was stable, more or less ritualized for each artist. With singers wearing suits and ties or in shirtsleeves, the visual world of the music hall signaled respectability and sobriety. Under the convergent impetus of rock and advertising, the image on stage now implies. on the contrary, a debauchery of originality and endless renewal (Bov George, Prince, Sigue Sigue Sputnik): in place of the discreet distinctive sign, we have the unmistakable mutant. Visual presentation is no longer simply a decorative element; it is constitutive of the positioning, identity, and originality of groups, and its importance will undoubtedly continue to keep pace with that of video clips. The more groups and singers there are, the more a total advertising logic is required; the more marginal difference there is, the more the logic of effect, spectacular impact, and fashion innovation is imposed. While show business is cultivating hypertheatricality. movie stars are gradually losing their glamour, their power to fascinate. The democratization of the stars' image prolongs a process begun half a century ago. Starting in the i93os, star figures underwent major transformations that brought them closer to the standards of realitv and evervday life. The unreal and inaccessible beauty of silent-film stars was replaced by the more human, less royal beauty of stars who were not so much marblestatue types.15 The ethereal vamp gave way to a more tantalizing fleshand-blood woman: idealized heroes gave way to stars whose good looks were less canonical but more interesting, more personalized. Stars closer to the spectator's reality came into their own with the "sex appeal" of the 195os (Bardot, Monroe), which desublimated the image of woman by means of a “natural" eroticism. Under the subterranean impulse of the work of equality, the stars left their remote, sacred universe behind. Their private lives are now on display in magazines; their erotic attributes appear on screen and in photos; one sees them smiling and relaxed in the most down-to-earth situations, with families, in town. on vacation. This trend toward desacralization, which is in essence democratic. did not just suddenly pop up out of nowhere. To be sure, cinema invented more-realistic and less-distant stars, but they were always endowed with exceptional beauty and seductive power. Clothing, photos. ideal measurements. an ample bustline: the golden age of the star system did not abandon the splendor of excess and the fantasy of the ideal all at once. Instead, it orchestrated a compromise formation: magical figures ostentatiously detaching themselves from the commonplace with whom the publie could nevertheless identify. At present, everything suggests that the process by which the stars are being "humanized." their dissimilarities diminished, has reached the end of its road. We are in the era of stars whose physique is “nothing special"; they are no longer seduetive because thev are extraordinary, but because they are like us. "People don't look like him, he looks like them"—this remark by one of Jean-Jacques Goldman's fans can appropriately be addressed to these new "normal-looking" stars who lack any obvious distinguishing features, such as Miou-Miou, Isabelle Huppert, Marlène Jobert, Marie-Christine Barrault. Stars once were models; they have become reflections. We are in the ultimate phase of the democratic descent from Mount Olympus, the end of a process brought about by the code of communicational proximity. casualness, contact, pop psychology: people want "nice" stars. The psychological values in which we are immersed have caught the stars in the net of everyday ordinariness. The universe of spectacles keeps rejoining real life, keeps getting involved in the world. While the stars keep their new aesthetic profiles on displav. they also participate in large numbers in benefits for causes such as Band Aid or the Restaurants du Coeur. This phenomenon not only expresses the collective exhaustion of ideologies, it also reflects the irrepressible democratization of stardom. The idols are no longer content to be associated superficially with the great causes of history and the great choices in democratic elections: they now collect money, create associations for mutual support and for charity; they comnmit themselves to causes benefiting the most disadvantaged members of society. The demigods have taken up pilgrims staffs: they have returned to the world, sensitive to the misfortunes of the wretched of the earth. The more the stars are trivialized, the more media they penetrate. Multistars go along with multimedia. Once again, the phenomenon has its antecedents: stars have used their music-hall success for a long time to break into the film world (Bob Hope. Frank Sinatra, Bing Crosby, Yves Montand). Still rather exceptional until recently, the multistar pattern is in the process of becoming a rule; it is impossible to count the show-business idols who have propelled themselves into film (Johnny Hallyday, A. Souchon. Madonna. Tina Turner. Grace Jones). Screen stars become variety singers (Isabelle Adjani. Jane Birkin), singers take up writing (R. Zaraï, Jean-Luc Lahaye). while television stars become novelists and essayists (Patrick Poivre d'Arvor, François de Closets). The creatures of seduction seek to shed the yoke of image; they too aspire to profundity. Stars are no longer entirely superficial beings; like everyone else, they want to express themselves (autobiographies are legion), to bear witness, to deliver messages. Success opens the door to diversification. It calls for the all-out use of the star's name, the best possible advertising device. Fame in one area induces a probability of success elsewhere: one cannot produce a full-fledged vogue effect, but one can use stars to increase the audience and establish the best possible conditions for success. The enigma of the stars has less to do with their seductive power than with the delirious cult devoted to them. Here is the most troubling question: how can we account for the emotional transports of fans, in a modern society with scientific and technological inclinations? Earlier, Edgar Morin took this phenomenon as an expression of the durability of religious and magical feelings at the heart of the rationalist world.1º Stars have a share in divinity; thev are demigods with their faithful followers who love unrequitedly and quarrel over the stars' intimnate possessions, who go into delirium in their presence. The ritual does not amount to a totemic meal in the strict sense, but is more or less equivalent: an indigestion of confidences, interviews, indiscretions having to do with the god. Archaic magic has not been eliminated; it arises anew in the fetishistic adoration of stars. A religion of stars? But if so, why does this adulation find its privileged soil in youth? Why does it disappear so quickly with age? The ephemeral nature of that passion forces us to relate it not to a religious manifestation but to a fashionable passion, a temporary crush. The idolatry of the stars is not of the same essence as religious idolatry; it is only one of the extreme forms of modern infatuation. Unlike religious adoration, which is inseparable from a symbolic organization, from a transcendent meaning or content. the adoration of stars has the peculiarity of being an attachment to a pure image; it is the ecstasy of appearance. What moves fans is neither a human quality nor a message of salvation; it is the charm of a sublimated and aestheticized image. The cult of stars is a cult of personality, not a cult of the sacred; it is aesthetic, not archaic; an intimate revery. not a transcendent mysticism. The continuity between love of gods and love of stars is merely formal and artificial, an abstract analogy masking the disparity of two forıns of logic that have nothing in common. The homo religiosus basically stems from a symbolic institution that separates the earthly here and now from an originary elsewhere; it implies a social order that strictly determines the contents of belief, collective rituals, and required prescriptions. There is nothing of the sort with the idolatry directed at stars: that is not a social institution at all, but an expression of disparate personalities replete with subjective demands, fantasies, and delirium, aberrant. uncontrollable, unpredictable behavior. Behind the collective hysteria. there is the erratic movement of individualities; beyond imitation of the idol. there lie the incomparable aspirations and daydreams of individuals, as revealed in particular by fan letters. Far from being an archaie form of behavior, the cult of stars is a typically modern individualist phenomenon, based on the movement of individuals toward a free state: there is no dogma. no instituted body of beliefs, no obligatory ritual beyond the unleashing of fantastie amorous passions on the part of individual subjects. Only one aspect of the phenomenon is visible when we refer to an acute form of alienation and dependency. The adulation of stars may actually lead to new behaviors: the young win a share of autonomy, however minimal, while shedding certain cultural influences, imitating new attitudes. extricating themselves from the influence of their original milieu. Unswervingly committed to their idols, fans reveal by that very token their personal tastes, their subjective preferences; they affirm their own individuality with respect to their familial and social environment. The cult of stars is at once a manifestation of the heteronomy of beings and, paradoxically, a springboard for the individual autonomy of youth. Having an idol is a way for young people to attest, ambiguously, to their own individuality, a way of gaining access to a form of subjective and group identity. If the phenomenon is manifested among the young, it is because at that age aesthetic tastes and preferences are the principal means of asserting one's personality. The cult of stars, at least during the golden age of film, was chiefly a female phenomenon: in the 194os, about 8o percent of the fans were women. The reason for this is undoubtedly the same, for in a “phallocratic" society girls have far fewer means than boys to assert their independence. For generations of young women, devotion to stars has been a way of creating their own continent, opening up their personal horizons and gaining access to new models of behavior. Everything suggests that this difference between the sexes is in the process of being dissolved by women's liberation and the liberalization of mores. At present. the cult of stars is characterized less by the fans' gender than by the increasingly early age at which such cults develop: in recent years. ten-year-olds have succumbed to Michael Jackson fever. This is not so astonishing, really, in a society in which family authority is diminishing and in which education is based on the code of dialogue and communication. In such a social environment, the desire for independence appears earlier and earlier. more and more insistently. By displaying tastes and preferences that prevail among young adults, children and young teenagers set the dynamics of individual autonomy into motion, start the process of subjective separation. the conquest of their own criteria—even though the criteria are still those of the peer group. Star worship is not a mass narcotic; it cannot be explained on the basis of the "wretchedness of need" or the dreary anonymous life of modern high-rises.1 If it could. why would it not spread among adults? To the extent that the phenomenon is inseparable from the quest for identity and individual autonomy. it can only appear in a democratic universe in which the inegalitarian hierarchical order has been dissolved and the social fabric shredded by individualism. In a world in which places and roles have always been predetermined according to a preestablished order, there are no stars. The inequality between fan and star is not the same as the inequality that links the faithful to God. It is the inequality linked to the democratic revolution, where all human beings, detached and free, can recognize one another; where one wants to know everything about the daily private life of others; where one can express love without impediment or restraint, over and bevond differences of age, social standing, or celebrity. It is because there are no longer any regulated forms of collective belonging among human beings that amorous passion can take on unbridled intensity. It is because there is no longer any substantive inequality among individuals that we have the possibility of a form of adoration in which the being most admired is at the same time a confidant, an older sibling, a spiritual advisor, a sought-after lover; where mythic prestige does not exclude the desire to know the details of private life or rule out the spontaneity and proximity of contact. Amorous passion detached from any imperative social code can be invested in the most remote figures. There are no rules; the variable impulses of each individual are in the driver's seat. Underlying the “stellar liturgy," there is more than the magic of the star system, more than the anthropological need for dreams and imaginary identifications; there is also the dynamic of democratic equality that has liberated love from all ritual frameworks. ## The Media Explode on the Screen The ability of the various manifestations of media culture to offer a universe of exoticism, leisure, dreams, and oblivion probably accounts for its prodigious success. Thus it is not very risky to insist. as numerous empirical studies have done, that the need to escape is the principal need underlying cultural consumption. For sociologists like Lazarfeld or Merton. and even more so for philosophers like Marcuse or Debord. the culture of escapism has become the new opium of the people: its task is to make them forget the wretchedness and monotony of daily life. The industrial imagination, recreational and mind-dulling, offers its response to a generalized alienation. By increasing the degree to which work is fragmented and society is atomized, bureaucratic technological logic generates passivity. reduces professional competence, fosters boredom and irresponsibility. creates solitude and chronic frustration on the part of individuals. 'This is fertile terrain for mass-media culture, which has the power to make people forget reality; it allows them to glimpse an unlimited field of projections and identifications. We consume as spectacle what real life denies us: sex, because we are frustrated: adventure, because we have no excitement in our daily lives. This problem of alienation and compensation has been explored to the saturation point in a good deal of sociological and philosophical literature. Because it encourages passivity. dulls the faculties of initiative and creation, and discourages militant activity. mass culture simply broadens the sphere of subjective dispossession. It acts as an instrument for integrating individuals into the bureaucratie and capitalist system. If mass culture is unquestionably destined, by and large, to satisfy people's need for escape, what long-term effects does it have? Those who analyze media culture as a means of distraction act as if everything is over and done with when the dream is fulfilled, as if the phenomenon leaves no trace, as if it does not modify the behavior and attributes of its public. This is obviously not the case. Above and beyond the evident psychological satisfactions it provides. mass culture has had a decisive historical function. It has reoriented individual and group attitudes, and has spread new standards of living. The attraction of mass culture cannot be understood unless we take into account the new ideological referents, the new existential models that it has successfully diffused at all social levels. On this point, Edgar Morin's analyses are entirely accurate. Beginning in the 192os and 193os. mass culture has been an active agent in the process by which rigorist values have been withering away with increasing rapidity. Mass culture has broken down forms of behavior inherited from the past while proposing new ideals and life-styles based on personal accomplishment, entertainment, consumption. and love. By way of stars and eroticism, sports and women's magazines. games and variety shows, mass culture has exalted the life of leisure, individual happiness, and well-being; it has promoted a new ethics for living based on play and consumption.18 The central themes of mass culture have provided powerful support in the elaboration of a new figure of the modern individual, absorbed in his or her personal achievement and well-being. By offering, in multiple guises, models of self-realization and myths focusing on private life, mass culture has been a crucial vector in contemporary individualization, paralleling and even anticipating the revolution of needs. But how is this individualism to be understood? It is remarkable that as soon as the real issue here was engaged, the critical thinkers most receptive to mass culture should have gone straight back to the problematics of negativity. alienation. and the consolation of consciousness. In their view, mass culture works only to produce pseudo-individuality; it renders “part of the life of its consumers fictitious. It turns spectators into phantoms, projecting their minds into a plurality of imagistic or imaginary universes, conveving their souls into the swarm of countless doubles that live for them vicariouslv. . . . Mass culture nourishes life on the one hand, depletes it on the other."19 Its work is "hypnotic." It sacralizes the individual only in fiction; it magnifies happiness even as it makes concrete existence seem less real: it invites people to live vicariously through the imagination. The result is a "sleepwalking" individualism, dispossessed of itself by enchanted figures from the realm of the imaginary. Individualist norms are presented as delusory; they merely extend the consolations offered by the opium of the people in another form. At the same time, such thinkers have obscured the real work of mass culture, work related to the democratic enterprise over the long haul; they have ignored the paradoxical but real contribution of mass culture to the rise of subjective autonomy. From the standpoint of the mythology of happiness, love, and leisure, fashion culture has permitted a generalization of the desire for self-assertion and individual independence. The hero seen as self-made man, the love stories presented in magazines and movies, the emancipated models provided by stars have made new reference points available to individuals, inciting them to live increasingly for themselves, to break awav from traditionalist standards, to control their own lives. Mass culture as a whole functions the way the star system does: it provides an extraordinary wav for human beings to detach themselves from their cultural and familial roots, to promote an ego that is more fully in charge of itself. By offering imaginary escapes, frivolous culture has played a part in the conquest of modern personal autonomy: less is imposed on the individual by the group, more models for self-identification and personal orientation are offered. Media culture has not simply disseminated the values of the petit bourgeois universe; it has also been a vector in the democratic individualist revolution. This point needs to be highlighted: the superficial cannot be reduced to its manifest effects. Artifice has its own historical reality; consummate fashion liberates people from confining and homogeneous social norms more than it subjects them to its own euphoric order. However, a new phase is already on the horizon. The impact of industrial culture is no longer what it was: the model that began to form in the 193os is no longer valid. During that entire golden age. mass culture brilliantly conquered a society that was quite extensively attached to traditionalist principles, to puritanical and conformist norms. The very fact of that disjunction has allowed mass culture to play a major role in the modernist adaptation and restructuring of behavior. The gap has now been closed, by and large: having massively assimilated the norms that had earlier been sublimated in films, society is no longer under the voke of a different culture. Since the 196os, mass culture has been engaged more in reproducing the dominant values than in proposing new ones. Mass culture once anticipated the spirit of the age: it was ahead of its time and the prevailing mores. Now it merely follows or accompanies them: it no longer offers poles of identification within a context of rift. The life-styles exhibited by media culture are precisely the ones that prevail in everyday life: marital conflicts, family dramas, drug abuse, problems of aging. issues of violence and personal security: the figures of the industrial imagination no longer offer anything absolutely new. At most, they magnify what we see around us every day. Fiction of course remains, with its hyperspectacular and unexpected universes, but in spite of its distance from the commonplace, the themes and myths it conveys tend more to echo society as it is than to anticipate where it is headed. Instead of initiating the audience to a new life-style, mass culture merely reinforces the individualist quest that is present at all levels of the social body. We can take Dallas as an example: in a sense, its universe has nothing whatever in common with our ordinary one (big business, jet sets, luxury), yet at every point we are reminded of concerns and problems we all have to deal with (couples separating, the drama of divorce, the desire for self-fulfillment). Culture still has some influence over aesthetic tastes, in music for example, but it has little influence over individual values, attitudes, or behavior. Increasingly it is rediscovering its essence as fashion, as a superficial culture without consequences. If mass culture continues to accelerate the process of individualization, it does so less through its own thematics than through the cocktail of choices and diversity it offers: there can always be more musical styles. groups. films, series, so that this phenomenon can only generate more minimal differentiations. more possibilities for asserting more or less personalized preferences. For the most part, however, the process by which individuals develop their own subjectivity is carried out in other arenas. Information" is what has taken up the slack. The most important cultural and psychological effects of the era are now produced by information. broadly defined. Generally speaking, information has replaced works of fiction in the forward march of individualist democratic socialization. Newsmagazines. debates. and polls have more repercussions on consciousness than any box-office success. The French television programs Psy Shou' or Ambitions provide opportunities for more subjective redeployment than all the hours spent contemplating products of the industrial imagination. To be sure, information conveyed through print and radio has been broadening people's horizons for a long time. However, with the development of television. the scope of the phenomenon is of a new order of magnitude. By continually transmitting a vast diversity of information about life in society. from politics to sexuality, from dieting to sports, from economy to psvchology. from medicine to technology, from theater to rock groups. the media have become powerful instruments for forming and integrating individuals. The explosion of contemporary individualism cannot be separated from the media explosion. With the proliferation of news sources and the knowledge they provide about other ways of thinking and behaving, individuals are inevitably led to“position theinselves" with respect to what thev are seeing. They review received opinions more or less rapidly: thev make comparisons between where they are and elsewhere, between themselves and others, between the past and the future. Special reports, televised debates, and the daily news all familiarize us with different viewpoints and perspectives on a whole range of issues; they contribute toward the individualization of opinion, to the diversification of models and values, to the disruption of the shared traditional frames of reference; they help individuals become less dependent on an identical, unitary culture. Like a built-in zoom lens, information in democracies liberates minds from the limits of their own particular worlds; it functions as a machine for setting consciousness in motion, for multiplying the opportunities to make comparisons—and ever since Rousseau we have understood the primordial role comparison plays in the development of individual reason. Information certainly has its "digest" aspect and its "distraction" aspect; be that as it may, there is no justification for continuing to assert that. owing to media-supplied information, “rational-critical debate [has] a tendency to be replaced by consuinption," that "the consumption of mass culture leaves no lasting trace; it affords a kind of experience which is not cumulative but regressive."20 The elitist intellectualist reflex is manifest here: something that amuses cannot possibly educate: something that distracts can only work against rational communication; something that seduces the masses has to give rise to irrational views; something that is easy and programmed can produce only passive assent. Such contentions are based on a profound misunderstanding. The universe of media information leads on a massive scale to the disruption of received ideas: it leads to reading, and to the development of the critical use of reason. It is a machine that adds complexity to the coordinates of thought. that stimulates a demand for reasoned argument, even if it does so within a simple. direct and relatively unsystemnatic framework. The prevailing view of the media needs fundamental revision. Media consumption is not about to bury reason; the spectacular does not abolish the formation of critical opinions: news “shows" are pursuing the itinerary of the Enlightenment. Information collaborates with the rise of individualism in still another way. We hear a lot of talk about the "global village." the media-induced contraction of the planet; at the same time, we need to note that the media are powerful instruments for overinvestment of the ego. They keep us informed about the multiple threats that surround us: they tell us about cancer, alcoholism, sexually transmitted diseases. and others: they are sounding boards for the various dangers that lurk on our highways and beaches and in contacts with other humans; they point out the precautions we need to take to stay slim and safe. 'This whole flood of information has centripetal effects: it leads individuals to pay more attention to themselves, to manage their bodies, appearance, and health "rationally": people heed the disturbing, occasionally catastrophie tone of some media programming and are led to be more careful. 'The better informed people are, the more they take charge of their own lives, and the more the self is the object of concern, solicitude. and preventive measures. Even when the media make an effort not to dramatize issues, they generate worry and a diffuse anxiety that leads to narcissistic preoccupations. While they are distilling worry on the one hand, the media are in the process of removing culpability from many types of behavior on the other (drug use, rape, impotence, alcoholism, and so forth). Everything can be shown or talked about, but without value judgments; such information is presented as facts to be registered and understood, not to be condemned. The media display virtually everything and judge almost nothing. They help orchestrate the new profile of anxious but tolerant narcissistic individualism with open morality and a weak or inconsistent superego. In various realms the media have succeeded in replacing churches, schools. families. political parties. and labor unions as agencies of socialization and the transmission of knowledge. More and more, it is through the media that we learn what is going on in the world; it is from the media that we get the new data that enable us to adapt to our changing environment. The socialization of human beings through tradition, religion, and morality is giving up more and more ground to the impact of media news and images. We have definitively left behind what Nietzsche called“the morality of mores": the cruel and tyrannical domestication of humans by humans that has been practiced from time immemorial, along with disciplinary instruction. has been replaced by a type of socialization that is entirely unprecedented: it is "soft," plural, noncoercive, and it functions in terms of choice, current events, the pleasure of images. Information transmitted through the media has the peculiar ability to individualize consciousnesses and disseminate the social body through its countless contents. while at the same time it is working to homogenize the social body. as it were. by the very form of media language. Under its influence in particular. ponderous ideological systems continue to lose their authority: information is a determining agent in the process that turns people away from the great systems of meaning that have paralleled the contemporary evolution of democratic societies. Information in democratic societies is subtended by a logic of the factual, the contemporary, the new: it gradually reduces the impact of doctrinaire ambitions, and forges a consciousness that is more and more alienated from “religious" interpretations of the world, from prophetic and dogmatic discourses. And this applies not only to the fragmented, discontinuous, immediate daily news, but also to the daily broadcasts in which experts intervene, scientists and other specialists who explain the latest developments on the issues simply and directly to the public. The media function by way of the discreet charm of documentary and scientific objectivity. They undermine global interpretations of phenomena, preferring to register facts and syntheses that are largely "positivist." Whereas the great ideologies tended to free themselves from immediate reality, which they assumed to be misleading, and applied “the irresistible power of logic," implacable procedures of deduction, definitive explanations following from absolute premises,21 information for its part glorifies change and emphasizes the empirical and “scientific" elements. It offers fewer glosses, but more images; fewer speculative syntheses, but more facts; less meaning, but more technical details. Hypercoherent arguments are replaced by events, value judgments by factual data, doctrines by news flashes, ideologues by experts, the radiant future by the fascinating present, by scoops and ephemeral current events. By putting novelties and the positivity of knowledge before the public, the media discredit the systematizing spirit; they propagate a mass allergy to totalizing visions of the world, to the exorbitant pretensions of hyperlogical dialectical reasoning. They favor the emergence of a hyperrealist spirit, enamored of facts, of what is "direct" or "live," of polls and novelties. Individual orientation through values has by no means disappeared; it is blended with the realist's appetite for information and with an openness to the voice of the other: and it has softened as faith in secular religions has eroded. If information is an accelerating agent for the dissemination of individualism. it is successful only inasmuch as it simultaneously diffuses the shared values of dialogue pragmatism, and objectivity, by promoting a homo telespectator with realistic, relativistic, and open-minded tendencies. If we grant that the media individualize human beings through the diversity of their contents but that they recreate a certain cultural unity by the way their messages are presented, we may be able to clarify the current debate on the social effects of "fragmented television." The terms of this debate are very familiar.22 Sometimes the threat to the cultural unity of nations posed by the proliferation of communication networks is emphasized; in this view, the increase in the number of channels and programs can only further divide the collective body and be an obstacle to social integration. Sometimes, on the contrary, it is argued that the more audiovisual choices there are, the more social standardization there will be. 'This is a tired old debate: hyperdisaggregation versus hyperhomogenization. In reality, the media explosion will not have a profound impact on the process set in motion by the rise in mass communications: the phenomenon will develop the spiral of individualization and the spiral of cultural homogenization simultaneously. On the one hand. additional programs and channels can only disseminate individual tastes and accentuate the passion for personal autonomy. On the other hand, the multiplication of programs will obviously not go forward along radically contradictory paths. The same principles of communication will be invoked in each case: seduce the public, present current "hot" topies. aim for effect rather than academic demonstration. Whatever the range of choices may be, the same major problematic themes will be dealt with, and the same essential information will be imparted; successful programs will capture a broader audience. The media will keep on promoting a culture of current events, efficiency, communicational exchange, and objectivity. Fragmented telecommunications will boost the growing trend toward the autonomy of the individual along with the trend toward its hyperrealist acculturation. The social bond is not in danger of being torn apart; at most, it will become more supple, allowing for Brownian movements of individualities against a background of spot culture and ideologies whose passion is spent. Let us avoid science-fiction scenarios: the new individualism of the media is not a harbinger of social disintegration. Rather, the inverse is true: the more free choice and individualization there is, the greater the capacity for social integration becomes, and the more opportunities there are for individuals to recognize themselves in their society, to find in the media something corresponding to their own expectations and desires. By discrediting ideological metasystems, by launching an eventcentered culture. the media also contribute to developing a new relation of individuals to knowledge. Through the press and television, individuals have more and more information, in the superficial "digest" mode, about what is happening in the world. Entire segments of what we know come from the media: not only the latest scientific and technological knowledge, but also information concerning practical aspects of everyday life. Our choices are directed less and less by traditional knowledge and more and more by elements captured here and there in the media. How to eat properlv, how to stav voung and healthy, how to bring up children, what books to read—to all such questions, articles and popularizing texts bring not definitive answers but terms. data. and information appropriate to the discussion. What results is an essentially fragile mass knowledge, less and less assimilated in depth. The media have the effect of destabilizing the content and organization of knowledge: closed and limited knowledge of the traditional universe has been replaced by a mass culture that is much more extensive but also looser and more superficial. The media determine a tvpe of individual culture characterized by turbulence, explosiveness, systematic blurring. Lacking access to fixed knowledge, overexposed to countless shifting messages. individuals are much more receptive to novelties from outside: they are tossed about according to the information they receive. Thus our relation to knowledge is increasingly elastic. We know many things. but almost nothing we know is solid, organized, or assimilated. Each person's culture resembles a mobile patchwork, a splintered construction over which our mastery is weak: “mosaic or rhapsodic culture," as Jean Cazeneuve calls it. While people keep their distance from monolithic ideologies. thev are more receptive to information about the present and to novelties; people have been converted to a fuzzy skepticism with a realistic tinge. Information dissolves the strength of convictions and makes individuals permeable, ready to give up their own opinions and systems of reference without much of a struggle. The neonarcissistic individual—labile, uncommitted, a member of the chewing-guın culture——is a child of the media. With their weak and changeable opinions, their focus on reality and novelty, the media, together with consumerism, allow democratic societies to move to a more rapid and more supple pace of social experimentation. The media cannot be equated with a rationalization of social control, but with an increased superficiality and mobility of knowledge. They are vectors of a higher power of individual and collective transformation. There should be little need, then, to underscore all that distinguishes the analysis I propose here from McLuhan's hypermaterialist analyses. It is obvious that the real message is not the medium. It is time to restore the contents conveyed by the media to their rightful place in the cultural and psychological transformations of our time. Thus television, as a "cold medium," has only a small role to play in the anthropological upheavals of the contemporary world. The explosion of news and information and their reorganization under the law of fashion have been the chief agents of the individualist leap forward. It is curious to read, in McLuhan's writings. that television stimulates "participation in depth," intense involvement of the self, whereas in fact, quite to the contrary, it makes the masses indifferent; it drains energy from the political scene and draws individuals away from the public sphere. We watch television from the outside: we listen distractedly; we skim over the pictures: we jump from channel to channel. Our relation to television is anything but intense involvement. The increased demand for personal motivation and expression that we see now concerns only the private self, not the increasingly corporatist. pragmatic, disillusioned public person. Everything leads us to voice serious reservations about the so-called power of the video image. as a "low-definition" image, to be the source of new habits of perception and experience. To say that a technologically poor picture compels the viewer at each instant to " close' the spaces in the mesh by a convulsive sensuous participation that is profoundly kinetic and tactile"2 is only an artifice of analvsis. an act of argumentative gymnasties that gets us nowhere: it conceals the multiple and complex mainsprings of the future of democratie individualism. It is true that attitudes have become more relaxed and that tastes for intimacy and self-expression have developed, but these attitudes and tastes do not have to be linked to low-intensity video images: again. they have to be seen as related to the galaxy of demoeratie values (autonomy, hedonism, psychologism) driven by mass culture and more generally by the system of consummate fashion. ## Information Plays and Wins The crucial role of information in the process of socialization and individualization cannot be separated from its spectacular and superficial register. Committed to being factual and objective. media information is by no means exempt from the work of fashion. It is reshaped in large part by the imperatives of display and seduction. It aims to inform, but through pleasure, renewal, and distraction: all programming with a cultural or vocational bent has to adopt the perspective of leisure. Mass communication seeks mercilessly to weed out pedagogical approaches, dry and tedious instruction. Reports have to be brief; commentary must be clear, simple, and interspersed with fragmented interviews, slices of life, or anecdotal elements: at all events the pictures have to distract, hold attention, and shock the audience. The basic object is to hook the widest possible public with the technology of rapid rhythms, flash sequences, and simplicity. There is no need for memory. references, or continuity; everything must be understood at once. and everything must change very quickly. The world of animation and seduction is paramount: famous entertainers (Yves Montand) and business stars (Bernard Tapie) are asked to present programs on the economic crisis or on setting up businesses. The same goal of entertaining accounts for the proliferation of talk shows. To be sure, the exoticism of imagery is lacking. but the thrill of live broadcasting compensates: the cinema of personalities. the unexpected reactions, the jockeying of minds and positions. Sometimes the exchange is courteous and mildmannered (Les Dossiers de l’écran, L’Avenir du futur, Apostrophes). On other occasions it is less so: thus Droit de réponse merely pushed the democratic espousal of information and spectacular animation to its limits by allowing the disordered. sympathetic, and confused confrontation of ideas and milieus to play itself out. In any event, it is the “show" aspect that determines the media quality of programs and that shapes the information presented. Media communication is orchestrated under the law of seduction and entertainment. It is implacably restructured by the fashion process because it is governed by the law of polls, the race for audience ratings. In a pluralist communicational universe subject to the resources of advertising, the fashion form organizes the production and distribution of programs; the fashion form governs their shape, nature, and timing. Once the media bow to polls, the seduction process reigns supreme; it can claim even “scientific" and democratic value. The republic of ratings simply underlines the sovereignty of fashion in the media, that is, the law of immediate success with the viewing public. The audiovisual explosion will not put a stop to this process: the more competing channels and specialized media there are, the more pitiless the principle of seduction, as measured by the ratings, will become. New charms will have to be aimed at the same limited segments; new presentations and new formulas for keeping the public's attention will have to be imagined. More than ever before, what seduces is minimal difference. Televised newscasts have fallen into step. The phenomenon is not a recent one, but it is intensifying. To be convinced of this, it suffices to observe the changes that have occurred in the tone and presentation of televised news bulletins. We have moved from the news format dominated by an official and pedagogical tone that characterized the early days of the medium to less-distant, less-solemn, more-natural newscasting. Earlier journalists spoke in restrained, professorial voices, and the atimnosphere was tense; now the tone is casual, and the ambience is cool. Television news has probably held on to some basic elements of gravity and seriousness; its brief flashes, free of rhetoric, have nothing in common with the carefree fantasy of fashion. Yet the imperative to seduce is obvious in the announcers, who are young, pleasant, attractive. and charming: their voices are reassuring. The law of glamour reigns: it is measured by the vardstick of numbers of viewers. For a long time, television has been nurturing great newscasters, stars such as R. Dimbedy in Great Britain or Walter Cronkite in the United States. The phenomenon merely multiplies as new avenues are exploited; all the channels are on the lookout for journalists with an attractive image. Newscasting is dominated by journalistic stars who can have a measurable influence on the ratings. Information is sold to millions of viewers via the announcer's personality, aura. or looks. We are in the age of the anchorperson: these stars have kept their high standing in the popularity polls even as the great filn stars are fading away. Information manufactures and demands stars; it is as if the accomplished style of television newscasts had to have some human brilliance as a counterpart, a surfeit of individuality. It is the same with newscasts as with objects or advertising: the fashion form. the imperative of personalization and seduction, are at work everywhere. For a long time it has been obvious that news programs and theater have the same mainsprings: the dramatization of facts. the search for sensational effects, the artificial creation of stars. All news tends to be caught up in the frenzy of the scoop, in the desire to deliver something new and unexpected according to a logic analogous to that of fashion. But television news grows out of the fashion form even more directly. More than any other news medium, television funetions essentially by turning information into images—an invasion of images that are sometimes unfamiliar; they are often banal, devoid of special interest, merely illustrative. Images accompany commentaries and reported facts almost systematically: a half-hour television newscast presents more than twenty minutes worth of pictures. Television news oscillates between the anecdote and the thriller; it is inseparable from visual pleasure, direct representation, and hyperrealist stimulation. All information comes via the kaleidoscope of images Video tracks, visual effects, decorative elements (scenography, colors, titles, credits) are all-important: visual theater has colonized television news. In the print media, the seduction process is reflected less by a profusion of images than by subtleties of page formatting, the tone of the writing, and the increasingly frequent use of humor in articles, headlines, and lead paragraphs. No newspaper is exempt from this any longer: the logic of information and the logic of play have been reconciled everywhere. Just as eighteenth-century fashion toved with major and minor historical phenomena, using ribbons and hairstyles to poke fun at financial debacles or at popular uprisings. in the same way today's news continues to use a casual, fanciful style to present the events of the day, no matter how tragic. When it took over the media, the humoristic code shifted the register of information into the casual, playful logic of fashion. It is true that television newscasts do not have the same mocking, sometimes disrespectful tone: the need to use clear. synthetic discourse in a limited time span militates against the use of wordplay and innuendo. The announcer's huinor can appear only incidentally, and discreetly. Television news seduces with high-toned chic: it combines seriousness of discourse with the increasingly frequent play of the new images made possible by electronic technologies and computers. In television news programs, we find multiple signs of sophisticated representation and visualization, scenographic gadgetry intended to produce effects and animation, to concoct a trademark image and a "look" for the channel. The new ways of treating images mean that mockups of television newscasts can be constructed; "screen-pages" can be designed with computer graphic techniques, electronic inserts, titles, illustrations. logos. and banners; images can be shifted on the screen, made smaller or larger at will. juxtaposed for duplex effects (the “embedded" man). Television news relies more and more on stylistic research (credits with special effects and modernistic rhetoric, abstract electronic imagery) and gives rise to a decorative display consisting of flashes, ephemeral embedded images, variations and recompositions of images that echo the modern spectacular and accelerated character of current events.2+ As the airwaves and their synthetic images are “dressed up," the fashion process of seduction is getting its second wind: news has made it into the fashionable era of electronic gadgetry. The charges brought against media news are couched in familiar terimns. Media news is avid for the sensational; it focuses on secondary or insignificant details: it puts incommensurable cultural phenomena on the same footing; it is the product of a "staging” that forestalls the critical use of reason and prevents any apprehension of the phenomenon as a whole. While it may be true that the spectacular is consubstantial with news, we nevertheless tend to forget too quickly that seduction also focuses attention, captivates the audience, increases the desire to see, to read and be informed. The effects induced are the same as those of political marketing: because of lively, entertaining programming, the most varied questions concerning scientific and technological progress, the worlds of art and literature, sexuality, and drugs are made accessible to everyone. By bringing specialists together, by producing magazine programs with the rhythm of variety shows, television puts blocks of knowledge at the disposal of the masses. What was once esoteric becomes familiar; what might have resembled an evening course becomes appealing and holds millions of viewers spellbound. The unreality of what Boorstin called the "pseudo-event" is much more than a device for manipulating or alienating the spectator: we have to speak of a partial reappropriation of a universe. a broadening of the horizon of knowledge for the greatest number of people. although within a somewhat ragged framework. What is at stake is not "subjection to power"25 or degradation of the cultural use of reason, but a democratization of access to culture, an expanded possibility of forming freer opinions. However positive it may be, the phenomenon has obvious limits: if the sum of knowledge increases, the same is not true of the power to synthesize knowledge or to put the data received into perspective. By "blowing up" the present, news blurs the reference points for interpretation: it overexposes what is visible and anecdotal at the expense of what is invisible and fundamental; it obscures the larger picture in favor of a focus on events. This is at once the media's limitation and their power: they fragment knowledge and make it superficial. Nevertheless. on the scale of the history of democracies, they open up the public to the world. make it more critical and less conformist than before. In the same way, the hasty judgment about the so-called decline of the public sphere in connection with the extension of the media ought to be revised. Theoreticians have competed to outdo one another with their critical denunciations: the media have instituted "communication without response" (Debord) and a "monopoly on speech":2" they deprive the public of the possibility of speaking out and contradicting:2" they are responsible for the disappearance of social contacts and relations of exchange. The ready-to-consume culture and the one-way architecture of the media short-circuit social communication and discussion among individuals. Casting human beings as passive, irresponsible consumers lacking in initiative, the media destroy human relations; they isolate people. reduce opportunities for people to get together. weaken the taste for exchange and conversation. People no longer speak to each other: instead, they consume messages. The media destroy sociability; they accelerate the decline of publie man, all the more so in that the information they convey depends more and more on a positivist "performative" requirement that is "incompatible with communication." By valorizing the criterion of efficiency erected as a monopoly on truth, news that is predominantly objectivist blocks "the exchange of rational argument": it has "the effect of substituting exchanges of merchandise for what had been communicational interaction."28 The era of mass communications entails the deterioration of human communication. However, if we look somewhat more closely, we see that the media are also the occasion of countless discussions; they continue to furnish subjects of exchange among individuals. Numerous small relational circuits in the public itself are grafted onto media communication. Just as theatrical performances allow the exchange of points of view, television offers numerous subjects of conversation: documentary reports are discussed and evaluated in families and in society: is there anyone in France who has not talked about the Psy Shou or Dallas? Televised series and films are topics for judgment and negotiation: "What are we going to watch tonight?" The media do not asphyxiate the sense of communication; they do not bring sociability to an end. They reproduce incidents of social exchange in a new way. They institute social exchange in a basically less ritualized and freer form. Individuals do not communicate less than ever: probably people have never communicated so much on so many issues with so many people. However. they communicate in a more fragmented, less formal, more discontinuous manner. in keeping with their taste for autonomy and speed. The media do not create a space of communication comparable to that of the classic liberal public space as Habermas describes it when he evokes the salons. societies. and clubs in which people discuss, reason, and argue face-to-face. Even if his description of the public sphere is very idealistic and even if this type of rational communication has only been realized historically to a very limited extent, we may accept the idea that the human communication incited by a media presentation does not look much like a coherent and systematic exchange of arguments. But this still does not justify speaking of the disintegration of the public sphere, if that term refers to the place where public opinion and criticism take shape. The media are wrongly viewed as mechanisms for manipulating the public in order to produce social consensus; the seduction of news and information is also an instrument of individual reason. It is important to understand that the development of individual reason comes about less and less through discussion among private individuals and more and more through consumption and the seductive paths of information. Even if there were a decline in social forms of discussion, it would not be legitimate to infer from this that the critical spirit had disappeared. Seduction does not abolish the practice of reason; it broadens and universalizes reason even as it modifies the exercise of reason. Indeed, the media have made it possible to generalize the sphere of the public debate: first, by allowing a constantly growing number of citizens to become more aware of the issues involved in political choices—allowing them to be better-informed judges of the political game;2º second, by enlarging the space of questioning: from one perspective, television newscasts and documentaries, reports and discussions do no more than set off a dynamic of interrogation on all issues of public and private life. Prisons. homosexuality, nuclear power, euthanasia, bulimia, techniques of procreation—there are no issues left that have not been the object of news programs, analysis. and discussion. The public space has not ceased to be the place for critical discussion. no matter how much it has been penetrated by managerial concerns and by the system's standards for productivity. Experts and popularized presentations of scientific issues in no way preclude the possibility that basic rifts may develop over the way problems should be evaluated. Far from stifling public debate, the media nourish it and place it within the democratic space of endless questioning. Information is not colonized by the standards of utilitarian rationality. Through media debates, the various conflicts of values proper to the modern world arise, bringing standards of efficiency, equality, and freedom into conflict. The public is offered not only recipes, but also a multiplicity of approaches and viewpoints. The relative atrophy of social movements, the indifference to the political sphere, the frivolity of viewers do not point simply to the decline of the public sphere and a monopoly of the utilitarian ideology. Even as they succeed in producing a consensus. the media simultaneously pursue differences in perspective. Seduction integrates the public with contemporary society even as it develops criticism and civil polemics. While the media broaden the space of critical interrogation. they also pacify its terms. There are occasional complaints about the muffled tones of television programs, about their aseptic worldliness. But those who make such complaints fail to appreciate the communicational effectiveness of such an apparatus. The media, recycled by the fashion process, educate the publie about the ethos of the community. They diffuse in large doses the standard of peaceful conversation, a nonviolent model of sociability. Scenes of violence in movies and on television, it may be surmised are in large measure counterbalanced by this staging of an endless dialogue and the exchange of arguments. The "simulation" of communication carried out by the media (questioning of the public. computerized polls, and so on), the debates, the pleasant tones of voice are essential: they produce the ideal of civility, and they disallow outrageous polemics and uncontrolled aggressivity. In this sense, the media have to be viewed as a major component in the consolidation of the democracies, which are henceforth committed to the code of verbal confrontation without bloodshed. The media socialize the publie to accept the seduetiveness of verbal exchanges and relational contact; they participate in the process of civilizing ideological and social conflict. ## Meaning Carries On The Bearable Lightness of Meaning: Fashion and Ideology IkE oBJects and mass culture. major discourses about meaning are caught up in the irrepressible logic of novelty, carried away by a turbulence that may not be absolutely identical to fashion in the narrow sense but is nevertheless analogous in principle. The world of consciousness, too. is now ordered by the ephemeral and the superficial: this is the new configuration of democratic societies. It would be patently absurd to claim that the frivolous process has completely taken over intellectual life and that ideological shifts are governed by a gratuitous logic of renewal. However. it can be argued that the fashion process succeeds in annexing even those spheres that are a priori most resistant to the play of fashion. We are not living through the end of ideologies; we are ushering in the era of ideologies recycled as fashion. Never has change in cultural and ideological orientations proceeded so precipitously as it does in our societies; never has it been so dependent on fads. The speed with which frenzies of meaning have come and gone and proliferated over the last two or three decades is particularly striking. On the hit parade of ideas. coming one after another or overlapping, there has been the counterculture movement, antiauthoritarianism, third-worldism. libertarian pedagogy, antipsychiatry, sexual liberation, worker management, consumerism, and ecologv. At the same time, in the more specifically intellectual sphere. France has embraced structuralism, semiology, psychoanalysis, Lacanianism, Althusserism, the philosophies of desire, and the “new philosophy." The ballet continued through the 198os, with the spectacular turnaround of neolibertarianism: the “conservative revolution," the return of the sacred, the ecstasy of “roots," and the glorification of businesses. In the 196os and 197os, the hvpercritical ideology of protest was a big hit, just like the miniskirt or the Beatles. Marx and Freud became superstars and gave rise to floods of ravished exegetes, mimetic discourses, imitators, and readers. And what is left today, in France? In a few short years, the most hallowed references have fallen into oblivion. "Mav '68 is history!" What was once indispensable has become old-fashioned. Not by virtue of a critical movement, but simply through disaffection: one wave ends, another is launched with the same epidemic force. Taken to extremes, this phenomenon leads people to change the way they think just as they change addresses, cars, or spouses. Systems of representation have become consumer objects; they function almost according to the throwaway logic of fads and tissues. One misunderstanding needs to be avoided from the outset. To speak about the fashion process in ideas does not mean that everything floats in a state of absolute nondifferentiation, that collective opinions oscillate from pole to pole without fixed anchor points. Consummate fashion makes sense only in the democratic age where there is consensus and strong. widespread, lasting attachment to the founding values of the modern ideology: equality, freedom, and human rights. The accelerated obsolescence of systems of representation can develop only against the background of the overall stability of modern democracies. Here is the paradox of consummate fashion: whereas democratic society is more and more capricious in its relation to collectively intelligible discourses. at the same time it is more and more balanced, consistent, and firm in its ideological underpinnings. Parodying Nietzsche, one might say that homo democraticus is superficial by way of depth: the securing of the principles of individualist ideology is what allows meanings to enter into their merry dance. No one would claim that fashion is intruding on intellectual life for the very first time. Since the seventeenth century at least, the cultural sphere has been stirred up, in worldly and intellectual circles, by countless "frenzies." and even political views have gone through many eycles of alternation and change. However, if we look closely at the various ideological shifts that repeatedly jolted the democracies through the middle of the twentieth century, we do not find the fashion process at work: the tenor and emotional investment of the ideological formations characteristie of that era preclude the intervention of the fashion form. Republic. nation proletariat, race, socialism, secularism, revolution—these were all sacred terms for the political ideologies that embraced the mission of renewing the world. These ideologies crystallized as dogmas calling for personal devotion and sacrifice. Modern revolutionary discourses, systems for global interpretation of the universe claiming to offer total knowledge of present, past, and future, have reintroduced a certain form of religious faith through their eschatological doctrines, their "scientifie" ambition to articulate and maintain truth and justice with certainty. As "secular religions," they have given rise to militancy and absolute passions, unswerving submission to the correct line, total personal commitment, the gift of believers' lives and subjective individualities. Calling for renunciation of self in favor of revolution, nation. and party, the glorious age of ideologies is completely opposed to fashion and its relativism. Whereas the heroic reign of ideology requires the abnegation of individuality, the reign of fashion rests on the requirement of immediate individual happiness. Whereas ideology generates orthodoxy and scholasticism, fashion is attended bv small individual differences and fluctuating commitments. Ideology is Manichean: it separates good from bad, cleaves society down the middle. and exacerbates social conflicts; fashion pacifies and neutralizes antagonisms. Whatever reversals may have come about in the sphere of political and social thought during the last two centuries, fashion did not succeed until recently in imposing its ephemeral legislation, countered as it was by ideologies with theological pretensions. We have left behind the age of secular prophecy. Within just a few decades. the discourse of radical social change has been largely swept awav. It has lost all its legitimacy and all social moorings. No one believes any longer in the glorious fatherland of socialisn; no one believes in the saving mission of the proletariat and the party; no one militates for the -Great Day" ahead. The historical importance of this debacle of the revolutionary imagination cannot be overstressed. No sooner did eschatological convictions and beliefs in an absolute truth of history begin to crumble than a new regime of "ideologies" came into being: that of fashion. The ruin of Promethean visions opens up an unprecedented relation to values an essentially ephemeral, mobile, unstable ideological space. There are no more megasystems: they have given way to the fluctuation and mutability of trends. Where we used to have faith, we now have infatuation. After the era of intransigent theology comes the era of frivolous meaning: interpretations of the world have shed their former seriousness and taken up the casual intoxication of consumption and express service. And the importance of the ephemeral in the ideological realm is very likely to intensify: in recent years, we have already seen the most politically convinced people make a clean sweep of their views and change direction by 18o degrees. Yesterday's French Marxists are supporters of religion, and the “angry young men" have become apologists for capitalism. The heroes of cultural confrontation have been converted to the cult of the self, and devotees of worker management promote the market economy. We are prepared to adore unconditionally what we were only recently ready to burn. This destabilization does not involve the masses alone; it also affects the political class, as the conservative vogue in the early i98os attested. It is not limited to the average person in the street; it extends to intellectuals as well, as one can see from the repeated gyrations of some of the French intellectual starlets. Mobility of conscience is not an exclusive privilege of our era. What is unique to our era, on the other hand, is the way in which inconstancy has become generalized, virtually systemic: today it is taking over as the dominant “ideological” mode of operation. To be sure, people still believe in causes, but casually, without committing themselves “to the bitter end." No longer inclined to die in great numbers for their ideas, humnan beings in modern democratic societies are always prepared for change; consistency has become old hat. People live less and less according to systems of dominant ideas; like the rest, such systems have been swallowed up by frivolity. Higher goals do not disappear, but they no longer stand out. Of course they are capable of mobilizing the masses on occasion, but indirectly, and in unpredictable ways. like passing flare-ups that are quickly extinguished, replaced by the longer-lasting quest for personal happiness. The dominant trend produces adjustable and expendable plans. A preference for provisional arrangements is winning out over fidelity, superficial commitment over motivation based on belief. We are embarked on an interminable process of desacralization and desubstantialization of meaning that defines the reign of consummate fashion. This is how the gods die: not in a nihilist demoralization of the West and anguish over the loss of values, but in small jolts of meaning. Not in the morosity of Europe, but in the euphoria of fleeting ideas and actions. Not in passive disillusionment, but in hyperanimation and temporary highs. There is no point in weeping over the "death of God\*: God is getting a Technicolor, fast-forward funeral. Far from engendering a will to nothingness, the death of God carries the desire for the new and its excitement to extremes. The new flexibility has to be resituated within the continuity of the dynamics of democracy. By positing the organization of society as dependent on humans and no longer on a sacred agency, the modern ideologies had been the instituting matrixes of our democratic universe. a universe called forth by the will of the collective body alone. But by setting up intransigent dogmas and establishing an ineluctable meaning for history. this process of secularization in a sense stopped in its tracks. lt reintroduced in secular guise the old religious apparatus of human submission to an inaccessible higher principle. The age of fashion represents one more step forward toward the democratic elimination of the intangible and the hieratic. Nothing now requires self-sacrifice; discourses are open to flexible debate, to correction, to the nondisruptive revision of principles. The fashion form reflects the final stage of the democratization of minds and meanings. Beyond fashion's mood shifts, paradoxically, democratie society is digging a homogeneous furrow, pursuing an identical trajectory. One of the limits of the cyclical theory of collective behavior has to do with the way this theory sees the abrupt changes of ideological coordinates as backand-forth movements, pendulum swings between private and public life, as if there is nothing but historical discontinuity, reversals that are always radically opposed to whatever came before. Now if we consider the oscillations that have taken place over the past three decades, we are obliged to note that. despite these reversals, a single historical dynamic turns out, paradoxically, to be at work. To be sure, on the surface the utopian wave of the 196os is in total contrast to our disillusioned, pragmatist, corporatist moment; an era of public commitment is radically distinct from an era defined by its hyperindividualistic preoccupations, no matter what partial social conflicts may erupt here and there. However, can the counterculture or the events of May 1968 be seen as anything but waves of transpolitical individualist clains?² Can radical feminism be seen as anything but a movement allowing women to claim new freedoms? The ideology of protest brandished the banner of revolution, but one of its mainsprings was the individualist goal of living freelv, unhampered by organizations or conventions. This ideology helped in its own way to highlight the forward march of democratic individualisın and to topple a certain number of ponderous. repressive frameworks that had been resistant to personal autonomy. There is not an irreducible gap between that moment and the present one: they represent nothing but two different paths along a single trajectory. that of the conquest of individuality. Today, the emphasis on personal values and even the return of a certain moral conservatism are pursuing the same historical effort to conquer autonomy in other ways. As soon as the reference points of dogmatic progressivism are blurred and new antinomic references are promoted, community pressures become weaker and less homogeneous: what is correct becomes less clear; the gamut of individual choice broadens, and the possibility of variegating the values that orient our lives increases as well. Reason has its ruses: yesterday the ideology of the Left served the historical progress of individualism; today the values of order and business are playing the same role in their turn, almost in spite of themselves. Their manifest reversals notwithstanding. temporary ideologies do not disrupt the age-old continuity of the democracies; rather, they accelerate its progress. The fashion regime of collective representations did not replace the era of Promethean ideologies all at once. There was a turning point, a critical moment that functioned as a compromise formation between the historical phase of the revolution and the phase of consummate fashion. The last manifestation of the revolutionary spirit turned out to be curiously combined, in the 196os, with its counterpart, the fashion spirit. On the one hand, the 196os and their aftermath reintroduced the imaginary realm of revolution, through student demonstrations, the counterculture, radical feminism. and alternative movements. We saw the unfolding of an ideological escalation summoning us to change our lives, to destroy the hierarchical and bureaucratic organization of capitalist society, to free ourselves from all forms of domination and authority. With the evocation of the police state and the bosses' state, the return to general strikes, the “Internationale" and the barricades, the revolutionary mythology succeeded in refurbishing its coat of arms. On the other hand, the confrontations of the 196os for the most part broke off the essential links that had connected that mythology with the demiurgic projects of building a new world that were crystallized in the nineteenth century. May 1968 in this respect constitutes an unprecedented moment: without any definite goal or program, the movement was an insurrection without a future, a revolution in the present tense attesting simultaneously to the decline of eschatologies and to the protesters' inability to offer a clear view of the society to come. Without an explicit project, subtended by a spontaneous ideology. May 1968 was just a short-lived parenthesis, a frivolous revolution, an infatuation with Revolution rather than a fundainental mobilization. It offered the spectacle of revolution, a joyous affirmation of revolutionary signs. not revolutionary stakes and confrontations. Unlike the bloody revolutions that had focused on the deliberate construction of a different future. May 1968 was organized around the temporal axis of fashion—the present—in a “happening" that looked more like a big party than like the days that shook the world. The springtime of the students did not make serious proposals or build anything lasting. It criticized and palavered: it brought people together in the streets and universities; it upset certainties: it called for "the rebellion of life," for "everything, all at once." for the total fulfillment of individuals as opposed to organizations and bureaucracies. The idea was to explode instituted hierarchies in order to live unhampered in the here and now: May 1968 was subtended by a libertarian individualist. hedonist, and communicational ideology at the opposite pole from the self-abnegation of earlier revolutions. The collective and subjective present was the leading temporal pole of May 1968. This was the first fashion revolution: frivolity won out over tragedy. and history espoused play. May 1968 mobilized revolutionary passions more on the surface than in depth. In parodying revolution, May 1968 did less to reignite the age-old flames than to carry to its apotheosis, briefly. the fashion of protest. The ideological climate of the times played a preponderant role in the rise of the protest phenomenon in France. Neither the students objective situation nor the deterioration of their job prospects or future outlook can account for the youthful utopian rebellion. In May 1968, no one was really worrying about the future; the students gave very little thought to the value of their diplomas. Quite the contrary: they rejected the adaptation of university instruction to the needs of the capitalist economy. The employment crisis had not yet sunk in. The spirit of May 1968 did not result from a social inclination to worry; it resulted above all from ideological inclinations, intellectual fashions, among a particular age group: social criticism was "in," as were revolutionary attitudes, Marxism, and anticapitalism, at the very moment when the real revolutionary perspective embodied in the party and the working class were disappearing. The vogue for revolution evolved as a counterpart to the decomposition of the French Communist party and the integration of the working class to neocapitalism. This vogue managed to attract a lot of attention precisely because it was discredited among the masses and their protest organizations, because it was able to serve the voung as a sign of affirmation, a spectacle of visible difference. The intellectual break was of course particularly evident in hyperpoliticized leftist groups. but in fact radical ideas were more or less widespread in very broad layers of the student movement. Police efforts to suppress the student movement contributed to student espousal of the anticapitalist ideology that was more or less in favor, and led to the propagation of the protest phenonenon. While they do not account for everything, radical chic and hypercritical conformity among young people are crucial to an understanding of the breadth and contagiousness of the spirit of May 1968. Other cultural factors also played major roles in developing the spirit of protest. No circumstantial or structural explanation (the war in Vietnam, a centralizing and dominating state, the archaic nature of the university, the Gaullist regime in France) can account for a phenomenon that touched young people (in a variety of ways. to be sure—there were the hippies, the counterculture. the psychedelic movement, the provos, May 1968, the alternative movements. feminism, gay liberation), but that affected all the advanced democratic societies. The uprisings of the 196os can be related to the increase in school populations, the fact that students stayed in school longer. the fact that teenagers and postadolescents led lives without responsibility. separated from the real world of work. But each of these factors was important only within the broader framework in which the new fashion organization of society was overturning the values of everyday life. At the heart of the individualism of protest, there is the empire of fashion as the springboard of individualist demands, of the appeal for personal freedom and fulfillment. The hedonist age of fashion and the cult of personal developimnent that it inspires were vectors of the upheaval of the 196os and early 1970s, an upheaval that came about among young people because that group was less subject to the older forms of socialization, because it had assimilated the new standards for living one's life more rapidly, more directly, and more intensely than other groups. Hedonist individualism bumped headlong into archaic, authoritarian frameworks for socialization; it was this antagonism between a culture centered on the values of fashion and a managerial society, a culturally blocked society, that fed the trend toward protest. At the deepest level, what was at stake was a revolt aimed at harmonizing and unifying a culture with its own new basic principles. This was not a “crisis of civilization," but a collective effort to draw society away from the rigid cultural norms of the past and give birth to more a supple, more varied, more individualistic society that would conform to the requirements of consummate fashion. Revolutionary discourse has lost its attraction today. Eschatological narratives have lost their shock value; we are firmly ensconced in the terminal reign of the fashion of meaning. The disaffection with ideological odysseys and its corollary, the advent of "light" meaning. result not so much from a collective awareness of the totalitarianism of the Communist revolution, the inferno of the Gulag, than from the changes that have occurred within the Western world as it has been won over by the process of consummate fashion. The ludic-aesthetic-hedonistic-psvchologistic lifestyle celebrated by the media is what undermined the revolutionary utopia and discredited discourse on behalf of a classless society and a harmonious future. The consummate-fashion system fosters the cult of individual health and life in the here and now; it holds sacred the personal happiness of individuals and the pragmatism of attitudes: it destroys class solidarities and consciousness in favor of explicitly individualistic demands and preoccupations. The empire of seduction has been a euphoric gravedigger for the great ideologies. Taking into account neither the singular individual nor the requirement of freedom to live hic et nunc. those ideologies found themselves poles apart from contemporary individualist aspirations. The fluidity of meaning inherent in our societies is matched by more or less pronounced concerns about the vitality of the democracies. Stripped of belief in great causes, indifferent to major projects of collective edification, are not denocracies highly fragile, vulnerable to threats from without, haunted by the spirit of capitulation? Under the reign of fashion. militant fervor is quenched: might not this phenomenon. under some circumstances, foster the establishment of dictatorial regimes? What becomes of the spirit of freedom, courage in the face of danger, or the mobilization of energies in a society that lacks higher goals. that is obsessed with the quest for personal happiness? These questions cannot be ignored. but it is illegitimate to draw hasty conclusions about the degeneration of the democratie spirit, a spirit gone soft owing to the flabbiness of citizens convictions. One may well wonder whether, today, people would be ready to die in large numbers for the institutions of the republic: but once the question has been raised, how can one reasonably go further? No one can give a serious answer to the sort of question that situates us in a catastrophic scenario with necessarily unprecedented features. Has the will to fight been snuffed out by the cult of the self? If we look at the profile of contemporary society, we find nothing that authorizes us to answer categorically in the affirmative. 'The rout of heroic ideologies does not lead to generalized cowardice, to the paralysis of the citizenry and the rejection of war. Military service does not arouse enthusiasm, but it does not generate any movement toward collective refusal; except for extreme pacifists, the principles of armed defense, a credible dissuasive force, and the reinforcement of military potential are challenged by no one. While the democratic states, with the support of their own populations, continue to arm themselves, pursuing their military-industrial course, civil society for its part manifests collective calm and remarkable firmness of opinion in view of the expansion of terrorism. The temptation to give in to terrorist blackmail is rejected by the majority. despite the threats that weigh on public tranquillity; judges willing to pronounee a severe verdict against the head of a terrorist organization despite the risks have been widely welcomed by society and the political class. Homo democraticus does not dream of heroic sacrifice and an impressive show of weapons, to be sure; still, he does not fall into the cowardice and unconsciousness of capitulation and the immediate present. Terrorist violence has to be answered with strength and the enforcement of laws: threats by foreign nations have to be answered with the reinforcement of military might. Without enthusiasm but with lucidity. contemporary individuals have adopted the old adage: “If you want peace, you must prepare for war." The withering away of hard-line ideological choices is not the same thing as the advent of the spirit of surrender and collective lack of foresight: moreover. it reinforces the social legitimacy of democratic institutions. Apart from tiny terrorist groups with far-out views rejected by all political formations. the democracies no longer harbor within themselves any unconditional adversaries. This is an entirely new situation: revolutionary parties no longer have any impact whatever. In a more relativist world, lacking any ardent historical faith, respect for institutions wins out over subversion; political violence makes no new converts and becomes illegitimate in the eyes of the community; in Western Europe, appeals to bloodshed and physical violence are rejected by the social and political bodv. Critics endlessly find things to criticize in our societies, and in the end they take a certain satisfaction in doing so: for the first time since the advent of the democratic age, human beings have no more social utopias; they no longer dream of a different society. On the surface, the twists and turns of fashion destabilize the democracies; at a deeper level, they settle them down, make them more stable and more resistant to holy wars, less threatened from within, less vulnerable to the hysterical delirium of total mobilization. What we are seeing, then, is not the decline of the democratic spirit but its advance. The gentle drift of meaning is accompanied, to be sure, by a process in which the political is made more spectacular and more trivial, in which militancy and labor-union memberships decline, in which the spirit of citizenship is inflected toward consumerism, in which the public is less involved in the election process and sometimes disaffectedso many revealing aspects of a crisis of homo democraticus. ideally conceived. Yet we can hardly fail to see at the same time that the dissolving of ideologies and the dream of consummate fashion go hand in hand with a more autonomous civil society, one that is more mobilized around what touches it to the quick: women's rights, the environment, education. On the one hand, there is less and less religious commitment to political causes; on the other, there are more "social conflicts" attesting that civil society is not so passive as some make it out to be, that it intervenes more directly and spontaneously in matters involving the lives of individuals and families. Less boxed in by ponderous dogmas. more mobile. more attached to the quality of life and individual freedoms, society is freer to intervene, more able to bring pressure to bear on the state. more apt to express its hopes outside the traditional political parties and lahor unions. The loss of faith in ideologies that characterizes our era leads to more open conflicts, to a greater involvement on the part of citizens with their own immediate affairs, to a less arrogant wielding of power on the part of electoral majorities. Society makes itself increasingly heard. and public power has to learn to imagine solutions that are less technocratic and more flexible, less authoritarian and more diversified. in harinony with the contem porary open individualistic world. ## The Thrill of the Comeback But let us consider the great ideological shift that is taking place in France before our very eyes. In a few short years, the Marxist paradigm has given way to the libertarian paradigm; the opposition to capitalism has vielded to the consecration of free enterprise and the limitation of state power. After the great nay-saying, there is the ecstasy of profit. Yesterday. utopias were in the air; today, there is pragmatism and managerial realism. 'The rehabilitation of competitive individualist values is a corollary of the ideological promotion of economic competition. As ambition, effort. and money take on enhanced prestige, the end of the "68 recess" is being proclaimed; educational institutions are being denounced as increasingly flabby and subject to pedagogical ideology. Merit, excellence. and individual competence are winning out; after the euphoria of the counterculture and relationships, the global pendulum has swung back to efficiency. Nevertheless. the neolibertarian wave is clearly a long way from carrying the day without false notes. If private enterprise and decreased state intervention are unquestionably in favor, this in no way prevents the social body, even in the United States, from supporting systems of social proteetion, social policies established within the framework of the welfare state. Distaste for state interventionism in economie matters in no way undermines the collective attachment to social justice, to establishing protections against major risks, to state intervention in social matters and even in university affairs, as recent student movements in France and Spain have shown. Entrepreneurial dynamism may be celebrated, but large numbers of people manifest their attachment to acquired benefits and a salary scale based on seniority. The will to restore the authority of teachers and of knowledge itself does not undermine the importance of the relational dimension and the need to take subjective motives into consideration in the pedagogical realm. Fashion has its extremes, but in its social diffusion it smoothes over the most pronounced wrinkles; it reconstitutes itself heterogeneously: it gives up all doctrinal character in order to achieve. de facto. a certain "continuity in change," a more rapid transformation of the collective body that still will not disrupt the great equilibriums of democratic societies. The current neolibertarian trend is much more a fashion than a hardline ideological credo: the attraction of the new and the image of privacy are more seductive than the libertarian political program. Like any fashion, this one will secrete its own antitheses. No doubt, after a while, we shall see new enthusiasm for the state and even for the rationality of the universal: we shall have new waves of protesters, hirsute or not, along with romantic utopias at war with the world of money, hierarchy, and work. As soon as the theological age of ideologies ended, we were consigned to a chronic instability of values. to the ebb and flow of actions and reactions, to the "eternal return" of fashion, which keeps on recycling the old forms and values in modern guise. In the 198os, France resonates to the sound of high-tech modernism and a backward-looking mongrel competitiveness; but for how long? This moment can be described as one of the cycles of modern history characterized by overinvolvement in private affairs, in contrast with an earlier phase of attachment to the public sphere. A shift with respect to the public/private axis has in fact occurred; a new privatizing cycle is under way, after the various collective engagements of the i96os and the early 197os. The question is whether such a fluctuation can be understood, even partially. as a disappointment resulting from participation in public actions.3 Through its stress on the role of dissatisfaction and personal frustration, Albert Hirschman's analysis accounts for the abruptness of the collective reversals we have witnessed, over and beyond the consideration of contingent objective factors and “rational actors." At the same time, this analvsis makes clear how much changes in preference owe to the inconstancy and frivolity of human motivations: in a sense, the logic of fashion underlies this theory of ideological and social oscillations. But the importance attributed to disappointment is highly overestimated; as it happens, that particular disappointment has little explanatory value in the cycle that concerns us. Today, those who have been disappointed by the revolutionary mobilization are not the only ones who put their hopes in the private sphere; in a general way, the entire social body does the same—the silent majority itself, which has been quite apathetic politically for decades. This apathy has nothing to do with the disappointment provoked by actions taken in the public interest; it has been a long time since the masses played an active role in the great eschatological struggles and clung to the hope of changing the world. The same people who vaguely condemned capitalism and its excesses without being politically committed themselves have come to the point of revising their judgments in favor of free enterprise. What we are seeing is not disappointment. but the invincible attraction of the new. The current shift has less to do with the experience of dissatisfaction than with the ruin of the great ironclad ideologies: it has less to do with frustration than with the frenzy of change and the passion for all that exalts free individuals. Without the seductive power of novelty, the new libertarian ideas would never have won such a large audience so rapidly. The cultural promotion of free enterprise came about not only by way of realism in relation to the economic crisis. but also through the spirit of fashion. Although it is in part a fashion, the new entrepreneurial culture still produces fundamental and presumably lasting changes in individual and collective behavior. With the change in the social image of business. the latter becomes less a place of exploitation and class struggle than a place of creation of wealth that calls for more widespread participation. In the Europe of the 198os, the figure of the profiteer boss is yielding on a broad scale to that of the creator and hero-star of business. Labor unions are starting to take this change of climate into account in their language and practices: worker management looks like a has-been: capitalism is no longer evil incarnate; strikes are becoming weapons whose use is sometimes problematie. At the same time, the taste for enterprise is spreading and winning new social legitimacy. 'The winners' turn has come—the photogenic bosses, the yuppies. Here is a crucial ideological updating for the free societies that, having shed their image as inveterate exploiters, find themselves endowed with strengthened legitimaey and a culture at least theoretically favorable to a more realistie participation on the part of wage earners and to a process of conflictual cooperation in businesses. A shift in ideological coordinates of this nature cannot leave the subjective sphere itself unchanged; it is carried away by new goals and meanings. We are far removed from the culture of marginal dissidence. We are now worrying about the future: effort, courage, and risk have returned to center stage: emulation, professionalism, and excellence are extolled. Still. does this new cultural environment toll the death knell of the narcissistic profile of contemporary personalities? The spirit of competition and ambition have been rehabilitated, and there is a consensus about business: is this not a new configuration incompatible with the reign of the self-absorbed ego. preoccupied with its own intimate sensations and well-being? In one sense, a page is about to be turned. Laxity, permnissiveness, and scattershot popular psychology have all had their day; an entire sector of "cool" culture is being overtaken by referents that are more “serious," more responsible, more productive. But psychologizing individualism has not succumbed: it has recycled itself by integrating the new thirst for busi ness, software, media, and advertising. A new narcissistic generation is on the move, in the grip of a frenzy for computers, productivity, business, and the image-meter. Not only are the pop-psychology cult, the idolatry of the body and of personal autonomy more active than ever, but the original, historically unique interhuman relation instituted by the second individualist revolution is being perpetually recuperated. To be sure, we are undergoing a meritocratic reaction: to be sure, the taste for success, competition and business is returning at full strength. But how is this moment to be interpreted? Not at all as a classic reinvestment in hierarchical values and the primacy of other-directed criteria, but much more fundamentally as the pursuit, through other means, of the properly narcissistic process of reduction—which does not mean abolition—of the subjective dependence on collective criteria of social respectability. At the heart of what constitutes contemporary individualism, there is a new structure of interpersonal relations in which the ego wins out over social recognition, in which the individual quest for happiness and self-expression displaces the ageold primacy of the judgment of others (as reflected in concern with honor, conspicuous consumption, social standing, and so on). Far from being abolished, this shifting of the social relation among human beings pursues its own dynamic. It is simplistic to suppose that we are simply witnessing a comeback of competitive ideology. of the frenzied quest for success and social status: the new spirit of the times is simply getting on with the task of emancipating individuals with respect to the collective reference points of social success and the approval of others. Even the craze for media recognition that henceforth drives artists, journalists, writers, bosses, and everyone else must not be understood as signaling the primacy of an obsession with others, but much more as autopublicity, the narcissistic pleasure of appearing on the screen, of being seen by as many people as possible. Media exposure satisfies the desire to be loved and to please more than the desire to be respected and admired for one's works. Narcissus is more eager to seduce than to be respected; he wants to be talked about, wants people to care about himn, wants to be fussed over. As Patrick Poivre d'Arvor has declared to a major daily newspaper: “I need to be loved." It is once again respectable to earn money and social success, but the psychological mainsprings of these activities have little to do with the desire to rise in the social hierarchy, to hoist oneself up above others, to be envied, to win respectability. Ambition itself is caught up in the vertigo of intimate subjectivity: business offers as much a way to establish an economically comfortable place for oneself as a means for realizing one's own potential and outdoing oneself, a way to have a challenging goal in life. The narcissistic structure of the ego dominates: it is a matter on the one hand of having enough money to enjoy the goods and services of modern life in private, and on the other hand of doing something by and for oneself, of experiencing the excitement of adventure and risk. Competition has taken on a new tonality: it no longer connotes the effort to “make it," but rather a narcissism more attentive to oneself and one's intimate resonances than to social posturing, rank. and prestige. There is no rift between the new entrepreneurial cult and the multiple passions of individuals for writing, music, or dance: self-expression. "creativity," “in-depth participation" of the self prevail everywhere. In an increasing number of cases, people in business. the liberal professions. and others change their professional activities, not because their "career profiles" are blocked, but because as individuals they are not fulfilling themselves as they would like. The neonarcissistic age implies the subordination of the forms of competition to desires for personal accomplishment. The other is less an obstacle or an enemy than a springboard to being oneself. True, individuals measure themselves against one another. assert themselves individually in comparison with others: still, this does not mean that a new cycle is simply replacing hedonistic individualism. It is the very same process of narcissistic privatization that is widening the frontiers; the ego is becoming more and more the master of interpersonal competition, as in certain sports (footraces, nontournament tennis) in which competition with others is above all a way of relaxing. staying in shape, challenging oneself, or setting a personal record The neolibertarian vogue warrants our attention. How could free enterprise, which French intellectuals have denounced for so long. have won their hearts in such a short time? How can we explain the cultural reversal in favor of profit and markets? How, in a nation like France, so inclined for so long to the protective centralism of publie power, could a movement like the disengagement of the state have come about? We know that, in the French case, the socialist experience of the early 98os contributed more than a little to this shift. In particular, it revealed the limits of state action in an economy involved in the international market; it exposed constraints on the economy and the reality of international economic links; it undermined leftist dreams by putting into action, after an initial start-up phase a pragmatic style of business management. Beyond the political alternation of right and left, the context of economic crisis was crucial. Its first quite concrete impact came through the continued growth of obligatory payroll deductions: what appeared to be a means of protection, a guarantee of freedom and well-being, began to look to some like an obstacle to autonomy and individual responsibility. The increase in taxes and social contributions ceased to be taken for granted; they gave rise to the feeling that we were forging nations of welfare clients, immature democracies. At an even deeper level, the economic crisis was a pedagogical instrument converting minds to reality, making utopian visions and miraculous solutions by the all-purpose state obsolete. Lingering unemployment, zerogrowth rates, industrial weakness, loss of competitiveness, deficits in the balance of pavments—the new econonic configuration led belatedly to an awareness that the European nations were running out of steam, and needed to acquire the means to emerge from the crisis state. This new configuration is at the root of the cultural promotion of the entrepreneur, the emphasis on risk and individual merit as means of giving our societies a new lease on life and opening up opportunities for the future. Whatever their importance, all these factors could come into play only because they were grafted onto the transformations of values and lifestyles that belong to the age of consummate fashion. By hyperindividualizing human beings. by developing the taste for personal autonomy, by privileging the registering of facts. the reign of objects and information led to a valorization of everything that relates to freedom and individual responsibility. The neolibertarian vogue is in part an ideological adaptation to ways of life that center on the independent individual unit, an entity resistant to omniscient systems, to intrusive, homogeneous, directive frameworks. It is impossible to separate the consensus over profit and enterprise from the action that characterizes the generalized fashion system, a system that continues to promote individual autonomy, as we have seen, and to uproot dogmatic eschatological beliefs. In the era of protest, individualist claims had free rein to denounce the bureaucratic capitalist system and to espouse revolutionary radicalism; this era constituted an intermediate phase between a militant revolutionary age and an age of individualism absorbed first and foremost in private preoccupations. Consummate fashion has pursued its course: the narcissistic individualism that governs us, hostile to great prophecies and fond of hyperreality, has been fertile ground for the libertarian renaissance. The requirement of flexibility, the moves to denationalize and deregulate, echo the transformations of individuality itself: it has become flexible, pragmatic, and eager above all for personal autonomy. Alongside this second libertarian wave, various conservative manifestations are unfolding, reflecting just as spectacular a reversal of values. The ideology of law and order has the wind in its sails at the moment: in France, public opinion is running in favor of the death penalty, and many states in the United States have already reenacted and implemented it. As far as French prisons are concerned, there is less and less emphasis on rehabilitation and social reinsertion; we are told that we have had enough soft" prisons and lax justice, that we have to punish with a firm hand, that we have to reestablish mandatory sentences. In England, there are threats to restore physical punishment. “Therapeutic injunctions" for drug addicts and penalties for substance abuse have been advocated. Numerous associations such as Pro-Life or Laissez-les-virre (Let them live) are crusading for the abolition of legal abortion. In the United States. attacks on abortion clinics are increasing, and since 1977 it has not been possible to pay for voluntary abortions with public funds. Leading political figures in France as well as in America have declared that legalized abortion must be brought to an end. A new moral order is struggling to take hold: the slogan “work, family, fatherland" is coming back. After the frenzy of sexual liberation and women's liberation, we now hear praise for chastity, for virginity, occasionally for the role of woman as housewife: contraception is stigmatized, while AIDS appears as a sign of divine wrath. and intolerant statements against homosexuality are heard more often in some contexts. More troubling still, racist and xenophobic themes are popping up shamelessly in public places. In France, people express doubts about the Holocaust; attacks on foreigners are increasing: parties of the extreme right do well in elections with slogans like "France to the French: foreigners out." The antiauthoritarian and emancipatory climate of the 196os and 197os is behind us; conservatism is front-page news. Can all these disparate phenomena—which nevertheless signal an unmistakable ideological reversal—be taken as manifestations of generalized fashion? Are we not witnessing an authentic conservative and moralistic comeback after the exacerbated cultural liberalism of recent vears? Is this not the very sign of fashion's eternal return, the alternation of old and new, the recycling of the past, the alternating cycle of neo and retro? The analogy is misleading: at its core, what is sometimes called the "conservative revolution" is antithetical to the spirit and logic of fashion. While consummate fashion functions according to a logie of hedonism, seduction, and novelty, neoconservatism rehabilitates moralism, repression, and tradition. 'The process under way opposes the frivolous order to the moral order. Whereas the fashion form treats the individual subjective choice as god, conservative rigorism attempts to crush diversity and freedom of choice. Fashion is fed by the insatiable desire for novelty; neoconservatism is rooted in dogma. Fashion responds to the taste for change; the new moral order is a response to the anxieties produced by physical, economic, and cultural insecurity. Fashion exalts the present; the Moral Majority is nostalgic for a past order. Conservatives are carrying out a rigorous offensive in the area of morality; they are directing it explicitly, moreover, against hypermodernism and the laxity of the fashion spirit, which they accuse of having destroyed the values of effort, family, religion, work, and patriotism. What we are witnessing, in France and in the United States. is a reaction against permissive morality, against the destruction of authority and the family, against racial mixing and national suicide," against Western "decadence," which is blamed on the unbridled reign of total fashion. The desire for security aside, the rise of the Moral Majority in the United States is primarily the effect of a religious fundamentalism that consummate fashion has not succeeded in eradicating. The Moral Majority is not so much a fashion effect as an intolerant religious remnant, not so much an essential feature of contemporary democracies as a manifestation characteristic of nations in which fundamentalist groups and churches proliferate. Such groups have been able to win back their audience owing precisely to the earlier emancipatory tidal wave, the disintegration of social identities. and the individual and collective anxiety that disintegration generates. This neoconservatism does not reflect the flexible reign of consummate fashion: it reintroduces the hyperorthodox religious spirit of another age, in that it does not recognize the free action and judgment of private persons. Fashion's empire has not yet reached the end of its course. It has unearthed a number of cleavages, and in a few short years it has unleashed an unparalleled set of individualist claims. In societies in which the puritan sentiment is deeply rooted, the fashion process has come into conflict with intransigent faith and convictions that it has not managed to shake. Still. we should not be too quick to invoke a religious absolute impervious to worldly concerns: we must take the times into account, and we must acknowledge that the cultural effects of the wider fashion are only a few decades old. Let us not invoke, either, the omnipotent power of fashion's reign: there is nothing to suggest that it will ever succeed in changing the world of our beliefs into a realm of the consumable and the changeable. It is reasonable to suppose only that, because of the irreversible dynamics of fashion, fundamentalism will be less and less widely shared, less and less dominant in the modern democracies. However, there are no guarantees that it will ever disappear. Although it cannot be identified as a form of infatuation, the rigorist and authoritarian phase is not unrelated to consummate fashion. In search of novelty, the media have powerfully inflated the traditionalist comeback, as if public opinion had suddenly switched sides. We know that this is not the case. At issue is more a pseudo-event than a basic cultural reality; in this respect, the “return to values" effect is inseparable from the media and at the same time, paradoxically, from fashion—even as it sets itself up to challenge fashion. All the polls point in the same direction: the passion for autonomy and the desire for personal pleasure keep on growing. Family values may be invoked, but the divorce rate keeps on rising and the birthrate continues to drop. People are getting married later and later in life, and in smaller and smaller numbers. In France, one child in five is now born out of wedlock. The decline of permissive sexuality may be announced, but in high schools in Paris one of every two boys is sexually active, and one girl in three is no longer a virgin; the overwhelming majority of high school students think that contraception and free adolescent sexuality are legitimate. The public is hostile to abortion? In the United States, the mnajority is opposed to prohibiting it bv law, and in France. 30 percent of the right-wing National Front party voters are in favor of maintaining the right to abortion. Religious fundamentalism is on the rise in Western deimnocracies? To suppose so is to fail to note that the practices and beliefs of a majority of believers are increasinglv free. eclectic. and individualized. It is to forget that the phenomenon is developed by means of televangelism, Christian video advertising, Christian theme parks with laser shows, pools where you can swim in the daytime and get baptized at night. The phenomenon has many superficial echoes in the media. but few on the broad social scale: is this not in itself one of the characteristic features of fashion? A society restructured by the fashion form by no means keeps rigorist values out of the spotlight--but we have to recognize that the phenomenon remains a spectacle. Its effects may be non-negligible. but they are skin-deep and confined to a minority. Like neopuritanism, claims and demands for security cannot be considered fashion movements. Restoration of the death penalty. stricter justice. identity checks in public streets, restriction of the right of exile. nationality codes—none of these manifestations has anything to do with the ephemeral fluctuations of fashion. The polls are unanimous: the struggle against criminality and the desire for personal security head the list of public preoccupations. We have not seen the last of the demands for law and order: this is because, at the deepest level, what is at issue is not an ideology but an unavoidable component of an orderly individualist society restructured by the fashion form. In a hyperindividualist society in which socialization excludes physical violence and cruelty, in which diverse populations meet. in which communication takes the place of repression and in which publie order is very broadly assured, fear is part and parcel of the pacific, unarmed individual. Anxiety about personal safety is not a passing fancy; in a way. it is an invariant of democratic life. Tocqueville had already stressed this point: if democratie man has a natural taste for freedom, he has a still more ardent passion for publie order; he is always ready, in difficult circumstances, to give up his own rights to stifle the seeds of disorder: "The taste for public tranquillity then becomes a blind passion, and the citizens are liable to conceive a most inordinate devotion to order."+ Even as it is being inscribed in the prolongation of this democratic trend. the present moment nevertheless manifests a singular characteristic: in effect, citizens are demanding both more security in their everyday lives and more individual freedom. Thev want increased public order with no decrease in individual rights. Still, the desire for security does not have as its counterpart a willingness to give up political and personal freedoms, as Tocqueville feared it would. We are not witnessing the beginning of a trend toward restricting individual rights and increasing state prerogatives; instead we are seeing the crystallization of a heightened demand for public control and protection at the heart of a society profoundly attached to individual and democratic freedoms. Just as security measures do not stem from a constituted ideology, the resurgence of xenophobia is not inscribed within the continuity of classic racist ideology. Today, the very citizens whose attitudes toward darkskinned people are least welconing no longer advocate the destruction of the other: they no longer proclaim the unchallenged superiority of the Aryan or the Westerner. However many racist crimes there may be in Western Europe. and there are too many, the phenomenon remains circumscribed: we no longer see pogroms, massacres, or systematic rape. Racism no longer has the virulence it once had; it is much more contained, less aggressive. Many people dislike foreigners; few approve of bloodshed. Thev avoid making contact, but they do not commit aggressive acts. The frivolous age does not eliminate racism, but it modifies some of its features. No one imagines a "final solution" any longer; no one supports the proposition that populations of color are genetically inferior. Western Europe has left the thematics of racial purity behind; contemporary xenophobia develops on the terrain of the obsession with personal security and the protection of personal interests. In France, racism is going the way of other ideologies: it is less heavily freighted with meaning; it has become less sure of itself, less dominant. "postideological," more an expression of individual anxiety than of a Manichean world view. It is hardly necessary to specify that racism has not shifted, for all that—to say the least—into the casual world of fashion. ## Do-It-Yourself Enlightenment Although the new social regulation of meaning is not antithetical to the stable operation of democratic institutions, it does pose one thorny problem concerning the democratic ideal of subjective autonomy in the realm of opinion. Can we really speak of individual freedom where the life of the mind resonates to the rhythm of changing moods in fashion? If ideas oscillate with every capricious shift in fads, if we regularly adopt the “in" trends, what becomes of the democratic individualist goal par excellence: personal sovereignty or self-determination in the order of thought? The question is a crucial one, as Tocqueville recognized. Tocqueville's nuanced pessimism regarding the future of democracies is well known: as equality of conditions advances, the yoke of habit and collective prejudice weakens, benefiting independence of mind and individual reasoning. However, even as individuals are led to rely increasingly on their own understanding, a counterforce develops that leads them to trust public opinion. On the one hand, individuals strive increasingly to seek truth in themselves; on the other hand, they are increasingly inclined to follow the majority verdict unquestioningly. In democracies, the action of ordinary opinion on isolated individuals has a new and incomparable power: it exerts itself as fashion, not through coercion but through the invisible pressure of numbers. Taken to the extreme, democratic epochs may bring about “the absolute power of a majority" and may induce people to "give up thinking at all, thus extinguishing intellectual freedom." We can hardly fail to share Tocqueville's concern today, given the media's impact. the cult of best-sellers, the esoteric gurus, the entertainment programs. the proliferation of one-minute stars and of intellectual and ideological fashions. Yet however ambiguous the frivolous economy of meaning may be. it hardly seems justifiable to represent it as an enterprise tending to eradicate individual freedom or as a sign of an increasing subjugation of hunan minds. Actually, the acceleration and proliferation of fashionable conformities are fostering a partial but effective autonomy of minds: the epidemics of mimesis produce progress toward greater individualization of thought. People take pleasure today in denouncing the sheeplike mind lessness of our contemporaries, their absence of reflection. their unfortunate tendency to be inconsistent and to go off on tangents. Still. we can hardly argue that minds were freer when religions and traditions attempted to produce a seamless homogeneity of collective beliefs, when the great messianic ideologies imposed dogmatic doctrines with no room for individual critical examination. lt is easy to see what has been lost: today. convictions are less assured, there is less personal resistance to the seduetion of the new and of majority opinion. It is harder to pinpoint what has been gained in the same process: people are more prepared to raise questions in the absence of preconceived answers, and they are more comfortable calling themselves into question as well. Under the reign of total fashion, the mind is less firmly made up than before, but more receptive to criticism; it is less stable but more tolerant; less sure of itself but more open to difference, more receptive to evidence and to the arguments of others. To identify consummate fashion with an unparalleled process of standardization and depersonalization is to take a superficial view; in reality, consumiate fashion is the driving force behind a more insistent questioning, a multiplication of subjective viewpoints, a decrease in the similarity of small personal visions. The great ideological certainties are giving way before an explosion of individual microdifferences, subjective singularities that may not be very original, creative, or reflective but that are more numerous and more flexible than before. In the hollow space left by the collapse of catechisms and orthodoxies, fashion opens the way to the proliferation of subjective opinions. Nothing would be farther off the mark than to represent fashion with the features of an intellectual unanimity. Let us look at the current infatuation with libertarianism and a reduced role for the state: far from being reflected in a homogeneous discourse, it is accompanied by a whole range of variants and adaptations, from neolibertarians to social democrats by way of neoconservatives and various others. Virtually all intellectual groupings, in varying degrees, share the infatuation of the moment, but none of them uses it in precisely the same way. A few vears earlier. the same thing happened with revolutionary Marxist thought, which gave rise to a torrent of interpretations and combinations: spontaneism. self-management, Maoism, Freudo-Marxism, marginal utopia, structuralist Marxism, theoretical antihumanism, and so on. Fashion is a do-it-vourself enterprise in which individuals concoct for themselves a more or less made-to-order intellectual universe consisting of assorted borrowings and reactions to one thing and another. Our societies are committed to the flowering of small and large differences of opinion; individual consciousnesses, far from being homogenized by fashion, are being carried away in a process of broadened differentiation, of à la carte intellectual tinkering. Progress is a term that is somewhat out of fashion today. However, we must not hesitate to reactivate the notion, even if by doing so we engage in head-on confrontation with thinking shaped by the posterity of Marx and Nietzsche. Yes. there is progress in freedom of thought, even despite the mimicry and conformity of fashion. Yes, the forward movement of enlightenment is continuing: people “as a whole,"” as Kant would say, continue to emerge from their status as “minors." In advanced democracies, ideological fanaticism is becoming extinct; traditions are coming undone; a passion for information is moving to the foreground. Individuals are increasingly capable of examining issues freely; they are less influenced by collective discourse, better able to use their own intellectual resources, to "think for themselves"—which obviously does not mean they are impervious to all influence. To be sure, fashion restores a form of external determination in the intellectual realm; it signifies one particular version of the influence of the other. But the authority is nondirective; it is accompanied by a greater desire for argumentation and a greater capacity for individual questioning. Consummate fashion is not an obstacle to the autonomy of human consciousness; it is the condition for a mass movement toward enlightenment. The notion of thinking without the help of others, apart from a nourishing intellectual and ideological climate, is in any case meaningless."Somewhere and somehow authority is always bound to play a part in intellectual and moral life. The part may vary, but some part there must be. The independence of the individual may be greater or less but can never be limitless."º If, in a world of creative geniuses, the mimetic reign of fashion may damage personal autonomy, it nevertheless allows personal autonomy to come into play at the level of the majority of human beings. Something always leads us to resist the idea that fashion might be considered an instrument of freedom. Beyond the apparent unifornmity it achieves. does fashion not lead to discouraging thoughtful individual efforts in the search for truth and justice, operating as it does through seduction and relying on mimetic facility? Is not being master of one's own thoughts necessarily the result of individual effort. an act of courage and explicit construction? In one sense it is impossible to get around this point of view: however, it applies better to the work of intellectual discovery than to the constitution of people's more general thoughts. If we restrict ourselves to a voluntarist definition of intellectual autonomy. only a few professionals in the realm of concepts can claim to have access to freedom of mind; the masses are condemned, and properly so, to idolatry and spectacle, to the consumption of idea-images, on the assumption that thev are incapable of reaching maturity, or of using their minds freely and creatively. It seems to me that such an elitist dichotomy fails to take into account the much more complex process that is under wav in modern societies. The conquest of individual freedom may be carried out at a more empirical level, through the multiplicity of influences and their confrontations, through the play of diverse comparisons. The progress of self-determination in history is not accomplished via the roval road of individual speculative effort, but via a set of cultural and social phenomena that are in apparent contradiction with the Enlightenment. "Have the courage to use your own intelligence. That is the motto of the Enlightenment." The era of consummate fashion is one that allows very large numbers of people to think for themselves; this is because the timeless order of tradition has exploded and terrorist systems of meaning have lost their hold on human minds. People are subject to a great variety of influences, but no single one of them is strictly determining any longer: no single one does away with the capacity to reconsider. The critical spirit is expanding in and through the mimicry of fashion, in and through the fluctuations of "opinion": such is the greatest paradox of the dynamies of enlightenment. Autonomy is inseparable from the mechanisms of heteronomy. Still, we ought to be wary of self-satisfaction: the impulsive reactions of the public, the phenomenon of sects, the various esoteric and parapsychological beliefs that often monopolize the news are here to remind us that enlightenment does not go forward without its contrary. The individualization of consciousness also leads to apathy and an intellectual vacuum, to instant" thinking and mental hotchpotch, to the most irrational commitments and new forms of superstition, to “anything and everything." But no matter how real and spectacular they may be, these phenomena must not be allowed to obscure the underlying force that is modifying the relation of individuals to truth and meaning. People may devote little time to the work of thinking, but they speak more often in their own names. They may produce few deliberate meditations, but human beings have moved closer to adulthood and maturity. The irrationality of fashion contributes to the fashioning of individual reason; fashion has its reasons that reason does not know.