# Notes ## PREHISTORY 1. E. Porter Belden, New York: Past, Present and Future (New York: Putnam, 1849), p. 1. 2. John A. Kouwenhoven, The Columbia Historical Portrait of NewYork (New York: Doubleday, 1953), p. 43. 3. John W. Reps, The Making of Urban America (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1965), p. 148. 4. Ibid., pp. 297–98. 5. William Bridges, "Commissioners' Remarks," in Map of the City of New York and Island of Manhattan (New York, 181l), p. 24. 6. Text of advertisement in Belden, New York: Past, Present and Future. 7. Reps, The Making of Urban America, pp. 331-39. 8. Ibid. 9. William Richards, A Day in the Crystal Palace and How to Make the Most of It (New York, 1853). 10. Official Guidebook, New York World's Fair (New York: Exposition Publications, 1939). ## CONEY ISLAND: ## THE TECHNOLOGY OF THE FANTASTIC 1. Lindsay Denison, "The Biggest Playground in the World," Munsey's Magazine, August 1905. 2. Maxim Gorky, "Boredom," The Independent, August 8, 1907. 3. History of Coney Island (New York: Burroughs & Co., 1904), pp. 4–7. 4. Denison, "The Biggest Playground." 5. Edo McCullough, Good Old Coney Island (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1957), p. 55. 6. Guide to Coney Island (Long Island Historical Society Library, n.d.). 7.McCullough, Good Old Coney Island, p. 291. 8. Guide to Coney Island. 9. "The Annual Awakening of the Only Coney Island," New York Times,May 6, 1906. 10. Guide to Coney Island. 11. Ibid. 12. "The Annual Awakening." 13. Oliver Pilat and Jo Ransom, Sodom by the Sea (New York: Doubleday.1941), p. 161. 14. History of Coney Island, p. 10. 15. Ibid. 16. Guide to Coney Island. 17. History of Coney Island, pp. 24, 26. 18. Pilat and Ransom, Sodom by the Sea, p. 191. 19. Guide to Coney Island. 20. Grandeur of the Universal Exhibition at St. Louis (Official Photographic Company, 1904). 21. History of Coney Island, p. 22. 22. Ibid. 23. Ibid., p. 12. 24. Ibid., p. 15. 25. Ibid., p. 16. 26. Guide to Coney Island. 27. Pilat and Ransom, Sodom by the Sea, p. 168. 28. Denison, "The Biggest Playground." 29. James Huneker, The New Cosmopolis (New York, 1915). 30. Gorky, "Boredom." 31. Walter Creedmoor, “The Real Coney Island," Munsey's Magazine, August 1899. 32. Advertisement in New York Herald, May 6, 1906. 33.Quotes about Globe Tower are from Brooklyn Union Standard, May 27, 1906, and Brooklyn Daily Eagle, May 19, 1907. 34. Article, New York Herald, February 22, 1909. 35. Gorky, "Boredom." 36. Pilat and Ransom, Sodom by the Sea, p. 169. 37. Ibid., p. 172. 38. Text on back of postcard. 39. Pilat and Ransom, Sodom by the Sea, text on book jacket. 40. McCullough, Good Old Coney Island, p. 331. 41. Ibid., p. 333. ## THE DOUBLE LIFE OF UTOPIA: ## THE SKYSCRAPER 1. Life, October 1909. 2. King's Views of New York (New York: Moses King. Inc., 1912), p. 1. 3. Benjamin de Casseres, Mirrors of NewYork (New York: Joseph Lawren, 1925). p. 219. 4. Text on back of postcard. 5. W. Parker Chase, New York — TheWonder City (New York: Wonder City Publishing Co., 1931), p. 185. 6. Louis Horowitz, as quoted in Earle Schultz and Walter Simmons, Offices in the Sky (Indianapolis and New York: Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1959), p. 80. 7. Ibid., p. 177. 8. All quotes about the 100-story building are from an article in the New York Herald, May 13, 1906, sec. 3, p. 8. 9. Manna Hatin, The Story of New York (New York: The Manhattan Company, 1929), p. xvi. 10. Chase, New York — The Wonder City, p. 184. 11. Andy Logan, New Yorker, February 27, 1965. 12. This section is based on various Hippodrome programs; on Murdock Pemberton, “Hippodrome Days —Case Notes for a Cornerstone," New Yorker, May 7, 1930; and on "Remember the Hippodrome?" Cue, April 9, 1949. 13. Henri Collins Brown, Fifth Avenue Old and New— 1824-1924 (New York: Official Publication of the Fifth Avenue Association, 1924), pp. 72–73. 14. S. Parker Cadman et al., The Cathedral of Commerce (NewYork: Broadway Park Place Co., 1917). 15. All quotes about Murray's Roman Gardens from Chas. R. Bevington in New York Plaisance— An Illustrated Series of New York Places of Amusement, no. 1 (New York: New York Plaisance Co., 1908). 16. This building was first discovered by Robert Descharnes and published in his superb Gaudí; I am very grateful for his collaboration in securing the illustrations reproduced here. 17. Hugh Ferriss, The Metropolis of Tomorrow (New York: Ives Washburn, 1929). 18. Hugh Ferriss, Power in Buildings (New York: Columbia University Press, 1953), pp. 4–7. 19. Howard Robertson, as quoted on book jacket of Ferriss, Power in Buildings. 20. Ferriss, The Metropolis of Tomorrow, pp. 82, 109. 21. Ferriss, Power in Buildings. 22. Thomas Adams, assisted by Harold M. Lewis and Lawrence M. Orton, "Beauty and Reality in Civic Art," in The Building of the City, The Regional Plan of New York and Its Environs, vol. 2 (New York, 1931), pp. 99–117. 23. As quoted in ibid., pp. 308-10. 24. "Fête Moderne: A Fantasie in Flame and Silver,"programfor theBeaux-Arts Ball, 1931. 25. Article, New York Herald Tribune, January 18, 1931. 26. "Fête Moderne." 27. Pencil Points, February 1931, p. 145. 28. Empire State, A History (New York: Empire State, Inc., 1931). 29. Edward Hungerford, The Story of the Waldorf-Astoria (New York: G. P. Putnam & Sons, 1925). pp. 29–53, 128–30. 30. Frank Crowninshield, ed., The Unofficial Palace of New York (New York: Hotel Waldorf-Astoria Corp., 1939), p. x. 31. Hungerford, The Story of the Waldorf-Astoria. 32. Empire State, A History. 33. William F. Lamb, "The Empire State Building, VII: The General Design," Architectural Forum, January 1931. 34. Empire State, A History. 35. Paul Starrett, Changing the Skyline: An Autobiography (New York: Whittlesey House, 1938), pp. 284–308. 36. Empire State, A History. 37. Architectural Forum, 1931. 38. Lucius Boomer, "The Greatest Household in the World," in Crowninshield, Unofficial Palace, 39. Ibid. 40. Kenneth M. Murchison, "The Drawings for the New Waldorf-Astoria," American Architect January 1931. 41. Ibid. 42. Texts on back of postcards. 43. Kenneth M. Murchison, "Architecture," in Crowninshield, Unofficial Palace, p. 23. 44. Francis H. Lenygon, "Furnishing and Decoration," in ibid., pp. 33-48. 45. Lucius Boomer, as quoted by Helen Worden in “Women and the Waldorf," in ibid., p. 53. 46. Clyde R. Place, "Wheels Behind the Scenes," in ibid., p. 63. 47. Boomer, "The Greatest Household." 48. B. C. Forbes, "Captains of Industry." in Crowninshield, Unofficial Palace. 49. Worden, "Women and the Waldorf." pp. 49-56. 50. Elsa Maxwell, "Hotel Pilgrim," in Crowninshield, Unofficial Palace, pp. 133-36. 51. See "The Downtown Athletic Club," Architectural Forum, February 1931, pp. 151–66, and "The DowntownAthletic Club," Architecture and Building. January 1931, pp. 5–17. 52. Arthur Tappan North, Raymond Hood, in the series Contemporary American Architects (New York: Whittlesey House, McGraw-Hill, 1931), p. 8. 53. Chase, New York — The Wonder City, p. 63. ## HOW PERFECT PERFECTION CAN BE:THE CREATION OF ROCKEFELLER CENTER 1. For much of the biographical information on Raymond Hood, this chapter has relied on Walter Kilham, Raymond Hood, Architect — Form Through Function in the American Skyscraper (New York: Architectural Publishing Co., 1973). and on further details generously provided by Kilham in personal interviews. 2. Kilham, Raymond Hood, p. 41. 3. "Hood," Architectural Forum, February 1935, p. 133. 4. See Howard Robertson, "A City of Towers— Proposals Made by the Well-Known American Architect, Raymond Hood, for the Solution of New York's Problem of Overcrowding," Architect and Building News, October 21, 1927, pp. 639-42. 5. North, Raymond Hood, introduction 6. Hugh Ferriss, The Metropolis of Tomorrow, p. 38. 7. Kilham, Raymond Hood, p. 174. 8. North, Raymond Hood, p. 14. 9. Kilham, Raymond Hood, p. 12. 10. "Hood," Architectural Forum, p. 133. 11. North, Raymond Hood, p. 7. 14. All quotations from Raymond Hood are in F. S. Tisdale, "A City Under a Single Roof," Nation's Business, November 1929. 12. Ibid., p. 8. 13. Ibid., p. 12. 15. Published in "New York of the Future," special issue of Creative Art, August 1931, pp. 160-61. 16. "Rockefeller Center," Fortune, December 1936, pp. 139–53. 17. Raymond Hood, "The Design of Rockefeller Center," Architectural Forum, January 1932, p. 1. 18. Merle Crowell, ed., The Last Rivet (NewYork: Columbia University Press, 1939), p. 42. 19. David Loth, The City Within a City: The Romance of Rockefeller Center (New York: William Morrow & Co., 1966), p. 50. 20. Hood, "The Design of Rockefeller Center." p. 1. 21. Wallace K. Harrison, "Drafting Room Practice," Architectural Forum, January 1932, pp. 81-84. 22. Hood, "The Design of Rockefeller Center," p. 4. 23. Kilham, Raymond Hood, p. 120. 24. Rockefeller Center (New York: Rockefeller Center Inc., 1932), p. 16. 25. Ibid., p. 7. 26. Text on back of postcard. 27. Rockefeller Center, p. 38. 28. Kilham, Raymond Hood, p. 139. 29. See Loth, The City Within a City, p. 27, and "Off the Record," Fortune, February 1933, ## p. 16. 30. The Showplace of the Nation, brochure published to celebrate the opening of Radio City Music Hail. 31. "Debut of a City," Fortune, January 1933, p. 66. 32. Showplace of the Nation. 33. Kilham, Raymond Hood, p. 193 34. "Off the Record." 35. “Debut of a City," pp. 62–67. 36. Bertram D. Wolfe, Diego Rivera—His Life and Times (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1943), p. 237. 37. Alfred Kurella, as quoted in ibid., p. 240. 38. Diego Rivera. "The Position of the Artist in Russia Today." Arts Weekly, March 11, 1932. 39. Wolfe, Diego Rivera, p. 337. 40. Ibid., p. 338. 41. Ibid., p. 354. 42. Diego Rivera, as quoted in ibid., pp. 356-57. 43. Ibid., p. 357. 44. Ibid., p. 359, and Diego Rivera, Portrait of America (New York: Covici, Friede, Inc., 1934), pp. 28-29. 45. As quoted in Wolfe, Diego Rivera, p. 363. 46. Rivera, Portrait of America, pp. 26–27. 47. Caption in The Story of Rockefeller Center (brochure, New York: Rockefeller Center, Inc., 1932). 48. Rockefeller Center Weekly, October 22, 1937. 49. As quoted in "Now Let's Streamline Men and Women," Rockefeller CenterWeekly, September 5, 1935. 50. Kilham, Raymond Hood, pp. 180–81. 51. Harvey Wiley Corbett, "Raymond Mathewson Hood, 1881–1934," Architectural Forum, September 1934. ## EUROPEANS: BIUER!DALI AND LE CORBUSIERCONQUER NEW YORK 1. Salvador Dali, "New York Salutes Me!," Spain, May 23, 1941. 2. Le Corbusier, as quoted in New York Herald Tribune, October 22, 1935. 3. Salvador Dali, La Femme visible (Paris: Editions Surrealistes, 1930). 4. Salvador Dali, "The Conquest of the Irrational," appendix of Conversations with Dali (New York: Dutton, 1969), p. 115. 5. This "theory" was actually put into practice, as described in Robert Sommer, The End of Imprisonment (New York: Oxford University Press, 1976), p. 127. 6. Especially important reinforcement for Dali's theses was provided by the dissertationof the psychiatrist Jacques Lacan, “De la psychose paranoíaque dans ses rapports avec la personalité." 7. Dalí, La Femme visible. 8. Salvador Dali, Journal d'un genie (Paris: Editions de la Table Ronde), entry for July 12, 1952. 9. For a more complete record of all the permutations, see Salvador Dali, Le Mythe tragique de l'Angélus de Millet (Paris: Jean Jacques Pauvert, 1963). 10. Geoffrey T. Hellman, "From Within to Without." parts 1 and 2, New Yorker, April 27 and May 3, 1947. 11. Le Corbusier, La Ville radieuse (Paris: Vincent Fréal, 1964), caption, p. 129. 12. Le Corbusier, When the Cathedrals Were White —A Journey to the Country of Timid People (New York: Reynal & Hitchcock, 1947), p. 89. 13.Ibid. 14. Le Corbusier, La Ville radieuse, p. 133. 15. Ibid., p. 127 16. As quoted in Hellman, "From Within to Without." 17. Ibid. 18. Le Corbusier, La Ville radieuse, p. 207. 19. Ibid., p. 134. 20. Hellman, "From Within to Without." 21. Le Corbusier, La Ville radieuse, p. 220. 22. Ibid., diary entry for Sunday, July 22, 1934, p. 260. 23. Quotations are from Salvador Dalí, The Secret Life of Salvador Dalí (New York: Dial Press, 1942), pp. 327–35. 24. Dali, "New York Salutes Me!" 25. Hellman, "From Within toWithout." 26. See New York Herald Tribune, October 22, 1935. 27. Le Corbusier, When the Cathedrals Were White, p. 197. 28. Ibid., p. 92. 29. Ibid. 30. Le Corbusier, "What is the American Problem?," article written for The American Architect, published as appendix toWhen the Cathedrals Were White, pp. 186–201. 31. Le Corbusier, When the Cathedrals Were White, p. 78. 32. Quotes from Dali, The Secret Life of Salvador Dali, pp. 372–75. 33. Hugh Ferriss, Power in Buildings, plate 30. 34. Frank Monagan, ed., Official Souvenir Book, New York World's Fair (New York: Exposition Publications, 1939), p. 4. 35. Official Guidebook, New York World's Fair. 36. Paris Soir, August 25, 1939. 37. For Le Corbusier's description of the UN design process, see Le Corbusier, UN Headquarters (New York: Reinhold, 1947). 39. Ferriss, Power in Buildings, plate 41.