‘Economic Theory and Design’, excerpts of which are now included in Chapters 7 and 8) and beginning to develop (in Chicago) the seminar ‘Design and the Creation of Value’. By the time Heskett moved to Hong Kong in 2004 (to teach in the School of Design at Hong Kong Polytechnic University), the seminar had more or less acquired its final form. Towards the end of this decade, just before he left Hong Kong, Heskett was beginning to think seriously of publishing it as a small book.

In both Chicago and in Hong Kong the seminar was delivered to graduate students undertaking MDes, PhD or MA degrees in design. Since in Hong Kong, especially, but also in Chicago, the students were working professionals, there was no presumption of any prior exposure to economics theory or thought.

In presenting economics in this way, Heskett was operating on something of the basis enunciated by the Cambridge economist Ha-Joon Chang. In a recent book, he argues that it is precisely because today economics is at once more than ever central to our lives, and at the same time less a ‘science’ than it pretends to be, that

it is entirely possible for people who are not professional economists to have sound judgments on economic issues, based on some knowledge of key economic theories and appreciation of the political and ethical assumptions underlying various theories. Very often, the judgments by ordinary citizens may be better than those by professional economists, being more rooted in reality and less narrowly focused.

## He adds:

Willingness to challenge professional economists and other experts is a foundation stone of democracy. If all we have to do is to listen to the experts, what is the point of having democracy? What this means is that, as citizens in a democracy, all of us have the duty to learn at least some economics and engage in economic debates. This is not as difficult as it may seem. As I try to show in my new book, Economics: The User’s Guide, most of economics can be understood by anyone with a secondary education, if it is explained accessibly. The economy is too important to be left to professional economists … as citizens; we should all learn economics and challenge what the professionals tell us to believe.<sup>22</sup>

Heskett would have entirely agreed with this. He was impatient with the pleas of designers that they should somehow be exempt from such understanding. But precisely because of this pedagogical determination, his project had to take on the task of explaining economics as accessibly as possible without oversimplifying the fundamental propositions and models that were being presented. Design and the Creation of Value is the (incomplete)<sup>23</sup> result of this exercise.

## 2 What, precisely, does the text offer?

The version of the seminar on which this book is based is dated from 2009.

Heskett lays out the substantive principle of the organization of the seminar as follows:

In considering the economic role and value of design, two major aspects need to be discussed. Firstly, it is necessary to come to terms with the existing body of economic theory and practice and ask to what extent can it shed light on essential roles design can play in the context of business. Secondly, the way economic theory defines its field, and the tools and methods it uses, have come to constitute tightly defined forms of orthodoxy. Can design supplement or reinforce economic theory in clarifying and amplifying aspects of business in ways that at present are not commonly recognized? The question here is whether design theory and practice has the potential to add to, extend or provide linkages to economic theory. The organisation of this book is therefore broadly based on these two perspectives: one examining design from the standpoint of economic theory; the other examining economic theory and business practice through the prism of design.<sup>24</sup>

The only caveat to Heskett’s explanation is that in fact, as the title of the seminar suggests, there are actually three, and not two, areas of concern here. There is design, for the book is, overall, essentially about how design can be understood and misunderstood (it is first of all a contribution to the understanding of design). There is economics – for the core of the book is a historical presentation and critique of economic thought vis-à-vis design. But there is also the third element, value. Value means here largely, but by no means only, economic value (for ultimately it is the extension of value creation beyond the economic narrowly thought that is Heskett’s concern). But value is the crucial third term in the equation because it is the essential mediator between economics and design. It is the introduction of ‘value’ as a concept lying between design and economics (but belonging fully to neither) that allows the dialogue to begin.

Design and the Creation of Value is, therefore, essentially the exploration of the relations between these three moments. This exploration is in turn undertaken through the three major sections of the text.

1. The preface and first chapter (‘Design in Economic Life?’ – not, note, ‘Design and economic life’) ask some initial questions about the differences between conceiving of design as a ‘creative act’ and seeing it within a fuller context of economic activity – a contrast that Heskett establishes by playing off the differences between a decorator’s design for a toilet by the New York designer Jonathan Adler and the designs for sanitary ware for the Turkish company VitrA by the UK designer Ross Lovegrove. Although the example sounds trivial, the important distinction that Heskett begins to make here concerns the changed responsibilities of the designer once he or she wishes to move from a merely executant or operational to a strategic role: ‘Neither at the levels of management or of strategy, however, is it possible to yet say that it is commonplace for design to be integrated into the management structures of companies, nor has there yet been an articulation of the role of design at the levels of management and strategy that is convincing to the majority of senior managers.’<sup>25</sup>

2. In ‘Part One: Economic Theory and Design’, Heskett then turns directly to economics – to, in his words, ‘a consideration of major bodies of economic theory, how they condition understanding of design and can explain its contribution to creating value’.<sup>26</sup> Six bodies of theory are considered under this rubric<sup>27</sup>: Neoclassical economics; Austrian theory, Institutional theory, New Growth Theory, the ideas of List and the ‘National System’ and Socialist theory (Marx).<sup>28</sup> The presentations of these theories and models – aided by diagrams that usefully model the continuity and difference between these bodies of thought – are clear and concise. The text we have in these chapters is an attempt at artful balance of presenting models with maximum clarity without oversimplifying the case. The logic of presentation, however, is by no means simply chronological. Thus, for example, the ideas of List and the National System discussed in Chapter 6 largely predate the models discussed in the preceding chapters. The organizational principle is, rather, to begin with what is today the absolutely dominant model of economic activity: Neoclassical theory (Chapter 2). By then examining, successively, the theories of the Austrian economists, Institutional Theory, New Growth Theory and List and ‘The National System’, Heskett by degree shows the limitations of the Neoclasscial model, first in terms of how these alternate models understand value creation and then, increasingly, vis-à-vis comprehending the role of design. The focus in each chapter is on how these models explored in each deal with the relations of production, use and the creation of value (and in the case of List and the National System, of state policies that can enable and engender value creation). In this sequence of five chapters, Heskett rather cleverly shows how the various models discussed in each can be understood successively as making more complex the question of value creation: a process that implicitly (if almost never explicitly)<sup>29</sup> gradually makes room for design and then (in the final models) shows design’s necessary structural place in the creation of value. (See the final diagram in the book, Figure 9.11 – page [178]).

At the end of Part One, Chapter 6, on List and the National System and the application of List’s ideas, first in Germany in the late nineteenth century and then in Asia, provides the transition from the exploration of economic theory proper to the discussion of the interplay of design, economics and value.

3. The three chapters in ‘Part Two: Design and the Creation of Value’ are in many ways the ‘application’ of the insights drawn from Part One. The final chapter (9) directly and substantively addresses value creation through design, but in Chapters 7 and 8, Heskett critically explores the relation of design and economics, looking first at design from the perspective (or in his terms the ‘standpoint’) of economics (Chapter 7), and then, in an unusual critical reversal, considering economics from the standpoint of design. Here Heskett critiques the limits of economics in terms of its understanding of the qualitative (as against the quantitative); of users (as against discounting the role of the user) and of value (as a complex phenomena irreducible to price).<sup>30</sup> As I will say at the end of this introduction, this double confrontation is of methodological as well as substantive interest. What Heskett is modelling here is not only a relation between economics and design (in terms of how they may be dialectically thought) but also a necessary methodological approach for the study of design as a whole. Finally, the seminar is completed by a brief, theorized, exploration of design’s contribution to the creation of value (Chapter 9).

## 3 What does the work achieve?

Aside from the important methodological observation that I just mentioned and to which I will return at the end of this introduction, I think we can point to a number of major contributions – I count at least seven – that the text makes to understanding.

The first and most obvious is that it presents economic theory in a way that makes it accessible to a non-specialist audience. A footnote above noted that while the plethora of discussions concerning ‘design and business’, ‘design management’, ‘innovation’ ‘creativity’, and ‘design thinking’, all claim economic benefit stemming from design; economics itself is distinctly absent from the discussion (save as the unthought and rarely critically grasped background). Heskett emphatically brings economics and economic models into these questions as foreground, and does so in a way that allows designers and those who deploy design to begin to grasp with more acuity what is actually afoot in this relation. From being an unspoken, unmanageable and, therefore, unthought abstraction, economics is made both tangible and critically graspable. It is, in a word, made real, not mythic.<sup>31</sup>

Heskett’s second achievement follows from the first. It is based on the fact that the mode of economics that Heskett brings into play is not simply the ‘given’ of neoclassical models of economy (repeated today ad nauseam in the media, and which, especially in their political and professional deployment, have acquired something of the patina of inexorable ‘common sense’) but a much wider field of economic thought. By refusing the singularity of neoclassical economics, and by bringing in a range of ideas on economic life that remain, at least in part, unfamiliar to most non-economists (the whole of Austrian theory, with perhaps the partial exceptions of Hayek and Schumpeter; Institutional theory, with the likely exception of Veblen; the ‘New Growth’ theorists, almost all without exception little-known figures outside of economics; and List and the ‘National System’, almost unknown outside of Germany and more recently Japan), Heskett offers the reader not just a roll-call of names (though to make something of a convincing narrative of these developments is itself an achievement) but an expanded corpus or lexicon of economic concepts. The value of this expanded field becomes evident in Chapters 7 and 8 where the direct relationship between economic theory and design is demonstrated in a number of instances. Overall, Heskett shows that, thought widely, the study of economics has more resonance with the question of the contribution of design to value creation than might be supposed.

Linked to the last point, the third major contribution of the text is to show that the conceptual and intellectual ‘schism’ between economics and design, though empirically real, is (from the side of the former at least) very largely a product of the dominance of neoclassical models of the economy. Heskett is clear on this:

The greatest problem in considering what economic theory explains about design, specifically or by implication, is in the context of neo-classicism, which in the Anglo-American world dominates both academic and applied economic practice. … if markets and products are as constant as depicted in Neo-classical theory this at best reduces design to a trivial activity concerned with minor, superficial differentiation of unchanging commodities, a role, indeed, that it does frequently perform. At worst, it contradicts the whole validity of design.<sup>32</sup>

Heskett is not alone in the view that neoclassical economics cannot cope with or has a very limited view of production. For example, Ha-Joon Chang, in the book referred to above, essentially agrees: ‘Production has been seriously neglected in the mainstream of economics, which is dominated by the neoclassical school.’<sup>33</sup> It is unsurprising then that, in many ways, the economics chapters of Design and the Creation of Value constitute, in effect, an often searing (if quietly spoken) critique of the limits of neoclassical theory and its presuppositions. This criticism is not confined to design. By presenting a range of alternative theories and models, Heskett takes the reader through the critique of neoclassical thinking as it applies to the economy as a whole. The basis of the critique involves how economics grasps (or fails to grasp) the dynamic character of the ‘real-world’<sup>34</sup> economy. As the reader gradually discovers, it is precisely this shift towards grasping the dynamics of the (capitalist) economy that allows – in the end necessitates – a structural place for design in value creation. As Heskett again puts it, here at the beginning of