## Chapter 7:

Design … is about envisioning change, a condition not readily embraced by Neo-classical models that are concerned with explaining what is, and is not fundamentally concerned with what might be. As we saw below however … as soon as the possibility of change is admitted into economic models, the perspective shifts and it becomes much easier to relate design to economic theories.

The fourth virtue of the text, and perhaps its major single intellectual virtue, is that the critique of neoclassical economic models is not conducted merely negatively. What Heskett shows – and this becomes apparent in the key series of diagrams of economic models that illuminate the text – is that as one contrasts neoclassical theory, first with Austrian theory (see Figure 3.1) and then with the insights gained from Institutional theory and New Growth theory (Figures 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.7, 4.9), it is possible to see a successive deepening of the understanding of value creation. Heskett shows that these models do not only articulate different ‘schools’ of economic thought; rather, they build upon each other in ways that allow for the development of a more adequate model of how value is created, what he calls ‘value creation theory’. The logic of the text is clear on this point. Beginning with the dynamics and the agents of value creation (the work of the Austrian economists stressing innovation and change) (Chapter 3) and then with the work of Veblen, Coase, North and others on the significance of cultural and institutional factors (Chapter 4: Institutional Theory), Heskett builds a wider foundation for value creation, which then enables him to take up, successively, more contemporary questions of the role of technology, ideas, process and production innovation and ‘knowledge of users’ (Chapter 5: New Growth theory) and, finally, issues of the deployment of policy and the development of national economies (Chapter 6). By working systematically through these factors, and by diagramming the shifting factors involved, Heskett shows how a far more comprehensive model of value creation can be developed, one that transcends the limitations of the standard neoclassical models. This in turn finally allows, as was said already above, for the structural placing of design within that model and allows us to see design as itself a factor of production.

A fifth virtue follows from this sequence. If the latter by no means develops the last word, or the only possible model, of value creation, the heuristic sequence of models that Heskett deploys effectively charts not only the fact of changes and developments in economic theory over the last 150 years or so, but also the very possibility of change and evolution in economic thinking. In other words, economics is revealed here, not as it sometimes wishes to present itself (especially in the political sphere) as a fixed science dealing with unalterable laws but as a flexible (or at least quasi-flexible) system of thought seeking to adequately grasp the complexity and the continuing question of value creation.

If Heskett offers both a serious critique of conventional (and dominant) neoclassical economics vis-à-vis its understanding of economic life at the level of production and use of things and services, and, at the same time offers an appreciation of the struggle of other economists to model more accurately the dynamics of value creation, the sixth virtue of the text is that in this process he also holds design accountable, that is, design does escape critique. Arguing that if it wishes to be taken as seriously as it often demands it should be (especially in relation to its contribution to business success), then it must meet a fundamental criterion: ‘For design to function as a strategic instrument … a credible case must be made for its capabilities in organizations prepared to use it in such terms. Specifically, any designer aspiring to a strategic role needs to understand and frame economic arguments for the value of design that makes sense in a business context.’<sup>35</sup> In the text, Chapter 7 essentially positions design from the standpoint of economics. In effect, it presents the minimum demands that an economically adequate conception of design must incorporate. It thus offers a serious, and perhaps unsurpassable, challenge to how design should be thought. If Heskett implies an economics can only be adequate if it can model design’s contribution to value creation, he equally implies that design can only be adequate if it can critically comprehend and articulate the economics of value creation. 36

Finally, a not inconsiderable, virtue of the text is that although it is about design and economics and the creation of value, it never ultimately conflates ‘economic value’ with value or values per se. This becomes particularly evident in Chapters 8 (see Section 3) and in the conclusion to Chapter 9 (and it is also explored in the paper ‘Value and Values’ added as an appendix to this volume: Appendix 2). This is, as we know, not insignificant today, both with respect to design – which is often adamant that it is not merely concerned with economic value<sup>37</sup> – and, even more importantly, in terms of the economy as a whole. With some understatement, the economist Duncan Foley concludes his book on economic theory by noting that if the all-but-absolute domination of capital accumulation today requires us to understand its logic and operations, that ‘understanding … does not require us to surrender our moral judgment to the market, either as individuals or as political actors’.<sup>38</sup> Heskett would agree that interest in economics does not and should not necessitate an abdication of ethical concerns; that economics is, after all, always in the end political economy, which is also to say a moral economy.<sup>39</sup> As he notes at the end of his (unpublished) manuscript Crafts, Commerce and Industry:

We have in the history of design an astonishingly rich inheritance. What is even more amazing is that with every newborn child the latent potential for similar achievement exists in this incredibly fertile human capability. It is the greatest renewable resource we possess and to acknowledge its creative potential could be the finest legacy we leave for our children and grandchildren.

The more than sentimental force of this observation in relation to the question of value (and values) is that design is the capability in practice of negotiating the economic, material, social and psychological incommensurabilities involved in meeting and dealing with human material needs. Design is therefore, in this process, the creation or the addition not just of ‘value’ but of complex, multiple ‘values’ that embody, express and enable capabilities.

## 4 What are the limitations of the text?

If the points above illustrate some of the text’s virtues, and show in what ways the seminar demands engagement, what are its limitations, its critical gaps and voids? What are the issues that it fails to deal with adequately?

There are, again, I think, seven such limitations. But I should note immediately that by ‘limitations’ I mean often less limits to the argument as it is presented in the seminar, and rather delimitations in regard to the context in which the work arose – delimitations that almost necessarily put limits on that with which it deals (and with which future work in this field must contend).

The first and most obvious limit is that Design and the Creation of Value is a very brief text. It is in fact less a book than an extended essay.<sup>40</sup> Its brevity gives it force: the possibility of grasping, almost in one sitting, a range of economic thought and a corpus of thinking concerning design and value. But, precisely because it is an essay, the book cannot, by definition, be comprehensive or systematic; still less can it engage with every issue opened in the relation between design, economics and value. The book has therefore to be read as, in effect, a text from where further work and research begins rather than ends.<sup>41</sup> The text is the opening of a field. It does not close down debate. It should, rather, be read, as all essays should, as an encouragement to think – and as an encouragement to understand how those who participate in its arguments can begin to grasp the measurability of the economics and economic thought and therefore bring these (critically) into thought and practice, rather than merely evading what appears as the immeasurable. This is the politics, in the strict sense, of the seminar.

The second limitation of the seminar is that of the contexts and moments in which the work was made. While Heskett is obviously happy to, in effect, take up Ha-Joon Chang’s position in terms of making economics accessible to a moderately intelligent audience, the immediate contexts that he developed the seminar in – the Institute of Design at IIT in Chicago in the 1990s, graduate programmes in design at Hong Kong Polytechnic University in the 2000s – were intellectually limited, and in two senses. Both institutions, although they aspired to thinking design strategically, were in different ways subject to acute short-term market pressures that tended to collapse longer-term, wider thinking into operational ‘quick-fix’ solutions. Perhaps, even more significantly, in neither institution was there any significant interest in critical and historical thought. Thus, the institutional discourses within which the seminar emerged, while encouraging in one sense, were limiting in another. In many ways in fact, the thrust and tone of Heskett’s seminar go against the grain of the logic of the places from which it emerged. It pushes at the intellectual limits, both of its immediate audience and that of the culture within design pedagogy, which consistently lowers expectations as to what designers and design students should be taught and expected to know.<sup>42</sup> In his teaching, Heskett pushed at these limits, remaining convinced to the end that students had the potential to grasp this material. But at the same time, the broader – or in this case the narrower – institutional setting delimited the zones and depth of intellectual inquiry that were possible.

Third, the context of the seminar’s emergence was delimiting in another and even more fundamental sense in that even as the text itself, in some of its aspects, pushes beyond the limits of the market as we receive it today, the dominance of the market as is (and even of market society) becomes the effective horizon of the work. It is this that perhaps explains the disappointing section of the text on ‘Socialist theory’ (now Appendix 1). Heskett spends a convincing paragraph in the preface explaining why ‘Socialist theory’ should be dealt with, but the actual presentation offers little interest.<sup>43</sup> No reference is made, for example, to the commodity nor to the wider discussion of exchange value/use value (and design) that has extended into contemporary thought within and without economics.<sup>44</sup> The weakness of the section on Marx has its counterpart in the almost complete absence of a direct discussion, in the seminar, of capitalism, especially in its most recent forms. If neoclassical theory is discussed and critiqued, neoliberalism is not.<sup>45</sup> More particularly, the rendering of Marx as an isolated historical figure in economics misses the extent to which the greatest contribution of Marxist economic thought is in terms of the history of capitalism. If neoclassical economics often does its best to deny history, Marxist economic thought is at its best thinking historically, whether that is in works of the history of the industrial epoch (e.g. the magisterial volumes of Eric Hobsbawm covering the period 1789–1991)<sup>46</sup> or in Marxist thinkers looking at the development of capitalism, particularly as it evolves towards Neoliberalism (e.g. Robert Brenner’s The Economics of Global Turbulence on the crises of the 1990s)<sup>47</sup> or those seeking to tease out the contradictions and tensions within the capitalist economy (see, for example, the prolific work of David Harvey)<sup>48</sup> or the careful empirical work of Thomas Piketty, who though not a Marxist as such belongs to the range of critical economists whose strength comes from looking at the wider historical development of capital.<sup>49</sup>

Fourth, the underlying tension in Design and the Creation of Value around the question of what the economy is, is also, however, a more general one so often found in economics and in discussions of value. Is economics the study of the economy (as economists like to insist, the study of the only possible form the economy can successfully take?) or is economics as a field really only engaged in modelling (and justifying) the fact that this is a capitalist economy? The question is difficult, and particularly from an operational point of view.<sup>50</sup> It has urgency in view of the continuing cycle of economic crises and in view of the need to rethink what the ‘economy’ is, and how it should be conceived in the light of the necessity to create a sustainable global postcarbon economy, an economy that, while it will, by necessity, use markets, cannot, structurally, also be capitalist,<sup>51</sup> at least in the essentially mercantile (and massively exploitative) forms that we are now experiencing.

Fifth, the work is delimited in another sense that will strike anyone coming to it for the first time. Of necessity, it betrays in its emphases the historical moments of its conception and orientation. The book is essentially rooted in a view of the economic value of design as that which can in part ‘save’ industry from itself. The brief biographical details I offered above will make immediate sense of this. Heskett came to maturity as a design historian in the mid-1970s, a period when the ‘oil-price shock’ of 1973–4 was the catalyst to turning the underlying crisis of profitability in the manufacturing industry in the United Kingdom and the United States of America into deindustrialization and the global exporting of manufacturing.<sup>52</sup> Across the next twenty years, first in Sheffield and later in Chicago/the mid-West, Heskett watched first-hand as these developments unfolded around him, while in parallel (as I noted above) he watched Germany and Japan in particular pursue considerably more intelligent policies,<sup>53</sup> at both government and firm levels, vis-à-vis the application of design capabilities to industry.<sup>54</sup> Heskett’s stance on the economics of design (and this applied also to Heskett’s work in Hong Kong,<sup>55</sup> and, indeed, to the consultancies he undertook on almost a global basis) was thus grounded, in effect, on the same principle as the one that motivated one of Heskett’s economic heroes, Frederick List (see Chapter 6), that is, that of seeking to make industry work better. The problem, of course, and this is noted in the last limitation discussed below, is that in many ways we are in a ‘post-industrial’ economy, that is, one where there is still much, globally, industrial production (China) but where the industrial is no longer formative for the economy. In the most direct sense, consumption ‘replaces’ production and finance, and more particularly rent-seeking through financial flows and debt, trumps both. What, then, is design and the creation of value in such an economy?

This last point gains a little more force when we reflect that, almost by necessity, Heskett is formulating the arguments he deploys in Design and the Creation of Value just at the point before it becomes definitively evident that the older disciplinary limits and boundaries of design are definitely breaking down in the interests of a much wider, and therefore also much looser, deployment of ‘design’. Bruno Latour captures this development when he remarks in some comments how in the last decades design has expanded in both range (‘ever larger assemblages of production’)<sup>56</sup> and depth (‘everyone with an iPhone knows that it would be absurd to distinguish what has been designed from what has been planned, calculated, arrayed, arranged, packed, packaged, defined, projected, tinkered, written down in code, disposed of and so on. From now on, “to design” could mean equally any or all of those verbs’).<sup>57</sup> One result is to make the act of design in general far more complex and less differentiated than has been previously understood. Heskett recognizes this – see his reference in the preface to the famous quotation from Herbert Simon that talks about design as ‘the core of all professional training’<sup>58</sup> – but in relation to the economics of value creation this no longer quite equates to the product-user model that still dominates. This is in part because of the new centrality of the economics of innovation and of the ‘Hollywood’ model of product cost (where almost the entire cost of production lies in the ‘software’ creation of the product).<sup>59</sup> Indeed, we could say that a crucial addition that is needed in terms of the economics of design is a reconsideration of the (sometimes astonishing) economics of design-led innovation.<sup>60</sup>

Finally, the fact that the book was essentially complete in its focus by 2004 and was conceived at least a decade earlier, and on the basis of concerns that in origin date from twenty years before that, explains at least in part, the lack of overt or detailed reference to both the emerging digital economy and the idea of what we would now call the post-carbon economy. The import of this should not be exaggerated, in that attention to the former in particular, in the somewhat superficial ways that this usually occurs in design, is often diversionary of what is actually occurring vis-à-vis the economy. On one side, then, there are the forms of a ‘new economy’ emerging. This is the case made, for example, by the British economic journalist Paul Mason in his recent book, Post-IndustrialCapitalism: A Guide to a Future, <sup>61</sup> which explores the digital and ‘knowledge’ economies and posits the possibility of the emergence within current capitalism of new forms of knowledge-based value creation and modes of organization that will transform capitalism from within. On the other side, even more fundamentally, we find ourselves having to confront not just a different form of capitalism than that which was the bread-and-butter as it were of Heskett’s life (essentially the twentieth-century industrial economy) but a different historical epoch (that of the artificial in which the horizon, medium and prime condition and limitation of the world is no longer nature but the artificial – or as it is often labelled at the moment, the anthropocene). In this world or this epoch, the urgent economic task is the project of a post-carbon economy (which is today the most accurate way of thinking ‘sustainment’). Seen from this perspective, an entirely new kind of economy is required.

But we need to be careful here not to be too dismissive of what is (and hence of Heskett’s text). First, the fact that the condition, horizon and limit of our world is now the artificial and not nature<sup>62</sup> not only demands an economics adequate to it<sup>63</sup> but also a recalculation, which means a rethinking, of value – which is, of course, precisely the underlying thesis of Heskett’s argument (even though it is not couched in, or addressed to, these new conditions).<sup>64</sup> Second, there is a temptation that many have been led into in discussing the digital- and post-carbon economies (let alone capitalism today as a whole) to dismiss the industrial and with it manufacturing in general (the dismissal is also, needless to say, axiomatic within design, especially among students). But there is an acute difference between the end of the industrial epoch, a period when the industrial