was the formative condition of the world and its economy (an epoch that began between 1775 and 1825 and ended in the years after 1975) and the ‘end’ of industry and manufacturing. The former has ended (industry is no longer formative in the economy or in society as a whole) the latter has not. Production continues.

It is interesting that the economist Ha-Joon Chang, whom I quoted earlier as effectively supporting Heskett in the latter’s view that production was undertheorized in economics (see note 33), continues his argument in the same section by mounting a robust defence for continuing concern for manufacturing. Since it bears directly on the orientation of Design and the Creation of Value, it is worth quoting in full:

Unfortunately, with the rise of the discourse of post-industrial society in the realm of ideas and the increasing dominance of the financial sector in the real world, indifference to manufacturing has positively turned into contempt. Manufacturing, it is often argued, is, in the new ‘knowledge economy’, a low-grade activity that only low-wage developing countries do. But factories are where the modern world has been made, so to speak, and will keep being remade. Moreover, even in our supposed post-industrial world, services, the supposed new economic engine, cannot thrive without a vibrant manufacturing sector. The fact that Switzerland and Singapore, which many people consider to be the ultimate examples of successful service-led prosperity, are actually two of the three most industrialized countries in the world (together with Japan) is a testimony to this.<sup>65</sup>

Contrary to conventional wisdom, development of productive capabilities, especially in the manufacturing sector, is crucial if we are to deal with the greatest challenge of our time – climate change. In addition to changing their consumption patterns, the rich countries need to further develop their productive capabilities in the area of green technologies. Even just to cope with the adverse consequences of climate change, developing countries need to further develop technological and organizational capabilities, many of which can only be acquired through industrialization.<sup>66</sup>

In Ha-Joon Chang’s view therefore – and this would obviously echo Heskett’s underlying argument – the attention to questions of production and use is not outdated. In an increasingly artificial world, it is difficult to see how they could be, no matter how much the condition of the screen might dominate immediate consciousness.

## 5 The intellectual force of Heskett’s text

To close this introduction, I would like to bring the discussion back to what I think might ultimately be the most important aspect of this short book. As noted above, and as delineated in the notes by Sabine Junginger and Cameron Weber in this volume, Heskett’s work has considerable substantive implications for further research and thought in design management and economics.<sup>67</sup> But if we turn back to the text and Heskett’s own ambitions for the work, then, as noted at the beginning of this introduction, the deepest problem that Heskett set out to solve was not the substantive problem of value per se but the intellectual difficulty that underlies, and which creates, the all-but-impossibility of solving the substantive problem, that is, the ‘deep schism of mutual incomprehension’ that separates design and economics.<sup>68</sup>

Heskett’s point was that unless and until this schism is in some way crossed or unless (as I put it above) design and economics are made to belong to each other, or better, and in the other sense of this metaphor, to listen to each other, then adequately solving the puzzle and problem of value – and ultimately the project of creating either an adequate design or an adequate economics – remains at best difficult and perhaps impossible. The uniqueness and the force of the book (and its methodological interest, meaning the lessons it embodies for scholarship) lie in how Heskett achieves this end. Three points are significant:

1. The first methodological premise that Heskett works to is that economics is that which design cannot avoid – except at the cost of neutering or removing from thought one of its prime conditions of existence. The relation, however, is active, not passive, and is so both substantively (as we’ve just seen) and intellectually. The crucial relation is as follows: Just as economics ‘passes judgement’ on design, that is, reveals certain aspects of design not otherwise sufficiently grasped, so too design ‘passes judgement’ on economics, reveals moments of inadequacy and offers perspectives, particularly around questions of value, growth, innovation, desire, use and cost, that are by no means trivial. Thus, if economics confronts design with some truths that designers like to evade, design demonstrates truths concerning the creation of value that much, if not most, standard economic theory finds difficult to incorporate into its models. The relation therefore (between design and economics) is internal not external. Hence it is not design and economics that we need to think but, as the title of Chapter 1 has it, ‘Design in Economic Life’, that is, we need to think the implication of the one in the other. Substantively, this means a double necessity: first, to look at design through the lens of economic theory in its historical development, and also, second, to ‘put the flea to the elephant’ and to insist that design’s quantum of truth concerning things and value (no matter how ‘fragmented and often ill-defined’ the field may be) can nonetheless usefully augment economic theory. This is precisely what Heskett begins to do in Chapters 7 and 8.<sup>69</sup>

2. But although the confrontation between design and economics is apparently conducted directly in these chapters, across the book as a whole, as was made clear in the first pages of this introduction, there are actually three, not two, subject matters in play. ‘Value’ is not simply that which is the object of the book; rather, lying between ‘design’ and ‘economics’, it performs a mediating role, at once connecting and relativizing the absolute claims of both.<sup>70</sup> One can understand the role of this ‘third subject’ by drawing on an insight from Roland Barthes. In talking about how the concept of ‘text’ worked in relation to the rethinking by himself and others of the category of the ‘literary work’ (and its related disciplines: linguistics, anthropology, psychoanalysis), he notes:

What is new and which affects the idea of the work comes not necessarily from the internal recasting of each of these disciplines, but rather from their encounter in relation to an object which traditionally is the province of none of them. It is indeed as though the interdisciplinarity which is today held up as a prime value in research cannot be accomplished by the simple confrontation of specialist branches of knowledge. Interdisciplinarity begins effectively when the solidarity of the old disciplines breaks down … in the interests of a new object and a new language neither of which has a place in the field of the sciences that were to be brought peacefully together, this unease in classification being precisely the point from which it is possible to diagnose a certain mutation.’<sup>71</sup> (My emphasis)

With all due allowance to the differences in context, and for all the incongruity of Barthes appearing in this context, the point he makes is apparent. As has been already noted, it is the introduction of a third term, value, the ‘new object and a new language’ that belongs wholly to neither field – which allows for a genuine exploration to begin. In particular, in Heskett’s case, it is the question that the third term introduces into the relation between design and economics that makes it possible for him to triangulate the relation between design and economics, to play both off in terms of how they grasp – or fail to grasp – an object common to each. In other words, what appears at first sight as external and incommensurate (design ‘vs.’ economics) is discovered, through value, to possess an internal relation (design <> economics). This is precisely why it is the direct and indirect pursuit of the modelling of value creation in economics that is the organizing principle of Heskett’s presentations of economic thought. What Heskett is touching on in his explorations of value creation is precisely the mutation in the conditions of production, use and value creation that is now occurring, mutations that force, if in subtle ways, a transformation in how we think of both economics and design.<sup>72</sup>

3. But what applies to economics applies also to the wider fields and disciplines with which design reciprocally engages. Design’s necessary dialectical implication in other disciplines and fields (both within the university and within practice) demands that to think design adequately, we need to go beyond the hopelessly unproductive relations of the ‘and’ in design-and-X relations. Where the conjunction actually marks not the connection but the separation and a priori distinction between fields (and further implies that while they might merrily dance around each other, both will maintain their existing identity and form), the project that Heskett effectively argues for in Chapters 7 and 8 is wider and more courageous. It is the courage to let one discipline ‘invade’ and think (listen to) the other. The metaphor that is used here comes from Heidegger, from towards the end of one of his most profound essays – and one with significant purchase for design. In ‘Building Dwelling Thinking’, Heidegger is trying to think what he calls the ‘crisis’ of dwelling.<sup>73</sup> In relating the latter to the disconnect he sees in the present between how we think the condition of ‘dwelling’ in the world and the act of building (now reduced largely to a technological feat) and thinking, he offers an insight that has never yet been sufficiently taken up in thought:

Perhaps this attempt to think about dwelling and building will bring out somewhat more clearly that building belongs to dwelling and how it receives its nature from dwelling. … Building and dwelling are, each in its own way, inescapably for dwelling. The two are however insufficient for dwelling so long as each busies itself in separation instead of listening to one another.They are able to listen if both – building and thinking – belong to dwelling.<sup>74</sup> (My emphasis)

The thrust of Heidegger’s argument is clear if, nonetheless, difficult to think.<sup>75</sup> Disciplines, or fields, in our time do not generally ‘belong’ to one another in the ways in which Heidegger is intimating they might. Yet perhaps our ‘learning to dwell’ (the real theme of Heidegger’s essay) requires that we begin to be capable of such listening and such belonging. Transposed to the issues Heskett is exploring (but in the same moment referring back to the wider question of how we make those modes and acting that bear on a condition), this would imply that as economic, though not only economic, beings (and as economic, though not only economic, designers), it requires developing our capability to ‘listen’ to economics while at the same time thinking this ‘belonging’ beyond the current limits of economics and beyond the current limits of design. Heskett’s incipient success in Design and the Creation of Value is to point us in this direction. It remains for others to take up the challenge he has issued.