Community Reinvestment Act and, relatedly, ‘red-lining’).<sup>12</sup> This incentivized unthinking investment in (unaffordable) housing was combined with and influenced by negative incentives for accurate bond-ratings due to regulatory capture (bonds were overrated so that more bonds were purchased than if they had been accurately rated). Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (the US government-backed mortgage agencies) were guaranteeing (poorly rated) mortgage-backed bonds (MBBs) at 100 per cent – and international banking standards (the Basel standards I, II and III) encouraged banks to hold these MBBs as reserves against which further lending could be made.

All of this combined by the time of the crash of 2007–8 so that there were inflated housing prices (cheaper money means more long-term investment, for example, mortgages and MBBs than if there had not been central bank interest rate manipulation) and the MBBs were more than double the value of the actual underlying mortgages (not least because MBBs are a worldwide phenomenon due to the Basel banking standards and the dominance of the US\$, and US Treasury debt, in the world economy).

What we saw in 2007–8 was that incentives for debt creation (including the ability to write off debt interest payments pre-tax on the US income tax code) help to create Veblen’s pecuniary habit to the detriment of workmanship (design is workmanship). We see these pecuniary habits take form as the central bank(s) keep near-zero rates of interest (for the US Fed from 2007 until late 2015) for unprecedented lengths of time. This ‘easy money’ is evident in the valuation of social media firms at billions of dollars in IPO capitalizations, many without actually making a profit. We also see this with the huge volume of mergers and acquisitions occurring concurrently with easy money and tax code incentives for debt creation.

It is not a failure to innovate that creates the financial crisis; there are lots of incentives to innovate in financial derivatives (the pecuniary), but as Heskett describes in the text (albeit as applied to design), there are less incentives to innovate in workmanship (real goods and services adding new value). The financialization of the economy (and the subsequent crises caused in part by central bank interest rate manipulations) is due to policy that encourages the pecuniary habit over the instinct of workmanship.

This policy-based social structure represents ill-shaped social values towards financialization and away from craft and quality.<sup>13</sup> In Heskett’s ‘Design Value Creation’ synthesis, he highlights that what institutional economics brings to the economic theory synthesis is transactional innovations and efficiencies; from here we find his critique that within firms, transactional relations can be pecuniary rather than user and quality-oriented – thus his appeal to business schools and business executives to change institutional habits towards value creation over the long-term rather than short-term (financial-only) profits.

## 4 On the bankruptcy of General Motors (GM), and its bailout during the great recession

John Heskett had taken an interest in the US automobile industry from the 1960s onward, as an example of the failure of industry to consistently adapt corporate strategies towards user-oriented design (as do, for example, Japanese motor companies), instead reiterating an ‘arrogant’ producer-oriented strategy in the United States.<sup>14</sup> Specifically, we find that GM provides a good case study for illustrating the thesis in Design and the Creation of Value, arguing for the necessity of design in high-level strategy and not just as a shallow afterthought towards product differentiation, a dichotomy of thought Heskett labels ‘design’ versus ‘styling’.

In our discussion above on Veblen, we find that whereas workmanship can create new value, the pecuniary instinct prioritizes financialization and paper profits for a self-interested management class over the creation of value for both the firm and the consumer design. Over time, as Veblen pointed out, this management class loses touch with the need to serve the wishes and needs of the end user (and, as we shall see, can then resort to rent-seeking to minimize the negative effects arising from this self-imposed lack of competiveness).<sup>15</sup>

Heskett describes how US business models may orient towards management-by-metrics and financial engineering (whereas design value-added regrettably is not easily quantifiable and can be relegated to the marketing department alone), which furthers the pecuniary over a useroriented design strategy (Heskett also attributes US industry arrogance to the dominant position in world markets obtained as a result of the Second World War). In our case, this means that US car firms lose market share to foreign competition, and therefore seek rents in the form of tariff and non-tariff trade barriers against more innovative and efficient foreign manufacturers. Under the guise of economic nationalism, this prioritizes domestic producers (some people) over domestic consumers. This is the reverse of the usual pattern in international trade treaties, whether WTO, bilateral or regional-multilateral.<sup>16</sup>

One factor at work here, however, is the force of time and place in influencing the deployment of assets. In Heskett’s chapter on Institutional Theory, we learn of Oliver E. Williamson’s ‘transaction cost economics’, though without an exploration of Williamson’s ‘asset specificity’. Like Ronald Coase, Williamson critiques, and improves upon, the neoclassical model of perfect competition. Asset specificity allows factors of production to be relative to a time and place and therefore not perfectly substitutable in an aggregated production function (as is assumed under most neoclassical and growth theory models).<sup>17</sup> This asset specificity of local context can explain why the US government used discretionary power to nationalize and restructure General Motors in 2009 as opposed to letting the markets and courts regulate GM’s bankruptcy.

In the US automobile industry, and especially in the case of GM, asset specificity includes interventions by the United Auto Workers, industry lobbyists and members of congress who support trade protection (automobile labour and industry groups are major donors to political campaigns and therefore get state-supported monopoly rents in return<sup>18</sup>). The GM nationalization is an ideal-type example of corporatist asset specificity, something we find as the necessary end result of GM’s uncompetitive producer-oriented practices – as compared to that of a consumer-oriented corporate design strategy that can maintain firm competitiveness in the long run. 19

The GM case study is also a fitting synthesis for many of the ideas contained in this book and as found in Heskett’s writings elsewhere.<sup>20</sup> The wealth of nations in the modern economy depends on a nation’s ability to focus on user design-oriented business development; this requires long-term commitments in education and research in order to integrate design in all levels of society. Firms, and especially smaller firms that represent the future, need to be able adapt to changing conditions in order to further brand durability and loyalty over the long term (to allow creative destruction rather than economic destruction). However, this does not necessarily mean that governments should pick ‘winners’.

How then can national governments handle the dramatic changes on multiple levels and technologies, of global markets, and business organization and that are currently causing major economic disruption and unemployment? The answer, I believe, is they cannot: government policy exercised through bureaucratic organizations is ill-equipped to understand and dynamically respond to change on any level. The world economy is at present so diverse and dynamic that attempts to control it through mercantilist-style policies will not only be futile but extremely damaging.<sup>21</sup>

## Conclusions

In conclusion I would like to make four points:

1 First, in terms of reading Heskett, I found his story of the development of economic thought refreshing and the synthesis convincing. These ideas are well illustrated by the ‘flow charts’ in the chapters on each school of economic thought, and especially so in the concluding chapter’s synthesis of economics, design and the firm. It is transparent from the text that Heskett is a careful and caring educator of designers and is rightfully considered a pioneer in relating how design can create value in our lives.<sup>22</sup>

2 Heskett’s book is a good example of interdisciplinary knowledge. He synthesizes very well three major fields: the history of economic theory, design as practice and firm strategic management.

3 As someone from economics coming newly to design, I was inspired by Heskett’s view of the designer as change agent, something in tune with today’s visually oriented, and instant and ‘sharing’, new economy. The designer can be a modern industrialist-entrepreneur like Steve Jobs or Bill Gates. The designer can be a founder of the many social media and sharing economy firms that have emerged over the last number of years (concurrent with the equity bubble abetted by the central banks’ unprecedented use of monetary easing since the financial crisis of 2007–8). The designer can be within a firm as an employee or executive, or an outside consultant engaged under contract to provide strategic leadership that may be lacking due to organizational stasis. The point is that the designer might be seen as a form of the Austrian school entrepreneur (and with this book, Heskett contributes to the economic theory of the firm by assigning designers within a firm an important part in turning tacit knowledge into value creation through artefact – both physical and digital – realization).

4 Finally, I want to note that reading John Heskett was of great value for me, his writing inspiring much insight into economic ideas of my own interest as shown above. I am sure that many of those with an interest in economic theory and students and teachers of design, economics and management will find the same result. The synthesis of disciplines offers new ways to understand entrepreneurship and, relatedly, to see afresh applied innovation as value creation and realization in ongoing exchange relationships. As such, Design and the Creation of Value is an engaging text for those interested in the ‘new economy’ while offering an innovative synthesis of disciplines by an experienced educator and a broadbased, and knowledgeable, industry professional and historian.

# Design as an economic necessity for governments and organizations

Sabine Junginger

John Heskett’s research into the economic life of design has shifted the perception of many in management about the role of design in business and society. Likewise, his work has reminded designers that they are not just merely designing some ‘thing’ but that in doing so, they have both opportunities and obligations to contribute in a meaningful way. John’s work is of renewed relevance today and continues to have significant implications for the future development of design research and design practice. Circumstances have changed, though, and we need to revisit as well as adjust some of the thinking that originated in the world of business and industry.

There is a growing recognition that the main arena in which design is practised is not business, but the organization. Designing goes on in every organization, regardless of whether it is part of the private or public sector. Each organization faces the same basic challenge: how to develop and deliver services that are relevant and valuable to people and how to do so to make the most economic use of its various resources to achieve this. This in itself is a design problem. It involves organizational structures as much as it involves its resources; it involves processes and tasks as much as it requires a vision or a purpose.

Designers always work within organizational contexts. They work with organizational clients and partners – and they establish their own organizations. To paraphrase John, organizations are the main arena of design practice. As he observed, there remains ‘a tendency for some designers to try to ignore this basic fact of their existence, which is yet another aspect of the problems in giving design credibility, but it will not conveniently disappear’.<sup>1</sup>

John Heskett insisted that design can, will and must be judged in terms of its contributions. Recent research in design management has centred on demonstrating the value of design to business in economic terms. A 2013 study sponsored by the Design Management Institute in Boston produced the Design Value Score Card, while projects funded by the EU and the OECD sought to develop a greater understanding of the value creation by design by ‘analyzing and measuring design as a user-centered innovation tool and as an economic factor of production’.<sup>2</sup> The €Design project, for example, studied the role of design in the integration of functional, emotional and social utilities of new or improved products (goods and services), processes and marketing methods in order ‘to help shape guidelines for analyzing and measuring the economic impact of design efforts and design outputs, thereby facilitating more detailed and robust measurements of design’.<sup>3</sup>

These studies expand on Heskett’s work but they do not provide much needed insights into the value of design to organizational life beyond production and consumption. Yet, the shift from design in business to design in organizations poses new questions and demands new approaches to inquire into design, design processes and the people who design. In this new setting, designing takes an active role in shaping businesses and management and it does so across the boundaries of the private and public sectors.<sup>4</sup> Societies and communities, organizations in their own right, also have organizational lives and the question is how design contributes to these – be that by way of policy-making and policy implementation or by way of supporting public organizations in developing and delivering meaningful and accessible services. While the contribution to design in business remains focused on profitability, this alone is no longer a criterion for business success. How businesses engage on a social and environmental level matters more and more. The requirement for design to contribute, ‘if it is to be of any use in business’ is the same requirement for design in the public sector.

‘Business is also a social activity,’ writes John. ‘Both its internal organization and the needs it meets in society depend upon social consciousness and functions. Some business managers educated in the tenets of Neoclassical thinking try to ignore this basic fact of their existence, but it too will not conveniently disappear.’ It is much rarer to find pure neoclassical thinking in government offices, but the basic problem of the business manager echoes that of the public manager: Their organization does not act in a vacuum and their internal operations need to be able to support the services it provides to citizens. They involve and affect people inside and outside the organization. Understanding business as a social activity affirms that management itself is a social activity (Falk 1961).<sup>5</sup> The inherent social relationships of business and management highlight their relevance for the public organizations and government agencies. Policy makers and public managers pursue business in its original meaning: by taking actions about the matters they are troubled by and care for (Dewey 1948).<sup>6</sup> I have argued elsewhere that the business of the public sector is the social.<sup>7</sup>

Heskett’s statement that ‘making profits is not a self-contained activity determined within a firm but depends upon satisfying customers’ needs’ reveals yet another reason to extend research and practice into design management to public organizations. Public organizations are less, if at all, concerned about profits. They are concerned about impact and about efficiency in accordance within the legal and political constructs they are part of. To achieve impact, government agencies have to understand the people they try to reach in situations they seek to address and improve. But the staff often has few means to engage in such research. Moreover, the demand for ‘customer satisfaction’ is a difficult one in the public realm. A tax office may deliver a great service experience to a taxpayer but that taxpayer may still leave dissatisfied because he or she may owe the government an amount of money he or she disagrees with. Success for government agencies takes the form of delivering just and fair services to all people, regardless of their income, status, education or other background. As in the business world, achieving this success is not a ‘self-contained activity’. Any design outcome depends on its being useful to and accepted by citizens, manageable by public organizations and supported by the social and political agenda.

All this points to design in government as an area that poses profound questions about the value of design and its contributions to human society. As we broaden the scope of design management from business to organizations, we benefit from an advanced understanding of the way economic theories treat design and find it necessary to present a design perspective on economics.<sup>8</sup> The ramifications are difficult to understate: design outcomes across the public sector concern and affect millions of people every day. It is the arena of design practice where, as John Heskett notes, ‘design is one of the basic characteristics of what it is to be human and an essential determinant of the quality of human life. It affects everyone in every detail of every aspect of what they do throughout each day. As such, it matters profoundly.’<sup>9</sup>

To explore the value of design in government, we can follow John’s lead and engage with policy theories, policy practices and policy processes from a design perspective. We need to study the ways in which designing goes on in the public sector and make design activities visible to illustrate how and what value they create for people. Designing in the public sector is a highly complex undertaking that involves people, policies, organizations and services. In very simple terms, public-sector design involves people designing policies, people running organizations that implement policies through services and people developing and delivering services to implement policies and fulfil policy intent.

Government functions best when it develops meaningful policies that are relevant to people and when public organizations develop, deliver and maintain services people can access, understand and use. In this ideal scenario, services are the means to fulfil the policy’s intent. But often, policies turn out to be ill conceived, and designed past the needs of people, leading to services citizens cannot or do not want to use. At other times, the internal operations of a public organization are cumbersome and not supportive to staff that seeks to deliver good service experiences. It is an indication that the design approaches employed are not supportive and appropriate to arrive at the desired design outcomes. In other words, new design thinking, new design practices and new design methods are called for.

I have yet to meet a civil servant who intentionally develops poor services for citizens. Those who develop and deliver these products do their best with the methods and tools they have been taught or otherwise acquired. But it remains a fact that very few have had an opportunity, for example, to engage with human-centred design or user-centred design. On the other hand, there are still only a few professionally trained designers (design thinkers and service designers included) who are prepared to engage with design issues in organizational life. In many cases, designers are experts in a specific method that quickly generates radical new ideas for new customer-oriented services. They are strong in developing innovative products but weak in seeing them through to implementation when this means working through organizational structures, resources and people. Moreover, designers hesitate to engage staff in their innovative approaches. We can only guess the reasons for this, but I suspect it involves a lack of theoretical and practical underpinning that would enable them to connect the value of their design work to the work of staff and their respective tasks.

In my view, this situation echoes the gulf between design and economics John sought to bridge. In the public sector, we find dominant theories at work for when and how new policies can be developed and introduced. We find management principles and best practices of public administration influencing daily work. And just like values drive theories in the economic disciplines, values drive theories in policy. It is no coincidence that human experience and human interaction rarely figure in theories on policy-making and policy implementation. It is also no coincidence that policy research has been content with depicting the policy cycle as a fragmented, linear and responsive design process blind to the needs of people affected by a policy. Until recently, questions about when and how to introduce a policy focused on political and organizational processes within government. Lately, researchers have begun to look at