policies as products of design. Guy Peters (2015), for example, has suggested we ‘design policies like we design a car’.<sup>10</sup>

## Designing in the Brazilian government

While I was reflecting on John Heskett and the relevance of his work in the present, I worked with a group of the Brazilian Ministry of Planning, Budget and Management, one of the central ministries in the Brazilian government to which all other ministries have obligations. Moreover, I visited the Federal Court of Accounts, the Federal Ministry of Justice and the Federal Ministry of Education. I also made a stop at the third largest bank in Brazil, Caixa. Caixa is one of two key financial partners for the Brazilian government to administer social welfare programmes.

In each organization, I met with people who sought to improve their internal operations by developing new design practices and by employing new design methods. They were challenging current design practices within their respective organizations and even across government agencies. They had been set up to secure vital government functions under severe economic hardship, a consequence of the country’s economic recession. As one senior public official put it: ‘We are doing this not even to do more with less because we are happy if we can still do the same with less.’

Most of these innovation teams were young; some had merely started a few months ago. One innovation group was made up of just a handful of in-house experts from the organization’s IT area. Their original mandate was to advance innovation within their organization by developing new digital tools for data analysis. In another agency, the innovation team consisted of twenty staff members. They based their innovation efforts on the ideas of computer hacking and open innovation. They proudly declared their approach to introducing new ways of working as ‘hacking bureaucracy’. A third ministry had hired an academic expert in business strategy and business innovation. This person was in charge of developing and implementing innovation programmes the ministry would then roll out in public. Unlike his colleagues in the other agencies, he had been given neither a mandate nor a team to support his efforts. He mostly worked with external partners and universities.

The economic argument for design in this context is different from the one John Heskett pursued. It is not about business and customers, it is about people and their government. It is not about growing the Gross Domestic Product but about providing essential government services to people. The design task is to develop new policies and services that do more, or at least the same, with less for governments. Design thinking and design methods are entering into the public sector to rethink current approaches and to generate arguments for new ones. The fundamental economic principles John laid out for design still apply. Design researchers and those involved in hands-on design projects have to pay attention to the bottom line regardless of which organization they work with. They also have to be able to explain to decision-makers why a human-centred approach to services aids their organization – the same way one has to put forth an argument to a business manager.

The presence of lone innovators in government alerts us to John’s observations about designers in business and the influence of ‘neoclassical thinking’ inside the organization. One of the reasons innovation in government is more difficult to achieve is that it must involve the organization itself in any change process. Services are at the heart of government agencies and any change to any service will ripple through the organizational system. Transforming existing situations into preferred ones for some, say citizens, requires concern for transforming an existing situation into a preferred one for those working within the organization.

It is difficult to understate the role of John Heskett in design when one works in an environment that is dominated by economists and legal experts. I continue to revisit his writings on the different economic theories, sometimes as to freshen up my thinking, sometimes to find a new anchor into my own work. I am aware that my own work and that of the people in these innovation teams obliges me to come to terms with economic questions. Design choices are choices about employing, allocating and using resources to achieve a desired outcome. This brings to mind a particular moment during a seminar I gave to policy planners in a Prime Minister’s Office two years ago. The topic was participation in government and I was invited to provide an interaction design perspective on the issue.

I used the pictures of two different walking aids for people and asked them to imagine these two objects as placeholders for two different policies. My point was that both walking aids sought to address the same problem: to provide mobility to people. The first walking aid was a bare metal construction in metallic grey. It had no wheels, so the person had to lift it and set it down as he or she walked. It was the simplest version of a walking aid that used only the minimum of materials. The second walking aid was painted red, had big wheels to master different surfaces, was equipped with hand brakes and sported a seat for resting and a basket for shopping.

When I asked the group which one they would take out to the park, they all agreed it would be the red one. ‘But,’ interjected the head of the policy unit, ‘it is probably a matter of cost. The paint on the red one is probably making it more expensive.’ Indeed, I responded, the acquisition cost for the preppy walking aid was certainly higher, though mass production and economies of scale would bring down that cost. However, I continued, while the acquisition cost for the simple version was cheaper at the moment, the cost produced by that minimum model over time was significantly greater: A senior person who can get to the park with his or her walking aid, to the shopping mall and to the community centre exercises, volunteers and spends her pension money in cafes and shops. In contrast, a walking aid that ties a senior to his house or apartment is more likely to lead to depression, loss of muscle tissue that leads to falls, and to deny him or her the opportunity to participate as a volunteer or to spend money in cafes and shops. The cost for health care alone to treat accidents and depression is immense. If we add to this a voluntary contribution, for example, to oversee homework for young students and the money he or she cannot freely spend in local businesses, money adds up quickly. Participation in society all of a sudden looks like an economic problem and reveals the real cost of a walking aid that, while cheap, denies people the chance to participate in society.

Understanding economic perspectives remains essential to articulate the value of design. The critical engagement with economic ideas allows designers to reveal some of these ideas as remnants of a different age and time. Classic economic theory concerned with comparison and evaluation, for example, works on the basis of ‘ceteris paribus’ or ‘all else being equal’. It is a demand that can only be fulfilled when we are dealing with a machine over which we have full control or when we can conduct an experiment in a controlled environment. But every organization, public or private, presents its own entity, involves different people and groups, concerns different laws and structures and has access to different resources. In short, there exists no ‘all else being equal’. This is certainly true for the ministries I have visited.

It is therefore difficult to apply economies of scale to the public sector. Yet, we often meet people who insist on the scalability of a public sector innovation project. Scaling, too, has its roots in the mechanical world of manufacturing and mass production. It is based on the idea that if we get the first product right, we can save the work on further research and development on the products that follow. It is an approach that has time and time again failed in the public sector. It is an approach that has not led to the efficiencies that people sought because those involved in the original development of, say, a social programme, design their solution tailored to their circumstances, addressing the needs of the people they are working with. Yet, these circumstances are rarely if ever identical to those of other agencies. Certainly, this was affirmed during my visit to the Brazilian ministries.

The fact that we can scrutinize and critique common economic theories for their impact on design is one of the great achievements of John Heskett. His notion that design has to make a contribution to be of value has been accepted across the different design disciplines. In the search for the precise value of design, researchers pursue different avenues. Co-design expert Elizabeth Sanders (2014), for example, detects the value of design on three different levels: the monetary level, the use or experience level and the societal level. ‘In each of these levels, co-design pursues different objectives, requires different mindsets, involves different people, deliverables and time frames.’<sup>11</sup>

Sanders might as well describe the different stages in the policy cycle: policy-making, policy implementation and service delivery. Design in the public sector must create value on each of these three levels as well as across these levels. To overcome traditional fragmentation and linear processes, governments on national, regional and local levels have set up public innovation labs.<sup>12</sup> This points to a fourth level for how design adds economic value: by integrating public services with public organizations and policies around the human experience.

A new economic theory based on behavioural insights from people has begun to challenge the classic notion of homo oeconomicus, where people are always acting in their rational interest. The emerging field of behavioural economics is making inroads in governments and presents new relationships with design. John would have enjoyed this development and helped us make sense for both design and economics. In his absence, this will be our task.

# Notes on editing the manuscript Design and the Creation of Value

Clive Dilnot

As implied in the introduction, the nature of the ms. ‘Design and the Creation of Value’ is more complex than it might first appear. The seminar emerged over many years of Heskett’s teaching, first in the Institute of Design at Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) in Chicago and then in Hong Kong, in the School of Design at Hong Kong Polytechnic University. The essence of the text in its final form is evident in the version he developed for the first of the series of seminars that he gave in Hong Kong beginning in 2004. This remained the basis of the final version we have, dated 2009.

However, things are not quite so simple, and in two directions. First, between 2004 and 2009, Heskett considered several times turning the seminar into a book and indeed worked up the preface and introduction and most of Chapters 1–6 as a quasi-book ms. However, this process was never completed, nor, as far as I am aware, was the text ever sent to a publisher. As a publishable work, the text was therefore incomplete at the time of his death. In particular, Chapters 7–10 of the original ms. were clearly unrevised, there were elements of repetition, and significant references were missing. In short, the seminar was not as complete, as a text, as it first appeared.

Second, particularly between the late 1990s and early 2000s, Heskett was experimenting with other versions of the text. For example, there are an extensive series of notes, entitled ‘The Economic Value of Design,’ that he prepared for a conference on design in Chile sponsored by the Ministry of Economics in 1999; and there is an even longer working paper entitled ‘Economic Theory and Design’ from roughly the same date that covers comparable territory. It might be thought obvious that these papers should be published. However, given their subject matter, it is no surprise that large sections of these papers overlap with the ms. of ‘Design and the Creation of Value.’ Moreover, neither paper is complete as is. The later sections of both, as they stand, are fragmentary. Thus, although of specialist interest, they do not quite congeal into a developed argument. On the other hand, important sections of both papers considerably extend the material and augment the original seminar, especially in terms of the exploration of the relation of design and economics as it is explored in Chapters 7–9.

The relation of the material in these papers to ‘Design and the Creation of Value’, therefore, poses something of an editorial conundrum. The solution to the dilemma has been to consider the text of the seminar in two parts. On the one hand, in regard to the preface and Chapters 1–6 (and what is now Appendix 1: Chapter 7 in the original), I have sought to preserve as much as possible of Heskett’s original text as is. Here the interventions have been to clarify repetitions and complete referencing. There has been some small augmentation of the text, using the material from the papers discussed above, in Chapters 5 and 6. These are referenced in each chapter but in the main, the structure of Chapters 1–6 has been essentially preserved as it was in the original.

In detail, changes to the preface and Chapters 1–6 are as follows:

– Preface. Unchanged.

– Regarding Chapter 1. In the 2009 text, Heskett twice (chapters 1 and 8) uses the example of a toilet redesigned by the New York interior designer Jonathan Adler as an instance of design mis-conceived as a purely ‘creative’ activity. In this version, the extended material on Adler’s design and on the contrast between simple and complex models of design processes that was originally also in [the original] Chapter 8 is now concentrated in Chapter 1.

– Regarding Chapter 5 on New Growth theory, I have added some important notes taken from the paper ‘Economic Theory and Design’ on the economist Richard Nelson’s critique of some aspects of New Growth theory.

– Regarding Chapter 6, The National System. The change here is that material on the application of Frederick List’s theories to design previously in Chapter 8 has been moved into this chapter. This consolidates the material on List and the National System into a single location and the concrete references to applications of List’s theories regarding design provide a useful bridge to the second half of the seminar.

Beyond these interventions, no changes have been made in Part One except for the addition of a number of diagrams and figures drawn from the slide sets that Heskett used to augment his presentations of economic theory. The tone of the text remains exactly in the form Heskett left it in 2009.

I have been bolder, however, with changes to Chapters 7–10 of the original ms., and here in two ways.

– First, as was noted in the introduction, the section on Marx (originally Chapter 7) is cursory. It does not link Marx’s thought to design in any way and does not form part of the argument; nor is it referred to in the later chapters. As placed, it tended to break up the logic of the argument Heskett was making. I have presented it here, therefore, as an appendix and renumbered the following chapters.

– Second, I have augmented the three remaining chapters of Part Two (7–9 in this version) with material drawn from the two working papers referred to above. This has enabled a much fuller presentation of the arguments. The major additions are footnoted in the respective chapters. They contribute material that cannot be found in the original seminar but which directly relates to the arguments Heskett is making. Apart from a few linking sentences and short paragraphs, all the material in the extended chapters is Heskett’s. The diagrams in Chapter 9 are as in the original.

My decision to augment these chapters has been aided by the fact that I published the original versions of what are now Chapters 7–8 (‘Design from the Standpoint of Economics/Economics from the Standpoint of Design’) under this title in the journal Design Issues in 2015 (see vol. 31, #3, Summer 2015, pp. 92–104). The same versions of these chapters also appear in The John

Heskett Reader: Design, History, Economics (London: Bloomsbury, 2016), pp. 42–56.

The book adds one unpublished paper by Heskett that bears directly on the question of value. ‘Value and Values in Design’ is an undated incomplete working paper, probably authored around 2000. It augments both the final part of Chapter 8 and the major concluding arguments of Chapter 9. In itself, it points to the wider discussion of ‘value’ that is both explicit and implicit within the seminar.

Regarding endnotes and footnotes: Heskett’s references have been completed. A few endnotes indicate editorial additions. The endnotes are also augmented by ‘editorial footnotes’ introduced by the editors. Heskett had included one-line biographies of some of the economists he discussed. I have extended these and also provided some further commentary at certain points. Finally, at the end of most of the early chapters, Heskett had indicated one or perhaps two readings. I have extended the reading lists though they are by no means comprehensive. Again, however, this is by no means a fully annotated text.

Acknowledgements. In revising Design and the Creation of Value for publication, I have benefitted enormously from help and assistance from three people in particular: in the initial stages, from exchanges with Suzan Boztepe. In regard to economics; from exchanges with Cameron Weber who carefully read and helped reference the economics chapters. Finally, as the ms. was being completed, John Heskett’s diagrams were reworked for publication by Christine Tsin, from Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Christine served as John’s assistant in the five years he was teaching there, was closely involved in the presentation of the seminar and was the original creator of the slides Heskett used in the presentations of the seminar. I am extremely grateful for her help. Sabine Junginger and Cameron Weber have been generous in spending time drafting significant introductions to aspects of Heskett’s work. These deepen, considerably, the contextual understanding of what Heskett achieved in the seminar. The project would not have occurred without the critical support of my editor at Bloomsbury, Rebecca Barden. The vital help of two other persons was also necessary: Victor Lo, whose generous backing for the project was crucial to enabling the time needed to research and detail the issues that arise in projects of this kind; and Pamela Heskett, John’s widow, without whom the project would have been impossible.

Design and the Creation of Value