institutional support for education, science, and the free dissemination of ideas.<sup>41</sup>

Romer’s emphasis on the role of government is unlikely to gain much support in the current political climate of the United States, but it does represent a very considerable modification of free-market ideas in their pure form. Again, however, a notable emphasis in this extended passage is upon ideas taken up by producers that lead to profits. Any consideration of how this might be achieved by delivering better products and services to customers as a primary means of ensuring profitability is lacking.

## Readings

W. Brian Arthur (2014). Complexity or Economy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Peter Robinson (1995). ‘Paul Romer’, Forbes, 5 June 1995, Start Page: 66. An interview with Romer that gives a basic explanation of his ideas.

David Romer (2011). Advanced Macroeconomics, NY: McGraw-Hill

Paul Romer (1992). ‘Two Strategies for Economic Development and Reform: Using Ideas and Producing Ideas’, World Bank Research Observer, Washington, DC.

Thomas A. Stewart (2010). Intellectual Capital: The New Wealth of Organizations, paperback edition (New York: Doubleday).

J. A. Schumpeter (1934). The Theory of Economic Development, many editions available on the internet.

Michael H. Zack (2009). Knowledge and Strategy, NY: Routledge.

With particular application to issues related to design and creative industries: Paul Stoneman (2010). Soft Innovation: Economics, Product Aesthetics and Creative Industries, NY: Oxford University Press.

On the debate over intellectual property rights (IPR) as necessary for creativity under a rule of law or as rent-seeking selfinterested market distortion, two current opposing views:

Michele Boldrin and David K. Levine (2008). Against Intellectual Monopoly, NY: Cambridge University Press.

Elizabeth Wurtzel (2014). Creatocracy: How the Constitution Invented Hollywood, Brooklyn: Thought Catalog Books.

# The National System

Almost seventy years after Adam Smith published The Wealth of Nations, a German economist, Friedrich List, (1789–1846), completed his own major work, The National System of Political Economy, which was published in stages between 1841 and 1844. For much of the intervening time, List has remained little known in the English-speaking world. Smith’s ideas have been and remain the mainspring of economic thought in the United States and Great Britain, but List’s concepts have also had remarkable influence in his native Germany and much of continental Europe, with their influence subsequently percolating through to Japan and East Asia.

List’s early career was as a civil servant in the independent German state of Würtemburg, but his advocacy of reforms brought him into conflict with what was an authoritarian royal government and led to his exile in the United States in 1825. There he edited a German language newspaper, became an American citizen and eventually returned to Germany in 1834. His affairs did not prosper, however, and in 1846 he committed suicide.<sup>1</sup>

His early experience of observing the effects of British industrialization and what he regarded as the negative impact of its growing competitive power on Germany was a powerful influence in the evolution of his ideas. The British lead in industrialization made it extremely difficult for German manufacturers to compete from a position of comparative technical backwardness and List regarded the advocacy of free trade by British politicians as a cynical ploy to ensure their country’s continued economic expansion and thus political dominance.

A convenient starting point in considering List’s ideas are the three major poles of thought he posited as emerging in European economic thinking. ‘I found the component parts of political economy to be – 1. Individual economy; 2. National economy; 3. Economy of mankind.’<sup>2</sup>

The last mentioned, ‘Economy of mankind,’ he identified primarily with the ideas of the French Physiocrats, such as Quesnay, who argued the case for universal free trade based on a belief that ‘the merchants of all nations formed one commercial republic’. In their enthusiasm for their cause, however, List asserted that the advocates of free trade had overstated their case. ‘The popular school has assumed as being actually in existence a state of things which has yet to come into existence.’<sup>3</sup> (List’s emphasis.) Free trade on a global basis was in List’s age still an aspiration, and even today it cannot be thought of in anything other than a partial sense.

At the opposite pole to the Physiocrats, and to be taken much more seriously because of its practical influence, was what List referred to as ‘Individual economy’. In essence, this meant the work of Adam Smith, who regarded individual decision-making as the crucial factor in determining how markets functioned and the division of labour as the organizational principle that determined levels of productivity and wealth.

List had two primary objections to Smith’s ideas. In The Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith had elaborated a concept of the economy essentially consisting of a nexus of individuals acting in their own self-interest, and constrained only by the need to restrict the possibility of harm to others. The advocacy of selfishness as the mainspring of economic motivation and activity raised serious questions as to whether such behaviour can be separated from other areas of human activity, for which other values and behaviour were regarded as the norm. This focus on the individual led Smith to construct a concept of the economy and society based on the principles of laissez-faire, with state intervention reduced to a minimum.

Second, List thought that Smith’s emphasis on the division of labour led him to neglect wider questions of the levels of skill and motivation that were also necessary if levels of productive power were to be fully understood. List pointed out that Smith had indeed acknowledged the question of productive power in the Introduction to The Wealth of Nations, as an important factor on which the condition of nations depends, but had neglected to follow this through due to his focus on division of labour.

By the great value that he attached to his idea of ‘division of labour’, he had evidently been misled into representing labour itself as the ‘fund’ of all the wealth of nations, although he himself clearly perceived and also stated that the productiveness of labour principally depends on the degree of skill and judgement with which the labour is performed. We ask, then, whether it can be deemed scientific reasoning if we assign as the cause of a phenomenon that which in itself is the result of a number of deeper lying causes.<sup>4</sup>

In contrast, by the mid-1820s, List began to elaborate a case for a third point of view: one that emphasized the role of the nation state as the social organization within which individuals functioned. Instead of the division of labour, he proposed the concept of ‘productive power’, an umbrella term for the ‘deeper lying causes’ that explain how a nation sustains its ability to produce, in the context of a broader social concept of how economic wealth was created. This in turn led him to advocate a concept of the nation state actively intervening to ensure that productive powers were consistently developed and maintained for the benefit of the nation as a whole.

Informing this point of view was a pragmatic belief that only the nation state exercised effective political and economic power, in a manner simply not applicable either to individuals or to the whole human race. ‘The object of the economy of this body,’ meaning the nation state, ‘is not only wealth as in individual and cosmopolitical economy, but power and wealth, because national wealth is increased and secured by national power, as national power is increased and secured by national wealth. Its leading principles are therefore not only economical, but political too.’<sup>5</sup>

There was also a dimension of moral objection in List’s critique of Smith’s ideas. In addition to the separation of economic from social behaviour, List objected to the manner in which the concept of the division of labour led to a debasement of work and its reduction to a material calculus. Instead he regarded skill and competence as essential in understanding economic achievement, and he anticipated on a national level the contemporary concept of intellectual capital to a remarkable degree. By 1827, he wrote of productive power essentially constituted by ‘the intellectual and social conditions of the individuals, which I call capital of mind’.<sup>6</sup> He elaborated this idea later:

The present state of the nations is the result of the accumulation of all discoveries, inventions, improvements, perfections, and exertions of all generations which have lived before us; they form the mental capital of the present human race, and every separate nation is productive only in the proportion in which it has known how to appropriate these attainments of former generations and to increase them by its own acquirements.<sup>7</sup>

This broader concept of productive powers led him to assert that the mental capital of a nation is generated not only by those who create value in exchange, but also by ‘the instructors of youths and of adults, virtuosos, musicians, physicians, judges, and administrators’ who are also responsible for creating productive powers,

some by enabling the future generation to become producers, others by furthering the morality and religious character of the present generation, a third by ennobling and raising the powers of the human mind, a fourth by preserving the productive powers of his patients, a fifth by rendering human rights and justice secure, a sixth by constituting and protecting public security, a seventh by his art and by the enjoyment which it occasions fitting men the better to produce values of exchange. In the doctrine of mere values, these producers of the productive powers can of course only be taken into consideration so far as their services are rewarded by values of exchange.<sup>8</sup>

In a commentary on List’s Outlines of American Political Economy, Michael Liebig suggests that List was strongly influenced by the ideas of an early Italian economist, Antonio Serra. The latter is best known for his Discourse on the Sources of the Wealth of Nations without Gold- and Silver-Mines, published in 1613, in which he distinguishes two categories of wealth creation, the accidenti propri and the accidenti communi. The former covers the natural conditions of geography and resources that favour a nation, which are a given. The latter, however, consists of crafts and manufactures, the education and culture of the population, and state policy, all of which can be increased and enhanced by human intent and action.

In addition, the influence on List of his period of residence in the United States as a political refugee cannot be ignored. He was strongly influenced by what he learned in the United States of ideas and efforts to protect the nascent industries of the young republic. The work of Alexander Hamilton was particularly important in this respect.

As early as 1783, Hamilton, fresh from duty in the War of Independence spent mainly as an aide to General Washington and now embarking on a career in government, argued against free trade and advocated that the new United States should regulate imports, so that ‘injurious branches of commerce might be discouraged, favourable branches encouraged, [and] useful products and manufactures promoted’.<sup>9</sup>

Later, in a Report on Manufactures commissioned by the U.S. Congress and submitted in December, 1791, Hamilton, who by this time held the post of Secretary of the Treasury in President Washington’s administration, again recommended the promotion of manufacturing in the United States, but went into much greater detail with a range of proposals. He justified these by asserting that the United States ‘cannot exchange with Europe on equal terms; and the want of reciprocity would render them the victim of a system which should induce them to confine their views to Agriculture and refrain from Manufactures’, Government encouragement of manufacturing was therefore intended to provide protection until American industry could compete on a basis of equality. Among the measures he recommended were policies for protective duties and prohibitions on rival imports, exemption of domestic manufactures from duties, and encouragement of ‘new inventions … particularly those, which relate to machinery’.

Despite his advocacy of government intervention, Hamilton remained generally in favour of free trade but was also pragmatic enough to acknowledge that economic power was rarely founded in idealistic expectations.

List supported such ideas, arguing that each nation should seek to develop its productive powers in ways appropriate to its specific circumstances.

American national economy, according to the different conditions of the nations, is quite different from English national economy. English national economy has for its object to manufacture for the whole world, to monopolize all manufacturing power, even at the expense of the lives of the citizens, to keep the world and especially her colonies in a state of infancy and vassalage by political management as well as by the superiority of her capital, her skill and her navy. American economy has for its object … to supply its own wants, by its own materials and its own industry – to attract foreign populations, foreign capital and skill – to increase its power and its means of defence, in order to secure the independence and the future growth of the nation. It has for its object lastly to be free and independent and powerful, and to let everyone else enjoy freedom, power and wealth as he pleases.<sup>10</sup>

List realized with great clarity that the changes being wrought by industrialization meant that material resources, the capital of nature, were increasingly of less importance than the capital of mind in transforming those resources through invention. He saw this as a double-edged sword, capable of decimating existing industry if allowed to proliferate unchecked, but also of enhancing national productive power if carefully adapted by means of a protective national policy.

A single new invention made in a foreign country, and not imitated immediately, because yet kept secret, would destroy, in a free country, a whole branch of the manufacturing industry in a short time, whilst a protective system would preserve it until the secrecy is revealed, and our productive power increased by it. … By securing the home market to home manufacturers, not only the manufacturing power for the supply of our wants is for all times secured against foreign changes and events, but an ascendancy is thereby given to our manufacturing powers in competition with others, who do not enjoy this advantage in their own country.<sup>11</sup>

Such protection could mean sacrificing some degree of material prosperity in the present in order to ensure a greater degree of security and prosperity in the future:

It is true that protective duties at first increase the price of manufactured goods; but it is just as true … that in the course of time, by the nation being enabled to build up a completely developed manufacturing power of its own, those goods are produced more cheaply at home than the price at which they can be imported from foreign parts. If, therefore, a sacrifice of value is caused by protective duties, it is made good by the gain of a power of production, which not only secures to the nation an infinitely greater amount of material goods, but also industrial independence in time of war.<sup>12</sup>

Above all, List argued that, in principle, an economy based on division of labour must also be socially divisive. In contrast, the concept of a national economy encompassed not only a division of commercial functions between individuals but also the union of powers in a common cause. In List’s vision of what an industrialized country could achieve, industry, society and culture were therefore indissolubly linked. If not only protected but actively promoted by national policies, a beneficent cycle of improvement could lead to a constant enhancement of the achievements and potential of a country:

In the manufacturing State the industry of the masses is enlightened by science, and the sciences and arts are supported by the industry of the masses. There scarcely exists a manufacturing business which has not relations to physics, mechanics, chemistry, mathematics, or to the art of design, etc. No progress, no new discoveries and inventions, can be made in these sciences by which a hundred industries and processes could not be improved or altered.<sup>13</sup>

Unlike Marx, List did not advocate the replacement of capitalist society. He regarded competition within an economy as a vital necessity for its effective functioning, but argued that the industries of some countries needed protection until they could compete internationally on an equal footing. In short, he was suggesting an alternative way in which capitalism could function.

Although there was little recognition of List’s ideas in his lifetime, their later influence in his home country was enormous. Echoes of his ideas are also clearly discernible in the dramatic rise to economic power of Japan and the East Asian economies. From the perspective of design, the importance of his concepts can be immediately seen.<sup>14</sup> As soon as the possibility of change is admitted into an economic model – as it is in List, unlike in Neoclassical theory – it becomes much easier to relate design to economic theories. As the quote above indicates, List’s concepts of the role of state policy in promoting productive powers specifically acknowledges ‘the art of design’ as one of the factors capable of profound influence in improving manufacturing industry.

In fact the continuity of this idea in Germany was apparent on several levels by the early years of the twentieth century, following its unification in 1871 and its rapid industrialization. In terms of policy, the involvement of the German Imperial Government in the applied arts had numerous facets. It provided, for example, a ‘Standing Exhibition Commission for German Industry’ under the Ministry of the Interior, which included representatives from the Foreign Ministry, the Prussian Ministries of Commerce and Education, and other interested parties. This was responsible for the presentation of official national exhibits at major international exhibitions. Usually, a state official was appointed as commissioner responsible for an exhibition, and direct government funding was provided. Subsidies were also available for exhibitions where a direct state involvement was inappropriate. With Germany’s emergence as a major political and industrial power, such events were given high priority in the first decade of the century, as a means of impressing the world outside with the nation’s strength and achievement.<sup>15</sup>

In addition to exhibition organization and promotion, commercial attachés, an English electrical journal noted in 1907, were being appointed to German consulates: ‘It is the duty of these commercial attaches to increase Germany’s foreign trade, and these experts of trade and commerce are always in direct communication with all the leading manufacturing and exporting houses of the German Empire, and make frequent trips to Germany for the purpose of personal conference with them.’<sup>16</sup>

Another initiative of the Reich government was to appoint Hermann Muthesius, an architect in the employ of the Prussian government, to the post of cultural attaché at the German Embassy in London – apparently at the suggestion of Kaiser Wilhem II. Across the 1890s, Muthesius reported regularly and wrote widely on developments in British architecture and design.<sup>17</sup> Following his London appointment, he returned to be placed in charge of all applied art education in Prussia and appointed leading reformers to head the major schools within his remit. A constant theme in Muthesius’ lectures and essays was the close linkage of cultural, social and economic concerns in terms very close to those used by List.

Another prominent figure in elaborating List’s ideas was a liberal politician, Friedrich Naumann, who founded a journal Die Hilfe, in 1894, in which he frequently wrote about the applied arts. Most notably, in 1904, he published an important article, ‘Art in the Age of the Machine’, which called for industrial methods of production to be used to create new forms expressing the spirit of the time, and the need to positively harness the potential of mechanization.

Quality work and good form were therefore advocated by Naumann as indispensable elements of achieving social unity domestically and commercial competitiveness internationally. Establishing such standards meant that appreciation of quality had to be encouraged in the home market, an aim that could hardly be achieved by oppressing workers, paying them low wages and housing them inadequately. Good wages and working conditions were therefore a necessary precondition. In a book, Neudeutsche Wirtschaftspolitik, (New German Economic Policy) published in 1907, Naumann elaborated these ideas. In reviewing the book, Anton Jaumann observed that Germany’s competitive position was characterized by possession of few natural resources and dependence on imports of raw materials that had to be paid for by manufactured exports. How could it then survive the intense levels of international competition? Naumann’s answer was clear:

We must bring goods to the market that only we can manufacture. We cannot in the long run compete in cheap mass-production. Only quality is our deliverance. If we are able to deliver such excellent goods that can be imitated by no other people in the world and if these goods are so excellent that everyone wishes to buy them, then we have a winning hand.<sup>18</sup>

Nothing, concluded Naumann, injured the commercial reputation of a nation as much as the label ‘cheap and nasty’.

Naumann was also involved in the foundation of an association in 1907 to promote design, the Deutscher Werkbund. At its founding meeting in Munich in October, 1907, Fritz Schumacher, a leading architect and designer, gave the opening address and posed the question: Why was a new organization necessary? His answer was essentially a restatement of List’s ideas as reformulated by Naumann. Art, he said, was not only an aesthetic, but also a moral power, but both were combined in the most important of powers: economic power. The best creative and commercial spirits of the age should therefore unite to reestablish a harmonious culture. Once again, the unity of national cultural attainment and commercial success in international markets was strongly asserted.

The importance and continuity of the ideas originating with List require a volume of their own to give an adequate account. It can be argued, however, that the productive powers of Germany, as understood by List, have been an innate factor in enabling Germany to overcome the chain of