particularly New Growth theory’s inclusion of technology as a core factor in understanding how business actually functions, also have intriguing possibilities. Of especial value is the argument that technological knowledge, both coded and tacit, has in-built value from its capacity to derive innovative ideas from practice.

Nathan Rosenberg’s argument (which will also be referred to in more detail in the next chapter) that for ‘technological improvement to exercise a significant social impact, it must ordinarily fulfill additional criteria. Specifically, it must combine design characteristics that will match closely with the needs and tastes of ultimate users, and it must accomplish these things subject to the basic economic constraint of minimising costs,’<sup>8</sup> is a direct instance of combining arguments around the contribution of technology to the creation of economic value with a grasp of how such developments have to be successful in also addressing users and their needs through the forms and characteristics of the product itself.

A similar point arose with Douglas North’s interesting descriptions of the complexity of the values involved in the ‘value’ of a product:

We get utility from the diverse attributes of a good or service or, in the case of the performance of an agent, from the multitude of separate activities that constitute performance. … When I buy an automobile, I get a particular color, acceleration, style, interior design, leg room, gasoline mileage – all valued attributes, even though it is only an automobile I buy. … The value of an exchange to the parties, then, is the value of the different attributes lumped into the good or service. … From the particulars in the foregoing illustrations we can generalize as follows: commodities, services, and the performance of agents have numerous attributes and their levels vary from one specimen or agent to another. The measurement of these levels is too costly to be comprehensive or fully accurate.<sup>9</sup>

If North’s ‘lumped together’ perhaps betrays the only way that an economist can describe the synthesis that the design of the product actually performs (orchestrating all the individual ‘valued attributes’ such that they contribute in terms of more than the sum of their parts to the overall value), nonetheless, the underlying comprehension is significant – as is his last line, which tells us exactly why it is so difficult to assess, quantifiably, the value design ‘adds’ or creates.

These comments and others open the door to a consideration of design also contributing to the processes of generating innovative ideas (although the balance between coded and tacit knowledge in design may tilt to the latter). Innovative ideas, of course, are by no means the sole perquisite of designers and, indeed, can originate from a broad constituency. Whatever the source, however, all will need translating into tangible form or definable process, and it is this translation from concept to specificity in terms acceptable to users that is the particular skill and contribution of design.

## 2 How economics positions design

If the first set of implications of economics for design is in terms of what design can learn from economic theory regarding its possible roles within the economy, the second group of insights is about how economics positions design. To summarize the varied possibilities inherent in current

trends in economic thinking, three clear areas of concern for designers in the context of production can be stipulated:

1 Given the crucial role assigned to technology in New Growth theory, an ability to understand technological opportunity and act upon it is required.

2 Their work must be capable, through innovation, of contributing to creating new economic value.

3 They must function within institutional structures of various kinds that enable and constrain their endeavours.

## 1 Re: Technology<sup>10</sup>

Concepts of designers that are only concerned with superficial visual form completely underestimate the degree to which a working understanding of technology, as a minimum, is necessary to function as a designer. Without the ability at least to have dialogue with, and work in close relationship to, technological specialists, designers will be necessarily confined to the trivialities of what is often called ‘felt-pen design’. To adequately understand technological opportunity therefore requires technological competence. Design on this level is capable of being involved with the total product concept, not just visual appearance as a last-minute additive. Conceived this way, designers work as equal partners with other major corporate functions, participating in fundamental decision-making. They have an ability to originate product concepts that deliver genuine improvement over what exists in a market and develop them technically in detail, in terms of materials and manufacturing procedures. The issue of visual appearance to communicate product uniqueness thus becomes an integral concern of the development process and not some arbitrary add-on.

The corollary of this possibility concerns quantification. From the point of view of designers attitudes to economics, there is mistrust of the dominance of numerical calculation and financial management in corporate administration, something perceived as alien to how design functions. Setting aside the irrational aspects of what is indeed frequently an exaggerated, defensive reaction, and the deficiencies of some designers in clearly articulating their ideas, there is nevertheless substance in such perceptions. To a large extent, it is because tacit knowledge is such an important element in design practice. Competence in the skills of design, as in many other practical disciplines, grows from constant experiment on the basis of trial and error, from which cumulative experience becomes in-built and not easily rationalized. The problem is compounded, because if design is based in large part on tacit knowledge and cannot be explained by theories of rational decision-making, neither can it therefore be easily summarized in quantitative terms. If the management of any firm does not have an understanding of, and sympathy towards, the particular nature and virtues of tacit knowledge, it will inevitably be easy to make designers appear incompetent by demanding conformity to practices that are alien to design. Under such circumstances it is not surprising that design is often not taken seriously.

Advocating a greater understanding of tacit knowledge on the part of management should not, of course, absolve designers from any consideration of the extent to which rational analysis and quantitative explanations may contribute to a better understanding of what their practice is and can achieve in its context of practice. There is much to be done on this level. Particularly when tackling large-scale, complex problems, appropriate methodologies and techniques based on logical analysis and quantification are frequently a necessary platform for creative design work at

a high level.

## 2 Re: Innovation<sup>11</sup>

More important in the context of innovation and growth is the role of designers as originators, or contributors to the origins, of totally new products capable of significantly changing existing markets, or even of creating new ones, and therefore of generating new economic value. If a vital role of design, as suggested here, is the translation of technological possibility into specific form, a close harmonization of design and technology is essential.

To deliver economic value, the role of design in innovation is not just the frequently attributed function of ‘adding value’, but much more significantly, of creating new value. In Neoclassical theory, the emphasis on price effectively restricts concepts of value to a scarcity of what is desired in the marketplace. It excludes any concept of quality or value in use, which is not an intrinsic quality of products and has little relation to price. It does, however, have a great deal to do with competitiveness and profitability, both of which ultimately hinge upon the capacity to satisfy human wants and needs. Within the confines of Neoclassical theory, therefore, design is at best confined to a role of adding value to pre-existent concepts, which can be a potentially useful function within a portfolio of any firm’s strategic options, albeit too frequently as a lowlevel activity. As already pointed out, however, it does not encompass the full potential of design.

More important in the context of innovation and growth is the role of designers as creators, or contributors to the creation, of totally new products that are capable of significantly changing existing markets, or even of creating new ones, and therefore of generating totally new economic value. This will be dealt with in more detail in Chapter 9.

## 3 Re: Institutional structures<sup>12</sup>

The third factor derived from economic theory, institutional structures (explored in Chapter 4), impinges upon design at every stage in innumerable ways, from the level of government to the immediate context in which designers work – even when design is not specifically considered as an element in their workings. For example, laws, such as those in the United States on product liability, or those in Germany on recycling packaging materials, profoundly affect design practice. Other factors include the general cultural climate of a society, the way design is manifested in public and private institutions, and whether and how design is taught at all levels of the educational system. At the level of the firm, any designer needs a Machiavellian instinct to survive the institutional hazards of corporate structures, turf wars, the prejudices of specialist disciplines (including their own) and the politics of working in teams. They need the patience of Job in explaining and demonstrating the value of their work to co-functionaries and clients. A knowledge of legal matters such as safety, environmental protection, product liability, racial discrimination and provision for disability is another dimension. They need to be able to navigate the complexities of distribution and retail systems. These are just a few of the demands made upon them.

Also on the level of institutional relationships are questions of education and research in design. There is a vital need for more educational initiatives to prepare designers for the complex decision-making processes of strategy and innovation, and to combine high-level creativity with technological competence. Much of design education, however, still remains at a comparatively low skill level with an emphasis on the development of ‘creative’ ability without any technical substance, economic relevance or institutional awareness. By contrast, the thrust of new economic theory would suggest that the evolution of new

approaches in education and methodology is of enormous importance for design. There is a vital need for designers to be more specifically prepared for the decision-making processes involved in complex innovation, combining high-level creativity based on technological competence with business awareness, and to be able to plan how to use a spectrum of design abilities with other disciplines.

There is also on all these levels a need for research into how design can and should function, to which the economist Richard Nelson’s comments on the various approaches to research, and in particular his distinction (noted above in Chapter 5) between formal and appreciative theory, and empirical practice, are highly relevant. The relationship between formal and appreciative theory can be seen as a vital link characterizing academic research, and that between appreciative theory and practice, a vital element in high-level professional practice.

Overall, it is clear that new economic theory offers many potentially fruitful channels of discussion in understanding design in the context of new technology, and how it can add and create value. Focusing only on this monovalent purpose, however, is to overlook the fact that design is capable of definition on other levels. Asserting the uniqueness of design, however, should not blind us to the fact that the relevance of current trends in economics for design, and not just technology, is profound. It is possible, in terms of New Growth theory, to conceive of design, in economic terms, as not just another exogenous variable, and a low-level one at that, but as an activity that is integral to converting technological opportunity into innovative reality.

## 3 But does design exceed economics?

Having begun to suggest the ways that economics offers insights into the work of design, it is also important to begin to see in what ways design in its economic role is inadequately understood by economics. This is the subject of Chapter 8 but can be opened here in two ways.

Specific attempts to explain design in an economic context have generally emphasized the level of its role in national economies. This focus on the macro-economic level has produced a number of useful generalities, but few significantly convincing arguments, about how design can be effectively applied in the specific context of practice in the business arena. Since the dominant arena of activity for designers is at the level of the firm, whether they are working as directly employed in-house designers or as external consultants, the major emphasis in discussing the role of design will need to be at the level of the firm, or the micro-economic level.<sup>13</sup> A consideration of the functions and processes at this level can reveal some contributions of design to innovation not generally considered in any economic theory and can also open further to the question of value creation.

Introducing the subject of values, however, moves discussion into another dimension beyond economics. This points up the obvious fact that design encompasses other concerns than those represented in economic theory. The latter is not primarily concerned with people, other than in very abstract masses, whereas design impinges directly upon the everyday experience of all human beings in every aspect of their existence. This difference is vital, and examining design in its own right is therefore necessary to help articulate how it might yield insights to complement or supplement economic theory, and perhaps more importantly, how it might significantly contribute to business practice.