In addition to utility, however, products also embody values. They have great potential for assuming meaning in people’s lives, in terms of symbolism. Their symbolic function can be a link to the culture of a society or group, in some iconic form, or may take on an intensely personal meaning. A sociological study of domestic culture in Chicago revealed

the enormous flexibility with which people can attach meanings to objects, and therefore derive meanings from them. Almost anything can be made to represent a set of meanings. It is not as if the physical characteristics of an object dictated the kind of significations it can convey, although these characteristics often lend themselves certain meanings in preference to others; nor do the symbolic conventions of the culture absolutely decree what meaning can or cannot be obtained from interaction with a particular object. At least potentially, each person can discover and cultivate a network of meanings out of the experiences of his or her own life.<sup>7</sup>

Symbols not only represent what is, but are also capable of mirroring dreams and aspirations of what might be. This is potentially a crucial aspect of design in enabling people to interpret innovation in terms relevant to their own lives.

This is something that will require further discussion in the next section.

## 3 The question of ‘value’

The notes above show that the context of use within which designers must function, requires a very different set of requirements and constraints from those of production.

– In the context of production, the dominant value is profitability, expressed in quantitative terms.

– In contrast, in the context of use, the main emphasis is on values, in terms of satisfaction expressed in qualitative terms, for example, in regard to the fundamental importance of utility, which in design terms relates to the capability provided for users by a design or, in other words, what it enables them to do.

In addition, as we saw above, designs assume meaning and significance in people’s lives, which may stem from alignment with the beliefs and symbols currently prevalent in the outside world, or may be of private significance to particular individuals.

This distinction between value and values and their relative importance is the cause of enormous confusion in businesses and can frequently be a source of failure.<sup>8</sup> Value is primarily defined in monetary terms. Money is both a measurement of value in markets and a store of value, or wealth. In some parts of the world, the primary expression of value for a firm is its share price and shareholders can often be considered its primary customers. A focus on monetary value, in terms of costs, prices, profits and capital, is a fundamental and unavoidable means of measurement in considering any aspect of business activity, design included. The point, however, is that solely focusing on financial measures or share price can ignore the means by which they are achieved and defined – or how and why they are established, enlarged and maintained. The argument here is that profitability cannot be understood without examination of these deeper causes, which inevitably involves a consideration of values in a wider sense than the numerical alone.

The problem here is that even in ‘advanced’ economic theory – for example, Richard Nelson’s tripartite division of formal research, appreciative research and practice, which was valuable in opening up alternative channels of thought and investigation of technology and design, more closely related to the realities of practice – the concept of value advanced does not substantially move beyond the single dimension of economic value. This is in marked contrast to other thinkers who have similarly understood the need for a dimension of thought capable of reflecting upon practice and developing proposals for change and improvement.

Concepts of value can be traced back at least as far as Aristotle, who regarded theory as the search for the ‘good’, which meant universal, eternal principles. In contrast, practice was an activity producing necessary things, but which, because it was subordinate to the desires of others, was considered a form of slavery. Between the two extremes, however, Aristotle suggests a middle ground, which he terms ‘practical wisdom’, that deals with ‘matters susceptible of change’.<sup>9</sup> He stresses the necessity of both kinds of knowledge and separates practical wisdom from practice in terms of a distinction between ‘doing’ and ‘making’.

The carpenter and the geometrician alike try to find the right angle, but they do it in different ways, the carpenter being content with such precision as satisfies the requirements of his job, the geometrician as a student of scientific truth seeking to discover the nature and attributes of the right angle.<sup>10</sup>

The difference is therefore between what is immediately required to complete a task, and reflection upon the more enduring principles involved in the task. Practical wisdom therefore entails experience of the practical, and reflection upon it, in search of what can potentially be fed back to effect change and improvement.

Aristotle’s distinction was also taken up by the American philosopher John Dewey, in his concept of empirical philosophy:

To distinguish in reflection the physical and to hold it in temporary detachment is to be set upon the road that conducts to tools and technologies, to construction of mechanisms, to the arts that ensue in the wake of the sciences. That these constructions make possible a better regulation of the affairs of primary experience is evident. Engineering and medicine, all the utilities that make for expansion of life, are the answer. There is better administration of old familiar things, and there is invention of new objects and satisfactions. Along with this added ability in regulation goes enriched meaning and value in things, clarification, increased depth and continuity – a result even more precious than is the added power of control.<sup>11</sup>

Interestingly, Dewey also put forward a concept of mental constructs as testable artefacts, that anticipated the emphasis on knowledge as a manifestation of technology in New Growth theory.

This means that both mental and material constructs are basically important in understanding the human capacity to design. As Hickman comments:

The major feature of Dewey’s technological landscape is his contention that what lies beyond theory and practice, and what allows them to have commerce with one another, is the production of testable artifacts, among which he includes both those things popularly called ‘mental’ and those popularly called ‘physical’. Dewey’s critique of technology is above all a critique of the production of novel and testable artifacts.<sup>12</sup>

In Dewey’s thought, the ultimate touchstone of this two-way traffic between reflection and practice is the possibility of the former enhancing the actuality of human experience:

What empirical method exacts of philosophy is two things: First, that refined methods and products be traced back to their origin in primary experience, in all its heterogeneity and fullness; so that the needs and problems out of which they arise and which they have to satisfy be acknowledged. Secondly, that the secondary methods and conclusions be brought back to the things of ordinary experience, in all their coarseness and crudity, for verification. 13

Aristotle assumed that change would be in accordance with values consonant with the ‘good’ that was the main emphasis in his concept of formal theory. Values were also a prominent feature of Dewey’s thought, and were also taken up as a constant thread in the work of the German philosopher, Hans-Georg Gadamer, who similarly drew on Aristotle’s ideas in viewing practical wisdom as a crucial competence in bridging the gulf between theory and practice. Gadamer emphasizes, in terms similar to Dewey, that practical wisdom ‘must arise from practice itself and, with all the typical generalizations that it brings to explicit consciousness, be related back to practice’.<sup>14</sup> In that sense, practical wisdom is a vital dimension of decision-making, which again raises the problem of the basis on which one takes decisions. Gadamer too is clear and insistent that values must be the basis of effective practical decision-making, that the decision-maker must be ‘aware of the normative viewpoints he follows and knows how to make them effective in the concrete decision demanded by the practical situation’.<sup>15</sup>

The question of values is also important on another level, which relates to Richard Nelson’s criticism of New Growth theory’s neglect of the importance of institutions. Basically, knowledge is generated, stored and applied not in a vacuum, but in specific institutional contexts, that are in themselves a manifestation of particular kinds of knowledge at any point in time. This has two broad levels of consequences: first, the interplay between the structure of an institution and the kinds of knowledge it permits, tolerates or encourages; and second, the degree to which an institution is capable of modification in order to realize in practice new knowledge or extensions of knowledge. This, in turn, will depend upon the values informing how the institution is organized and managed. It also brings into play the concept of culture.

Human beings are not just defined by their biological nature, which is indeed the basic platform for their capabilities and consciousness. They are also profoundly shaped in detail by the culture in which they grow, live and work. Culture is the accumulated experience of any social group, manifested in the beliefs, procedures and values held to be important. Although human beings across the planet are fundamentally biologically identical, the astonishing diversity of human society, belief and achievement is a reflection of human cultural creativity. Culture is not a static phenomenon, but is constantly being modified and changed as new experience and knowledge become part of the common stock. Indeed, the vitality and survival of a culture is precisely due to this capacity for growth and adaptation, rather than being a fixed and unchanging element.

Institutions and culture are therefore, like technology, all manifestations, albeit in different forms, of knowledge. All of them, moreover, do not exist in isolation, but interact on multiple levels and are interrelated by the values on which they are based. The values resulting from new knowledge and its implementation are not necessarily good, and, for example, technological innovation cannot be regarded unconditionally as beneficial to all involved.

For example, on a macro-economic level, in the processes collectively known as the Industrial Revolution in Britain between approximately 1770–1830, technological innovations, such as the Spinning Jenny, new weaving looms and steam engines, were the outcome of specific conditions in British society that encouraged invention and entrepreneurship on a scale not possible in other contemporary societies. In turn, new inventions introduced revolutionary concepts of not only mechanical technology, but also of the organization of technology in the form of factories, with innumerable concomitant changes in social and business organization.

The circumstances of many drawn into the new system were often miserable and dire. Initially, the consequences on every level of what resulted were justified in large measure by the economic concept of ‘laissez-faire’, a free-market concept of minimum regulation. Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx’s coworker, tells the story of meeting a Manchester businessman and telling him of his concern at the appalling social conditions visible in the city. ‘And yet, Sir’, the businessman replied after listening politely, ‘there is a good deal of money made here.’ So saying, he tipped his hat and bade Engels good day. It eventually required the efforts, on the basis of more humane values, of many individuals and organizations, up to the level of the state, to mitigate the terrible poverty, disease and exploitation that resulted from this myopic viewpoint.

More recent incidents stemming from the introduction of new technology such as the Three Mile Island incident and the Chernobyl disaster, both illustrating the dangers of nuclear power plants, the introduction of Thalidomide, and the Bhopal chemical plant disaster are all reminders that it was not the technology in itself that was the problem, but the values embodied in the organization, management and safety regulations relevant to the technology, and above all, the absence of vital human factors in understanding and evaluating technological performance.