# APPENDIX 1: SOCIALIST THEORY<sup>1</sup> / APPENDIX 2: VALUE AND VALUES IN DESIGN

> Section: appendix | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\auto\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --.md

# APPENDIX 1: SOCIALIST THEORY<sup>1</sup>

Although many figures would need to be described in any full account of the evolution and development of Socialist theory, there cannot be any question that Karl Marx (1818–83) towers over them all in his work and influence.

The significance of Marx is that he was the first economist to provide a substantial body of theory that gave focus to dissent with and misgivings about the mainstream of capitalist theory and practice. It is difficult to underestimate the effect of his ideas, even though some of their key features have become discredited.

He was born in Trier, in the German state of Prussia, of Jewish antecedents, although his father was forced to convert to Protestantism. Marx, however, became a convinced atheist. At university in Bonn and Berlin, he became influenced by the ideas of Hegel, who argued that a continuous process of transformation and development was characteristic of human development, which kept society in a condition of constant challenge and change.

Marx lived in a world in which the capitalist bourgeoisie in Europe and America were transforming in their own image on the basis of the theories of Adam Smith and his successors. There was inevitably much social suffering and exploitation in the early stages of industrialization. This led Marx to speculate on what the process of change should be in his own time, a path that increasingly led in the direction of socialism.

In 1841, he began work as a journalist in Köln (Cologne) and soon became the editor of the Rheinische Zeitung. The circulation of the paper rapidly grew, as Marx took up the grievances of local citizens against the government. His interest in and advocacy of socialism began to develop substantially, which brought him into frequent conflict with the Prussian censors. In 1843, the paper was closed down. Now married, Marx left for Paris. There he frequently met with Friedrich Engels, the son of a German textile manufacturer, who was to be a close associate for the rest of his life.

In Paris, Marx studied avidly. A range of socialist forbears profoundly influenced his thought: from France, Fourier, Saint-Simon, Blanqui, Louis Blanc and Proudhon; from England, Robert Owen; from Germany, Ferdinand Lassalle and Ludwig Feuerbach. At this time, he also worked for a refugee German newspaper, which again aroused the attention of the Prussian censors. At their request, the French government expelled Marx in 1845 and he left for Brussels.

In 1848, he published The Communist Manifesto, a pamphlet for a socialist organization that later became the Communist League. Its main points proposed the following:

– Society was the history of class struggle. The bourgeoisie had overthrown aristocratic rule and in turn would be supplanted by the proletariat created by the Industrial Revolution.

– Revolution was justified to hasten this inevitable process.

– An end to private ownership and progressive income tax.

– Public ownership of major industrial and commercial institutions.

– Work by all.

– Free education.

It concludes with a famous rallying cry: ‘Let the ruling classes tremble at a communistic revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win. Workers of the world, unite!’

That same year, 1848, is widely known in Europe as the Year of Revolutions, which broke out in France, various German states and the Austrian Empire, among others. Marx returned to Cologne, but the failed revolution in Prussia meant he had to leave again. This time, in 1849, he went to London, where he remained for the rest of his life. Support was initially provided by Friedrich Engels, who managed the branch of the family business in Manchester. Later, an inheritance of Marx’s wife gave basic financial stability. He plunged into political work with workers’ organizations in London and discovered the great resource that dominated the rest of his life: the library of the British Museum. There he researched and wrote, in particular, the three volumes of Das Kapital, the first volume of which appeared in 1867. This and other works of his prolific life as a writer have had enormous impact on multiple levels. They have shaped the experience of societies that underwent revolution and the establishment of Communist systems, most notably Russia and China, that profoundly shaped the course of events in the twentieth century. Even in societies remaining basically capitalistic, Marx’s ideas on social provision often led to their being adopted as a bulwark against communism.

At the heart of his economic theories was the assertion that labour is the source of value, a proposition going back to Adam Smith. Under the capitalist system, Marx argued, workers are paid as little as possible and the value of their labour is appropriated by capitalists. The value of labour, in terms of what workers are paid, is therefore always less than what the worker produces.

The theory is problematic, being based only on a limited view of production costs. It does not explain why wages, prices and profits are actually as they are. It ignores rewards for enterprise, the factor of scarcity and the role of consumer demand in determining value in the market place. It is still, however, at the heart of many critiques of consumer society.

Marx also argued that the proletariat was created by the bourgeoisie, which concentrated productive power in a few hands. In turn, the contradictions of this system would lead to the proletariat seizing power. In fact, however, capitalism has gradually but continually broken down the class system by allowing a greater proportion of the population access to opportunities for economic and social improvement. In addition, capitalist systems have shown a capacity to reform on important levels provision of social insurance, health and unemployment protection, education and pensions, which has mitigated many insecurities of life.

Social relations, political and cultural beliefs and practices, are all elements of what Marx termed ‘the superstructure’ and are all created from and dependent on the nature of the economic base. This creates a paradox: the new communistic system could not emerge until the economic base had been transformed – which was the task of revolution. However, it is an oversimplification to believe that people’s consciousness is simply determined by economic circumstances, and there is evidence to suggest that ideas do not alter in conformity with economic change.

According to Marx, the collapse of capitalism was inevitable. Clearly, this has not yet taken place and, indeed, the transformation of the former Soviet Union, China and other socialist states to a capitalist economy would argue, instead, for the inevitable collapse of socialism. There remains, however, a residual degree of uncertainty within the consciousness of many people, a nervousness at the possibility of a deep economic crisis. If the current wave of material prosperity should for any reason subside, this might again become topical.

# APPENDIX 2: VALUE AND VALUES IN DESIGN

There is a widespread belief among designers, a cornerstone of their practice, that not only can design, add or create economic value through products and processes, but it can go further by also enhancing individual, social and cultural life in beneficial ways. This paper will explore the extent to which these beliefs are sustainable, and whether a relationship exists between ethical and economic effect, between values and value.

The belief that design can, or should, embody ethical values has deep roots.<sup>1</sup> One of its clearest threads is discernible in the history of the English Arts and Crafts movement. One of the most distinguished heirs of that tradition, the English furniture designer, Gordon Russell, who in 1944 became the first head of the newly founded Council for Industrial Design (CoID), later the Design Council, wrote of the way in which, during the first half of the twentieth century, mechanization was used in the British furniture industry:

The machine, which might well have been used to produce a decent job of work, was often used purely to obtain cheapness at any cost.

Can anyone imagine that such conditions offered a healthy seed bed in which good designs might grow? For good quality – quality of design, of material and of workmanship – is the outward and visible sign of good health. It is not something which can be assumed at short notice, like the sham styles so beloved by the furniture trade, but something by which our whole standard of civilization can be tested: either you believe that the physical background of life ought to be pleasant, seemly and satisfying or you think it doesn’t matter.<sup>2</sup>

The passage is infused with terms indicating a strong sense of values: ‘healthy’, ‘good’, ‘quality’, ‘sham’, ‘standard’, ‘seemly’, ‘satisfying’. Indeed, Russell consistently argued for the recognition of consistent standards in designing and its potential for influencing the social life of users. Of this work in attempting to improve awareness of design and its potential, he wrote:

It is sometimes said that there is no such thing as good or bad design, that it has no real measurable standards, that it is, in fact, just a matter of personal taste. But it is readily accepted that there is a standard of, say, honesty, or driving, or housing, so why not one of design?<sup>3</sup>

Similarly, a distinguished Swedish designer, Gregor Paulson, expressed a point of view that design had an important role in moulding social values when he was addressing the Royal Society of Arts in London in 1950. Paulson accepted that differing points of view existed between producer and consumer and pointed to a fundamental difference in concepts of value between producers and users that is potentially profoundly important, although he did not substantially explore it in his address.

Products are looked upon by the consumer from the viewpoint of value in use, whereas the producer and the retailer must think of them as articles of trade, as means of exchange which bring the revenue necessary to pay wages and other expenses. Of course, most producers believe that the things they manufacture have high value in use, i.e., are such as the consumers want.

The matter was further complicated, he argued, by designers who often advocated idealistic beliefs about the role of taste, as they defined it, in society. It was possible, however, that if all three parties worked in cooperation, a satisfactory solution could emerge.

Furniture can be designed through collaboration between the three parties concerned in the drama; the manufacturer (represented by the technician), the designer and the consumer. Furniture which is fit for its purpose, good in quality and reasonably low in price, and stimulates demand because of its higher values in use is the outcome. … Furniture which can be combined to suit the dwelling, the family, the purchasing power at a given moment, will be bought throughout a lifetime in small units, but repeatedly. Sweden is trying to put this theory into practice. The [design] ideologists of the middle way want better homes for the common people, not to manifest a given taste, but because, to them, better homes are the most important influence for a better pattern of life. They want a new structure of the family budget; more spent on and in the home, less in the street. Designers who work in that spirit are social workers. Their heart is with the consumer, but they are not counteracting the interests of the producer. They believe themselves to be furthering them.’<sup>4</sup>

Paulson too uses a wide range of terminology that indicates the values he considers important: ‘fit for its purpose’, ‘good in quality’, ‘higher values in use’, ‘better homes’. The concept of ‘good’ design in that sense has faded almost out of sight, along with the paternalistic idealism of its protagonists, but no similar explicit ideals have taken their place. Design has instead become widely subordinate to business imperatives, with cost criteria dominating in much the same terms that Russell criticized. While designers are often still exasperated by the reluctance of business clients to consider their products on any level but cost, it must also be acknowledged that, unlike Paulson, some designers too readily ignore the fact that profitability is necessarily the dominating criterion in the functioning of any business.

Clearly, if the two standpoints are to be an opportunity for fruitful cooperation rather than antagonistic division, a reconciliation needs to be outlined between the twin poles of value, defined in terms of the economic needs of producers, and values, defined in terms of what users derive from any product. There is an extensive literature on the economic concept of value, which is ultimately quantifiable in terms of profit. On the other hand, values, in terms relevant to users, are less well-understood. A starting point in exploring the latter is the body of theory that focuses on values.

An immediate problem is that the emphasis is very emphatically on the plural. There is no established and accepted body of theory that can serve as an overall, general introduction to the subject. Instead, one must come to terms with a spectrum of views on what constitutes values, and how they function on multiple levels. There is also a problem with the terminology, as the singular and plural forms, value and values, are fluid, the two often being used interchangeably. (Since, however, a similar situation exists in the study of design and what it means, this should not be seen as an impenetrable obstacle, although it does represent a challenge.<sup>5</sup>)

Two major variations of how values can be understood are described by Milton Rokeach.

The value concept has been employed in two distinctively different ways in human discourse.

We will often say that a person ‘has a value’ but also that an object ‘has value’.<sup>6</sup>

He goes on to suggest that the former – personal values – are of greatest use in social analysis, and differentiates between specific values and the system of which they are a part.

A value is an enduring belief that a specific mode of conduct or end-state of existence is personally or socially preferable to an opposite or converse mode of conduct or end-state of existence. A value system is an enduring organization of beliefs concerning preferable modes of conduct or end-states of existence along a continuum of relative importance.

Of interest is the emphasis on ‘enduring belief’, implying continuity over time and an unchanging quality in the belief system.

Beyond the fleeting mention quoted above, Rokeach passes over any further discussion of the value of objects. Yet, his mention implies that objects, an end result of designing, can have value assigned to them.

This raises questions about how the two variants relate to each other. Can the two definitions of value be congruent, or have the possibility of congruence at some levels? Is it possible, in other words, to establish a relationship between personal values as an aspect of value systems, and the values embodied in objects?

Despite the fact that personal values are usually communicated in an absolute manner, particularly when the value system in which they are embedded is based upon religious or ideological faith, there is no definition of them that can be irrefutably demonstrated in objective terms. Ultimately, they hinge upon patterns of belief that have social justification and sanction within a particular social and cultural context.

Values, in this sense, are a recognition of reciprocal social responsibilities. Their efficacy, as emphasized by Rokeach, will depend upon a substantial element of stability – ‘an enduring organization’ – and codification into an overall set of standards that have communal validity, or are socially acknowledged as an outcome of processes of acculturation. The major manifestations or reflections of such values are behavioural outcomes, which provide standards or guides for evaluation.

There are basically two different ways of how values can be evaluated. They can depend upon internal validation, what a person believes them to be; or external validation, which stems from the authority of social sources.

Values are relatively general and durable internal criteria for evaluation. As such, they differ from other concepts such as preferences (or attitudes) and norms. Like values, preferences (and attitudes) are internal; unlike them, preferences are labile rather than durable, and particular rather than general. Whereas norms are also evaluative, general, and durable, they are external to actors and – in contrast to values – require sanctioning for their efficacy.<sup>8</sup>

For Hechter also, personal beliefs about what constitutes value are linked to general criteria and, again, there is an emphasis on durability. This raises a fundamental conflict when considering the relationship of such values to design, which in its modern forms, is about choice and the possibility of change, not just in tangible outcomes, but also in human behaviour. On the other hand, preferences and attitudes that focus on particularities and can rapidly change are obviously relevant to a discussion of design, as is the existence of socially sanctioned standards, or norms.

Another useful distinction can be made between instrumental and terminal values, between desirable conduct and end-states of existence. The former, instrumental values, connoting conduct or action towards an intended end, can be further subdivided into moral values and competence values, the first being a means of evaluating codes of behaviour, the second relating more to levels of competence or efficiency. In texts setting out systems of existential belief, such as the Bible of Judaism or Christianity, or The Koran of Islam, an ideal congruence is advocated between the attainment of desired end-states and the instrumental means used for their realization; in other words, the ends are justified by the means used.

It is often widely assumed that such values are contingent upon, or are synonymous with, religious belief. This need not necessarily be the case, however, and indeed, in the multi-cultural societies that increasingly typify the early twenty-first century, there are strong arguments that it should not be so. Where in the past religion and state have been intertwined, the result has been exclusion of non-believers, and persecution and oppression to ensure conformity with the value system, as with the Spanish Inquisition. Similar effects are observable in modern states based upon the dominance of a particular religious belief, such as Iran under the government of the Ayatollah Khomeini and his successors and the Taliban regime in Afghanistan. There is a difficulty, of course, in that despite the claims of such belief systems to universal validity, when juxtaposed, as is frequently the case in modern societies, their codes of values can sometimes conflict in practice. To give a simple illustration, Muslims and Jews prohibit the consumption of pork but eat beef, while Hindus eschew beef but eat lamb. Sharp differences therefore exist, although this does not preclude overlapping elements of commonality – all the groups mentioned eat chicken. Ultimately, therefore, values must be considered relative in general, and contex dependent in specific terms. Where more than one belief system coexist in any society, the door is open to religious conflict, so tragically evident in our time, for example, in Northern Ireland and the former Yugoslavia.

The intermingling of peoples and beliefs that typifies countries based on immigration, such as the United States, Canada and Australia, and in recent decades, Western Europe, supports arguments for some form of secular values bridging all sections of society. The Declaration of Independence founding the United States of America asserted the right of all citizens to ‘Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.’ This and the separation of secular from religious freedoms in the U.S. Constitution offer some examples of how values can be embedded in a society’s way of life without denying religious freedoms.

There is no guarantee, however, that secular belief systems will not also be repressive. Political ideologies such as Communism, advocating the creation of utopian social systems, were profoundly important in shaping events in the twentieth century. Brutal political measures in pursuit of utopian goals were justified in terms of a reversal of value systems: ‘The end justifies the means.’ It is thus perfectly feasible to conceive of the attainment of ends relying on competence values that are detached from any moral dimension.

On another secular level, social groups such as military units, businesses or professional organizations play a very important role in framing competence values. Perhaps the most notable concept is that of esprit de corps, the bonds of discipline and commitment that unite a military unit in terms of enabling it to face, if necessary, death or injury in service to a common cause. The problem of considering such competence values detached from moral values was illustrated, however, in behaviour demonstrated in the World Trade Center attacks of 11 September 2001. The terrorist hijackers undoubtedly showed the highest levels of courage and commitment to their cause in facing certain death, but in the service of indiscriminate destruction. Equally high levels of courage and commitment were displayed by New York firemen in facing raging fires after the attacks, despite the evident dangers that did indeed cost the lives of over three hundred of them. They were seeking to preserve life. The difference is important.

In less dramatic terms, businesses may embody a very specific set of values that profoundly influences the behaviour and actions of everyone working for them. Equally, a profession, such as medicine or law, may define a body of ethical standards to which members are expected to conform, with withdrawal of a licence to practice being the ultimate sanction for transgressions. Some forms of practice, however, have become increasingly detached from attention to ethical values, due to higher degrees of division of labour and specialization of task. These can function on a technocratic basis, that is, exercising skills and competencies without any fundamental regard for the outcomes of their application.

Defining a set of professional ethics is generally directed to the preservation and maintenance of value systems.

Any code of values that is absolute and immutable could be a serious obstacle to the potential for change in any situation. When the Islamic fundamentalists of the Taliban in Afghanistan proclaim that Islam is a complete religious, political, social and economic system that is perfect, it positions itself in complete opposition to the processes of change that are integral to modernity. Similar fundamentalist tendencies are found in other major religions such as Christianity, Judaism and Hinduism, that also vehemently oppose modernity.

Although discussion so far has focused on religious belief, such ultimate ends can in fact take many forms; for instance, they can be material, physical, economic, moral, social, political, aesthetic, intellectual, professional, personal or sentimental in nature.<sup>9</sup> Within this broad spectrum, behaviour has already been cited as a major manifestation, but objects and artefacts can also be important, playing many roles. They may embody values in an iconic sense, as with the Christian cross, or represent a sense of identification, as with the American flag. They may be a source of offence when they express difference, as with the Taliban regime’s destruction of ancient Buddhist icons in Afghanistan. Or they may be utilitarian means to an end, as tools in enabling competence values, whether as a chisel to a carpenter or a computer to a statistician.

The intended outcomes of design processes affect these issues in an uneven manner. This is in part because design skills cover a very broad spectrum of practice, from rapid changes of fashion to longer-term, more enduring technological solutions, from designing a package, to designing an urban transportation system. Another important aspect is that designers rarely have the luxury of working for themselves alone; they generally work for producers of one kind or another, employers or clients in business or other organizational contexts, for example, government bodies. Understanding the values of producers and establishing a compatibility with their own is crucially important for designers, and tensions can occur in situations where the values designers feel are important are subordinated to those of producers.

Producers are concerned with generating tangible outcomes of one kind or another, products, services or systems that compete in markets and must generate a return on investment adequate to ensure the continuation of production. In much economic and business theory, the term ‘consumption’ is used to describe the moment of purchase of producers’ offerings. The medium of exchange, cash, is in itself a fundamental index of value, in terms of whether a ‘consumer’ is prepared to pay the required price for the product in return for whatever utility or meaning it delivers. The terms ‘consumption’ and ‘consumer’ are problematic, however, since they avoid any substantial consideration of the processes of use. An important distinction in use is the factor of time. When anyone buys a newspaper from a kiosk, or purchases a ticket for a single bus ride, we can assume that it is for immediate use. There is a large category of similar products that will generally be used in a very short time span. In contrast, however, when anyone purchases a more durable product, such as a washing-machine or automobile, he or she is purchasing the promise of use over a much longer time period. Ultimately, however, whatever the time span involved, people have to want the products for what they contribute to their lives. Newspapers need to contain relevant material and be legible, buses need to provide an adequate service within a systemic structure of stops and information that is clearly comprehensible. Henry Dreyfuss, one of the first generation of American professional industrial designers, gave felicitous expression to the need to recognize user needs in his autobiography:

For years in our office we have kept before us the concept that what we are working on is going to be ridden in, sat upon, looked at, talked into, activated, operated, or in some way used by people individually or en masse. If the point of contact between the product and the people becomes a point of friction, then the industrial designer has failed. If, on the other hand, people are made safer, more comfortable, more eager to purchase, more efficient-or just plain happierthe designer has succeeded.<sup>10</sup>

In the final analysis, judgements on any designed outcome, of any kind, must therefore be not on the values designers or producers believe it embodies, but on its relevance and meaning for users. This stress on the values of users is not an end in itself, but a necessary, implicit means to the desired ends of designers and producers for successful, profitable products. Gregor Paulsen was indeed right: we do need to reconcile the requirements of all parties involved.

