# 1 On neoclassical economics / 2 On growth theory / 3 On Veblen, and the financial crisis of 2007–8 / 4 On the bankruptcy of General Motors (GM), and its bailout during the great recession

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\auto\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --.md

## 1 On neoclassical economics

In standard fashion, Heskett shows, in Chapter 2, neoclassical supply and demand graphs, but criticizes the fact that neoclassical economics cannot explain how the suppliers and demanders enter the market in the first place. Mainstream economics assumes given and known and unchanging consumer preferences and also presumes that all products in a given market are the same and that all producers have the same production costs, technologies and knowledge (in other words, there are no ‘transactions costs’. (It is this assumption that is addressed by New Institutional Economics [NIE] as explored by Heskett in Chapter 4.) In neoclassical economics, firms price according to the cost of production (as opposed to more realistically pricing at what the market will bear) and the costs of production have decreasing returns to scale above a certain quantity of production.<sup>4</sup> The neoclassical model, therefore, can explain neither new and qualitatively better products under market competition nor economic growth over the long term. It is these weaknesses that Heskett addresses in the subsequent chapters.<sup>5</sup>

This brings up one of the major dualities in economic theory as developed in the twentieth century through to today, that of the use of mathematics in positivist economics. Along with the development of statistics in the 1930s came mathematical models to use these statistics as a basis for improving the economy. It is the use of these statistical aggregates in mathematical economics that has become mainstream economics today, as witnessed by both neoclassical economics and, later (as Heskett also notes, in Chapter 5), in New Growth theory.<sup>6</sup> Heskett points out in this chapter that Edward Chamberlin’s The Theory of Monopolistic Competition [1933] introduces differentiated products and addresses weaknesses in ‘perfect competition’, but Chamberlin’s ideas did not catch on with quantitatively oriented mainstream economists.

Product differentiation means that quantities of inputs and outputs cannot be aggregated and integrated into mathematical models (as can Keynesian models and New Growth Theory models). With this math-based approach comes the power and prestige of the guild, where the economist is a mechanic whose toolkit can fine-tune to economy and, therefore (at least in theory), improve people’s lives.<sup>7</sup> But the price paid for this, as Heskett shows by referring to ‘creative destruction’ and design as expanding markets through the creation of value, is the inability of this mainstream approach to truly engage with the dynamics of economic change. As Heskett discusses at length in Chapters 7 and 8, it is this unmeasurable quality of design’s value creation that provides institutional stumbling blocks towards integrating design as strategy in the modern – financially engineered – firm. We see this same ‘measurability problem’ in modern economics. Heskett bridges and synthesizes these gaps by orienting products towards the user and not on internal firm metrics of return.

## 2 On growth theory

John Heskett was writing about New Growth theory in the late 1990s and the early 2000s, the most recent citation for this chapter is 2003, and it is now early 2016. It might be thought that Heskett therefore missed some recent developments, but I would like to present a view of growth theory as an intellectual enterprise that illustrates how John Heskett’s use of the category ‘Growth Theory Plus’ is not overcome by events, and might indeed be helpful towards capturing an accurate picture of the field of growth theory today.

New Growth theory came into its own as a field in part as a reaction to Robert Solow’s 1957 paper in the Review of Economics and Statistics.<sup>8</sup> Solow examined economic growth in the United States from 1909 to 1949 by using a model whose inputs are quantities of capital stock, labour hours and ‘technical change’, where technical change is defined as ‘any kind of shift’ to productivity that is not explained by capital and labour inputs. Solow found that labour productivity in the US economy doubled over the period, but that only 12½ per cent of this productivity improvement was due to increased capital investment. The remaining 87½ per cent of productivity growth came from (ill-defined in economics) ‘technical change’. The paper starkly illustrated how static neoclassical models missed the increasing returns to scale needed to explain exponential historical levels of economic growth.

The unexplained increase in labour productivity (and the unexplained increase, by orthodox economics, of historical economic growth) has become known as ‘Solow’s residual’ – or, which Heskett refers to in the text, as ‘the measure of economists’ ignorance’. It is this ‘residual’ that economic growth theorists have been trying to explain by proxying for ‘technical change’ (increasing returns to scale) in their models, and as Heskett effectively notes, this methodological

trend continues through to today.

Solow’s model (his aggregated production function) uses technical change as an exogenous (i.e. external) variable, where technical change is measured (defined) by what is not explained by the endogenous variables capital and labour. New Growth Theory now treats ‘technical change’ as an endogenous (i.e. internal) variable – something that (as Heskett’s diagrams make clear) interacts with labour and capital to create economic value. (A factor that is now internalized in the mathematical economist’s model, not something unexplained by it). The endogenous growth theory research programme is a subset of, or an outgrowth from or an advance, in New Growth Theory.

Explaining technical change is what Paul Romer calls the ‘economics of ideas’. Romer highlights the importance of human capital formation for economic growth.<sup>9</sup> A key step in the development of growth theory is Kenneth Arrow’s concept of ‘learning by doing’.<sup>10</sup> Heskett does not directly discuss Arrow’s seminal work, but his stance on Romer’s theses on the importance of human capital, skills and knowledge is that these forms of human capital have to be made manifest as transferable knowledge in order to create value. The Austrian school of economics believes that it is the entrepreneur who creates economic value through risk taking and profit creation (value creation absent political rents). John Heskett also sees a role for the designer in this endogenous value creation and insists that design be incorporated in the very highest level of a firm’s strategic management. (In an unpublished paper on strategic design and design as value creation, Heskett uses the case of Donald Deskey [1894–1989] as a prototype of the industrial designer-entrepreneur, who engages within and between design communities, business communities and the public sphere for advocating the ability of design as practice to create value[s] in society.)

In the final chapter of Design and the Creation of Value, Heskett introduces his category of ‘Design Value Theory’. This category summates/synthesizes his interdisciplinary ideas about the role of the designer in a firm’s long-term strategic management and how the designer’s role in value creation relates to economic theory as captured in ‘Growth Theory Plus’. (Here Heskett may concede too much interpretative and predictive robustness to mathematical growth theory as the ending synthesis of economic thought, though we cannot fault Heskett for trying to engage the mainstream of the economics profession in this text, the purpose being to incorporate the designer within a business world whose MBAs are required to study orthodox economic thought.)

In the synthesis of economics leading to growth theory plus in Heskett’s text and diagrams (see #17 and especially #28), we find most importantly (at the least for the present writer) the following:

a the market orientation of neoclassical economics,

b the end-user-oriented product innovations and imperfect competition of Austrian economics,

c the transactions costs approach of NIE within the firm, especially the tacit knowledge within a firm’s strategy, production and management processes,

d the socially created demand found in old (or original) institutional economics and

e the acknowledgement of (perhaps unmeasurable) factors of production (imbedded knowledge, technology and institutions within society) that can lead to increasing returns to scale and as explored by growth theory.

What Heskett then does, and this is his real innovation, is that he embeds a continuous firm and consumer feedback loop derived from design-driven firm strategy into his growth theory plus model, giving us ‘Design Value Theory’ with economic theory as a base.<sup>11</sup> Heskett shows in this text that a firm’s profits derive from creating exchange value, but that the purpose of design is also to create use value, through originality and creativity and in continuous feedback with the users of a firm’s products and services, between a firm’s designs and its network of users. But it is precisely this creation of use value for the user (by tapping into user knowledge and lifestyle) that creates the possibility for exchange value, expanding markets and economic growth.

## 3 On Veblen, and the financial crisis of 2007–8

Thorstein Veblen (1857–1929) was one of the founders of American institutional economics and is best known for his concept of ‘conspicuous consumption’ developed in the Theory of the Leisure Class (1899), a beloved and eccentric work of economic sociology. Veblen is therefore credited with introducing consumption preferences that can be socially determined (as opposed to being exogenously formed – that is, unaccounted for – in neoclassical theories of demand). In Veblen, instead of Marx and Engels, where the working class overthrows the rich in revolution, we have the not-rich wanting to be seen as living like the rich through visible lifestyle consumption choices.

Design and the Creation of Value introduces Veblen’s ideas into discussions on demand creation (based on social structure in the field of institutional economics) and in relation to design as a force for value creation rather than waste.

For our purposes here, we can use Heskett’s writings about Veblen, both in the present text and in some lectures Heskett gave in Helsinki around 2005 to help explain the financial crisis of 2007–8.

Heskett focuses on two of Veblen’s memes: (1) the ‘instinct of workmanship’ and (2) the ‘pecuniary habit’. Instincts are normatively positive for the continuation and evolution of the species whereas habits are normatively negative and counterproductive. Veblen sees conspicuous consumption as frivolous and wasteful and therefore, of course, counterproductive towards industrial development. By contrast, workmanship is normatively positive because craft (practice) leads to refined industrial output.

The financial crisis of 2007–8 was due to ‘financialization’ of the economy, which is related to Veblen’s pecuniary habit, in this case by policy (here acting as an institution, which then becomes/forms a social norm) that encourages debt over ownership. The pecuniary habit (financial returns in the market) is normatively negative as this behaviour does not lead to real economic productivity – and today mostly only generates fees for financial counterparties creating more debt.

Heskett further describes the difference between Veblen’s concepts of ‘instinct’ and ‘tropismatic action’. Tropismatic action is an unthinking response to stimuli (in our case, policy incentives) whereas action based on instinct is derived through reason.

This distinction can also help explain the 2007–8 financial crisis. After the dot.com crash of 2001, the US central bank (Federal Reserve) had been encouraging low rates of interest for several years. Also, beginning in 2000, the US Federal Housing Authority and the Federal Reserve were encouraging half the mortgage loans in the United States to be 0 per cent downpayment mortgages, and especially in districts that were deemed underdeveloped (see the

Community Reinvestment Act and, relatedly, ‘red-lining’).<sup>12</sup> This incentivized unthinking investment in (unaffordable) housing was combined with and influenced by negative incentives for accurate bond-ratings due to regulatory capture (bonds were overrated so that more bonds were purchased than if they had been accurately rated). Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (the US government-backed mortgage agencies) were guaranteeing (poorly rated) mortgage-backed bonds (MBBs) at 100 per cent – and international banking standards (the Basel standards I, II and III) encouraged banks to hold these MBBs as reserves against which further lending could be made.

All of this combined by the time of the crash of 2007–8 so that there were inflated housing prices (cheaper money means more long-term investment, for example, mortgages and MBBs than if there had not been central bank interest rate manipulation) and the MBBs were more than double the value of the actual underlying mortgages (not least because MBBs are a worldwide phenomenon due to the Basel banking standards and the dominance of the US\$, and US Treasury debt, in the world economy).

What we saw in 2007–8 was that incentives for debt creation (including the ability to write off debt interest payments pre-tax on the US income tax code) help to create Veblen’s pecuniary habit to the detriment of workmanship (design is workmanship). We see these pecuniary habits take form as the central bank(s) keep near-zero rates of interest (for the US Fed from 2007 until late 2015) for unprecedented lengths of time. This ‘easy money’ is evident in the valuation of social media firms at billions of dollars in IPO capitalizations, many without actually making a profit. We also see this with the huge volume of mergers and acquisitions occurring concurrently with easy money and tax code incentives for debt creation.

It is not a failure to innovate that creates the financial crisis; there are lots of incentives to innovate in financial derivatives (the pecuniary), but as Heskett describes in the text (albeit as applied to design), there are less incentives to innovate in workmanship (real goods and services adding new value). The financialization of the economy (and the subsequent crises caused in part by central bank interest rate manipulations) is due to policy that encourages the pecuniary habit over the instinct of workmanship.

This policy-based social structure represents ill-shaped social values towards financialization and away from craft and quality.<sup>13</sup> In Heskett’s ‘Design Value Creation’ synthesis, he highlights that what institutional economics brings to the economic theory synthesis is transactional innovations and efficiencies; from here we find his critique that within firms, transactional relations can be pecuniary rather than user and quality-oriented – thus his appeal to business schools and business executives to change institutional habits towards value creation over the long-term rather than short-term (financial-only) profits.

## 4 On the bankruptcy of General Motors (GM), and its bailout during the great recession

John Heskett had taken an interest in the US automobile industry from the 1960s onward, as an example of the failure of industry to consistently adapt corporate strategies towards user-oriented design (as do, for example, Japanese motor companies), instead reiterating an ‘arrogant’ producer-oriented strategy in the United States.<sup>14</sup> Specifically, we find that GM provides a good case study for illustrating the thesis in Design and the Creation of Value, arguing for the necessity of design in high-level strategy and not just as a shallow afterthought towards product differentiation, a dichotomy of thought Heskett labels ‘design’ versus ‘styling’.

In our discussion above on Veblen, we find that whereas workmanship can create new value, the pecuniary instinct prioritizes financialization and paper profits for a self-interested management class over the creation of value for both the firm and the consumer design. Over time, as Veblen pointed out, this management class loses touch with the need to serve the wishes and needs of the end user (and, as we shall see, can then resort to rent-seeking to minimize the negative effects arising from this self-imposed lack of competiveness).<sup>15</sup>

Heskett describes how US business models may orient towards management-by-metrics and financial engineering (whereas design value-added regrettably is not easily quantifiable and can be relegated to the marketing department alone), which furthers the pecuniary over a useroriented design strategy (Heskett also attributes US industry arrogance to the dominant position in world markets obtained as a result of the Second World War). In our case, this means that US car firms lose market share to foreign competition, and therefore seek rents in the form of tariff and non-tariff trade barriers against more innovative and efficient foreign manufacturers. Under the guise of economic nationalism, this prioritizes domestic producers (some people) over domestic consumers. This is the reverse of the usual pattern in international trade treaties, whether WTO, bilateral or regional-multilateral.<sup>16</sup>

One factor at work here, however, is the force of time and place in influencing the deployment of assets. In Heskett’s chapter on Institutional Theory, we learn of Oliver E. Williamson’s ‘transaction cost economics’, though without an exploration of Williamson’s ‘asset specificity’. Like Ronald Coase, Williamson critiques, and improves upon, the neoclassical model of perfect competition. Asset specificity allows factors of production to be relative to a time and place and therefore not perfectly substitutable in an aggregated production function (as is assumed under most neoclassical and growth theory models).<sup>17</sup> This asset specificity of local context can explain why the US government used discretionary power to nationalize and restructure General Motors in 2009 as opposed to letting the markets and courts regulate GM’s bankruptcy.

In the US automobile industry, and especially in the case of GM, asset specificity includes interventions by the United Auto Workers, industry lobbyists and members of congress who support trade protection (automobile labour and industry groups are major donors to political campaigns and therefore get state-supported monopoly rents in return<sup>18</sup>). The GM nationalization is an ideal-type example of corporatist asset specificity, something we find as the necessary end result of GM’s uncompetitive producer-oriented practices – as compared to that of a consumer-oriented corporate design strategy that can maintain firm competitiveness in the long run. 19

The GM case study is also a fitting synthesis for many of the ideas contained in this book and as found in Heskett’s writings elsewhere.<sup>20</sup> The wealth of nations in the modern economy depends on a nation’s ability to focus on user design-oriented business development; this requires long-term commitments in education and research in order to integrate design in all levels of society. Firms, and especially smaller firms that represent the future, need to be able adapt to changing conditions in order to further brand durability and loyalty over the long term (to allow creative destruction rather than economic destruction). However, this does not necessarily mean that governments should pick ‘winners’.

How then can national governments handle the dramatic changes on multiple levels and technologies, of global markets, and business organization and that are currently causing major economic disruption and unemployment? The answer, I believe, is they cannot: government policy exercised through bureaucratic organizations is ill-equipped to understand and dynamically respond to change on any level. The world economy is at present so diverse and dynamic that attempts to control it through mercantilist-style policies will not only be futile but extremely damaging.<sup>21</sup>

