# 2 What, precisely, does the text offer? / 3 What does the work achieve? / Chapter 7: / 4 What are the limitations of the text? / 5 The intellectual force of Heskett’s text

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\auto\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --.md

## 2 What, precisely, does the text offer?

The version of the seminar on which this book is based is dated from 2009.

Heskett lays out the substantive principle of the organization of the seminar as follows:

In considering the economic role and value of design, two major aspects need to be discussed. Firstly, it is necessary to come to terms with the existing body of economic theory and practice and ask to what extent can it shed light on essential roles design can play in the context of business. Secondly, the way economic theory defines its field, and the tools and methods it uses, have come to constitute tightly defined forms of orthodoxy. Can design supplement or reinforce economic theory in clarifying and amplifying aspects of business in ways that at present are not commonly recognized? The question here is whether design theory and practice has the potential to add to, extend or provide linkages to economic theory. The organisation of this book is therefore broadly based on these two perspectives: one examining design from the standpoint of economic theory; the other examining economic theory and business practice through the prism of design.<sup>24</sup>

The only caveat to Heskett’s explanation is that in fact, as the title of the seminar suggests, there are actually three, and not two, areas of concern here. There is design, for the book is, overall, essentially about how design can be understood and misunderstood (it is first of all a contribution to the understanding of design). There is economics – for the core of the book is a historical presentation and critique of economic thought vis-à-vis design. But there is also the third element, value. Value means here largely, but by no means only, economic value (for ultimately it is the extension of value creation beyond the economic narrowly thought that is Heskett’s concern). But value is the crucial third term in the equation because it is the essential mediator between economics and design. It is the introduction of ‘value’ as a concept lying between design and economics (but belonging fully to neither) that allows the dialogue to begin.

Design and the Creation of Value is, therefore, essentially the exploration of the relations between these three moments. This exploration is in turn undertaken through the three major sections of the text.

1. The preface and first chapter (‘Design in Economic Life?’ – not, note, ‘Design and economic life’) ask some initial questions about the differences between conceiving of design as a ‘creative act’ and seeing it within a fuller context of economic activity – a contrast that Heskett establishes by playing off the differences between a decorator’s design for a toilet by the New York designer Jonathan Adler and the designs for sanitary ware for the Turkish company VitrA by the UK designer Ross Lovegrove. Although the example sounds trivial, the important distinction that Heskett begins to make here concerns the changed responsibilities of the designer once he or she wishes to move from a merely executant or operational to a strategic role: ‘Neither at the levels of management or of strategy, however, is it possible to yet say that it is commonplace for design to be integrated into the management structures of companies, nor has there yet been an articulation of the role of design at the levels of management and strategy that is convincing to the majority of senior managers.’<sup>25</sup>

2. In ‘Part One: Economic Theory and Design’, Heskett then turns directly to economics – to, in his words, ‘a consideration of major bodies of economic theory, how they condition understanding of design and can explain its contribution to creating value’.<sup>26</sup> Six bodies of theory are considered under this rubric<sup>27</sup>: Neoclassical economics; Austrian theory, Institutional theory, New Growth Theory, the ideas of List and the ‘National System’ and Socialist theory (Marx).<sup>28</sup> The presentations of these theories and models – aided by diagrams that usefully model the continuity and difference between these bodies of thought – are clear and concise. The text we have in these chapters is an attempt at artful balance of presenting models with maximum clarity without oversimplifying the case. The logic of presentation, however, is by no means simply chronological. Thus, for example, the ideas of List and the National System discussed in Chapter 6 largely predate the models discussed in the preceding chapters. The organizational principle is, rather, to begin with what is today the absolutely dominant model of economic activity: Neoclassical theory (Chapter 2). By then examining, successively, the theories of the Austrian economists, Institutional Theory, New Growth Theory and List and ‘The National System’, Heskett by degree shows the limitations of the Neoclasscial model, first in terms of how these alternate models understand value creation and then, increasingly, vis-à-vis comprehending the role of design. The focus in each chapter is on how these models explored in each deal with the relations of production, use and the creation of value (and in the case of List and the National System, of state policies that can enable and engender value creation). In this sequence of five chapters, Heskett rather cleverly shows how the various models discussed in each can be understood successively as making more complex the question of value creation: a process that implicitly (if almost never explicitly)<sup>29</sup> gradually makes room for design and then (in the final models) shows design’s necessary structural place in the creation of value. (See the final diagram in the book, Figure 9.11 – page [178]).

At the end of Part One, Chapter 6, on List and the National System and the application of List’s ideas, first in Germany in the late nineteenth century and then in Asia, provides the transition from the exploration of economic theory proper to the discussion of the interplay of design, economics and value.

3. The three chapters in ‘Part Two: Design and the Creation of Value’ are in many ways the ‘application’ of the insights drawn from Part One. The final chapter (9) directly and substantively addresses value creation through design, but in Chapters 7 and 8, Heskett critically explores the relation of design and economics, looking first at design from the perspective (or in his terms the ‘standpoint’) of economics (Chapter 7), and then, in an unusual critical reversal, considering economics from the standpoint of design. Here Heskett critiques the limits of economics in terms of its understanding of the qualitative (as against the quantitative); of users (as against discounting the role of the user) and of value (as a complex phenomena irreducible to price).<sup>30</sup> As I will say at the end of this introduction, this double confrontation is of methodological as well as substantive interest. What Heskett is modelling here is not only a relation between economics and design (in terms of how they may be dialectically thought) but also a necessary methodological approach for the study of design as a whole. Finally, the seminar is completed by a brief, theorized, exploration of design’s contribution to the creation of value (Chapter 9).

## 3 What does the work achieve?

Aside from the important methodological observation that I just mentioned and to which I will return at the end of this introduction, I think we can point to a number of major contributions – I count at least seven – that the text makes to understanding.

The first and most obvious is that it presents economic theory in a way that makes it accessible to a non-specialist audience. A footnote above noted that while the plethora of discussions concerning ‘design and business’, ‘design management’, ‘innovation’ ‘creativity’, and ‘design thinking’, all claim economic benefit stemming from design; economics itself is distinctly absent from the discussion (save as the unthought and rarely critically grasped background). Heskett emphatically brings economics and economic models into these questions as foreground, and does so in a way that allows designers and those who deploy design to begin to grasp with more acuity what is actually afoot in this relation. From being an unspoken, unmanageable and, therefore, unthought abstraction, economics is made both tangible and critically graspable. It is, in a word, made real, not mythic.<sup>31</sup>

Heskett’s second achievement follows from the first. It is based on the fact that the mode of economics that Heskett brings into play is not simply the ‘given’ of neoclassical models of economy (repeated today ad nauseam in the media, and which, especially in their political and professional deployment, have acquired something of the patina of inexorable ‘common sense’) but a much wider field of economic thought. By refusing the singularity of neoclassical economics, and by bringing in a range of ideas on economic life that remain, at least in part, unfamiliar to most non-economists (the whole of Austrian theory, with perhaps the partial exceptions of Hayek and Schumpeter; Institutional theory, with the likely exception of Veblen; the ‘New Growth’ theorists, almost all without exception little-known figures outside of economics; and List and the ‘National System’, almost unknown outside of Germany and more recently Japan), Heskett offers the reader not just a roll-call of names (though to make something of a convincing narrative of these developments is itself an achievement) but an expanded corpus or lexicon of economic concepts. The value of this expanded field becomes evident in Chapters 7 and 8 where the direct relationship between economic theory and design is demonstrated in a number of instances. Overall, Heskett shows that, thought widely, the study of economics has more resonance with the question of the contribution of design to value creation than might be supposed.

Linked to the last point, the third major contribution of the text is to show that the conceptual and intellectual ‘schism’ between economics and design, though empirically real, is (from the side of the former at least) very largely a product of the dominance of neoclassical models of the economy. Heskett is clear on this:

The greatest problem in considering what economic theory explains about design, specifically or by implication, is in the context of neo-classicism, which in the Anglo-American world dominates both academic and applied economic practice. … if markets and products are as constant as depicted in Neo-classical theory this at best reduces design to a trivial activity concerned with minor, superficial differentiation of unchanging commodities, a role, indeed, that it does frequently perform. At worst, it contradicts the whole validity of design.<sup>32</sup>

Heskett is not alone in the view that neoclassical economics cannot cope with or has a very limited view of production. For example, Ha-Joon Chang, in the book referred to above, essentially agrees: ‘Production has been seriously neglected in the mainstream of economics, which is dominated by the neoclassical school.’<sup>33</sup> It is unsurprising then that, in many ways, the economics chapters of Design and the Creation of Value constitute, in effect, an often searing (if quietly spoken) critique of the limits of neoclassical theory and its presuppositions. This criticism is not confined to design. By presenting a range of alternative theories and models, Heskett takes the reader through the critique of neoclassical thinking as it applies to the economy as a whole. The basis of the critique involves how economics grasps (or fails to grasp) the dynamic character of the ‘real-world’<sup>34</sup> economy. As the reader gradually discovers, it is precisely this shift towards grasping the dynamics of the (capitalist) economy that allows – in the end necessitates – a structural place for design in value creation. As Heskett again puts it, here at the beginning of

## Chapter 7:

Design … is about envisioning change, a condition not readily embraced by Neo-classical models that are concerned with explaining what is, and is not fundamentally concerned with what might be. As we saw below however … as soon as the possibility of change is admitted into economic models, the perspective shifts and it becomes much easier to relate design to economic theories.

The fourth virtue of the text, and perhaps its major single intellectual virtue, is that the critique of neoclassical economic models is not conducted merely negatively. What Heskett shows – and this becomes apparent in the key series of diagrams of economic models that illuminate the text – is that as one contrasts neoclassical theory, first with Austrian theory (see Figure 3.1) and then with the insights gained from Institutional theory and New Growth theory (Figures 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.7, 4.9), it is possible to see a successive deepening of the understanding of value creation. Heskett shows that these models do not only articulate different ‘schools’ of economic thought; rather, they build upon each other in ways that allow for the development of a more adequate model of how value is created, what he calls ‘value creation theory’. The logic of the text is clear on this point. Beginning with the dynamics and the agents of value creation (the work of the Austrian economists stressing innovation and change) (Chapter 3) and then with the work of Veblen, Coase, North and others on the significance of cultural and institutional factors (Chapter 4: Institutional Theory), Heskett builds a wider foundation for value creation, which then enables him to take up, successively, more contemporary questions of the role of technology, ideas, process and production innovation and ‘knowledge of users’ (Chapter 5: New Growth theory) and, finally, issues of the deployment of policy and the development of national economies (Chapter 6). By working systematically through these factors, and by diagramming the shifting factors involved, Heskett shows how a far more comprehensive model of value creation can be developed, one that transcends the limitations of the standard neoclassical models. This in turn finally allows, as was said already above, for the structural placing of design within that model and allows us to see design as itself a factor of production.

A fifth virtue follows from this sequence. If the latter by no means develops the last word, or the only possible model, of value creation, the heuristic sequence of models that Heskett deploys effectively charts not only the fact of changes and developments in economic theory over the last 150 years or so, but also the very possibility of change and evolution in economic thinking. In other words, economics is revealed here, not as it sometimes wishes to present itself (especially in the political sphere) as a fixed science dealing with unalterable laws but as a flexible (or at least quasi-flexible) system of thought seeking to adequately grasp the complexity and the continuing question of value creation.

If Heskett offers both a serious critique of conventional (and dominant) neoclassical economics vis-à-vis its understanding of economic life at the level of production and use of things and services, and, at the same time offers an appreciation of the struggle of other economists to model more accurately the dynamics of value creation, the sixth virtue of the text is that in this process he also holds design accountable, that is, design does escape critique. Arguing that if it wishes to be taken as seriously as it often demands it should be (especially in relation to its contribution to business success), then it must meet a fundamental criterion: ‘For design to function as a strategic instrument … a credible case must be made for its capabilities in organizations prepared to use it in such terms. Specifically, any designer aspiring to a strategic role needs to understand and frame economic arguments for the value of design that makes sense in a business context.’<sup>35</sup> In the text, Chapter 7 essentially positions design from the standpoint of economics. In effect, it presents the minimum demands that an economically adequate conception of design must incorporate. It thus offers a serious, and perhaps unsurpassable, challenge to how design should be thought. If Heskett implies an economics can only be adequate if it can model design’s contribution to value creation, he equally implies that design can only be adequate if it can critically comprehend and articulate the economics of value creation. 36

Finally, a not inconsiderable, virtue of the text is that although it is about design and economics and the creation of value, it never ultimately conflates ‘economic value’ with value or values per se. This becomes particularly evident in Chapters 8 (see Section 3) and in the conclusion to Chapter 9 (and it is also explored in the paper ‘Value and Values’ added as an appendix to this volume: Appendix 2). This is, as we know, not insignificant today, both with respect to design – which is often adamant that it is not merely concerned with economic value<sup>37</sup> – and, even more importantly, in terms of the economy as a whole. With some understatement, the economist Duncan Foley concludes his book on economic theory by noting that if the all-but-absolute domination of capital accumulation today requires us to understand its logic and operations, that ‘understanding … does not require us to surrender our moral judgment to the market, either as individuals or as political actors’.<sup>38</sup> Heskett would agree that interest in economics does not and should not necessitate an abdication of ethical concerns; that economics is, after all, always in the end political economy, which is also to say a moral economy.<sup>39</sup> As he notes at the end of his (unpublished) manuscript Crafts, Commerce and Industry:

We have in the history of design an astonishingly rich inheritance. What is even more amazing is that with every newborn child the latent potential for similar achievement exists in this incredibly fertile human capability. It is the greatest renewable resource we possess and to acknowledge its creative potential could be the finest legacy we leave for our children and grandchildren.

The more than sentimental force of this observation in relation to the question of value (and values) is that design is the capability in practice of negotiating the economic, material, social and psychological incommensurabilities involved in meeting and dealing with human material needs. Design is therefore, in this process, the creation or the addition not just of ‘value’ but of complex, multiple ‘values’ that embody, express and enable capabilities.

## 4 What are the limitations of the text?

If the points above illustrate some of the text’s virtues, and show in what ways the seminar demands engagement, what are its limitations, its critical gaps and voids? What are the issues that it fails to deal with adequately?

There are, again, I think, seven such limitations. But I should note immediately that by ‘limitations’ I mean often less limits to the argument as it is presented in the seminar, and rather delimitations in regard to the context in which the work arose – delimitations that almost necessarily put limits on that with which it deals (and with which future work in this field must contend).

The first and most obvious limit is that Design and the Creation of Value is a very brief text. It is in fact less a book than an extended essay.<sup>40</sup> Its brevity gives it force: the possibility of grasping, almost in one sitting, a range of economic thought and a corpus of thinking concerning design and value. But, precisely because it is an essay, the book cannot, by definition, be comprehensive or systematic; still less can it engage with every issue opened in the relation between design, economics and value. The book has therefore to be read as, in effect, a text from where further work and research begins rather than ends.<sup>41</sup> The text is the opening of a field. It does not close down debate. It should, rather, be read, as all essays should, as an encouragement to think – and as an encouragement to understand how those who participate in its arguments can begin to grasp the measurability of the economics and economic thought and therefore bring these (critically) into thought and practice, rather than merely evading what appears as the immeasurable. This is the politics, in the strict sense, of the seminar.

The second limitation of the seminar is that of the contexts and moments in which the work was made. While Heskett is obviously happy to, in effect, take up Ha-Joon Chang’s position in terms of making economics accessible to a moderately intelligent audience, the immediate contexts that he developed the seminar in – the Institute of Design at IIT in Chicago in the 1990s, graduate programmes in design at Hong Kong Polytechnic University in the 2000s – were intellectually limited, and in two senses. Both institutions, although they aspired to thinking design strategically, were in different ways subject to acute short-term market pressures that tended to collapse longer-term, wider thinking into operational ‘quick-fix’ solutions. Perhaps, even more significantly, in neither institution was there any significant interest in critical and historical thought. Thus, the institutional discourses within which the seminar emerged, while encouraging in one sense, were limiting in another. In many ways in fact, the thrust and tone of Heskett’s seminar go against the grain of the logic of the places from which it emerged. It pushes at the intellectual limits, both of its immediate audience and that of the culture within design pedagogy, which consistently lowers expectations as to what designers and design students should be taught and expected to know.<sup>42</sup> In his teaching, Heskett pushed at these limits, remaining convinced to the end that students had the potential to grasp this material. But at the same time, the broader – or in this case the narrower – institutional setting delimited the zones and depth of intellectual inquiry that were possible.

Third, the context of the seminar’s emergence was delimiting in another and even more fundamental sense in that even as the text itself, in some of its aspects, pushes beyond the limits of the market as we receive it today, the dominance of the market as is (and even of market society) becomes the effective horizon of the work. It is this that perhaps explains the disappointing section of the text on ‘Socialist theory’ (now Appendix 1). Heskett spends a convincing paragraph in the preface explaining why ‘Socialist theory’ should be dealt with, but the actual presentation offers little interest.<sup>43</sup> No reference is made, for example, to the commodity nor to the wider discussion of exchange value/use value (and design) that has extended into contemporary thought within and without economics.<sup>44</sup> The weakness of the section on Marx has its counterpart in the almost complete absence of a direct discussion, in the seminar, of capitalism, especially in its most recent forms. If neoclassical theory is discussed and critiqued, neoliberalism is not.<sup>45</sup> More particularly, the rendering of Marx as an isolated historical figure in economics misses the extent to which the greatest contribution of Marxist economic thought is in terms of the history of capitalism. If neoclassical economics often does its best to deny history, Marxist economic thought is at its best thinking historically, whether that is in works of the history of the industrial epoch (e.g. the magisterial volumes of Eric Hobsbawm covering the period 1789–1991)<sup>46</sup> or in Marxist thinkers looking at the development of capitalism, particularly as it evolves towards Neoliberalism (e.g. Robert Brenner’s The Economics of Global Turbulence on the crises of the 1990s)<sup>47</sup> or those seeking to tease out the contradictions and tensions within the capitalist economy (see, for example, the prolific work of David Harvey)<sup>48</sup> or the careful empirical work of Thomas Piketty, who though not a Marxist as such belongs to the range of critical economists whose strength comes from looking at the wider historical development of capital.<sup>49</sup>

Fourth, the underlying tension in Design and the Creation of Value around the question of what the economy is, is also, however, a more general one so often found in economics and in discussions of value. Is economics the study of the economy (as economists like to insist, the study of the only possible form the economy can successfully take?) or is economics as a field really only engaged in modelling (and justifying) the fact that this is a capitalist economy? The question is difficult, and particularly from an operational point of view.<sup>50</sup> It has urgency in view of the continuing cycle of economic crises and in view of the need to rethink what the ‘economy’ is, and how it should be conceived in the light of the necessity to create a sustainable global postcarbon economy, an economy that, while it will, by necessity, use markets, cannot, structurally, also be capitalist,<sup>51</sup> at least in the essentially mercantile (and massively exploitative) forms that we are now experiencing.

Fifth, the work is delimited in another sense that will strike anyone coming to it for the first time. Of necessity, it betrays in its emphases the historical moments of its conception and orientation. The book is essentially rooted in a view of the economic value of design as that which can in part ‘save’ industry from itself. The brief biographical details I offered above will make immediate sense of this. Heskett came to maturity as a design historian in the mid-1970s, a period when the ‘oil-price shock’ of 1973–4 was the catalyst to turning the underlying crisis of profitability in the manufacturing industry in the United Kingdom and the United States of America into deindustrialization and the global exporting of manufacturing.<sup>52</sup> Across the next twenty years, first in Sheffield and later in Chicago/the mid-West, Heskett watched first-hand as these developments unfolded around him, while in parallel (as I noted above) he watched Germany and Japan in particular pursue considerably more intelligent policies,<sup>53</sup> at both government and firm levels, vis-à-vis the application of design capabilities to industry.<sup>54</sup> Heskett’s stance on the economics of design (and this applied also to Heskett’s work in Hong Kong,<sup>55</sup> and, indeed, to the consultancies he undertook on almost a global basis) was thus grounded, in effect, on the same principle as the one that motivated one of Heskett’s economic heroes, Frederick List (see Chapter 6), that is, that of seeking to make industry work better. The problem, of course, and this is noted in the last limitation discussed below, is that in many ways we are in a ‘post-industrial’ economy, that is, one where there is still much, globally, industrial production (China) but where the industrial is no longer formative for the economy. In the most direct sense, consumption ‘replaces’ production and finance, and more particularly rent-seeking through financial flows and debt, trumps both. What, then, is design and the creation of value in such an economy?

This last point gains a little more force when we reflect that, almost by necessity, Heskett is formulating the arguments he deploys in Design and the Creation of Value just at the point before it becomes definitively evident that the older disciplinary limits and boundaries of design are definitely breaking down in the interests of a much wider, and therefore also much looser, deployment of ‘design’. Bruno Latour captures this development when he remarks in some comments how in the last decades design has expanded in both range (‘ever larger assemblages of production’)<sup>56</sup> and depth (‘everyone with an iPhone knows that it would be absurd to distinguish what has been designed from what has been planned, calculated, arrayed, arranged, packed, packaged, defined, projected, tinkered, written down in code, disposed of and so on. From now on, “to design” could mean equally any or all of those verbs’).<sup>57</sup> One result is to make the act of design in general far more complex and less differentiated than has been previously understood. Heskett recognizes this – see his reference in the preface to the famous quotation from Herbert Simon that talks about design as ‘the core of all professional training’<sup>58</sup> – but in relation to the economics of value creation this no longer quite equates to the product-user model that still dominates. This is in part because of the new centrality of the economics of innovation and of the ‘Hollywood’ model of product cost (where almost the entire cost of production lies in the ‘software’ creation of the product).<sup>59</sup> Indeed, we could say that a crucial addition that is needed in terms of the economics of design is a reconsideration of the (sometimes astonishing) economics of design-led innovation.<sup>60</sup>

Finally, the fact that the book was essentially complete in its focus by 2004 and was conceived at least a decade earlier, and on the basis of concerns that in origin date from twenty years before that, explains at least in part, the lack of overt or detailed reference to both the emerging digital economy and the idea of what we would now call the post-carbon economy. The import of this should not be exaggerated, in that attention to the former in particular, in the somewhat superficial ways that this usually occurs in design, is often diversionary of what is actually occurring vis-à-vis the economy. On one side, then, there are the forms of a ‘new economy’ emerging. This is the case made, for example, by the British economic journalist Paul Mason in his recent book, Post-IndustrialCapitalism: A Guide to a Future, <sup>61</sup> which explores the digital and ‘knowledge’ economies and posits the possibility of the emergence within current capitalism of new forms of knowledge-based value creation and modes of organization that will transform capitalism from within. On the other side, even more fundamentally, we find ourselves having to confront not just a different form of capitalism than that which was the bread-and-butter as it were of Heskett’s life (essentially the twentieth-century industrial economy) but a different historical epoch (that of the artificial in which the horizon, medium and prime condition and limitation of the world is no longer nature but the artificial – or as it is often labelled at the moment, the anthropocene). In this world or this epoch, the urgent economic task is the project of a post-carbon economy (which is today the most accurate way of thinking ‘sustainment’). Seen from this perspective, an entirely new kind of economy is required.

But we need to be careful here not to be too dismissive of what is (and hence of Heskett’s text). First, the fact that the condition, horizon and limit of our world is now the artificial and not nature<sup>62</sup> not only demands an economics adequate to it<sup>63</sup> but also a recalculation, which means a rethinking, of value – which is, of course, precisely the underlying thesis of Heskett’s argument (even though it is not couched in, or addressed to, these new conditions).<sup>64</sup> Second, there is a temptation that many have been led into in discussing the digital- and post-carbon economies (let alone capitalism today as a whole) to dismiss the industrial and with it manufacturing in general (the dismissal is also, needless to say, axiomatic within design, especially among students). But there is an acute difference between the end of the industrial epoch, a period when the industrial was the formative condition of the world and its economy (an epoch that began between 1775 and 1825 and ended in the years after 1975) and the ‘end’ of industry and manufacturing. The former has ended (industry is no longer formative in the economy or in society as a whole) the latter has not. Production continues.

It is interesting that the economist Ha-Joon Chang, whom I quoted earlier as effectively supporting Heskett in the latter’s view that production was undertheorized in economics (see note 33), continues his argument in the same section by mounting a robust defence for continuing concern for manufacturing. Since it bears directly on the orientation of Design and the Creation of Value, it is worth quoting in full:

Unfortunately, with the rise of the discourse of post-industrial society in the realm of ideas and the increasing dominance of the financial sector in the real world, indifference to manufacturing has positively turned into contempt. Manufacturing, it is often argued, is, in the new ‘knowledge economy’, a low-grade activity that only low-wage developing countries do. But factories are where the modern world has been made, so to speak, and will keep being remade. Moreover, even in our supposed post-industrial world, services, the supposed new economic engine, cannot thrive without a vibrant manufacturing sector. The fact that Switzerland and Singapore, which many people consider to be the ultimate examples of successful service-led prosperity, are actually two of the three most industrialized countries in the world (together with Japan) is a testimony to this.<sup>65</sup>

Contrary to conventional wisdom, development of productive capabilities, especially in the manufacturing sector, is crucial if we are to deal with the greatest challenge of our time – climate change. In addition to changing their consumption patterns, the rich countries need to further develop their productive capabilities in the area of green technologies. Even just to cope with the adverse consequences of climate change, developing countries need to further develop technological and organizational capabilities, many of which can only be acquired through industrialization.<sup>66</sup>

In Ha-Joon Chang’s view therefore – and this would obviously echo Heskett’s underlying argument – the attention to questions of production and use is not outdated. In an increasingly artificial world, it is difficult to see how they could be, no matter how much the condition of the screen might dominate immediate consciousness.

## 5 The intellectual force of Heskett’s text

To close this introduction, I would like to bring the discussion back to what I think might ultimately be the most important aspect of this short book. As noted above, and as delineated in the notes by Sabine Junginger and Cameron Weber in this volume, Heskett’s work has considerable substantive implications for further research and thought in design management and economics.<sup>67</sup> But if we turn back to the text and Heskett’s own ambitions for the work, then, as noted at the beginning of this introduction, the deepest problem that Heskett set out to solve was not the substantive problem of value per se but the intellectual difficulty that underlies, and which creates, the all-but-impossibility of solving the substantive problem, that is, the ‘deep schism of mutual incomprehension’ that separates design and economics.<sup>68</sup>

Heskett’s point was that unless and until this schism is in some way crossed or unless (as I put it above) design and economics are made to belong to each other, or better, and in the other sense of this metaphor, to listen to each other, then adequately solving the puzzle and problem of value – and ultimately the project of creating either an adequate design or an adequate economics – remains at best difficult and perhaps impossible. The uniqueness and the force of the book (and its methodological interest, meaning the lessons it embodies for scholarship) lie in how Heskett achieves this end. Three points are significant:

1. The first methodological premise that Heskett works to is that economics is that which design cannot avoid – except at the cost of neutering or removing from thought one of its prime conditions of existence. The relation, however, is active, not passive, and is so both substantively (as we’ve just seen) and intellectually. The crucial relation is as follows: Just as economics ‘passes judgement’ on design, that is, reveals certain aspects of design not otherwise sufficiently grasped, so too design ‘passes judgement’ on economics, reveals moments of inadequacy and offers perspectives, particularly around questions of value, growth, innovation, desire, use and cost, that are by no means trivial. Thus, if economics confronts design with some truths that designers like to evade, design demonstrates truths concerning the creation of value that much, if not most, standard economic theory finds difficult to incorporate into its models. The relation therefore (between design and economics) is internal not external. Hence it is not design and economics that we need to think but, as the title of Chapter 1 has it, ‘Design in Economic Life’, that is, we need to think the implication of the one in the other. Substantively, this means a double necessity: first, to look at design through the lens of economic theory in its historical development, and also, second, to ‘put the flea to the elephant’ and to insist that design’s quantum of truth concerning things and value (no matter how ‘fragmented and often ill-defined’ the field may be) can nonetheless usefully augment economic theory. This is precisely what Heskett begins to do in Chapters 7 and 8.<sup>69</sup>

2. But although the confrontation between design and economics is apparently conducted directly in these chapters, across the book as a whole, as was made clear in the first pages of this introduction, there are actually three, not two, subject matters in play. ‘Value’ is not simply that which is the object of the book; rather, lying between ‘design’ and ‘economics’, it performs a mediating role, at once connecting and relativizing the absolute claims of both.<sup>70</sup> One can understand the role of this ‘third subject’ by drawing on an insight from Roland Barthes. In talking about how the concept of ‘text’ worked in relation to the rethinking by himself and others of the category of the ‘literary work’ (and its related disciplines: linguistics, anthropology, psychoanalysis), he notes:

What is new and which affects the idea of the work comes not necessarily from the internal recasting of each of these disciplines, but rather from their encounter in relation to an object which traditionally is the province of none of them. It is indeed as though the interdisciplinarity which is today held up as a prime value in research cannot be accomplished by the simple confrontation of specialist branches of knowledge. Interdisciplinarity begins effectively when the solidarity of the old disciplines breaks down … in the interests of a new object and a new language neither of which has a place in the field of the sciences that were to be brought peacefully together, this unease in classification being precisely the point from which it is possible to diagnose a certain mutation.’<sup>71</sup> (My emphasis)

With all due allowance to the differences in context, and for all the incongruity of Barthes appearing in this context, the point he makes is apparent. As has been already noted, it is the introduction of a third term, value, the ‘new object and a new language’ that belongs wholly to neither field – which allows for a genuine exploration to begin. In particular, in Heskett’s case, it is the question that the third term introduces into the relation between design and economics that makes it possible for him to triangulate the relation between design and economics, to play both off in terms of how they grasp – or fail to grasp – an object common to each. In other words, what appears at first sight as external and incommensurate (design ‘vs.’ economics) is discovered, through value, to possess an internal relation (design <> economics). This is precisely why it is the direct and indirect pursuit of the modelling of value creation in economics that is the organizing principle of Heskett’s presentations of economic thought. What Heskett is touching on in his explorations of value creation is precisely the mutation in the conditions of production, use and value creation that is now occurring, mutations that force, if in subtle ways, a transformation in how we think of both economics and design.<sup>72</sup>

3. But what applies to economics applies also to the wider fields and disciplines with which design reciprocally engages. Design’s necessary dialectical implication in other disciplines and fields (both within the university and within practice) demands that to think design adequately, we need to go beyond the hopelessly unproductive relations of the ‘and’ in design-and-X relations. Where the conjunction actually marks not the connection but the separation and a priori distinction between fields (and further implies that while they might merrily dance around each other, both will maintain their existing identity and form), the project that Heskett effectively argues for in Chapters 7 and 8 is wider and more courageous. It is the courage to let one discipline ‘invade’ and think (listen to) the other. The metaphor that is used here comes from Heidegger, from towards the end of one of his most profound essays – and one with significant purchase for design. In ‘Building Dwelling Thinking’, Heidegger is trying to think what he calls the ‘crisis’ of dwelling.<sup>73</sup> In relating the latter to the disconnect he sees in the present between how we think the condition of ‘dwelling’ in the world and the act of building (now reduced largely to a technological feat) and thinking, he offers an insight that has never yet been sufficiently taken up in thought:

Perhaps this attempt to think about dwelling and building will bring out somewhat more clearly that building belongs to dwelling and how it receives its nature from dwelling. … Building and dwelling are, each in its own way, inescapably for dwelling. The two are however insufficient for dwelling so long as each busies itself in separation instead of listening to one another.They are able to listen if both – building and thinking – belong to dwelling.<sup>74</sup> (My emphasis)

The thrust of Heidegger’s argument is clear if, nonetheless, difficult to think.<sup>75</sup> Disciplines, or fields, in our time do not generally ‘belong’ to one another in the ways in which Heidegger is intimating they might. Yet perhaps our ‘learning to dwell’ (the real theme of Heidegger’s essay) requires that we begin to be capable of such listening and such belonging. Transposed to the issues Heskett is exploring (but in the same moment referring back to the wider question of how we make those modes and acting that bear on a condition), this would imply that as economic, though not only economic, beings (and as economic, though not only economic, designers), it requires developing our capability to ‘listen’ to economics while at the same time thinking this ‘belonging’ beyond the current limits of economics and beyond the current limits of design. Heskett’s incipient success in Design and the Creation of Value is to point us in this direction. It remains for others to take up the challenge he has issued.

