# Conclusions / Design as an economic necessity for governments and organizations / Designing in the Brazilian government

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --\auto\Design and the Creation of Value -- John Heskett; Clive Dilnot; Suzan Boztepe --.md

## Conclusions

In conclusion I would like to make four points:

1 First, in terms of reading Heskett, I found his story of the development of economic thought refreshing and the synthesis convincing. These ideas are well illustrated by the ‘flow charts’ in the chapters on each school of economic thought, and especially so in the concluding chapter’s synthesis of economics, design and the firm. It is transparent from the text that Heskett is a careful and caring educator of designers and is rightfully considered a pioneer in relating how design can create value in our lives.<sup>22</sup>

2 Heskett’s book is a good example of interdisciplinary knowledge. He synthesizes very well three major fields: the history of economic theory, design as practice and firm strategic management.

3 As someone from economics coming newly to design, I was inspired by Heskett’s view of the designer as change agent, something in tune with today’s visually oriented, and instant and ‘sharing’, new economy. The designer can be a modern industrialist-entrepreneur like Steve Jobs or Bill Gates. The designer can be a founder of the many social media and sharing economy firms that have emerged over the last number of years (concurrent with the equity bubble abetted by the central banks’ unprecedented use of monetary easing since the financial crisis of 2007–8). The designer can be within a firm as an employee or executive, or an outside consultant engaged under contract to provide strategic leadership that may be lacking due to organizational stasis. The point is that the designer might be seen as a form of the Austrian school entrepreneur (and with this book, Heskett contributes to the economic theory of the firm by assigning designers within a firm an important part in turning tacit knowledge into value creation through artefact – both physical and digital – realization).

4 Finally, I want to note that reading John Heskett was of great value for me, his writing inspiring much insight into economic ideas of my own interest as shown above. I am sure that many of those with an interest in economic theory and students and teachers of design, economics and management will find the same result. The synthesis of disciplines offers new ways to understand entrepreneurship and, relatedly, to see afresh applied innovation as value creation and realization in ongoing exchange relationships. As such, Design and the Creation of Value is an engaging text for those interested in the ‘new economy’ while offering an innovative synthesis of disciplines by an experienced educator and a broadbased, and knowledgeable, industry professional and historian.

# Design as an economic necessity for governments and organizations

Sabine Junginger

John Heskett’s research into the economic life of design has shifted the perception of many in management about the role of design in business and society. Likewise, his work has reminded designers that they are not just merely designing some ‘thing’ but that in doing so, they have both opportunities and obligations to contribute in a meaningful way. John’s work is of renewed relevance today and continues to have significant implications for the future development of design research and design practice. Circumstances have changed, though, and we need to revisit as well as adjust some of the thinking that originated in the world of business and industry.

There is a growing recognition that the main arena in which design is practised is not business, but the organization. Designing goes on in every organization, regardless of whether it is part of the private or public sector. Each organization faces the same basic challenge: how to develop and deliver services that are relevant and valuable to people and how to do so to make the most economic use of its various resources to achieve this. This in itself is a design problem. It involves organizational structures as much as it involves its resources; it involves processes and tasks as much as it requires a vision or a purpose.

Designers always work within organizational contexts. They work with organizational clients and partners – and they establish their own organizations. To paraphrase John, organizations are the main arena of design practice. As he observed, there remains ‘a tendency for some designers to try to ignore this basic fact of their existence, which is yet another aspect of the problems in giving design credibility, but it will not conveniently disappear’.<sup>1</sup>

John Heskett insisted that design can, will and must be judged in terms of its contributions. Recent research in design management has centred on demonstrating the value of design to business in economic terms. A 2013 study sponsored by the Design Management Institute in Boston produced the Design Value Score Card, while projects funded by the EU and the OECD sought to develop a greater understanding of the value creation by design by ‘analyzing and measuring design as a user-centered innovation tool and as an economic factor of production’.<sup>2</sup> The €Design project, for example, studied the role of design in the integration of functional, emotional and social utilities of new or improved products (goods and services), processes and marketing methods in order ‘to help shape guidelines for analyzing and measuring the economic impact of design efforts and design outputs, thereby facilitating more detailed and robust measurements of design’.<sup>3</sup>

These studies expand on Heskett’s work but they do not provide much needed insights into the value of design to organizational life beyond production and consumption. Yet, the shift from design in business to design in organizations poses new questions and demands new approaches to inquire into design, design processes and the people who design. In this new setting, designing takes an active role in shaping businesses and management and it does so across the boundaries of the private and public sectors.<sup>4</sup> Societies and communities, organizations in their own right, also have organizational lives and the question is how design contributes to these – be that by way of policy-making and policy implementation or by way of supporting public organizations in developing and delivering meaningful and accessible services. While the contribution to design in business remains focused on profitability, this alone is no longer a criterion for business success. How businesses engage on a social and environmental level matters more and more. The requirement for design to contribute, ‘if it is to be of any use in business’ is the same requirement for design in the public sector.

‘Business is also a social activity,’ writes John. ‘Both its internal organization and the needs it meets in society depend upon social consciousness and functions. Some business managers educated in the tenets of Neoclassical thinking try to ignore this basic fact of their existence, but it too will not conveniently disappear.’ It is much rarer to find pure neoclassical thinking in government offices, but the basic problem of the business manager echoes that of the public manager: Their organization does not act in a vacuum and their internal operations need to be able to support the services it provides to citizens. They involve and affect people inside and outside the organization. Understanding business as a social activity affirms that management itself is a social activity (Falk 1961).<sup>5</sup> The inherent social relationships of business and management highlight their relevance for the public organizations and government agencies. Policy makers and public managers pursue business in its original meaning: by taking actions about the matters they are troubled by and care for (Dewey 1948).<sup>6</sup> I have argued elsewhere that the business of the public sector is the social.<sup>7</sup>

Heskett’s statement that ‘making profits is not a self-contained activity determined within a firm but depends upon satisfying customers’ needs’ reveals yet another reason to extend research and practice into design management to public organizations. Public organizations are less, if at all, concerned about profits. They are concerned about impact and about efficiency in accordance within the legal and political constructs they are part of. To achieve impact, government agencies have to understand the people they try to reach in situations they seek to address and improve. But the staff often has few means to engage in such research. Moreover, the demand for ‘customer satisfaction’ is a difficult one in the public realm. A tax office may deliver a great service experience to a taxpayer but that taxpayer may still leave dissatisfied because he or she may owe the government an amount of money he or she disagrees with. Success for government agencies takes the form of delivering just and fair services to all people, regardless of their income, status, education or other background. As in the business world, achieving this success is not a ‘self-contained activity’. Any design outcome depends on its being useful to and accepted by citizens, manageable by public organizations and supported by the social and political agenda.

All this points to design in government as an area that poses profound questions about the value of design and its contributions to human society. As we broaden the scope of design management from business to organizations, we benefit from an advanced understanding of the way economic theories treat design and find it necessary to present a design perspective on economics.<sup>8</sup> The ramifications are difficult to understate: design outcomes across the public sector concern and affect millions of people every day. It is the arena of design practice where, as John Heskett notes, ‘design is one of the basic characteristics of what it is to be human and an essential determinant of the quality of human life. It affects everyone in every detail of every aspect of what they do throughout each day. As such, it matters profoundly.’<sup>9</sup>

To explore the value of design in government, we can follow John’s lead and engage with policy theories, policy practices and policy processes from a design perspective. We need to study the ways in which designing goes on in the public sector and make design activities visible to illustrate how and what value they create for people. Designing in the public sector is a highly complex undertaking that involves people, policies, organizations and services. In very simple terms, public-sector design involves people designing policies, people running organizations that implement policies through services and people developing and delivering services to implement policies and fulfil policy intent.

Government functions best when it develops meaningful policies that are relevant to people and when public organizations develop, deliver and maintain services people can access, understand and use. In this ideal scenario, services are the means to fulfil the policy’s intent. But often, policies turn out to be ill conceived, and designed past the needs of people, leading to services citizens cannot or do not want to use. At other times, the internal operations of a public organization are cumbersome and not supportive to staff that seeks to deliver good service experiences. It is an indication that the design approaches employed are not supportive and appropriate to arrive at the desired design outcomes. In other words, new design thinking, new design practices and new design methods are called for.

I have yet to meet a civil servant who intentionally develops poor services for citizens. Those who develop and deliver these products do their best with the methods and tools they have been taught or otherwise acquired. But it remains a fact that very few have had an opportunity, for example, to engage with human-centred design or user-centred design. On the other hand, there are still only a few professionally trained designers (design thinkers and service designers included) who are prepared to engage with design issues in organizational life. In many cases, designers are experts in a specific method that quickly generates radical new ideas for new customer-oriented services. They are strong in developing innovative products but weak in seeing them through to implementation when this means working through organizational structures, resources and people. Moreover, designers hesitate to engage staff in their innovative approaches. We can only guess the reasons for this, but I suspect it involves a lack of theoretical and practical underpinning that would enable them to connect the value of their design work to the work of staff and their respective tasks.

In my view, this situation echoes the gulf between design and economics John sought to bridge. In the public sector, we find dominant theories at work for when and how new policies can be developed and introduced. We find management principles and best practices of public administration influencing daily work. And just like values drive theories in the economic disciplines, values drive theories in policy. It is no coincidence that human experience and human interaction rarely figure in theories on policy-making and policy implementation. It is also no coincidence that policy research has been content with depicting the policy cycle as a fragmented, linear and responsive design process blind to the needs of people affected by a policy. Until recently, questions about when and how to introduce a policy focused on political and organizational processes within government. Lately, researchers have begun to look at policies as products of design. Guy Peters (2015), for example, has suggested we ‘design policies like we design a car’.<sup>10</sup>

## Designing in the Brazilian government

While I was reflecting on John Heskett and the relevance of his work in the present, I worked with a group of the Brazilian Ministry of Planning, Budget and Management, one of the central ministries in the Brazilian government to which all other ministries have obligations. Moreover, I visited the Federal Court of Accounts, the Federal Ministry of Justice and the Federal Ministry of Education. I also made a stop at the third largest bank in Brazil, Caixa. Caixa is one of two key financial partners for the Brazilian government to administer social welfare programmes.

In each organization, I met with people who sought to improve their internal operations by developing new design practices and by employing new design methods. They were challenging current design practices within their respective organizations and even across government agencies. They had been set up to secure vital government functions under severe economic hardship, a consequence of the country’s economic recession. As one senior public official put it: ‘We are doing this not even to do more with less because we are happy if we can still do the same with less.’

Most of these innovation teams were young; some had merely started a few months ago. One innovation group was made up of just a handful of in-house experts from the organization’s IT area. Their original mandate was to advance innovation within their organization by developing new digital tools for data analysis. In another agency, the innovation team consisted of twenty staff members. They based their innovation efforts on the ideas of computer hacking and open innovation. They proudly declared their approach to introducing new ways of working as ‘hacking bureaucracy’. A third ministry had hired an academic expert in business strategy and business innovation. This person was in charge of developing and implementing innovation programmes the ministry would then roll out in public. Unlike his colleagues in the other agencies, he had been given neither a mandate nor a team to support his efforts. He mostly worked with external partners and universities.

The economic argument for design in this context is different from the one John Heskett pursued. It is not about business and customers, it is about people and their government. It is not about growing the Gross Domestic Product but about providing essential government services to people. The design task is to develop new policies and services that do more, or at least the same, with less for governments. Design thinking and design methods are entering into the public sector to rethink current approaches and to generate arguments for new ones. The fundamental economic principles John laid out for design still apply. Design researchers and those involved in hands-on design projects have to pay attention to the bottom line regardless of which organization they work with. They also have to be able to explain to decision-makers why a human-centred approach to services aids their organization – the same way one has to put forth an argument to a business manager.

The presence of lone innovators in government alerts us to John’s observations about designers in business and the influence of ‘neoclassical thinking’ inside the organization. One of the reasons innovation in government is more difficult to achieve is that it must involve the organization itself in any change process. Services are at the heart of government agencies and any change to any service will ripple through the organizational system. Transforming existing situations into preferred ones for some, say citizens, requires concern for transforming an existing situation into a preferred one for those working within the organization.

It is difficult to understate the role of John Heskett in design when one works in an environment that is dominated by economists and legal experts. I continue to revisit his writings on the different economic theories, sometimes as to freshen up my thinking, sometimes to find a new anchor into my own work. I am aware that my own work and that of the people in these innovation teams obliges me to come to terms with economic questions. Design choices are choices about employing, allocating and using resources to achieve a desired outcome. This brings to mind a particular moment during a seminar I gave to policy planners in a Prime Minister’s Office two years ago. The topic was participation in government and I was invited to provide an interaction design perspective on the issue.

I used the pictures of two different walking aids for people and asked them to imagine these two objects as placeholders for two different policies. My point was that both walking aids sought to address the same problem: to provide mobility to people. The first walking aid was a bare metal construction in metallic grey. It had no wheels, so the person had to lift it and set it down as he or she walked. It was the simplest version of a walking aid that used only the minimum of materials. The second walking aid was painted red, had big wheels to master different surfaces, was equipped with hand brakes and sported a seat for resting and a basket for shopping.

When I asked the group which one they would take out to the park, they all agreed it would be the red one. ‘But,’ interjected the head of the policy unit, ‘it is probably a matter of cost. The paint on the red one is probably making it more expensive.’ Indeed, I responded, the acquisition cost for the preppy walking aid was certainly higher, though mass production and economies of scale would bring down that cost. However, I continued, while the acquisition cost for the simple version was cheaper at the moment, the cost produced by that minimum model over time was significantly greater: A senior person who can get to the park with his or her walking aid, to the shopping mall and to the community centre exercises, volunteers and spends her pension money in cafes and shops. In contrast, a walking aid that ties a senior to his house or apartment is more likely to lead to depression, loss of muscle tissue that leads to falls, and to deny him or her the opportunity to participate as a volunteer or to spend money in cafes and shops. The cost for health care alone to treat accidents and depression is immense. If we add to this a voluntary contribution, for example, to oversee homework for young students and the money he or she cannot freely spend in local businesses, money adds up quickly. Participation in society all of a sudden looks like an economic problem and reveals the real cost of a walking aid that, while cheap, denies people the chance to participate in society.

Understanding economic perspectives remains essential to articulate the value of design. The critical engagement with economic ideas allows designers to reveal some of these ideas as remnants of a different age and time. Classic economic theory concerned with comparison and evaluation, for example, works on the basis of ‘ceteris paribus’ or ‘all else being equal’. It is a demand that can only be fulfilled when we are dealing with a machine over which we have full control or when we can conduct an experiment in a controlled environment. But every organization, public or private, presents its own entity, involves different people and groups, concerns different laws and structures and has access to different resources. In short, there exists no ‘all else being equal’. This is certainly true for the ministries I have visited.

It is therefore difficult to apply economies of scale to the public sector. Yet, we often meet people who insist on the scalability of a public sector innovation project. Scaling, too, has its roots in the mechanical world of manufacturing and mass production. It is based on the idea that if we get the first product right, we can save the work on further research and development on the products that follow. It is an approach that has time and time again failed in the public sector. It is an approach that has not led to the efficiencies that people sought because those involved in the original development of, say, a social programme, design their solution tailored to their circumstances, addressing the needs of the people they are working with. Yet, these circumstances are rarely if ever identical to those of other agencies. Certainly, this was affirmed during my visit to the Brazilian ministries.

The fact that we can scrutinize and critique common economic theories for their impact on design is one of the great achievements of John Heskett. His notion that design has to make a contribution to be of value has been accepted across the different design disciplines. In the search for the precise value of design, researchers pursue different avenues. Co-design expert Elizabeth Sanders (2014), for example, detects the value of design on three different levels: the monetary level, the use or experience level and the societal level. ‘In each of these levels, co-design pursues different objectives, requires different mindsets, involves different people, deliverables and time frames.’<sup>11</sup>

Sanders might as well describe the different stages in the policy cycle: policy-making, policy implementation and service delivery. Design in the public sector must create value on each of these three levels as well as across these levels. To overcome traditional fragmentation and linear processes, governments on national, regional and local levels have set up public innovation labs.<sup>12</sup> This points to a fourth level for how design adds economic value: by integrating public services with public organizations and policies around the human experience.

A new economic theory based on behavioural insights from people has begun to challenge the classic notion of homo oeconomicus, where people are always acting in their rational interest. The emerging field of behavioural economics is making inroads in governments and presents new relationships with design. John would have enjoyed this development and helped us make sense for both design and economics. In his absence, this will be our task.

