## Introduction (but really, you should read this)

In 1998 in The Invisible Computer, Donald Norman told us that computers as we know them are going to disappear. We’ll continue to use computers, of course, but they will disappear from view as they are absorbed inside “information appliances.” Norman drew an analogy to electric motors in the early twentieth century. When the technology was first marketed, consumers bought a very visible electric motor with attachments to accomplish various tasks— for example, to power a vacuum cleaner. But soon the motors were built into the appliances. No one any longer thought of the machine as an electric motor with an attachment to clean floors; instead, they thought of it as a vacuum cleaner, which contained a motor as a component. Norman believes that computers will evolve in this same way into information appliances, such as electronic calendars, cell phones, and portable e-mail readers. We won’t care much that there is a digital processor inside these appliances; we will care that each appliance accomplishes a task for us. Norman’s argument seems convincing when we look around at all the devices, from personal digital assistants (PDAs) to automobiles, that depend on computer chips. Still, Norman is telling only half the story. Our book is meant to tell the other half.

This is a book specifically about digital art, but it is written for digital designers and technologists in general: Web designers, educational technologists, graphic designers working with and in digital forms, interface designers, human-computer interaction (HCI) experts, those who are laying out the future of digital media for business and entertainment, and anyone interested in the cultural implications of the digital revolution. We describe in this book what digital art has to offer to this vast community.

Digital art shows that the computer is not becoming invisible in our culture, as the electric motor did. We don’t want computers to disappear. Although processors are being buried in all sorts of devices, computers continue to fascinate us. We continue to be exhilarated by and sometimes frightened of what digital technology is doing, and we are tantalized by the prospect of what it might do in the future. It is the task of digital art to fascinate, exhilarate, and sometimes provoke us. Appliances, on the other hand, don’t fascinate us; they brown our toast.

We are talking about two competing visions of digital technology: the pragmatic vision offered by Norman and other HCI experts, for whom computers are information appliances, and the vision offered by digital artists and interaction designers. They are competing in the sense that each vision is an attempt to convince our culture at large. The differences in these visions emerge quite clearly when we look at the most popular, the most exciting, and in some ways the most disappointing contemporary manifestation of digital technology: the World Wide Web. Let’s start with a parable.

## The Structuralists and the Designers

The Internet once belonged exclusively to the Structuralists, a community composed mostly of graduate students and professors in computer science, who seldom ventured outside their cubicles. This closely-knit community had its own ethics and languages (such as C). Their culture was highly developed in mathematics but not in art.

Around 199o, one of these Structuralists, Tim Berners-Lee, had an idea for a new service that would run on the Internet, a global hypertext system he called the World Wide Web. There had been other hypertext systems before this, most of which had worked only on stand-alone computers. Berners-Lee’s brilliant idea was that the links of one hypertext could point to information stored on other servers connected to the Internet. But his hypertext system was limited largely to verbal representation: each page could display only ASCII text along with links. This was adequate for the uses that Berners-Lee foresaw, because he wanted a system that would help scientists share drafts of their papers and other information. The World Wide Web grew slowly in its first years, precisely because it served this limited audience.

In 1993, another Structuralist, Mark Andreessen, and a colleague produced Mosaic, the first graphical browser for the Web. At the same time, he introduced a new tag—the in-line image tag—which allowed static images to be integrated into the text of the Web page. This apparently small improvement had enormous consequences, because people outside the Structuralist community began to see how the Web might be used to provide information and entertainment to a vast audience beyond the scientific world. They began to imagine what we now call e-commerce.

That’s when the Designers started to invade the Internet. Although this tribe was less homogeneous than the Structuralists, many of them were trained as graphic designers for print, and they brought the skills and assumptions of graphic design to the Web. They knew how to weave together words and images in order to communicate in the two-dimensional space of the printed page. They assumed that a Web site could function like a newspaper or magazine as a form of visual communication. Some Designers came to Web design because they were attracted by the potential of this new form. Others invaded the territory of the Structuralists as mercenaries, paid by clients who wanted to colonize this new realm for advertising.

The Designers soon mastered the Structuralist language, html. They considered this language primitive, however, because it did not provide enough control over the look of the Web page. The reason was that, in keeping with their view of how information should be organized, the Structuralists had designed html to describe the structure (paragraphs, lists, links) but not the appearance of the page. The appearance—the Structuralists believed, according to their ethic of technological democracy—should be determined by each user.

This was the great, almost religious difference between the Structuralists and the Designers. The Structuralists were separatists, believing that form and content could and should be separated. For them, a Web site is a pipe through which content flows to the user. They opposed elaborate visual design, which they thought impeded the flow of information. The Designers, on the other hand, were unitarians, who believed that form and content could not be separated: that a Web page communicates its message through the careful interplay of words and images. For the Designers, a Web page is an experience, and they wanted complete control over it, just as they had enjoyed (more or less) complete control in print. So the Designers kept pressing for more html tags that would give them that control.

The struggle to define the Web continued throughout the 199os. For example, the Designer David Siegel (from whom we have taken the term structuralist) wrote in his influential book Creating Killer Web Sites (1997), "I believe design drives the user's experience. . . . Who cares how great your content is if people aren’t attracted to it or don’t find it pleasurable to read?” (<sup></sup>).

As late as 2ooo, HCI expert and Structuralist Jakob Nielsen wrote in Designing Web Usability, “Ultimately users visit your website for its content. Everything else is just the backdrop. The design is there to allow people access to the content. The old analogy is somebody who goes to see a theatre performance: When they leave the theatre, you want them to be discussing how great the play was and not how great the costumes were" (99). Nielsen has become the champion of what might be called the Structuralist Reformation, pursuing with a puritanical zeal what he regards as the exuberance of the Designers.

Nielsen believes that the Web is for business, not pleasure: it should be a transparent channel for information transfer. He is literally an iconoclast, arguing that graphics are greatly overused on the Web (they slow download time). He would bar the use of Flash from Web sites. For Nielsen, the most efficient design is one that becomes invisible and leaves the user alone with the information content, and clearly that content is typically text rather than an image. Designers like Siegel believe that Web pages are visual (and potentially auditory) experiences. Static and now moving images are not “window dressing” that slow download time; rather, they are essential to the communicative experience.

Nielsen’s book and articles are widely read and discussed. For better or worse, however, the Designers seem to be winning the battle in cyberspace itself. Nielsen himself admits that the vast majority of Web sites are badly designed—that is, they don’t follow his prescriptions. There are more images, more digitized video and audio, more animation on the Web every day. Designers like Siegel would agree that sites are often (usually?) poorly designed. For them, the problem is not that the sites use too many images, but rather that they use these images poorly and so fail to provide a compelling experience for their users.

## The visible computer

The debate between the Structuralists and Designers over the World Wide Web is part of a struggle to define new media design and, in a larger sense, the significance of digital technology for our culture. While Jacob Nielsen and Don Norman might (or might not) object to the name, they represent the Structuralist position with authority. Nielsen tells us that Web pages should be transparent vehicles of information delivery. Norman tells us that the computer will be absorbed into a series of smart information appliances. They are not altogether wrong. Sometimes we do want our Web pages to provide the quickest route to a specific fact, and we are already surrounded by information appliances, especially cell phones.

For our current culture, however, the term appliance doesn’t describe computers very well. Computers don’t feel like toasters; they feel much more like books, photograph albums, or television sets. For us today—and it’s a realization that our culture has made gradually over the past thirty years—the computer feels like a medium. It is providing us with a set of new media forms and genres, just as printing, the cinema, radio, and television have done before. These digital media forms stage experiences for us.

As producers and as users of digital technology, we don’t want our computers to dis appear, any more than we want books, films, or paintings to disappear. As producers and as users, we often want to be aware of the medium in order to understand the experience that it