cannot deny that they are media forms, depending on highly sophisticated, electronic technology. At the same time, in crafting digital applications, designers must try to make their work easy to grasp and accessible for their users. Digital art, like the work at SIGGRAPH 2ooo, contributes to digital design by showing us how media forms can also be immediate.

TEXT RAIN, for example, combines forms of print and video to give us a new kind of reading and writing. A poem and a television show at the same time, TEXT RAIN is both visible and invisible as a media form. The participants find the interface so easy to use, so natural, that they need no instruction at all. They understand instantly how to project their images on the screen and interact with the falling letters. The space of TEXT RAIN is an image of the physical world and at the same time an interface, a space for the manipulation of texts.

Digital art, like other digital applications, often opens a window for us, as we look through the computer screen to see the images or information located “on the other side.” But TEXT RAIN is also a mirror, reflecting us as we manipulate the letters. It is as if we have passed through the screen and find ourselves inside some malfunctioning word processor that is raining letters down on us. TEXT RAIN surprises and pleases us by being simultaneously a mirror and a window. If there is one reason that digital art is important for digital design, it is this: digital art reminds us that every interface is a mirror as well as a window.

## Digital design should not try to be invisible

Think of the computer screen as a window, opening up onto a visual world that seems to be behind or beyond it. This is the world of information that the computer offers: texts, graphics, digitized images, and sound. Concentrating on the text or images, the user forgets about the interface (menus, icons, cursor), and the interface becomes transparent. HCI specialists and some designers speak as if that were the only goal of interface design: to fashion a transparent window onto a world of information.

There are times, however, when the user should be looking at the interface, not through it, in order to make it function: to activate icons or to choose menu items, for example. At such moments, the interface is no longer a window, but a mirror, reflecting the user and her relationship to the computer. The interface is saying in effect, “I am a computer application, and you are the user of that application.” No interface can be or should be perfectly transparent, because the interface will break at some time, and the user will have to diagnose the problem. Furthermore, even when the interface is working, we should not allow it to take us in completely. If we only look through the interface, we cannot appreciate the ways in which it shapes our experience. We should be able to enjoy the illusion of the interface as it presents us with a digital world.

But if we cannot also step back and see the interface as a technical creation, then we are missing half of the experience that new digital media can offer.

If we only look through the interface, we cannot appreciate the ways in which it shapes our experience.

The same would be true if we treated

any other medium as exclusively transparent. When we watch a film, we can sometimes get so absorbed in the story that we may temporarily forget about everything else, even that we are watching a film at all. The film as an interface has become transparent for us. Sometimes, however, we want to step back and appreciate how the film was made. This awareness enriches the experience of the film, and not only for a small group of film scholars. Many viewers of this popular medium are eager to learn more about how films are made, and they can. If we buy the DVD version of The Sixth Sense, for example, the disk includes scenes left out of the final cut, an interview with the director, M. Night Shyamalan, and descriptions of the special effects. These segments ask us to reflect on how the film succeeds in scaring and fooling us. Popular interest in the process of making films, television shows, and music has increased in recent decades, so that we enjoy all of these media forms as mirrors as well as windows. The same is true of the computer, itself now a medium. Every digital design functions as both a window and a mirror.

When we look in a mirror, we see ourselves, and we see the room behind and around us—that is, ourselves in context. Digital interfaces are like mirrors in the sense that they reflect the user in context, including her physical surroundings, her immediate working or home environment, and the larger environment defined by her language and culture. They do this work of reflecting whether or not the designers consciously intend it. Because the user brings all of these contexts to her interaction with any digital interface, the design cannot help but reflect them. The success of an interface, however, depends on the ways in which it can adapt to these contexts. The most compelling interfaces will make the user aware of her contexts and, in the process, redefine the contexts in which she and the interface together operate. This is where digital art can make a special contribution, because digital art is precisely the kind of interface that both reflects and redefines contexts.

Like other digital artists in the past two decades, those at SIGGRAPH 2ooo want us to be aware of the contexts in which their individual works in particular and digital technology in general function. For that reason, there are more mirrors than windows among their exhibits. TEXT RAIN is a mirror that reflects its users, for as passers-by are caught by the camera, they find themselves projected on the screen in a rain of falling letters. The exhibit we visit in chapter <sup></sup>, called Wooden Mirror, combines mechanical and electronic technology to produce a beautifully textured image of its visitors. In chapter <sup></sup>, we visit Nosce te ipsum (“know yourself ”), a digital collage that contains at its center a captured video image of the visitor. Other pieces in the gallery are mirrors in a metaphoric sense, reflecting the layers of media and culture in which we find ourselves situated today. Magic Book and the Fakeshop Web site remind us of the variety of media forms that surround us in our media-saturated culture. T-Garden concentrates on the spatial context in which we as embodied creatures operate, and Terminal Time reminds us playfully of the ideological lenses through which we understand history. None of these pieces is content just to reflect us; they all invite us to reimagine and redefine our contexts.

Taken together, all of these pieces from SIGGRAPH 2ooo demonstrate the value of digital art for the larger fields of digital design and HCI. Works of digital art have a critical function: they critique the art of design itself. They make us aware of the assumptions that are built into the practices of designers and computer specialists. Because computer designers so often assume that the interface should be a window, digital art insists that the interface can also be a mirror. And in the process, it demonstrates the other great strategy of digital design. Those who understand and master both strategies will be more effective designers.

Chapter 2. Wooden Mirror

T H E M Y T H O F T R A N S P A R E N C Y

The desire for transparency

is a cultural choice.

It is important for designers and builders of computer applications to understand the history of transparency, so that they can understand that they have a choice.