to the larger elements of the user illusion, as described in the Apple Human Interface Guidelines (1987). And the whole program, not just the font design, was about transparency: "The real point of graphic design, which comprises both pictures and text, is clear communication. In the Apple Desktop Interface, everything the user sees and manipulates on the screen is graphic. . . . Graphics are not merely cosmetic. When they are clear and consistent, they contribute greatly to ease of learning, communication, and understanding. The purpose of visual consistency is to construct a believable environment for the users. . . Simple design is good design. Simple designs are easy to learn and to use, and they give the interface a consistent look" (9, 1o).

The guidelines were meant to ensure that cutting and pasting would work in the same way in any Macintosh application and on the desktop itself, dialog boxes would look the same and use the same vocabulary, and all windows would be created from a set of predictable shapes and with predictable behaviors. The consistency of the Macintosh interface meant that once the user learned how menus, icons, and dialogs worked, she would be able to apply that knowledge to any application. These interface elements would become natural to her. The interface would disappear from her conscious consideration, leaving her alone with the content of her windows: the documents she was writing or the image she was creating.

## The myth of transparency

Digital design is an exercise in mythology, and among the digital mythographers were the creators of the GUI. The windowed interface has defined the way we interact with computers for nearly twenty years. (And what else lasts for twenty years in the computer world, except FORTRAN and C, which seem to be immortal?) The entire World Wide Web was built on computers using some version of the GUI and is now visited by hundreds of millions of users through their windowed screens. The creators of the GUI realized a commanding digital version of the myth of transparency.

In calling transparency a myth, we mean to describe both its strength and its weakness as a design philosophy. A myth allows its believers to construe their experience in a convincing way. Myths are not lies; they are exaggerations or simplifications. In this case, the myth of transparency is a story that artists and designers have told us (and themselves) in order to justify their designs. Because our culture had believed so strongly and for so long in the myth of transparency, interface designers could rely on it to make their designs compelling to users. Many myths are about origins, and the myth of transparency is one of these.

Here’s the version that interface designers tell (filmmakers, television producers, painters have told similar stories inflected to fit their media).

The Myth of Transparency Before there were computers—indeed, before there were media of any kind—people were just in the world. People saw things as they really were: there were no pixels, no aliasing, and no need for Web-safe colors. Objects were present to people; the rays of light reflected by objects entered their eyes undistorted by any intervening medium (other than the air itself). Today, a good computer interface gets the user as close to that original experience as possible

The strength of this myth is that it explains why icons are better than words, why 24-bit color is better than <sup></sup>-bit. The myth of transparency fosters the user illusion that the interface needs in order to be compelling. It’s not untrue, but it does simplify and exaggerate.

The danger comes when designers fail to recognize that the myth is a simplification of a complex reality. This is a danger because the strategy of transparency is never sufficient to dictate the design of a whole interface or artifact. For one thing, as every designer knows, there is a conflict between the simplicity (or transparency) and functionality. As they add functionality, designers often undermine the transparency of their design.

If we set a new Apple computer next to the original little beige Mac, we see a tremendous increase in both power and complexity. As computer hardware has improved, we have capabilities that we did not have in 1984—in graphic display, processing power, memory, and storage. Designers have added more and more features to the interface because of these hardware improvements, but also because of their desire to expand and elaborate the system. Adding new features is the principal strategy for convincing users to buy new versions of a program. That is why Microsoft Word developed from a simple text editor (patterned after Xerox PARC’s Bravo) into a suite of interlocking applications that not only format, spell-check, and evaluate our writing, but also annoy us with that dancing paperclip. It is why Web browsers (both Internet Explorer and Netscape) began adding features to write our e-mails and help us stage videoconferences. And it is why the Mac operating system (as well as Windows) continues to grow; the latest versions occupy one or more 6oo megabyte CD-ROMs (the first version fit on a 4oo kilobyte floppy disk).

With the Mac operating system, as with other software, growing complexity works against transparency. The operating system now contains so many features that it often acts in ways that even an experienced user cannot predict. Perhaps this “feature creep” is inevitable even with the best designs. If it is, then transparency is an ideal that can never be achieved. In an effort to make the system more powerful, designers are inevitably caught in this trade-off.

As designs grow old and familiar, designers get restless. For interface designers, the possibilities of the GUI seem to be played out. It is a magic trick that is no longer a challenge to perform. Designers want to stay ahead of their audience, so it isn’t surprising that designers have tired of the GUI, although their users have not. It’s a familiar story in the history of design. In 1951, the head of art direction for CBS, William Golden, designed the famous logo, the eye in the clouds. When he told CBS president Frank Stanton the following year that it was probably time to change the logo. Stanton wisely demurred. He knew that although the designer was ready to move on, the viewers were just getting comfortable with the logo, which lasted decades in its original form and still inspires today's design (Meggs 1998, 364).

Much of the digital design community and certainly HCI specialists seem convinced that at least the GUI, and probably the whole desktop computer, should be replaced. Although the desktop computer with its mouse and overlapping windows has become natural to hundreds of millions of general users, many specialists assume that <sup></sup>D graphics would provide an even more natural interaction.

## Virtual reality and the myth of the natural interface

Transparency goes by other names. In the history of writing and rhetoric, transparency was explained by the terms simplicity and clarity. In the history of painting, the ideal for many painters was to be “true to nature.” In a famous example, the British landscape painter Constable called his Wivenhoe Park a transcript from nature (E. Gombrich, 1961), and like painters two hundred years ago, interface designers today want to be true to nature. In their desire to replace the desktop computer and the GUI, they appeal to another myth.

The Myth of the Natural Interface Before there were computers—indeed, before there were any technologies—people were just in the world. They experienced the natural world in three dimensions, and they moved around it with six degrees of freedom. They could touch and manipulate things directly; there were no keyboards and no mice. A good digital interface gets us as close as possible to that natural state, allowing us to interact by movement and direct manipulation.

This myth, which also simplifies and exaggerates, lies behind the work to replace the GUI.

The most conservative approach is to replace the flat look of the GUI with a threedimensional representation on the computer screen. In place of the two-dimensional folders (already shaded to give a hint of a third dimension), we would see files and folders themselves arranged in three-dimensional perspective, and we would navigate through this projected space. In the movie Jurassic Park (1993), the young girl and her brother are trapped in the island’s command center. The vicious velociraptors are about to burst in and devour them unless the high-tech, computer-controlled doors can be sealed in time. The girl, a computer geek, manages to navigate the computer system and close the doors, because she can make sense of a <sup></sup>D interface to the UNIX operating system. The truth, however, is that if she really had to cope with such an interface, the velociraptors would probably be dining before she managed to find the program file.

The more sweeping proposals are to eliminate the need for the user to sit in front of a screen at all. Instead, the user would pass through the windowed screen of the GUI by putting on a VR headset and immersing herself in a world of visualized data. As we have noted, Ivan Sutherland envisioned such an interface when he invented virtual reality in the 196os and 197os. As Howard Rheingold wrote in Virtual Reality, "Sutherland opened a window, and pointed to the day when people would be able to go through that window and enter the abstract territory that computer simulations could create" (1991, 93). Sutherland was working at about the same time as Alan Kay (at one time a student of Sutherland), but the GUI was ready for the general user long before VR moved out of the research lab. All through the 198os, as the GUI was conquering the command-line interface, researchers continued to work on VR, and Jaron Lanier, the dreadlocked guru of VR, began claiming that it would replace symbolic communication. He was really imagining that VR would become the ultimate transparent interface. There would be no screen between the user and the information and no way for the user to step back and contemplate the screen at a distance, because she would be wearing the screens as eyepieces that completely covered her field of view. The user would occupy the same space as the data itself. Instead of using a keyboard and mouse, she would grasp and explore data with her hand (wearing a special glove fitted with sensors). Virtual reality as a transparent interface to all human data systems is, after all, the original vision of cyberspace that William Gibson suggested in Neuromancer.

VR interfaces are supposed to be natural because they create a visual world in three dimensions, like the physical world we inhabit. Yet the natural interface is a myth, a story that interface designers tell (us and themselves) in order to justify their designs. It is a compelling story because it has roots deep in the history of our culture. We can easily believe that seeing a picture is more basic, more direct, more “natural” than reading words. Even the cultural relativist John Berger wrote in his landmark Ways of Seeing, “Seeing comes before words. The child looks and recognizes before it can speak. But there is also another sense in which seeing comes before words. Seeing establishes our place in the surrounding world; we explain that world with words, but words can never undo the fact that we are surrounded by it" (1972, 7). If seeing is more natural and direct than reading, then any visual interface, even the GUI, is more natural and direct than an ASCII interface. By the same logic, the GUI is less natural than an immersive <sup></sup>D interface, which relies even less on words or other arbitrary symbols.

However, what is considered “natural” can change. Why should it seem natural to put on a headset and navigate in the virtual world? Why is this any more natural than typing on a computer keyboard, or reading a book, or writing on a roll of papyrus (as the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans did)? For some, the term natural is simply a way of indicating that the interface is easy for a beginner to learn or efficient for an experienced user. But even by this definition, the idea of the natural is not constant, because what is efficient or easy in an interface depends on what the interface is for. Some sort of virtual environment is almost certainly more efficient than a GUI in allowing the user to practice visual and motor skills, for example, for flight simulation. But if the task is to navigate through a collection of reports, memos, and spreadsheets, then the GUI may still be easier and more efficient.

Furthermore, <sup></sup>D interfaces are not radical departures from the GUI. Like the desktop GUI, they are still based on the myth of transparency; they are attempts to make the interface disappear. They simply go further in the direction established thirty years ago by the designers of the GUI. They try to do with pixels what Brunelleschi tried to achieve almost six hundred years ago with paint. The pursuit of transparency is endless, because transparency is redefined with each new technology. The Renaissance painters pursued transparency by applying the technique of linear perspective. The desktop GUI attempted to achieve transparency on screen-based computers, and VR technology now pursues transparency by offering the illusion of three dimensions. These are all versions of the same myth: that a technology can disappear completely and put the viewer or user in touch with reality.