The reason that designers must understand the myth (and the history) of transparency is that the strategy of transparency can be misapplied. As designers, we want the interface to disappear for the user for part of the time, but not completely and not irrevocably. At some subliminal level, the user must be aware of the interface at all times. She must know that she is using a computer and not actually writing on a piece of paper on the desktop. In VR, she must know that she is looking at a virtual world, or she is likely to run into a wall in the physical world. There is always a tension between the two worlds: the world depicted by any digital application and the physical world in which the user must function. (Even the characters in the movie The Matrix eventually had to return to the dystopic physical world in which their bodies lived.)

Finally, even if it could be achieved, perfect transparency would be a dangerous mistake. Think of the window metaphor. When a window pane is perfectly transparent, the glass perfectly clear, there is a danger that a bird will fly into it or a person will try to put his hand through it. In the story of the painter Zeuxis, no one, of course, was concerned about the crows who presumably broke their beaks against the wall while trying to get the grapes. But we do know of instances where humans can be endangered by interfaces meant to be transparent.

## The dangers of transparency

It's 4:00 A.M. on March 28, 1979. Late night or early morning are the most likely times for natural deaths and serious industrial accidents, perhaps because human operators are at the ebb in their circadian rhythms. (Think about that the next time your pilot is making the complicated preparations for landing your plane in Paris at what is for him 3:oo A.M.) The Bhopal chemical spill in India happened around midnight. At Three Mile Island, it was 4:oo A.M. when the disaster began.

As is usually the case in advanced technical systems, a cascade of failures contributed to the infamous near-meltdown of the Three Mile Island reactor near Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. Emergency feedwater valves had been closed days before for a repair and had never been reopened. The coolant system failed because an unknown operator had destroyed the valve control system by misconnecting a hose. The heat built up. At one crucial point, moreover, operators were supposed to ensure that the cooling system continued to carry away the excess heat. They were watching an indicator that told them that the water level in the coolant system was rising (when in fact it was falling), so they stopped adding water

(Casamayou 1993, 103; Johnson 1999). The problem was that the operators did not question their interface. They treated the valve indicator as if it were a transparent window on the level of water inside the reactor. The operators should have been prepared for that possibility; they should have looked at the indicator rather than through it. Under the pressure of an emergency, however, they made the assumption of transparency.

At Three Mile Island, the interface consisted largely of analog dials and indicators. But transparency can be the wrong design strategy for any kind of interface, analog or digital, if it lulls the user into thinking that the system is foolproof—if the operator fails to remember that the system may fail precisely in a way that masks its own failure.

Consider our sleepy airline pilot. Ordinarily, he wants to look through the instruments on the control panel (which, by the way, is now likely to be a “glass cockpit,” in which the readings are delivered by a computer interface). But when something appears to be wrong with, say, an engine, the pilot always asks himself whether the problem lies in the engine itself or in the instrumentation. Perhaps the engine is fine and the interface is faulty. Pilots need to remember what the operators at Three Mile Island forgot in a moment of high stress: that the instrument is an interface and is never completely transparent. In this case, it may now be called a glass cockpit, but in fact the glass may be a mirror, reflecting what the user is inclined to believe, rather than a transparent window.

It does not have to be a matter of life and death, of course. Failures in transparency occur regularly in desktop computer interfaces. It happens to all of us, even the most experienced users, in part because we do not think to question what the interface is telling us and in part because the interface confuses us with its transparency. For example, in the Windows operating system, users make frequent errors because the interface (by default) hides the three-character extensions on file names. We assume that a file has a certain extension (for example, .htm). We want to open the file in our Web editing application, so we call up the application’s dialog box and point it to the folder where we know the file is located. But the file does not appear in the list of files available to be opened. The reason is that the dialog box is “helpfully” filtering out files that do not end with the .htm extension. Because our file doesn’t end with that extension, we don’t see it. And when we look back at the folder on the desktop, the extensions aren’t listed, so it doesn’t occur to us that the file doesn’t have the proper extension. We can’t figure out why the program can’t see the file. In the name of transparency, the system puts a cloak of invisibility over the file’s full name.

This is the danger of transparency: that the interface will mask the operation of the system exactly when the user needs to see and understand what the system is doing. When

something unexpected happens, the user should be able to look at the interface. This is the notorious problem with software agents.

Deirdre Smith-Jones is a graphic designer with an interest in cultural studies. When she visits amazon.com from her home computer, she gets a message on the start-up screen: “Hello, Deirdre Smith-Jones. We have

The danger of transparency is that the interface will mask the operation of the system exactly when the user needs to see and understand what the system is doing.

recommendations for you.” The recommendations include Marita Sturken and Lisa Cartwright’s Practices of Looking and Lev Manovich’s The Language of New Media, which make good sense given Deirdre’s interests. But a year ago, Deirdre bought her nephew Dave Madden’s All-Star Baseball 2ooo, so now she continues to get offers for new Nintendo games. She bought her mother (who is notoriously hard to shop for) a Martha Stewart book for Christmas, and now she is offered every paean to stylish living published by the Martha Stewart machine. The amazon.com software agent can’t easily distinguish between the kinds of books that Deirdre buys regularly for herself and those she buys for others on an occasional basis.

Software agents, especially those on the World Wide Web, try to be transparent and present the user only with results. But these programs are never really smart or subtle: they all make mistakes. And when it fails, a software agent is no longer transparent, no longer the silent butler that it is supposed to be.

## Another strategy

The computer window is such an effective design because it can rely on the assumption of transparency. It is important for digital designers to understand this because designers work within and through such cultural assumptions. Like clever magicians, they offer the audience an illusion that it is already prepared to believe. In this case, hundreds of years of painting, printing, and photography have prepared us to look through the new windows that the computer offers. These traditions have inclined us to accept the illusion of virtual reality and other <sup></sup>D interfaces as well. The task of the designer is to encourage users to follow their inclination to look through the interface.

Designers must also bear in mind that the strategy of transparency, although popular, is not the only one available to them. Wooden Mirror in fact uses another strategy, which is the counterpart to transparency: the strategy of getting the user to look at the interface or object of design rather than through it. Wooden Mirror is not transparent; it is an opaque, richly textured surface that nevertheless manages to show the viewer to herself. This is the most important lesson, perhaps, that digital art has to offer for digital design: an interface can be not only a window but also a mirror, reflecting its user.

Chapter 3. Nosce Te Ipsum

S E E I N G Y O U R S E L F I N

T H E D I G I T A L M I R R O R

Digital artists suggest not that we look through the experience to a world beyond, but rather that we look right at the surface.