Postmodern designers and artists insisted that the viewer should become part of the process itself. They created disrupted and fragmented images that required us to work to understand them, such as the illustrations of the pioneering Wolfgang Weingart in the 197os (figure <sup>.</sup>). There are great cultural and artistic distances between The Ambassadors and Weingart, but they share something important: an emphasis on process and an awareness of the act of making.

When transparency and clarity were the dominant goals of our culture’s artists and designers, there were always those who questioned this strategy. Nosce is part of that tradition of questioning. Its collaged interface is in no way transparent; instead, it promotes itself

When transparency and clarity were our chief cultural goals, there were also artists and designers who questioned this strategy.

as an experience in its own right, not a representation or model of something unattainable. The strategy of transparency remains popular today—on TV news programs, for example, and in television and film drama—but its counterpart is also increasingly popular in our media-saturated environment.

## Multiplicity in contemporary culture

You’re watching a music video on television. (You turned it on as visual wallpaper, but then it caught your attention.) You see a series of rapidly edited images, one disconnected moment after another, with each image lasting five or ten seconds at most. The singer is walking down the road; now she’s on the beach. Now she’s wearing a dress, now a tuxedo, now a bikini. Is this a video representation of schizophrenia? It is MTV, and it has been among the most popular television channels for almost two decades.

You walk into a bar. Four large television sets are mounted on the walls, so wherever you sit, you can see one or two. Each set is showing a different football game. (The volume is turned down on all the sets, so you can listen to the bar’s own sound system as background music.) At the bar itself are small video units offering a networked sports trivia game in which you can compete against not only the other players at the bar, but patrons of other bars on the network.

You go to a rock concert, which is part of the tour of a famous group. When you find your seat in an arena about the size of Yankee Stadium, you gaze down on the stage seemingly a football field length away and look for the musicians, who at this distance are the size of tiny toy figures. Behind the musicians are giant video screens and huge speakers the size of small cars. The show itself is a barrage of sound and light, a multimedia experience in which the actual musicians are only the smallest part of the action. Projections on the giant video screens alternate between live video of the musicians dancing around the stage and prerecorded video appropriate to the concert’s theme.

What do these experiences have in common? They are all examples of our contemporary media culture. Many people today, indeed the vast majority in our urban society, choose to surround themselves with complex media forms. They enjoy the multiplicity and prefer not to concentrate on any one medium or representation for very long. Even if they are watching a single media form (say, MTV on television), that form itself is fragmented and multiple. When we surround ourselves with multimedia in this way, the various media forms constitute the experience for us. This is a contemporary alternative to transparency: it is the mirror rather than the window—the strategy of reflection, multiplicity, self-awareness in action.

The striking fact is that this strategy is so popular today. The work of painters like Holbein and Vermeer appealed to a relatively small middle and upper class of collectors in the seventeenth century. In the early twentieth century, the futurists, such as Marinetti, and the dadaists, such as Tristan Tzara, performed their multimedia events in tiny coffee houses. They were denounced by mainstream art connoisseurs and were utterly unknown to people who flocked to silent movies and other popular entertainments. Today, Madonna performs her light and sound shows for sold-out crowds of a hundred thousand, who riot if she cancels.

Contemporary design in all its forms must take into account this aspect of our culture. Designers should respond to and appreciate the desire for multiplicity, for making the medium itself an experience to be savored. And, of course, contemporary visual design does respond. Rave design, for example, is a whole aesthetic built around the multiplicity and multimediacy of the mass concert or rave event. Breaking the illusion of transparency is not an esoteric or elite practice. It’s what MTV producers, rap singers, and technorock groups are also doing. MTV producers join digital artists in suggesting not that we forget the medium, but rather that we enjoy the medium or process as an experience—not that we look through the experience to a world beyond, but rather that we look right at the surface.

Contemporary culture is receptive to transparency (the window) and also to an alternative, self-reflective style (the mirror). This latter style, which was truly avant-garde in the early twentieth century, has become the aesthetic of rock concerts in the early twenty-first century. So digital graphic designers and the growing world of digital entertainment need to master both styles. Digital interface design needs to master both styles as well.

Contemporary culture is receptive not only to transparency (the window), but also to an alternative, self-reflective style (the mirror). Digital designers and the growing world of digital entertainment need both styles.

## Interface design

What we have been describing is a second strategy, a counterpart to the strategy of simple transparency. We can compare this second strategy with the first by listing their respective characteristics:

<table><tr><td></td><td>Strategy of Transparency</td><td>Strategy of Reflectivity</td></tr><tr><td>Goal</td><td>information delivery</td><td>compelling experience</td></tr><tr><td>Metaphor</td><td>interface as window</td><td>interface as mirror</td></tr><tr><td>Response by user</td><td>look through interface</td><td>look at interface</td></tr></table>

These two strategies form a continuum: no digital design can achieve pure transparency or pure reflectivity. Each design is a combination of these two strategies—perhaps with more elements of one or the other. We might be tempted to think that transparency is for “serious” digital applications, such as productivity software, while reflectivity belongs exclusively to art and entertainment. But it is not that simple.

It is true, however, that digital art emphasizes reflectivity. The art of SIGGRAPH 2ooo calls into question the assumption that the strategy of transparency can be all-inclusive and self-sufficient. One function of art in the past century has been to challenge such assumptions. The task of the SIGGRAPH Art Gallery is to place itself in the middle of a premier conference on digital technology and ask questions about how digital technology works with us and for us. Wooden Mirror, Nosce Te Ipsum, and TEXT RAIN playfully question our role as the user, the subject, of a digital interface. These pieces are not simply “art”; they are also “demos,” which we expect to find in a computer conference. They demonstrate compelling possibilities for our interaction with digital applications. They demonstrate how the interface can be made visible to us as a vital part of our experience.

## The importance of oscillation (between design strategies)

Designers of digital artifacts—in fact, designers of any media form in our digital era—must mix strategies and create an interface that is both transparent and reflective. This mixing of strategies means that the designers must examine their designs in two ways: from the outside and from the inside. They must look at each design as if they were users, and they must also be able to look at each design critically, from the outside.

When Bruce Tognazzini compared interface designers to magicians, he suggested that designers, like magicians, must live in two worlds: “Magicians live in both the world of their mechanical tricks and the illusory world they are creating for their spectators, but they believe' in the spectator's world" (1993, 359). Magicians always deal in two realities. Digital artists and designers too must believe in their illusions—but only up to a point. And the same is true for their audience. In a magic trick, the magician never wants the audience to see the interface, to guess how the trick works. But designers do want their users to be able to get behind the illusion at certain times.

Good designs oscillate between hiding and revealing themselves. Nosce Te Ipsum oscillates as it unfolds itself before the user and as the elements of the collage peel back to reveal the user to herself. The rhythm of oscillation comes from the interaction of the user with the system and is determined by the pace of the user’s walk. Interfaces should oscillate in a

Interfaces should oscillate in a controlled way between states of transparency and reflectivity. The essence of the GUI interface, for example, is controlled oscillation. Alan Kay understood this when he invented overlapping

Interfaces should oscillate in a controlled way between transparency and reflectivity. The essence of the GUI is controlled oscillation.

windows, the key element in the GUI. One window in isolation is meant to be transparent, to show the user the data that it contains. Kay and his colleagues came up with the idea that multiple windows on the screen can be stacked or overlapped. At any time, the user can call any window forward and make it the focus of the interaction, and that action of calling the window forward (by a click of the mouse) requires that the user acknowledge the interface, at