There are Web radio and television stations, Web soap operas, sites to promote and advertise corporations and organizations, official and unofficial fan sites for celebrities, gambling and pornography sites. Audiences already know how to read these various media forms, how to tell good sites from poor ones. The same is true of computer games delivered on CD, DVD, or over the Web. Already, the fans of such games can draw subtle but (to them) important distinctions among the various subgenres: action, adventure, role playing, simulation, puzzle, and so on.

## Remediations are not forever

In 1945, American radio was thriving with different media forms for drama, comedy, and news and information. Other than a few enthusiasts for television (who must have sounded rather like VR enthusiasts do today), no one thought that within fifteen years, these forms would all but disappear. Between 1951 and 1956, longstanding favorites such as The Life of Riley, The Shadow, The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet, and The Lone Ranger went off the air. (Gunsmoke lasted until 1961.) Television didn't kill radio, but it killed radio as a medium for telling stories. Many of the qualities of radio entertainment were taken over by television in the 195os, and many radio series, such as The Lone Ranger, Amos and Andy, and The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet, migrated to television.

Media forms and even media can become moribund and can be replaced. Radio continues to spawn new forms: the pseudo-political talk show, endless subtle varieties of popular music programming, the non-news news format (where reports of traffic jams and local thunderstorms are treated as news items). These too are remediations—of the Hyde Park (eccentric) orator, the disco dance, and the gossip once exchanged in barbershops. And there are the interesting hybrids: radio broadcast over the Web, music downloadable from the Internet, and so on. But media forms for narrative and drama hardly exist on broadcast radio anymore.

Remediations are always provisional. Because remediation, like beauty, is in the eye of the beholder, the task of the designer is to convince the user of the value of each remediating design. When designers succeed, new media forms are born. But a new form is not better in any absolute sense than the older form. It depends on what criteria we use to judge the new and old forms. Designers and producers of the new form want the audience to adopt new criteria. Television programs are better than the experience of film only if we measure the two forms by the standard of “liveness.” Television news is more up-to-date and therefore (by some standards) more informative than the film newsreels that used to run in theaters in the 194os before the feature presentation. If we measure by the quality of the image, however, film was always and is still better (as we wait for HDTV). Web sites are better than television if we judge them by the standard of point-and-click interactivity. But television is still better than the Web at delivering higher-quality moving pictures in real time. The key is which standard is applied.

In digital design, the standards seem to be changing more rapidly than ever before. Everything about digital design is in motion, including the criteria by which we judge it. The standards for judging a printed book—the transparency of the layout and typography— remained much the same from 16oo to 19oo and beyond, although there were changing ideas about how to achieve that transparency. But with the new media of photography, then film, radio, and television, the criteria changed several times in the space of 15o years. Today, digital design is at most 3o years old, and the criteria seem to change often, as digital technology is presented as a rival to different earlier media and their forms. First, the computer was a new kind of book, then a new kind of graphic design, and now also a new kind of television and film.

## The variety of digital remediations

In a sense, electronic computers started to function as remediators as soon as they were tinkered together in the 194os. They were built to remediate the mechanical calculating machines and the card tabulators that had been used since the turn of the twentieth century to record the U.S. Census and similar data for business. It was these tabulators that made IBM an important company before electronic computers were ever built. The early electronic computers used punch cards or punched paper tape as input and sometimes as output. What they remediated was what happened between input and output: they replaced the mechanical operations of sorting with electronic comparisons. We did not see this replacement as a remediation, however, because we did not understand the computer as a medium at all. Instead, in the early years, we were captivated by the idea of the computer as an electronic brain rather than as a medium of representation. Although the computer was already a remediator in the 194os and 195os, our culture did not get the point until much later, when we began to see how the computer could explicitly supplement or replace other media forms.

It is no coincidence that the researchers at Xerox PARC, such as Alan Kay, who finally and convincingly demonstrated that the computer could be a medium, also introduced the

great remediating metaphor: the computer as a secretary’s desktop in a business office. The paper files and folders of the physical desktop become electronic files and directories in the computer, and the user places files into folders by manipulating them with the mouse. It is a good metaphor. Usability experts tell us that a metaphor is or should be operational: that it should make it easier for the user to go through the steps required to accomplish a task in information management.

Metaphors, however, have a larger purpose, precisely because the computer is now understood as a medium. A digital metaphor should explain the meaning and significance of the digital experience by referring the user to an earlier media form. There does not have to be, and indeed there could not be, a perfect correspondence between the operations of the computer and the work of a secretary seated at a desk. The historical importance of the desktop metaphor was that it explained what the new personal computer was good for. It explained that unlike the behemoth mainframes of the past, these computers were meant for the work that secretaries, businesspeople, writers, and academics used to do with pen, paper, and typewriters. (And although it has not eliminated pen and paper, the personal computer has almost eliminated the typewriter.) The desktop metaphor obeyed the double logic of remediation: it depended on the importance of past media, and yet it asserted that the computer could improve on the past.

The desktop metaphor incorporated, rather inconsistently, an earlier metaphor that Douglas Engelbart developed and Alan Kay had perfected. As we have noted, the display of information in separate, movable, overlapping rectangles on the screen could have been given a variety of names, but developers chose the name window and so invoked a cultural metaphor that goes back to Renaissance painting. Today, computer windows can replace not only paintings, but potentially other media forms such as printed books, to offer us a view onto a world of information. The first computer windows held only blocks of text; now, especially with the prevalence of the World Wide Web, computer windows contain static and moving images as well. They offer experiences and not mere data, and they constitute the principal unit of digital design on the desktop computer.

Although its windows are (sometimes) meant to be transparent, the computer itself is anything but transparent today. We see computers and computational devices all around us; they are the most visible and obvious examples of a media revolution. Furthermore, the computer has now emerged as perhaps the most vigorous and eclectic remediator of all the various media that we still use. Various digital forms, and particularly the World Wide Web, borrow from, reconfigure, and remix all of the principal media of the twentieth century (film, radio, audio recording, and television), as well as two great earlier media: photography and print itself. All of these were new media themselves at one time and defined themselves in distinction to earlier media.

Like their predecessors working in graphic design, photography, film, and television, digital designers are becoming used to borrowing from earlier forms. Digital art has the important task of explaining how this bor-

Computers and computational devices are the most visible and obvious examples of the media revolution.

rowing works: we borrow in order to offer a new experience for the viewer or user, but that experience always depends on our remembered sense of the reality or authenticity of earlier forms. The magic of Magic Book lies in the way it recalls our childhood belief that the stories that books tell are real worlds—worlds that we should be able to explore and inhabit.

Magic Book is nostalgic in this sense. It is striking how many digital designs, particularly Web sites, make a nostalgic appeal to “simpler” technologies from “simpler” times. For this reason, radios and television sets, jukeboxes, photo albums, and control panels with quaint analog displays are all popular metaphors on the Web.

## Metaphors and remediation

A digital metaphor may be a navigational tool, but at the same time it shapes the user’s experience of the site. This is the way to think of navigation in general: it is not simply the movement between units of information but an experience. To design the navigation and interaction strategies of a Web site (or any computer application) is in large part to define the user’s experience of the site.

Usability experts claim that designers use metaphors too freely. A metaphor, they argue, can be misleading if users fail to understand its limits. In fact, digital metaphors are never perfect analogies, and users soon realize that they are not meant to be. If the computer desktop was perfectly like a physical desktop, folders would be as hard to rename and reorganize in the computer as they are on a physical desk. Texts of letters and other documents would be as hard to change. Why would anyone then bother to buy a computer to do word processing and file organization? The purpose of a good design metaphor is to emphasize differences from as well as similarities to the original. The divergences from the metaphor are