part of its meaning, because they show the ways in which the computer application improves on the original. This is especially true when the metaphor is to another medium, when the computer interface is a remediation of an earlier form.

In our media-saturated culture, it is inevitable that we should understand Web sites, computer games, or even productivity tools in comparison with other media. We make these comparisons so quickly and automatically that they become almost unconscious. That is why we love metaphors and computer icons, even when usability experts tell us that both are overused.

## The rhythms of remediation

Suppose you had invented a new medium—a technology that transmitted and created experiences in a way unlike any other. A friend comes to you and asks what your invention is for. What do you say? How could you describe it without referring to other media? You would have to say: “It’s like television, only you view images in three dimensions on a headset.” Or: “It stores symbolic information like a printed book, except that the reader can change the information.” You have to tell people how it fits into the ecology of existing media forms. Until you can explain how it resembles and how it surpasses other media, people won’t recognize it as a medium at all.

This very thing happened with the computer. For the first several decades, people did not understand the computer as a medium. It became a medium only when Licklider and Kay began to explain how it could combine the functions of the book, the telephone, the painter’s canvas, and so on. They had to indicate what was familiar about the new medium in order to indicate what was different. Each designer of a new media artifact in effect does the same thing: defines a rhythm of the old and the new and makes that rhythm intelligible to the user. If the artifact is a perfect replica of an older form, the user will see no need for it. And if the artifact is utterly and completely new, the user will not understand what it does or why he should learn it.

The rhythm of remediation is another name for the rhythm discussed in chapter <sup></sup>: between the transparent and the reflective. Because the user is accustomed to the earlier medium, it seems transparent and natural. Why design a news and information Web site to look like a newspaper? Because a newspaper is still seen as the “natural” way to present news. Put a story in a multiple-column format with headlines and bylines, and people will regard it as news (as newspapers themselves prove every day by running stories that tell us nothing of local, national, or international significance). The very fact that these stories appear in the

proper format qualifies them as news. The stories on the news and information Web sites often follow the same structure and present the same content as in newspapers. What is new and (at least at first) unexpected is that Web sites can present links that allow the user to jump to other stories. Hyperlinks are reflective elements in the interface: they compel the user to consider where the link might take her.

## Remediation as a conscious design strategy

The rhythms of the old and new will be different for different sites, depending in part on whether the remediation is explicit or implicit—for example, whether the site looks and acts like a television or simply recalls the medium forms of television broadcasting implicitly in the way it addresses the user. But the borrowing of older media forms always has a double sense: it both honors the older forms and challenges them. The borrowing helps explain a new technology to its users. One piece at SIGGRAPH 2ooo says to its users, “This virtual reality application is like a book in the sense that it imagines a world for you to experience. At the same time, it improves on the book by allowing that world to surround you as a visual experience.” Another says, “This Webcam site is like a television show, but with the advantage that you as the viewer can decide which camera view to watch and when to switch.”

Digital design should take this lesson from digital art: designs, as media experiences, borrow a sense of authenticity or reality from previous media forms. Like digital art, commercial designs borrow from earlier forms in order to claim to improve on them. Whether she is working on a Web site or the interface for a new word processor, the digital designer is remediating some earlier forms. Likewise, the user will be consciously or unconsciously comparing her site or interface to earlier media. He will be trying to read a Web site as if it were a print publication, he will read the graphics as if they came in a magazine, or he will read the streaming video as if it were a television broadcast. As it was for the artists of SIGGRAPH 2ooo, the strategy of remediation should be a conscious part of design, especially now that we understand the computer as a medium that can offer us new media forms. The poet and critic T. S. Eliot said that good poets borrow and great ones steal. We could say that all designers remediate and good designers do so consciously and consistently.

Chapter 5. Fakeshop

T H E D I V E R S I T Y O F N E W M E D I A