medium we can look right through, a window onto a world of pure experience. The pieces of SIGGRAPH 2ooo, however, don't fit this description. Disparate and diverse, they call attention to themselves. We can’t simply look through them, because they are reflective, and what they reflect is the relationship between the old and new media forms that they combine.

The enthusiasts for convergence do not expect the digital interface to work in this way; they expect that users will grasp the converged medium automatically and without reflection. Yet this doesn't happen with the art of SIGGRAPH 2ooo. It is not that these pieces are always “difficult” or esoteric. Many of them (TEXT RAIN, Wooden Mirror, Terminal Time) appeal to a broad audience of artists, computer experts, designers, and many others. Nevertheless, the pieces refuse to converge to a single, simple media form, because that is not the direction in which our digital culture is heading.

Where we are heading instead is toward ubiquitous computing.

## Ubiquitous media

Mark Weiser's pioneering work in the early 199os added a new term to the digital lexicon. In a Scientific American article in 1991, he predicted:

My colleagues and I at PARC believe that what we call ubiquitous computing will gradually emerge as the domi nant mode of computer access over the next twenty years. . . . When almost every object either contains a computer or can have a tab attached to it, obtaining information will be trivial: “Who made that dress? Are there any more in the store? What was the name of the designer of that suit I liked last week?” The computing environment knows the suit you looked at for a long time last week because it knows both of your locations, and, it can retroactively find the designer’s name even if it did not interest you at the time. Ubiquitous computers will help overcome the problem of information overload. There is more information available at our fingertips during a walk in the woods than in any computer system, yet people find a walk among trees relaxing and computers frustrating. Machines that fit the human environment, instead of forcing humans to enter theirs, will make using a computer as refreshing as taking a walk in the woods. (104)

## Weiser drew a contrast between ubiquitous computing and virtual reality:

The opposition between the notion of virtual reality and ubiquitous, invisible computing is so strong that some of us use the term “embodied virtuality” to refer to the process of drawing computers out of their electronic shells. The “virtuality” of computer-readable data—all the different ways in which it can be altered, processed and analyzed—is brought into the physical world. (98)

“Embodied virtuality” recognizes the fact that digital designs intersect with our physical world: they cannot escape from it into pure cyberspace. While VR (virtual reality) seems to eliminate the computer, as it takes the user into a graphic world, ubicomp (ubiqui-

tous computing) or embodied virtuality does just the opposite: it scatters computational devices throughout our environment. With ubicomp, the computer joins us in our physical world; with VR we join the computer in its

Digital designs intersect with our physical world; they cannot escape from our world into pure cyberspace.

world. Ubicomp recognizes the divergence and diversity of design; VR wants to be the ultimate convergence. Ubicomp seems to be winning. Although VR has proven useful for specialized applications, we are not any closer today than we were in 199o to a general 3D, immersive interface. Meanwhile, computational devices continue to multiply, and we continue to purchase and surround ourselves with them.

But Weiser got one thing wrong. Even while he was drawing a contrast between virtual reality and embodied virtuality, he insisted that ubicomp too would be invisible computing. His Scientific American article began, “The most profound technologies are those that disappear. They weave themselves into the fabric of everyday life until they are indistinguishable from it. . . we are trying to conceive a new way of thinking about computers in the world, one that takes into account the natural human environment and allows the computers themselves to vanish into the background" (94).

Media are among the most profound technologies, and they do not disappear. Instead, media and their forms oscillate between being invisible and visible—between being windows and mirrors. When media become visible, they become mirrors, reflecting the world around them, the contexts in which they function.

The ubicomp enthusiasts show a great interest in the information processing of everyday housekeeping tasks—smart refrigerators, toasters, doors, windows, and thermostats all talking to each other. While there have been a certain number of these “free-range appliances,” our culture is far more interested in ubiquitous media devices: digital cameras, MP<sup></sup> players, and mobile phones. Most digital devices with which we now surround ourselves are functioning as media forms, representing the world to us and sending these representations back and forth through twisted pair, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, or through the “luminiferous ether.”

Media are everywhere today—in our living rooms, bedrooms, dens, and kitchens. They follow us when we leave the house—not as free-range appliances, but under our close supervision. Our cell phones accompany us everywhere, while radios, cassette decks, CD and DVD players, and sometimes even navigational computers travel with us in our cars. And when we reach our destinations—offices, malls, restaurants, bars—we find that many of these same media are already there as well. In offices, assistants and their bosses listen to the radio while working at their word processors. Many of us now seem to prefer both working and leisure environments in which two or more media forms compete for our moment-tomoment attention. It’s no wonder writers on media are convinced that attention is the most important currency in the information economy.

The World Wide Web is the perfect example of a complex of new media forms driven by competition for our attention. E-commerce on the Web is all about attention, because at any moment (as Jakob Nielsen reminds us) the user can click on a link, choose a menu item, or type in a URL, and fly off to another site. Web advertisers talk about “buying and selling eyeballs”—trying to convince the user to lend her attention to their banner advertising and click through to their site. The Web also contributes to our hypermediated environment by morphing into a combination of media forms: text, graphics, animation, audio, and video. Competition for attention is the ultimate motive behind remediation—competition not just between various instances of the same form (various television channels) but also between forms from different media (for example, between television and Web sites or between movies and computer games).

On the Web and elsewhere, ubiquitous computing has become ubiquitous media. We want more media forms on more varied devices. In many cases, these devices are portable, and in some cases, we are even prepared to wear them.

## Wearable media forms

Wearable computers are more than 4oo years old. Admittedly the first wearable computer, the wristwatch, whose basic design and purpose was relatively unchanged from the sixteenth century to the twentieth, was an analog device. The wristwatch set a standard to which all current wearable computers are (usually implicitly) compared. Meanwhile, the clock (portable or fixed) was the prototype for the entire mechanical technology that dominated Europe and then North America from the Middle Ages to the arrival of the integrated circuit. Before there was ubiquitous computing, our society experienced hundreds of years of ubiquitous mechanization, as people surrounded themselves with mechanical devices.

We might think that the watch is a perfect example of a transparent information technology—its purpose to indicate the time as quickly and efficiently as possible. Yet we also know that a watch not only tells the time; it also makes a fashion statement and tells us something about the wealth or poverty of the wearer.

From the eighteenth century to the mid-twentieth, the Swiss were the best watchmakers. No one could match the perfection of the Swiss mechanism. When the American manufacturer Bulova began marketing the Accutron, a watch with a quartz controller, in 196o, the Swiss smiled and continued to construct their beautiful and precise mechanicals. But quartz watches instantly began to win every contest for accuracy. Rather than admit defeat, the Swiss simply declared an end in Switzerland to accuracy contests in the wristwatch category (Landes, 1983, 346). Quartz watches and then fully digital watches proved in the coming years that the mechanical clockwork mechanism was utterly obsolete. The digital watch delivered information more cheaply and so much more accurately that there was no reason for anyone ever to own a mechanical watch. As we know, no one wears a mechanical watch any longer . . .

Well, in fact millions of people continue to wear watches with mechanisms or at least analog displays. What saved the Swiss industry was the realization that it was not only selling time; it was selling a design. The Swiss (and others) developed ever more elaborate and expensive designs that people could display as marks of wealth. They developed the Swatch line to sell a lifestyle, rather than a wristwatch, just as the Coca-Cola company sells a lifestyle rather than brown fizzy water.

The Rolex and the Swatch are interfaces that are obviously and emphatically not meant to disappear. They are meant to be seen and appreciated not only by the user but by his acquaintances as well, with each design appropriate for a certain social group or a certain fashion context. In general, retro designs and advertising have worked so well that analog watches are considered cool, and digital watches are often regarded as appropriate apparel only for geeks. However, digital watches are clunky and uninteresting only when they appear