# Improvisation and the Art of Making Things Stick Karin Barber The concepts of creativity and cultural improvisation invite us to focus on the growing points of social life: to ask how new ideas, genres, forms of social being come into existence. They present a challenge to anthropology to try to trace the most elusive and fluid aspects of reality. But they also challenge us to understand the fluidity of social processes in relation to the almost universal human effort to fix things – to nail cultural arrangements down, to produce forms that will endure. People's ceaseless innovative and re-creative activity is often directed precisely towards making a mark that transcends space and time. Improvisation and the art of making things stick cannot be separated: we find them everywhere fused and intertwined. Two venerable models of the nature, place and scope of social innovation lie behind current thinking. One proposes that the normal situation is inertia, stability and repetition. What needs to be explained is how and why change happens. Bascom, for example, suggested that conformity is taken for granted in most social institutions. A preferred site in which to trace the movements of change and innovation, therefore, is art forms, where a greater degree of innovation and creativity may be expected. This, he suggested, may serve to shed light on less visible processes of social and political change in wider society. Even so, the problem is to explain how traditional, routine repetition with variations – in folk music, for example – can sometimes jump to a qualitative transformation involving genuine originality (Bascom 1959). So in traditional societies, stability and continuity are the default situation and are associated with conformity and a lack of originality; change is exceptional and – when it is not the result of external forces – it is associated with individual innovation and creativity. The other model starts from the opposite assumption – that everything that happens is new, unrepeatable and not wholly predictable from what went before. G.H. Mead, in The Philosophy of the Present, called this the emergent'. The present is not a piece cut out anywhere from the temporal dimension of uniformly passing reality. Its chief reference is to the emergent event, that is, to the occurrence of something which is more than the processes that have led up to it' (Mead 1932: 23). Scientists and historians seek to find rational order and stretch this back so that the present may be seen to follow from the past; but in fact time itself is constituted out of a succession of interruptions'. What takes place does so under necessary conditions', but these do not determine in its full reality that which emerges' (ibid.: 16). The past is as hypothetical as the future'; the present, defined by the emergent, is constantly breaking new ground. The problem here, then, is not how to explain change, but how to account for the social creation of continuity. In trying to think about how new things emerge from the matrix of the customary on the one hand, and how people go about solidifying the flux of social life on the other – issues which clearly lie at the very centre of anthropology – we find ourselves ambushed at every turn by latent binary distinctions: between text’ and performance'; between scripted and improvised enactment; between memorization and composition; between the creativity that leads to a concrete product' and the creativity which is an end in itself.¹ It is worth noting, before we go any further, that in many cultures the ideational repertoire suffers no such handicap. There are local models of being-in-society which effortlessly combine what our own vocabulary keeps separating. Early in the history of our discipline, Malinowski (1935) provided riveting evidence of this in Coral Gardens and their Magic. ## Growth and Imperishability Malinowski tells us that Trobrianders cultivated their yam gardens with passion, devotion and artistic care. They grew far more yams than they needed for consumption. They did far more work on the yam gardens than was required in strictly biological terms for successful growth and maturation of the crop – tidying the plots, building beautiful fences. The growth of the yams, and the appearance of the yam garden, reflected, or embodied, the personal and social enhancement of the gardener. As your garden flourished, so did you and your reputation. Gardening, then, was about change, emergence and the progressive manifestation of qualities that were never fixed but constantly crescent. Not only that, but once harvested, the yams did not stay put. Every man grew the bulk of his yams to give to someone else – to his married sister and her husband, or to a chief as tribute. Every man's storehouse was filled by someone else. If the yams were plentiful, both giver and receiver stood to gain in prestige from the transaction. People calculated whether to give or to withhold, and how to conceal the extent to which they did the latter. Both giving and withholding yams were strategies of personal social navigation. Yams, then, moved along the circuits of social relationships and were mobilized in games of alliance and clientship. Here was a local model of social being which envisaged enormous scope for negotiation and improvisation. It was a model in which personal success was understood as analogous to and deeply connected with growth, increase and change; and in which persons were constituted through constantly renegotiated relations with others, witnessed in the flow of goods from one person to another. But this picture has another equally striking aspect. When people harvested their yams, they built them into towering conical structures of perfect symmetry on the perimeters of their gardens, sheltered by a bower, and put on display to all comers. Then, when it was time to present them to the designated recipient, the tower would be dismantled, carried to the recipient's village and rebuilt in front of his house. After being carefully counted, admired and acknowledged, the pile would be dismantled for a second time and carried into the recipient's storehouse, where again the yams would be arranged meticulously. Malinowski states that the bwaymas (the storehouses), especially those of aristocrats and chiefs, were more beautiful than their dwelling houses – better kept, more prominent, more elaborately decorated. And the desire of the storehouse owner is that the yams should remain therepermanently: magic is performed to reduce human appetites so that the full storehouse, dark with its freight, will not be depleted. Their garden magic combined encouraging change and growth (Shoot up, shoot up, shoot up, O taytu'), and striving intensely to stabilize and fix. At key points in the cycle, the garden magician pronounces a spell which reiterates: It shall be anchored, it shall be anchored! .. . It is anchored, my garden is anchored Like an immoveable stone is my garden Like the bedrock is my garden Like a deep-rooted stone is my garden My garden is anchored, it is anchored for good and all (Malinowski 1935: 130). The garden is anchored' before planting; the tubers, once growing, are anchored' to secure them with deep roots; and finally, as the storehouse is prepared to receive its pile of donated yams, every component of the building is enumerated – from the corner stone to the ornamented end of the ridge pole – and anchored'; finally, at the end of the harvest process, the magician can sum up, my village is anchored'. What huge effort goes into making things stable, fixing things, and attempting to arrest the processes of consumption and decay! What an extraordinary ambition, to turn piles of perishable yams into monuments outlasting human appetite! The gardeners and the magicians appear to be converting the yams in to imperishable wealth. Prosperity is yams that last, that remain so long in the storehouse that the floor becomes black with their dust. Here, then, is a way of looking at things which has no trouble combining concepts of fluid emergence and fixed stability. The yams must grow and change; shoots must emerge; the tubers must be dug up and circulated through social networks. But for their embodied value to be realized, they must also be fixed and preserved.² The human community takes responsibility for both processes, bending their powers of action, volition and utterance both to promote movement and to arrest it. What is most important for the purposes of this chapter is that perdurance is conceived as the outcome of vigorous, unremitting activity. Things do not last through inertia: they are made to last, through intense human creative efforts. Making things stick, then, is most definitely flagged up here as a practice, a process in itself. Do all human societies share the propensity to build things that transcend time and space? Clearly, not all in the same way. Not far from the Trobriands, the Sabarl islanders developed what Debbora Battaglia has described as a deconstructive philosophy of transience and dissipation, a distrust in language as a vehicle of memory, a diffidence about the possibility of preserving anything or ever knowing anything for sure – a philosophy she contrasts strongly with those of monumentbuilding cultures (Battaglia 1990). It is an outlook that can be explained partly by the Sabarls' peculiar history, which involved a nineteenth-century migration to an infertile rock-fortress without adequate soil or water, resulting in dependence on other islands even for basic necessities. Nonetheless, the central ceremonial and social event, into which Sabarl people poured their resources and effort, was the mortuary feast, precisely designed to recuperate and preserve memory. In these ceremonies, the kin of the deceased extracted and fixed a usable residue of the dead person's persona; at the same time, the event offered a fresh start, realigning the survivors in new configurations of alliance and obligation. Thus the act of fixing and the act of innovative reconfiguration happened simultaneously, and were in fact the same thing. Perhaps what we need, then, is not a binary division between cultures that build monuments and those that do not, but a comparative view of what kind of fixing they do, what models and idioms they use to describe it, and how they provide for the continued generation of novelty in the very act of consolidating tradition.³ ## Performance Theory and Entextualization If understanding social life is at least partly about understanding how people give form to their activities, then kinds of behaviour often consigned to the margins of social theory – dance, song, verbal art – become central, as Wendy James has demonstrated in her ‘new portrait' of anthropology (James 2003). This is not so much (or not only) because, as Bascom thought, performance genres are a privileged place where there is more innovation and creativity, but because the effort to give form here has a reflexive, demonstrative dimension in which its own processes are, as it were, brought to the surface. Gilbert Lewis, in Day of Shining Red, alludes to the positive alerting peculiar aspect of ritual which calls to us for attention as it does to the performers’ (Lewis 1980: 20). Performances attract attention by framing and staging creative, form-giving processes, and in doing so, they not only designate themselves for future re-creation, but also bring to view the operations by which they are constituted. All cultures, I believe, produce forms that are marked out for special attention – whether or not they are thought of, locally, as something we could translate as art forms'. Performance theory, emerging simultaneously in anthropology, folklore and theatre studies and gathering strength in the 1980s and 1990s, greatly enhanced our capacity to recognize and talk about the fluid, processual and emergent properties of performance genres. Battling against long-standing tendencies to reify and freeze them, this theory strongly contrasted performance' with text', declaring that the two were utterly different in kind. Text implied a view of society as prescriptive, fixed and adhering to rigid structures; performance implied a focus on what was improvised, ephemeral, fluid, of the moment only – but in that moment, vital and responsive to contingencies of context. The habit of reducing performances to fixed written texts was deplored, and a methodology was developed to capture the performance event itself rather than some presumed antecedent script – to capture the unfolding moment of performance in its living, richly context-embedded immediacy. Richard Bauman (1977) speaks of the severe limitations a text-centered' approach imposes on the study of oral verbal art. Performance can never be text', in Edward Schieffelin's view, for performativity is located at the creative, improvisatory edge of practice in the moment it is carried out', whereas texts are changeless and enduring' (Schieffelin 1998: 198–9). Dwight Conquergood elegantly sums up the opposition as a war of vocabulary, where the benign forces of “"improvisation", "flow", “"process", “participation", “embodiment", and “dialogue" are ranged against the enemy lexicon -"fixity", "structure", "objectification", "reification", "system", "distance", and “detachment"" (Conquergood 1989). But while performance theory provided wonderful conceptual tools for thinking about emergence, it had a tendency to dismiss the whole idea of the aspiration to fixity as a scriptocentric imposition. It thus offered inadequate resources for understanding how the fluid is consolidated, and why stunningly creative oral performers so often claim that their texts have never changed by so much as a syllable. But out of performance theory came its own inverse and complement: the concept of entextualization'. The idea was demonstrated in an ethnography of ritual speech by Joel Kuipers (1990) and in Greg Urban's study of Amerindian genres (1991); further developed in Natural Histories of Discourse, edited by Michael Silverstein and Greg Urban (1996); and later extended into a general theory of cultural transmission and dissemination by Urban in Metaculture (2001). Entextualization is the process of rendering a given instance of discourse as text, detachable from its local context', as Silverstein and Urban put it (1996: 21). Discourse is the unremarked and unrepeated flow of utterances in which most human activities are bathed. Text is created when instances of discourse, by being rendered detachable from their immediate context of emission, are made available for reproduction in other contexts. In other words, they are stretches of discourse which can be transmitted over time and space. According to Natural Histories of Discourse, detachability is achieved by a variety of devices. It can of course be accomplished by writing down a stretch of utterance, but it can also be achieved wholly within an oral context. In myth, narratives are put into the remote past tense, detaching them from the immediate context of the listener; they are put into the third person, thus escaping the tendency of first- and secondperson discourse to suck the listener into a dialogic engagement with the speaker; and they are often structured from a series of parallel formulations which, by establishing internal patterns of repetition, encourage the repetition of the whole text. This concept of entextualization can be pushed further, in two directions. The first is that it could be extended downwards into the very plane of discourse' from which it risks being too sharply distinguished. Studies of language acquisition have shown that, contrary to Chomsky's assumptions, language learning is not a matter of intuiting a complex set of rules (whether or not these are already hardwired' into cognition) and then freely operationalizing these rules by feeding into them a collection of individually acquired words, to generate a potentially infinite number of original utterances. Rather, people learn languages by long exposure to prefabricated and semi-prefabricated chunks of utterance which they may only later break down into separable, constituent parts. We learn idioms, formulae, turns of phrase, standardized expressions, and then we learn to vary them. MacKenzie (2000) suggests that ordinary speech is therefore not unlike the oral formulaic mode of composition attributed to Homer and to the epic bards of old Yugoslavia (Lord 1974 [1960]). This means that ordinary' everyday discourse should not be conceptualized as a neutral, evenly flowing stream out of which the rocky outcrops of entextualized text emerge. Rather, all utterance is made up of verbal chunks in varying stages of solidification, susceptible to varying degrees of free play and reformulation. There is an internal propensity to text formation from the very first words we utter. But conversely – and this is the second point – the notion of entextualization should be expanded to encompass further processes of creativity and improvisation. Kuipers' and Urban's early concentration on sacred speech and myth allowed the conclusion that entextualized utterance is typically frozen utterance, detached from living interpersonal exchange. Myth's concern with events remote in time, ritual speech's numinous aura, inevitably set them apart from other discourse. In relation to myth and ritual speech, the need to think of entextualization together with fluidity and improvisation was not so apparent as it would be with many other oral genres. Genres like African praise poetry, for example, are constituted out of lapidary fragments that are fixed' by being rendered compact, dense, allusive and obscure. In many cases these formulations are believed to be ancient and unchanging. They are clearly recognized as text which pre-existed the moment of utterance, and will outlast it. They are quoted; they are subjected to elaborate exegetical attention; and they may be given objective correlatives in the gold-weights, umbrella finials and pot-lids which are used to recall them. But performances are assembled in always changing configurations, drawing different selections from the open-ended corpus, linking them in different ways, and inflecting them to speak to an addressee in the present context of utterance. In the case of Yoruba oriki, the more skilled and experienced a performer is, the more fluid her performance: it is the inexperienced girls who chant blocks of barely changing lines. The oriki chant is valued because it mobilizes something believed to be of permanent worth, inscribed in changeless formulations, and in so doing, charges the addressee with the accumulated powers of the alaseku, those whose deeds remain'. But to activate and release those powers the performer uses every art at her disposal, expanding her resources by raiding other subjects' collections of epithets and even other genres, and incorporating her own observations and witticisms. Thus the consolidation of chunks of text is what makes possible, and gives point to, the performer's fluid displays of competence, while it is only in full-blown performative utterance that the powers stored in these condensed, obscure formulations can be released (Barber 1991, 1999, 2003). ## Memory, Composition and Improvisation The concept of entextualization, thus expanded, opens the way to an integrated vision of the generation of cultural forms from the bottom up, in which misleadingly sharp binary oppositions can be allowed to fade away. Much recent work supports such a move. The conceptual split between text and performance gets in the way of understanding the links between the emergence of new things and the effort to achieve permanence. It is echoed in equally categorical divisions between improvising and performing from a script, and between memorizing and composing a text. In the field of music, Nicholas Cook has shown how closely related and interdependent all these activities are. Listening is not a matter of simply receiving all the sound impressions that enter your ears: as you listen, you disassemble and reconstruct the sounds in accordance with stylistic schemes which you build up as you go along, but which you also bring with you in the form of expectations created by previous exposure to music. This same process underlies remembering, improvising and composing. Remembering is not a matter of recording the full panoply of sounds that your sensory organs register, but rather of reconstructing a ‘stylistically plausible whole' from a set of attributes or aspects – whether structural or incidental – that you analysed out of those sounds in the process of listening (Cook 1990: 108). Similarly, playing a piece of music from a score involves the same processes as improvisation, and is undoubtedly generative'. Psychologically speaking, both jazz and classical pianists are improvising, in the sense that they are creatively synthesizing performance schemes in the real time of performance; the difference is merely in the nature of the constraints within which this creativity operates' (ibid.: 113). And finally, there is a continuity between what it means to know a pre-existing piece of music ... and what it means to compose music' (ibid.). It seems to me that much the same could be said about oral verbal genres: memorizing an oral text is not the opposite of improvising a new one, but rather is in a continuum with it. The text is reconstructed from salient cues and recurrent patterns, not simply reproduced like a photocopy. Form-giving activity – of a kind that constitutes cultural entities which are recognized as preceding and outlasting the moment of their performance – always draws upon the conventions of genre, and at the same time subtly modifies them. To hear a symphony as a symphony, to hear a fugue as a fugue – in short, to hear any music as form – is then to hear it as repeatable, and hence as independent of its realization in sound on any particular occasion (ibid.: 36). To recognize a symphony as a symphony, an epic as an epic, or a yam-growing incantation as such, requires a consciousness of genre. Genre conventions are not usually reducible to rules'; rather, they are a bundle of attributes adding up to an overall impression, which is recognized as one would recognize personality (Fowler 1982). Recognition is built up through exposure to numerous instantiations of the genre; but each instantiation also adds an increment, and thus subtly adds to the genre's range of possibilities.4 Genre, therefore, is like the past in G.H. Mead's philosophy: it is continually reconstructed retrospectively, as every new thing that happens occasions a readjustment in the perception of those that preceded it. Genre, then, arises from memory – the composite memory of overlaid, overlapping experiences of individual performances or texts. But genre is also prospective: it is a set of expectations of form. Composers create in the expectation that certain formal attributes will be recognized and understood as such; audiences interpret in accordance with expectations which the genre's conventions have aroused. Even when the composer's aim is to rupture the conventions and generate something wholly novel, the effect depends on both composer and listeners recognizing and expecting the conventions that are being broken. Drawing from performances of Shakespeare's plays, Kirsten Hastrup suggests that agency ... is closely tied to a vision of plot, to the anticipation of a story, a line of future development' (Hastrup 2004: 155). The recognition and recreation of all form in social life can be seen as simultaneously recapitulatory and anticipatory. To establish form is to abstract key attributes from past and current instantiations with a view to re-embodying them in future ones (cf. Urban 2001). Entextualization, or the art of making things stick, is therefore really the art of laying down the means for new creation. This double process happens in all domains of social life. Leo Howe takes up the performance/text distinction in order to suggest that inscription' – the establishment of text – is itself a process, an activity involving risk, competition and struggle over what gets inscribed. He goes on to propose that inscription is just as applicable to acts, skills, abilities, operations and procedures, as it is to meanings' (Howe 2000: 65–6). In an argument that is congenial to the perspective I am outlining here, he captures in this formulation the inseparability of fixing and improvisation: As a performance proceeds it is simultaneously inscribed in the very acts which make up the performance' (ibid.: 66). By doing, you lay down a track which can be retraced, though never exactly replicated.⁵ ## Collaborative Improvisation The idea that innovation and creativity are necessarily the result of departures from convention by gifted individuals has also been comprehensively revised. Improvisation is a matter of give and take; innovation can arise between people and not only from within people. In ensemble work, the participants arrive at a kind of unanimity, an ability to function not as a collection of individuals but as something approaching an organism. In some cases, this is achieved by a kind of merging of functions, in which all participants become interchangeable. In the directorless group theatre improvisation described by Theodore Shank, everyone can do everything: each member of a group combines the specialized traditional functions of playwright, director, designer etc' (Shank 1972: 30). In other cases, however, group unanimity arises from a high degree of specialization, in which each participant occupies a well-defined, distinct role and contributes one component to a larger mechanism. Hutchins' extraordinary analysis of the navigational system onboard a US steamship – which, he concludes, works like a supra-personal brain (Hutchins 1995) – is an extreme and striking case of this kind of ensemble. Playing Stockhausen's atonal music, the score of which looks like a mathematical puzzle, is another case where each participant slots in his or her own component according to instructions, producing an overall effect beyond what any individual could envisage (Cook 1990). But most often we seem to see both these kinds of procedure combined – a distribution of specialized tasks, but also a blending of individual autonomy in mutual attunement that may take the form of a kind of interpersonal shadowing. In chamber music the performers keep together because, rather than abiding by a uniformly agreed beat, they are, in a quite literal sense, playing by ear' (ibid.: 130), each listening to the others and accommodating him or herself to them in a mutuality of performance' that is like the rapport of a conversation. The Woi epic of the Kpelle people of Liberia (Stone 1988) demonstrates the combination of distribution of roles and merging of competences in exemplary form. This enigmatic narrative is improvised by a peripatetic specialist storyteller, but only with the skilled and alert cooperation of multiple, distinct, well-defined segments of the participating audience. The percussionists, the main chorus, the support chorus, the song-catcher', the ‘muu-raising people' and the questioner' all play defined roles, interacting with each other, in structured dialogic exchanges, as well as with the principal narrator. The narrator sets out an obscure fragment; the questioner elicits expansion and explanation: What is that? Who is saying that? Has he died now?' Other participants, in turn, prompt the questioner if he misses a beat. Thus the narrative is pieced together bit by bit. The narrator frequently calls on the participants to play their part, while the participants prompt the narrator to fill out the story. The segments are artfully joined to defer closure; among the reflexive remark that pepper the performance are repeated comments that the head of an epic does not come out: you just keep bouncing'. Here we see a form that highlights – and renders visible by overt staging – the collaborative nature of its production: it involves an artful foregrounding of co-narration, with its profusion of designated roles paired off into dialogic dyads. The Woi epic is a mythical story, regarded as ancient, certainly recognized by the participants as pre-existing and outlasting the moment of performance – but its telling is staged to dramatize the fact that with each performance it has to be, as it were, coaxed out, pieced together and collectively rediscovered. This is how the consolidation of text happens. And in their own reflexive self-commentary, the performers express the view that the epic never can come out fully: its telling will always be ongoing and incomplete. In such episodes of cooperative mutual attunement, it is clear that something happens that exceeds the sum of the individual contributions. Participants may collectively generate a textual environment which then inspires further production. I have described in detail how this happens in the case of Yoruba popular theatre, in which a company of twenty to thirty male and female itinerant professional actors mounted long, complex, coherent but unscripted dramas, some of which would remain in the company's repertoire for as long as thirty years, gradually evolving in response to audience taste and changing theatrical fashion. Each actor conceived of him- or herself as bringing a unique individual resource of personality, experience and gifts to the collective enterprise, and to some extent the actors were in competition with each other, each striving to expand his or her own part, fuelled and vindicated by audience acclamation. However, in the course of participating in the activities (including live stage performances) of the Oyin Adejobi Theatre Company over a number of years, I gradually realized that the company collectively improvised a linguistic medium suited to the subject matter of each play. The style, consistent right through the performance, could vary markedly from one play to another, even if they were being improvised by the same actors on successive nights. Folajiyo, a folkloric play set in a traditional kingdom, abounded in homely proverbs and idioms referring to a familiar rural and domestic environment. New water has flowed in, new fish have entered it'. You have eyes like the eyes of a frog'. He's piled his ragged clothes on in layers like the palm frond'. There were no instances of modern slang or English loanwords. But Morawo – which was created around the same time as Folajiyo and coexisted with it in the repertoire for a number of years – had an entirely different style, suited to its theme of a young whitecollar city woman playing one man off against another in her pursuit of wealth and security. The first words of this play, uttered by an aladuura preacher, were gbàdúrà! Gbogbo åyin ôlömôge tí böìfùrçńdì yín jà yín jùúlå bí típà bá ja èèpåç lå – ê gbàdúrà!' ‘Pray! All you young girls whose “boyfriends" have dumped you like a “tipper" dumping soil – pray!’ Thus, in the first sentences, we hear two loanwords and a contemporary metaphor; and Morawo went on from there to unleash a cornucopia of slang, neologisms, Anglicisms and novel turns of speech (Barber 2000: 404–16). This production of a specific linguistic medium was not imposed on the actors by the manager or boss of the company. Through hours and hours of hanging around backstage and hearing the plays over and over again, I was gradually able to pick up the subtle transit of verbal ideas through the texture of the play – a kind of ripple effect, where a key word or expression introduced by one actor would be registered and echoed in different ways right across the performance, even by bitpart actors who had no on-stage interaction with the originator of the expression. Through this sensitive mutual stylistic awareness, a sense of the appropriate medium seemed to be arrived at as they went along, led by the more experienced and dominant actors. It was made possible by the actors' sense that each of them, though endowed with distinctive gifts and competences, could potentially play any part; all listened to everyone else's words as if they could potentially be their own. Here, then, we see how a form established its own space in which to provide for innovation of a particular kind. Although the improvised dramas often appeared exuberant, freewheeling and at times bordering on the chaotic, their improvisations were actually both inspired and regulated by a medium of the actors' own joint making. ## The Lengths People Go to People go to extraordinary lengths to make a mark that transcends time. Greg Urban's recent reworkings of the notion of entextualization have focused on the question of how culture moves in the world'. His question is how and why some kinds of cultural elements are more successful at being transmitted through time and space than others. This opens up brilliant possibilities, bringing within a single comparative explanatory framework oral and literate cultures, traditional and ‘modern' ones. The perspective of entextualization, or the rendering of discourse into detachable, repeatable text, is now expanded into a general theory of culture which takes the variability of elements and their uneven distribution as its starting point. Though his evocation of culture's movements has a curiously idealist cast to it – culture is an ‘immaterial, ghostlike form' (Urban 2001: 2) which wants to continue on its journey through space and time' (ibid.: 19) – it has much in common with Sperber's (1996) materialist, epidemiological' approach and the distributional models of culture developed by evolutionary cognitive sciences (for example, Durham 2002). All these approaches do away with the idea of a’ culture as a stable, integrated structure shared by all the members of the relevant group. Instead culture is treated more like a population, a congeries of individual elements which move around, mutate, cluster in certain areas and are more or less successful in reproducing themselves. Describing culture is more like giving a statistical profile of a population than drawing an architectural plan. As Sperber (1996) cogently argues, this approach dispenses with many of the theoretical problems associated with trying to describe the belief system of the X'. However, it also dispenses with – or at best shifts attention away from – human agency. Human populations become mere carriers of cultural elements, which move, mutate, colonize new territory and propagate themselves, and whose success or otherwise is ascribed to their inherent properties rather than to what human beings decide to do with them. In a strong version of this approach, cultural elements (called memes', in parallel to genes) are propelled by a drive to reproduce and perpetuate themselves, as genes are also said to be (Dawkins 1976; Blackmore 1999). The human effort and ingenuity expended to make things stick has dropped from view – and with it, history, intertextuality, genre and the collective creation that happens between people and exceeds the sum of their individual representations. What makes cultural elements fit' to survive? One of the startling facts about human cultures is their sheer excess, the inordinate expenditure of energy, skill and attention on the creation of form. Many cultural forms, far from being in any obvious sense naturally' fitted for self-reproduction and self-propulsion through time and space, seem to be created to advertise the high human cost of their production and reproduction. Take – as one example out of the millions available – igisigo, a genre of oral praise poetry that was part of the aristocratic court culture of Old Rwanda. It was produced and transmitted by a specialized guild of hereditary bards, and was the oldest and most rigorously transmitted of the many court genres, reputedly dating back fourteen generations. The poems were so constructed that only specialized rhetoricians could compose and interpret them, and the oblique and evasive style of the genre is signalled in its very name, the root of which, according to Alexis Kagame, means to compose in a figurative style, incomprehensible on first hearing' (Kagame 1969: 152). What makes many of the allusions in igisigo incomprehensible on the first hearing is the artful construction of a series of departures from the initial idea, a process of ‘veiling' or ‘making disappear' (kuzimiza) through synonyms, homonyms and metonyms. A single word could require a whole sequence of steps to retrace the composer's thought-path and retrieve the disappeared' meaning. The art of composing and interpreting Rwandan dynastic poetry involved deliberately going out of one's way to avoid the linear narrative and vivid imagery that would make the text spontaneously memorable. Great ingenuity went into constituting these texts as obscure, and then into ensuring that despite their difficulty they would be meticulously transmitted and widely known. People went to great lengths to learn them because their obscurity conferred prestige. Associated with the Mwami's court and aristocratic culture, their creation and decipherment could be seen as a kind of conspicuous consumption of creative energy. The powerful royal dynasty, surrounded by the Tutsi aristocracy, defined themselves as distinct and aloof by creating and perpetuating a genre that cost a lot in terms of training, time and effort to master and to transmit; and the fact that the genre was indeed successfully transmitted for long periods was simultaneously a cause, a result and a sign of its immense prestige (and hence that of its owners). Here we seem to see a deliberate repudiation of what is easily memorable in order to draw attention to the creative resources at the king's command. Such lavish form-giving effort – examples of which could be adduced from almost anywhere in the world – seems to require a focus on the people who expend it, and the historically and culturally specific projects in which they are engaged. We need to ask by what specific methods people simultaneously improvise and make things stick, and why they do it. What are their own conceptions of innovation and perdurance? To what source do they ascribe creativity – where do they say new things come from? How do they build loopholes into their most binding customs, thus creating a space for future innovation? How do they create occasions and contexts in which supra-individual improvisation can occur? Again we may look for clues in the reflexive commentaries embedded in entextualized forms. Let me offer a final example from the vast corpus of Yoruba oral divination poems, running to many thousand verses, which are carefully and systematically learned by all Ifá priests. The core formulations in each verse are believed never to have varied over hundreds of years, and the corpus as a whole is widely regarded in western Nigeria (and beyond) as the repository of all Yoruba wisdom. This huge effort of inscription' was doubly inscribed when nineteenth century Yoruba cultural nationalists began to write the corpus down, in order to create literary monuments that would testify to their advanced civilization. In one such collection, published by the Reverend E.M. Lijadu in 1898, there occurs the following verse: Hoes can't hoe the farm by themselves If it were not for us humans who back them up If it were not for us humans. Axes could not blaze their way through the wood If it were not for us humans who back them up If it were not for us humans. Cutlasses can't slash through the forest by themselves It's we human beings who support them and back them up, We human beings. We bring the yams home, the mortar can't pound the yam by itself But only with the help of humans who back it up. Only us humans. And what is it that backs human beings up? Only God, only people.6 This potent verse remarks upon the human capacity both to make things and to make things happen. Hoes, axes, cutlasses, mortars are potential-filled, purposeoriented entities, but their potential and purpose can only be realized when human beings back them up', supplying the energy that sets them in motion. People in turn are backed up, given the power to make things happen, by God – and by other people. This wonderful image of human mutuality suggests a model in which agency itself is generated cooperatively. In divination this verse, like all the verses in the Ifá corpus, is activated by diviners to steer clients' future life-courses in the light of precedent. Just as the human being in the verse above energetically sets his own creations in motion, thus enabling them to realize their potential, so the diviner sets the scrupulously preserved, carefully transmitted Ifá texts in motion – releasing their stored power by creatively applying them to fresh situations – and thus enables his clients to act effectively in the world. Forms like these verses embody and reflect upon creativity and cultural improvisation in stimulating, provocative ways. Particularly enchanting is the way they can fuse into one concept what our own vocabulary keeps encouraging us to split. They thus provide food for thought about the human habit of simultaneously improvising and striving to make things stick. ## Notes 1. For a discussion of this last distinction and the role it plays in the aesthetic theories of the philosophers R.G. Collingwood and John Dewey, see Sawyer (2000). 2. The political economy of Trobriand yam culture was socially non-egalitarian, and from a nutritional point of view it wasted resources. However, my aim here is not to evaluate its effects, but merely to highlight the idiom in which it was conducted. 3. Maurice Bloch (1998) has suggested that the tendency to memorialize – to preserve and refer back to the past – varies in form and degree according to social structure and historical experience. He compares the lineage-based Sadah of northern Yemen, who have a long-term genealogical view of knowledge and virtue, and the Bicolanos of central Philippines, who see themselves as people who have nothing', and whose view of human existence centres upon mutability – even their icons are believed to grow and decline. 4. Cook draws a strong distinction between pre-nineteenth-century music, where composers remained wholly within the conventions of a genre, so that what was produced and approved was not an individual creation but a perfect instantiation of a genre, and post-eighteenth-century music, where originality and innovation were valued and conventions were broken (Cook 1990: 36–7). This is an important historical shift, also documented in other European arts. But even very conformist instantiations of a genre usually add something new to the field of resources on which subsequent compositions draw. 5. Performance theory opened the way to the development of this perspective: see Richard Schechner's (1985) use of the idea of theatrical and ritual performance as restored behaviour', in which strips of behaviour' are as it were demarcated for recreation, but never exact replication. 6. My translation, from E.M. Lijadu, Ifá. The Yoruba text (with the original spelling) runs as follows: Awôn ôkô ko le fi ara-wôn r'oko, afi awa enia ti ise elegbè lêhin wôn, afi awa enia: aake ko le gbiyanju tèfetefe, afi awa enia ti işe elegbè lêhin rå, afi awa enia: awôn àdá kò le fi ara wôn șan inu igbó lô, awa enia ni ie elegbè lêhin wôn, awa enia: a mu iu wa ile, odó kò le tikararå gún u n'iyán, afi awa enia ti ise elegbè lêhin rå, afi awa enia. Njê kini ise elegbè lêhin enia? Afi Ajalôrun afi enia – kanran-Sá'. (1908 [1898]: 40). ## References Barber, K. (1991), I Could Speak Until Tomorrow: Oríkì, Women and the Past in a Yorùbá Town, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. — (1999), Quotation in the constitution of Yorùbá oral texts', Research in African Literatures, 30(3): 17–41. — (2000), The Generation of Plays: Yoruba Popular Life in Theatre, Bloomington: Indiana University Press. (2003), Text and performance in Africa', Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, 66(3): 324–33. Revised and republished (2005) in Oral Tradition 20(2): 264–77. Bascom, W. (1959), ‘The main problems of stability and change in tradition', Journal of the International Folk Music Council, 11: 7–12. Battaglia, D. (1990), On the Bones of the Serpent: person, memory, and mortality in Sabarl island society, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Bauman, R. (1977), Verbal Art as Performance, Prospect Heights I1.: Waveland Press. Blackmore, S. (1999), The Meme Machine, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Bloch, M. (1998), How We Think They Think: anthropological approaches to cognition, memory and literacy, Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. Conquergood, D. (1989), Poetics, Play, Process and Power: the Performance Turn in Anthropology', Text and Performance Quarterly 9(1): 82–95. Cook, N. (1990), Music, Imagination and Culture, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Dawkins, R. (1976), The Selfish Gene, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Durham, W.H. (2002), ‘Cultural variation in time and space: the case for a population theory of culture', in R.G. Fox and B.J. King (eds), Anthropology Beyond Culture, Oxford and New York: Berg. Fowler, A. (1982), Kinds of Literature: an introduction to the theory of genres and modes, Oxford: Clarendon Press. Hastrup, K. (2004), Action: Anthropology in the Company of Shakespeare, Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press. Howe, L. (2000), ‘Risk, ritual and performance', Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 6(1): 63–79. Hutchins, E. (1995), Cognition in the Wild, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. James, W. (2003), The Ceremonial Animal: a new portrait of anthropology, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Kagame, A. (1969), Introduction aux grands genres lyriques de l’Ancien Rwanda, Butare, Rwanda: Editions Universitaires du Rwanda. Kuipers, J.C. (1990), Power in Performance: the creation of textual authority in Weyewa ritual speech, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. Lewis, G. (1980), Day of Shining Red: an essay on understanding ritual, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lijadu, E.M. (1908 [1898]), Ifá: Îmôlå rå tí șe pilå İsìn ní ilå Yorùbá, Ado-Ekiti: Omolayo Standard Press. Lord, A.B. (1974 [1960]), The Singer of Tales, New York: Atheneum. MacKenzie, I. (2000), 'Improvisation, creativity, and formulaic language', The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 58(2): 173–9. Malinowski, B. (1935), Coral Gardens and their Magic: A Study of the Methods of Tilling the Soil and of Agricultural Rites in the Trobriand Islands, Volume 1, London: Allen and Unwin. Mead, G.H. (1932), The Philosophy of the Present, ed A.E. Murphy, LaSalle, Ill.: Open Court. Sawyer, R.K. (2000), Improvisation and the creative process: Dewey, Collingwood and the aesthetics of spontaneity', The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 58(2): 149–61. Schechner, R. (1985), Between Theatre and Anthropology, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. Schieffelin, E.L. (1998), Problematizing performance', in F. Hughes-Freeland (ed), Ritual, Performance, Media, ASA Monographs 35, London and New York: Routledge. Shank, T. (1972), ‘Collective creation', The Drama Review, 16(2): 3–31. Silverstein, M. and Urban, G. (eds) (1996), Natural Histories of Discourse, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Sperber, D. (1996), Explaining Culture: a naturalistic approach, Oxford: Blackwell. Stone, R. (1988), Dried Millet Breaking: time, words and song in the Woi epic of the Kpelle, Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Urban, G. (1991), A Discourse-centered Approach to Culture, Austin: University of Texas Press. (2001), Metaculture: how culture moves through the world, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Modes of Creativity in Life and Art Part I ## Introduction Tim Ingold In 1970 the distinguished French biochemist, Jacques Monod, published a little book entitled Chance and Necessity. Along with his colleagues André Lwoff and François Jacob, Monod had been awarded the Nobel Prize in 1965 for groundbreaking work on the mechanisms of genetic replication and protein synthesis. The book amounted to a forthright declaration of his scientific credo, and of the potential of the molecular biology he had helped establish to unravel, once and for all, the secrets of life and its evolution. Monod's philosophy is uncompromisingly mechanistic: every living creature, so far as he is concerned, is a chemical machine whose structure and patterns of behaviour are fully determined by interactions among its molecular constituents, principally proteins. Fundamentally, all the information specifying these constituents is encoded in the materials of heredity – that is, in strands of DNA. From this it follows that the growth or development of the organism is, in Monod's words, not a creation; it is a revelation' (Monod 1972: 87, original emphases). It is, in other words, no more than the realization of a design that is already there, albeit in the virtual form of a blueprint installed at the point of inception of the organism-to-be, independently and in advance of its life in the world. By the same token, creativity is excluded from the life-process itself. The source of all creation in the biosphere, Monod claims, is not life but those chance events, of genetic mutation, that alter the design specifications underwriting the construction of living things. Evolution occurs precisely because the mechanism of replication that otherwise ensures the high-fidelity copying of elements across generations does not work perfectly. It is this indeterminacy that allows for the creative emergence of new designs. According to modern theory, the idea of revelation' applies to epigenetic development, but not of course to evolutionary emergence, which, owing to the fact that it arises from the essentially unforeseeable, is the creator of absolute newness. (Monod 1972: 113) Not all advocates of the so-called modern synthesis' of neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory were quite so outspoken. One of them was Theodosius Dobzhansky. Chance, Dobzhansky argued, may be the source of all variation in the biosphere, but it is not, in itself, the source of all creation. Evolution occurs not because of variations alone, but because these variations undergo a process of selection in which they are tested in manifold combinations and recombinations. The relative viability of these combinations, under specific environmental conditions, then determines the frequency with which their elements are represented in future generations. Thus the creativity of evolution, for Dobzhansky, lay in what he called the antichance factor' of selection, working on the raw material of variation supplied by chance. What are created, however, are not living organisms, but rather designs for life that are subsequently realized in the forms we actually observe. Every new form of life that appears in evolution', writes Dobzhansky, can, with only moderate semantic license, be regarded as an artistic embodiment of a new concept of living' (Dobzhansky 1974: 329). I return below to the analogy between the organism and the work of art. What matters now is that for Dobzhansky as much as for Monod, life is a movement of revelation, and not of creation. It is no more than the writing out of a genetic text that has been pre-composed through a reshuffling of elements. Nor was this view limited to those whose approach to science was similarly reductionist. Noone could have been more opposed to reductionism than Gregory Bateson, yet in his Mind and Nature Bateson compares the process of epigenesis – that is, the emergence of the form of an organism through its life in the world – to the development of a complex tautology ... in which nothing is added after the axioms and definitions have been laid down' (Bateson 1980: 57). He goes on to set up a radical opposition between, on the one hand, epigenesis and tautology, and on the other, art, learning and evolution. Whereas the former entail a working out, or unfolding, of what is already given, the latter comprise the whole realm of creativity ... in which the ongoing processes of change feed on the random (ibid., original emphasis). Thus in art as in life, the creative element lies in the sheer novelty of the conception, not in its subsequent realization. Yet just as in evolution, every new design emerges through the recombination of elements, so in thought, according to Bateson, ‘the genesis of new notions is almost totally ... dependent upon reshuffling and recombining ideas we already have' (ibid.: 201). Learning is like evolution in that the testing of these ideas, in different combinations, affects the probability of their recurrence. This combinatory view of creativity, as the endless generation of first-time novelties through the rearrangement of elements (Boden 1990: 38), is deeply embedded not only in biology and psychology but in many other fields of academic discourse as well, not least in anthropology (Friedman 2001: 46–8). For example, it underlies Lévi-Strauss's celebrated notion of the creative mind as a bricoleur that is for ever engaged in the novel assembly of structures of thought out of the bits and pieces of old ones. And in linguistics, it reappears in Chomsky's notion of rule-governed creativity’ as the capacity to construct an infinite variety of comprehensible expressions from a finite repertoire of lexical items (Lévi-Strauss 1966: 17; Chomsky 1964: 22–3). Yet this view has always existed side by side with another, less mainstream perhaps, which would deny that there is anything intrinsically creative about the recombinatory generation of novelty. In his Science and the Modern World, first published in 1926, the philosopher Alfred North Whitehead insisted that the creativity of the evolutionary process was to be found in something other than the mechanism of variation under natural selection (Whitehead 1938 [1926]: 134–5). For the world we inhabit is not made up of static and discrete bits and pieces that may be connected up in myriad ways into ever-changing patterns. It is rather a movement, or flow, in which every element we might identify is but a moment. Creativity, for Whitehead, lay in that very movement of becoming by which the world, as it unfolds, continually surpasses itself. Whitehead's term for this unfolding was concrescence' (Ingold 1986: 173; cf. Whitehead 1929: 410). It was in the philosophy of Henri Bergson – which Monod would later dismiss as almost completely discredited' (Monod 1972: 34) – that Whitehead found inspiration. In his Creative Evolution of 1911, Bergson had been quite explicit in repudiating the creativity of the kind of invention that proceeds by a new arrangement of elements already known' (Bergson 1911: 48). Thus an evolutionary mechanism that worked in this way, through mutation and recombination, although it might generate an ever-changeful sequence of non-recurrent patterns, would not in itself be creative. To the contrary, the creativity of evolution, for Bergson, lay precisely in the life process itself – that is, in the very process that writers like Monod, Dobzhansky and Bateson regarded as revelatory or expressive rather than creative. To highlight the contrast between these two views of creativity we can return to the analogy between the living organism and the work of art. For as Bergson insisted, the artist's invention is inseparable from the progress of his work. If he is painting a picture, the picture is not already created before the painting begins. This is what makes painting different from solving a jigsaw puzzle. With the puzzle the result is already given; to obtain it requires only a work of recomposing and rearranging – a work that can be supposed going faster and faster, and even infinitely fast, up to the point of being instantaneous'. With painting, by contrast, the time taken up by the invention is one with the invention itself. It is the progress of a thought which is changing in the degree and measure that it is taking form. It is a vital process, something like the ripening of an idea. (Bergson 1911: 359–60) Thus the movement of consciousness, in the painter's work, is creative in bringing forth the idea it embodies; it does not merely give outward expression to a conception that has sprung ready-formed to his mind. In just the same way, the life of the organism is generative of form rather than merely the revelation of pre-existing design. A creativity that is inherent in the flow of life or consciousness, however, is continuous rather than punctual. It cannot be collapsed into a sequence of one-off events or novelties, nor can it be reconstructed by joining them up. The artist's invention, in this view, does not end with the completion of his work, any more than it began with a preconceived idea of its final form. It is not, in other words, encompassed within the bounds of any specific project. Rather, every work encapsulates the movement that brought it forth, and is in turn encapsulated in the maturation of what follows. Likewise the life of the organism is not simply expended in the translation of an initial, genetically encoded design into a material end-product. If we ask what organisms and persons create, the answer must be that they create one another and themselves, playing their part in the neverending and non-specific project of keeping life going. For a conscious being', as Bergson reasoned, to exist is to change, to change is to mature, to mature is to go on creating oneself endlessly. Should not the same be said of existence in general?' (Bergson 1911: 8). To answer Bergson's question in the affirmative is to acknowledge that while no artist is immortal, and while every creature dies in the end, the process of life nevertheless goes on in a world that has been unalterably affected by their presence. I have dwelt on the contrast between these two views of creativity since I believe it accounts for many of the tensions that come to light in the three chapters that follow. In his discussion of the kōlam – beautiful patterns of interwoven lines traditionally drawn by Tamil women in southern India to cleanse and protect their homes and temples – Amar Mall notes the concern of many scholars that the widespread publication of pattern books will thwart local creativity, encouraging women to copy existing patterns rather than invent their own. These books, however, reproduce ready-made patterns and say little or nothing about the techniques involved in forming them. The perception that copying is inimical to the exercise of the creative imagination betrays an approach to creativity that sees in technique nothing more than the revelation or transcription of a design that already stands fully formed before the practitioner's mind. If one follows this approach, then technique becomes irrelevant to the explanation of form or pattern, since it adds nothing to what has been laid down from the start. Drawing a kōlam, to recall Bateson's analogy, would be equivalent to the development of a complex tautology. But as Mall shows, it is very far from the case, especially with more convoluted patterns, that the design precedes its execution. It rather develops or matures as the work proceeds, so that the final form of the pattern only emerges when it is virtually complete – when the meandering line (kampi), having made any number of possibly unanticipated twists and turns, eventually finds its way home, or at least when journey's end is in sight. Only then, as kōlam-makers say, has the pattern come' or been brought back' to its starting point, so as to form a closed loop that has neither beginning nor end. And the practitioner may be both surprised and delighted by the result: surprised, since it may be far from what was expected; delighted, because the innovation has come out of the work itself. The capacity of the kampi kōlam patterns – as indeed of their makers – to go on creating themselves endlessly' (to borrow Bergson's words) is even more striking by contrast to kōlam different sort, in which the lines connect fixed points rather than weaving around them, so as to reveal a structure that, rather like in a jointhe-dots' puzzle, is already given in advance of its execution. Whereas it might be said of the maker of a kampi kōlam, in the memorable phrase of the painter Paul Klee (1961: 105), that her line goes out for a walk', always developing as it goes, in kōlam of this other sort every constituent line is preconceived as a link between points even before it is marked out on the ground. These lines are inflexible, of finite length, and static rather than dynamic, welding the points they connect into a rigid assembly. The contrast between these two species of kōlam, and the kinds of line involved in each, is clearly recognized by practitioners. Moreover a quite different sense of innovation is entailed in each case. To create a new assembly means shattering the original connections between its elements and reconnecting or recombining them in novel configurations, in the manner of the bricoleur. The makers of kampi kōlam, however, find their way as they go along, so that the novelty of their patterns is apparent only when they have finally arrived rather than prior to setting out. It would be a great mistake, then, to regard every sort of pattern as the realization of a preformed cognitive assembly, or as the embodiment of a conception' that has lodged itself in the maker's mind. And for the same reason, it would be wrong to suppose that the pattern necessarily appears to those who come across it as an intellectual puzzle to be solved. This, for example, is how Alfred Gell, in his study of complex pattern, understands the kōlam. It is a ‘mind-trap' (Gell 1998: 80) that ensnares anyone – including, in this case, potentially malevolent demons – who would attempt to figure out the generative principles of its construction, or to unpack the tautology it represents. Yet what surely distinguishes the kampi kōlam from kōlam of other kinds is not a difference of degree of complexity, as Gell suggests, but one of kind, corresponding quite precisely to Bergson's distinction between painting and puzzle-making. As Bergson said of the work of art, so one could also say of the kampi kōlam, that it embodies the process of thinking rather than the detached thought, a consciousness rather than a conception, life itself rather than a way of living' (Ingold 1986: 182). The meaning of the pattern, therefore, can be grasped only by an intuition that enters into it, or that follows its trails, rather than by an intellect that, in contemplating the finished work, attempts to reconstruct the puzzle from its solution. Much the same conclusion can be drawn from Fuyubi Nakamura's study of contemporary Japanese calligraphic art. Indeed the lines of the kampi kōlam and those of calligraphy have much in common. In both cases they find their own way, flexibly and organically, rather than connecting fixed points. In both, too, they are learned and remembered as rhythmic gestures. While these gestures leave their traces in the lines we see, it is thanks to their very rhythmicity that these traces are woven into recognizable patterns. Rhythms, as André Leroi-Gourhan has observed, are in this sense the creators of forms' (Leroi-Gourhan 1993: 309). Thus the calligraphic line is read' by reliving the gestural movement that gave rise to it, rather than by contemplating its final form and seeking to extrapolate to some concept of which it might be supposed to be the expression. Again, the same is true of the line of the kampi kōlam. Both, in this sense, can be compared in their performance to music or dance (cf. Gell 1998: 95). As Nakamura shows, one can never grasp the meaning of calligraphy simply by looking at it and wondering what it might express or reveal. One has to enter into it and to join in the process of its production – in other words, to be reunited with the calligrapher in his or her inked traces' (see also Yen 2005: 89–90). Yet to be able to do that, one must have some knowledge of calligraphy's history and techniques. Moreover, while the conventions of the art world might lead us to speak of calligraphic works', no work is ever finished. It cannot be contained within the bounds of a project that originates with a conception and is fulfilled in its material expression. The work might rather be compared to a never-ending story whose every telling is shaped by previous relations and goes on to shape subsequent ones. In this sense, it evolves through time: it has no determinate point of origin, nor any final destination. Far from yielding a concrete and objectified end-product, every performance is just one moment in the work's concrescence – its ongoing generation. This idea is reinforced by a method of learning in which, through repetitive practice in copying or imitating previous or classic exemplars, novices incorporate the movements and sensibilities of the masters into their own bodily comportment, only to surpass them in the development of their own personal style. At no point, however, do they cease to copy. For every original is a copy in that it is modelled on previous studies, and every copy is an original in that it can become a model for those who follow. There is nothing creative, for Japanese calligraphers, about the production of novelty for its own sake. What is observed in calligraphy, according to Nakamura, is a creativity of a different kind: one that is not opposed to imitation as the original is to the copy, but that finds in imitation the very impetus that keeps a work alive, allowing it to grow and flourish. James Leach, in the final chapter of this part, shows how imitation and creativity (which the Japanese critic Kobayashi Hideo has described as mother' and child') came to be prised apart in the history of modernity, to the point at which they now appear radically opposed on either side of a master dichotomy between subject and object, intellectual freedom and mechanical necessity (see also Ingold 2000: 350). It is this that has led to the emergence of a notion of creative art or invention as the spontaneous production of novelty, feeding on the random recombination of experiences or elements of design. And by the same token, it has reduced the process of imitative learning or copying to the mere replication of these elements, in a manner analogous to genetic replication. In this view, the practice of imitation amounts to no more than running off identical copies from a template or schema that has already been downloaded' into the novice's mind. This is not, however, the way novice calligraphers learn their art. They do so, rather, by following in the footsteps of predecessors, along the same or similar trails. Novices are thereby enabled to grow into the knowledge and skills of the masters, in the very process of forming their own. The wisdom to which they aspire, far from having been transmitted at the outset, lies at the end of the journey – albeit at a horizon they can approach but never reach. This is why, as Jerome Bruner (1986: 123) has pointed out, there can be no distinction in practice between learning culture and (re)creating culture, since the contexts of learning are the very crucibles from which the cultural process unfolds. In this process, knowledge is not so much replicated as reproduced – that is, produced anew, as the crystallisation of concrete, situated activity' (Ingold 2002: 62; on this distinction, see Jablonka 2000: 39). Though a piece of music is replicated each time it is played from a disk, it is reproduced each time it is performed with an instrument. A kampi kōlam, as Mall shows, is likewise reproduced or created anew every time it is copied. And so, too, is a calligraphic exemplar every time it is performed with the brush. No performance can be repeated, yet as a work comprises the accumulating trail of its performances – each one copying the copy of a copy – every performance becomes part and parcel of the ever-evolving work. Contemporary calligraphers, however, are torn between this understanding of their art and the demands of an art world that lays all the emphasis on the originality and creative agency of the individual artist. In this modernist conception, every trace on paper is a unique and finished work' which may be linked to the agency that produced it as object to subject. In his chapter, Leach spells out the history of ideas that led to this isolation of human subjects vis-à-vis one another and their objective productions. He shows how the connections between subjects and objects came to be epitomized in the idea of property, and how these connections were guaranteed and enforced through the elaboration of property rights. In this world of subjects and objects, or persons and things, culture itself becomes a project whereby humanity inscribes its preconceived designs upon a material substrate. At the centre of this story of the emergence of possessive individualism stands the magisterial figure of John Locke, one of the founding fathers of the European Enlightenment. For Locke, property begins at the point where human subjects mix their labour with the raw materials of nature, impregnating the things they find there with their own creative agency and causing them to bear fruit (cf. Gudeman 1986: 80–4). Thus in tilling the soil, in cultivation, they mix their labour with the land. And in the measure that they transform the land, and establish control over it, they also transform themselves in the collective human project of culture-building or civilization. Now as it turns out, calligraphers, according to Nakamura, also speak of mixing. But the mix is not just of their labour with the materials, but of the materials themselves, principally paper, ink and ink-stone. As the active' ingredient, the ink is said to mix with the paper – in ways that are never entirely predictable – to yield an outcome. It seems as though the agency of things’ (the materials supplied by nature) has at least partially taken over from the agency of the person' (the calligrapher and his techniques), so that the outcome is a consequence of the interaction between the two. Significantly, this theme of the displacement of agency runs through all three chapters in this part. In the case of the kōlam, Mall contends that agency is to some degree displaced from the practitioner to the pattern, so that the outcome may surpass or confound her original intention. And of the villagers of Reite, on the Rai Coast of Papua New Guinea, Leach argues that in the creation of knowledge, agency is displaced from the people to the land in which they live. The ground, villagers say, gives people knowledge. But the implications of Leach's argument are more profound. For the land that Reite people inhabit, contrary to the imagination of Locke and his intellectual successors, is not filled with concrete entities that have, as it were, already crystallized from the flows and circulations of substance in which they are formed. Their world is rather concrescent, in Whitehead's sense, undergoing continual formation. In such a world, creative agency resides neither in persons nor in things, nor even in persons and things. Indeed it is not, as Gell (1998: 16) would have it, an internal property that resides at all, or that either persons or things possess, whence it causes effects' in their vicinity. Attempts to move beyond the modernist polarization of subject and object, or the mental and the material, in terms of a language of agency that remains trapped in these very same categories, are bound to lead to contradiction and confusion. Contemporary anthropology, as Gell's work exemplifies, is in the thick of it. Perhaps, instead of claiming that entities possess an agency that causes them to act, we should acknowledge that agency possesses'the entities that – like eddies of dust raised by the wind, to adopt Bergson's (1911: 134) metaphor – are caught up in it. This agency could be none other than the generative flux of the world itself in its continual concrescence, from which persons and things emerge and take the forms they do for the duration of their existence. Thus the kōlam is the outline of a movement that is as much creative of the practitioner as of the pattern, the calligraphic trace captures the momentary confluence of hair, soot and morning dew in the sweep of a brush, and – in Reite – a new song comes to a man through his susceptibility to the generative power of the ground in a particular place. More generally, what these chapters show is that humans do not, through their creative interventions, transform the world from without, but rather – belonging within it – play their part in the world's creative transformation of itself. ## References Bateson, G. (1980), Mind and Nature, London: Fontana. Bergson, H. (1911), Creative Evolution (trans. A. Mitchell), London: Macmillan. Boden, M.A. (1990), The Creative Mind, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. Bruner, J.S. (1986), Actual Minds, Possible Worlds, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Chomsky, N. (1964), Current Issues in Linguistic Theory, The Hague: Mouton. Dobzhansky, T. (1974), ‘Chance and creativity in evolution', in F.J. Ayala and T. Dobzhansky (eds), Studies in the Philosophy of Biology, London: Macmillan. Friedman, J. (2001), ‘The iron cage of creativity: an exploration', in J. Liep (ed), Locating Cultural Creativity, London: Pluto Press. Gell, A. (1998), Art and Agency: An Anthropological Theory, Oxford: Clarendon Press. Gudeman, S. (1986), Economics as Culture: Models and Metaphors of Livelihood, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Ingold, T. (1986), Evolution and Social Life, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. — (2000), The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill, London: Routledge. - (2002), Between evolution and history: Biology, culture, and the myth of human origins', in M. Wheeler, J. Ziman and M.A. Boden (eds), The Evolution of Cultural Entities, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Jablonka, E. (2000), 'Lamarckian inheritance systems in biology: a source of metaphors and models in technological evolution', in J. Ziman (ed), Technological Innovation as an Evolutionary Process, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Klee, P. (1961), Notebooks, Volume 1: The Thinking Eye, London: Lund Humphries. Leroi-Gourhan, A. (1993), Gesture and Speech, (trans. A. Bostock Berger), Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Lévi-Strauss, C. (1966), The Savage Mind, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. Monod, J. (1972), Chance and Necessity, (trans. A. Wainhouse), London: Collins. Whitehead, A.N. (1929), Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. — (1938 [1926]), Science and the Modern World, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Yen, Y. (2005), Calligraphy and Power in Contemporary Chinese Society, London: Routledge Curzon.