# Introduction Melissa Demian and Sari Wastell We originally conceived the conference panel from which these chapters are taken as a forum in which to explore critically the nature of creativity in social, political and religious life by considering the extent to which – or those contexts within which – creativity'is imagined as a social rather than an individual capacity. While anthropologists have periodically invoked creativity in their considerations of social and cultural novelty, more often than not creativity is conceived as a psychological response to radical change (Kirshenblatt-Gimblett 1978; Stephen 1997), or the novel actions of individual persons who become a focal point for others in their society (Lavie, Rosaldo and Narayan 1993). In either case, no matter how socially dispersed the effects of creativity may appear to be, creativity as a cause or source of action is still construed as an interior capacity of the autonomous individual, the genius' whose creations and innovations mask the social relations upon which those innovations depended (Woodmansee 1984; Biagioli 1998). In order to avoid reproducing this version of creativity, we proposed as our starting point that the innovations which appear to cause temporal or historical discontinuities are not always (if indeed ever) genius-instigated and unprecedented practices or forms of knowledge. Rather, they are appropriations in the sense that practices, information or belief systems are transplanted' and then recontextualized by those who appropriate them. This process of decontextualization and recontextualization generates the effect or appearance of social discontinuity. The problem of course is that innovation might not be an appropriation of a practice at all. To play with contexts could just as easily cause long-standing practices to be recontextualized in an unanticipated milieu. Here, the appropriation would be of the context rather than the practice itself, an as if’ scenario where dissimilar social contexts are treated as homologues to one another. This too would attest to a form of creativity that could rarely be understood in terms of individual capacities, and one that might not easily be recognizable as creativity in vernacular Euro-American terms. The reason for this is precisely because such a form of creativity, in which enduring terms of reference are pressed into service in contexts for which they seem unwarranted, unexpected or misplaced, effects a claim to continuity. Creativity, according to its common-sense definition, is supposed to be about the new. That the lodestar of evaluations of creativity should be a kind of social alchemy – absolute transformation – at one time privileged any number of unenunciated predicates within anthropology itself. Not only did it underscore the dispensation of possessive individualism, it also shored up temporal presumptions about the dynamism of modernity as against the stasis of the tradition'in which our informants were allegedly mired. Whereas the West' not only had a history but actively made history as well, the Rest' were destined to be washed over by histories of others' making and to respond in a repetitive and programmatic fashion.¹ Indeed, the measure of creativity could be scaled, a variation evaluated as less creative than a transformation, which in turn is less unprecedented than a revolution.2 Creativity in this formulation is about action without precedent or about a self-conscious agency, but never about people doing the same thing over and over again in different or unexpected contexts. If the starting point for recognition of creativity is the combination of forms (Leach 2004: 152), it is also worth noting that some combinations are recognized as creative to the exclusion of others. Social discontinuity, for instance, is clearly in the eye of the beholder. Discontinuity alone cannot index creativity, because it categorically precludes one rendering of what creativity might actually be. Bearing this caveat in mind, we chose to highlight the concept of appropriation in the conference panel, be it the appropriation of knowledge-and-practices or of an entire context, in order to ask how people mobilize the unfamiliar or unforeseen, either voluntarily or involuntarily, to engender or efface a sense of social distinctiveness. In doing so, we hoped to open up a space for debate about what might actually constitute creativity in disparate ethnographic settings, an aim which we think has been realized in the three chapters that follow. At the same time, we also wanted to ask who attributes creativity' to acts and persons, both amongst the actors concerned within the ethnographic setting, and between actor/informants and the anthropologist/observer. If creativity is not a stable term of reference, how do people claim to recognize it when they see it, and by what measure is the act or person deemed to be creative (a point to which we will return below)? Finally, we encouraged contributors to the panel to consider what is at stake when creativity' is invoked in either indigenous exegesis or anthropological description. What exactly is being valorized, as in the case of discontinuity, and what are the social, political and historical catalysts that prompt the invocation of idioms of creativity? With this varied remit as our starting point for the conference panel, what we ultimately received were papers that provided critiques, implicit or explicit, of social change. This phrase, once popular in anthropology, has now fallen somewhat from favour, if only because of a growing recognition that if it describes anything, it describes a tautology: change is a categorical constituent of sociality. The fashionable line to take now is that this is especially true today, when the internally coherent and self-regulating hot' and cold' societies, as envisaged by Lévi-Strauss (1966), have been replaced by societies in an interconnected world, between which ideas flow as freely as people or commodities do. But if this is the case, where does it leave the concept of creativity in social life – is creativity just another practice of consumption? Can the concept of creativity offer any special purchase of this kind to ethnographic analysis, or is it still simply a Trojan horse for those asymmetries of modernity which allow Westerners to see themselves in both what they appropriate and what is appropriated from them (cf. Strathern 1999)? We argue that creativity has been dogged by a tendency to link it to what might on the face of it be imagined as its polar opposite: authenticity.³ If creativity is the capacity or process through which we are supposed to discover new social forms, authenticity is the knowledge practice through which we discover what is irrefutably endogenous to ourselves or to other people (Bendix 1997). Drawing on this tradition, some versions of cultural theory (for example, Gailey 1992) would have it that culture itself acts counter to the homogenizing effects of the market, and that as such its inherent creativity is also an inherent process of authentication against the threat of mass production and infinitely interchangeable value. But there are other ways of demonstrating ethnographically how creativity and authenticity are not so far removed from each other as they might seem. As each of the three chapters in this part reveals, creativity can be mobilized to discover authentic' forms of social experience. In Jeanette Edwards' chapter (Chapter 8), Baptist ministers in the north of England posit the family of God as subsuming or replacing the biological' family, such that discussions of the appropriateness of new reproductive technologies centre on the problem of whether the third parties' involved in these relationships irredeemably disrupt this family, or can unproblematically be excluded from it. In the chapter by Judith Scheele (Chapter 7), Kabyle political action in Algeria is stymied by the apparent paradox of the perpetual revolution', wherein the only way to claim political legitimacy is to appropriate the revolutionary rhetorics of Occupied France, the fight for Algerian independence, or the Palestinian intifada. In Elizabeth Cory-Pearce's account of early twentieth-century Maori scholarship (Chapter 6), attempts to classify the work of Makereti/Margaret Thom as stemming from either an indigenous or a cosmopolitan’ perspective are bound to run into trouble, particularly as Makereti herself appears to have declined to distinguish between anthropological and ancestral sources of knowledge about Maoridom, and instead treats one as an expression or embodiment of the other. Each of these contributions interrogates the relationship of creativity to authenticity in intriguing ways, and demonstrates that the relationship itself is predicated on a prior, but possibly spurious, association of authenticity with continuity, and creativity with discontinuity. Cory-Pearce also points to one of the other implicit themes that, while not comprising part of our original remit, emerged in the course of the conference session: how we know when we are being creative, and whether this knowledge is a sign of creativity's moral legitimacy or illegitimacy. As intimated earlier, self-consciousness around innovation is a hallmark of Western sensibilities about creativity, and yokes creativity to autonomous efficacy. It also resonates with one of the metaphors of creativity (Joas 1996: 70–126) that has long captured the attentions and enthusiasms of Western scholars on the subject: creativity as expression. Where creativity is imagined in terms of expression, it is reliant on a subject-object distinction that has not always proved a helpful analytic across the diversity of ethnographic contexts with which anthropologists grapple (see Leach, this volume, Chapter 5). However, two other predominant metaphors for creativity explored by Joas, production' and revolution', present their own problems. Production orients creativity in the direction of the material world, positing the objective circumstances of nature as the limiting factors which both instigate and constrain creative action.4 Revolution, on the other hand, assumes that there is a potential of human creativity relative to the social world, namely that we can fundamentally reorganize the social institutions that govern human co-existence' (ibid.: 71). Not only is the very stability of what constitutes the natural world as opposed to the social world a dubious starting point for anthropology, but conceiving of creativity in terms of an orientation to one over and above the other brings the question of reflexivity into acute focus. The 1990 Manchester debate concerning whether human worlds are culturally constructed couched this question in slightly different terms. Here the debate emphasized a distinction between construction as a self-conscious act which presumes both goals and the means for realizing them, and improvisation, which tends to emerge in the absence of a blueprint for action and is contingent upon what is to hand (Ingold 1996; Richards 1996). Whether both modalities are equally creative - and for whom – became a subject of serious discussion and debate within our conference session. For example, in Edwards' contribution, coming to be known' is a process of creative legitimation in English Baptist narratives of conception, wherein the foetus is deemed alive or sentient when it comes to be known by God. On the other hand, suggests Scheele, reflexivity and forethought harbinger delegitimation in the perpetually revolutionary politics of Kabylia, wherein the revelation of a powerful person's motives is a sign of the waning of that person's power. If, in the words of one of Scheele's interlocutors, All words [have] already been taken', the agency of political action cannot possibly have its source in living people or in contemporary political entities, but instead emanates from a past that is always just out of reach. The ambivalence towards creativity in these cases, and in Cory-Pearce's question of whether Makereti was an ancestral appropriator or a plagiarist (or both, or neither), is itself a suppressed aspect of the creativity concept. As Löfgren (2001) and Leach (2004; this volume, Chapter 5) have both observed, creativity is now touted as an unqualified good, desirable to fuel a knowledge economy' with a flexible workforce' and, perhaps more to the point, teachable to the children who will one day supply that workforce. But to conceive of creativity as unequivocally valuable is itself a novel position. Perhaps lurking in all three chapters in this part is the older tradition’ of creativity, wherein creativity is regarded as the disruptive characteristic of the mythological monsters, heroes and tricksters who make us human, but also separate us irretrievably from divine law (Mason 1988). In this tradition, creativity is as terrible as it is desirable, and is further conceived in explicit opposition to society: those who create must be counterbalanced by others who assess the moral value of their creations (ibid.). With the advent of monotheistic religions, all creativity was assigned to the Creator, such that the morality of creativity was unequivocal as long as it was attributed to divine inspiration. The Enlightenment concept of artistic genius, in other words, was only possible because God had been removed as an agent of creativity (Kristeller 1983: 107). But as Edwards' chapter in particular shows, this feat was only partially accomplished. Contemporary English Baptists have no trouble reinscribing divine intentions in the conception of children by means of IVF, since the child so conceived is not in the end related' to its parents by means of biology or even technology, but by means of the knowing recognition of God. The potential disruption of creativity is thereby obviated: there are always already novel ideas that precede the novel ideas of mere humans. We have sought to highlight some of the key questions that emerged during the conference panel, and that are raised by the chapters that follow. First, why has discontinuity become privileged as evidence for creativity, when in fact people may endeavour as far as possible to import old contexts into the background of new political forms in order to legitimize those forms (Scheele)? Second, is creativity only recognizable as such if it is self-conscious, that is, if action is undertaken with the reflexive intent to anticipate the regard of others (Cory-Pearce)? Finally, we might ask how pre-Enlightenment notions of a divine agency underlying creativity have been reinscribed into the discourse on apparently novel technological interventions (Edwards). The following chapters invite us to denaturalize the concept of creativity with the same rigour with which, say, modernity has become denaturalized, and they also ask whether creativity may be found in the appropriation of contexts rather than in the appropriation of specific social forms. There are of course risks to finding creativity in every moment of social life, not only because of the disruption that seems invariably to be regarded as a concomitant of innovation (Strathern 1992). One risk is that we end up looking for discontinuous agency or intent in every interpolation and hybrid that appears, rather in the manner of the vogue for transgression and resistance that has characterized much anthropological writing in recent years (Brown 1996). The opposite or perhaps complementary risk is that change or variation can only be approached negatively, as a kind of entropy, static, or “noise" (Wagner 1981: 29) in the social order which is itself the creation of a society imagining itself in relation to other societies. Wagner's caution is still apposite. If anthropology itself is a process of looking for social patterns that enable us to communicate our conviction that particular kinds of relationships exist, the ‘noise’ of social, political and religious creativity is the by-product of our attempts to convert our experience of these relationships into ethnographic description. ## Notes 1. Sahlins' (1987) structural historicism can be read in just this light. History, it is proposed, arrived on Hawaiian shores and the Hawaiians met it within the enduring templates of their culture'. As Appadurai (1988) noted (not referring specifically to Sahlins' work), in such a model the natives do not simply have culture, they are trapped inside it. 2. The urge to classify innovative political forms has a long history in anthropology. Here one is reminded of Gluckman's (1963) distinction between rebellions and revolutions, or Wallace's (1956) five-stage life cycle’ for revitalization movements. In both instances the anthropologist is faced with the improbable task of locating the level or unit of society from which new political forms emanate. 3. The extent to which authenticity, like creativity, is an intrinsic characteristic of sociality is anticipated in the word's etymology, which links authenticity to direct experience, to being there', and therefore to the unique and unrepeatable nature of that experience. The experiential subtext of authenticity can also be found in Heidegger's (1993) writings on authenticity as being true to one's Dasein. 4. One could think either of Marxist historical materialism or of Heideggerian phenomenology in this respect. ## References Appadurai, A. (1988), Putting Hierarchy in its Place', Cultural Anthropology, 3: 36–49. Bendix, R. (1997), In Search of Authenticity: The Formation of Folklore Studies, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. Biagioli, M. (1998), The Instability of Authorship: Credit and Responsibility in Contemporary Biomedicine', The FASEB Journal, 12: 3–16. Brown, M.F. (1996), On Resisting Resistance', American Anthropologist, 98: 729-35. Gailey, C.W. (1992), 'Introduction: The Politics of Culture in Civilization', in C.W. Gailey (ed), The Politics of Culture and Creativity, Gainesville: University Press of Florida. Gluckman, M. (1963), Order and Rebellion in Tribal Africa, London: Cohen & West. Heidegger, M. (1993), Basic Concepts, Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Ingold, T. (1996), Human worlds are culturally constructed: Against the motion (1)', in T. Ingold (ed), Key Debates in Anthropology, New York: Routledge. Joas, H. (1996), The Creativity of Action, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, B. (1978), Culture Shock and Narrative Creativity', in R.M. Dorson (ed), Folklore in the Modern World, The Hague: Mouton. Kristeller, P.O. (1983), "Creativity" and “Tradition", Journal of the History of Ideas, 44: 105–13. Lavie, S., Narayan, K. and Rosaldo, R. (eds) (1993), Creativity/Anthropology, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Leach, J. (2004), 'Modes of Creativity', in E. Hirsch and M. Strathern (eds), Transactions and Creations: Property Debates and the Stimulus of Melanesia, New York: Berghahn Books. Lévi-Strauss, C. (1966), The Savage Mind, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. Löfgren, O. (2001), Celebrating Creativity: The Slanting of a Concept', in J. Liep (ed), Locating Cultural Creativity, London: Pluto Press. Mason, J.H. (1988), ‘The Character of Creativity: Two Traditions', History of European Ideas, 9: 697–715. Richards, P. (1996), Human worlds are culturally constructed: Against the motion (2)', in T. Ingold (ed), Key Debates in Anthropology, New York: Routledge. Sahlins, M. (1987), Islands of History, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Stephen, M. (1997), ‘Cargo Cults, Cultural Creativity, and Autonomous Imagination', Ethos, 25: 333–58. Strathern, M. (1992), Reproducing the Future: Essays on Anthropology, Kinship, and the New Reproductive Technologies, New York: Routledge. — (1999), Property, Substance, and Effect: Anthropological Essays on Persons and Things, London: Athlone Press. Wagner, R. (1981), The Invention of Culture, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Wallace, A.F.C. (1956), Revitalization Movements', American Anthropologist, 58: 264–81. Woodmansee, M. (1984), ‘The Genius and the Copyright: Economic and Legal Conditions of the Emergence of the “Author", Eighteenth-Century Studies, 17: 425–48.