# You knit me together in my mother's womb': English Baptists and Assisted Procreation Jeanette Edwards For you created my inmost being; you knit me together in my mother's womb. I praise you because I am fearfully and wonderfully made; your works are wonderful, I know that full well. My frame was not hidden from you when I was made in the secret place. When I was woven together in the depths of the earth, your eyes saw my unformed body. Psalm 139, New International Bible) ## Religion and New Reproductive Technologies (NRT) In an intriguing study of clinical fertility services in Israel, Susan Kahn (2000) unpacks the relationship between the politics of nation-state formation, religion and new reproductive technologies (NRT). In Israel, technologies of assisted conception are widely and freely available until the birth of two live children. Kahn focuses, among other things, on the dilemmas and deliberations of Israeli rabbis who had to decide what was and was not possible under Jewish religious law. They reached some interesting and pragmatic solutions. Thus, for example, they decreed that Jewish women may use donated sperm, but, because of the Halakha prohibition on masturbation and the adulterous connotations of using semen from a Jewish man to inseminate a Jewish woman who is not his wife, it should ideally come from non-Jewish men. Of interest here is the way in which religious spokespersons make sense of new possibilities emerging from NRT and how they can not only accommodate those possibilities, but also enlist them into pre-existing religious understandings. My ethnographic example is from the north of England, and I am interested in how Baptist ministers draw on what they know about kinship and the origins of persons to explore novel interventions in human conception. ## Chapel Country Three towns, together with their satellite villages, make up a region in the northwest of England referred to locally as The Valley'.¹ The population grew with the development of the textile industry and shrank with its decline. Local historians describe the region as the cradle of the industrial revolution'. They also refer to it fondly and ironically as chapel country', with a nod to the continuing significance of nonconformist religion in the region that grew during the nineteenth century when chapels were built alongside mills and public houses.² There are ten Baptist churches in The Valley, only six of which have a fulltime dedicated minister. I was told that with a population of about 70,000, the Valley has the highest number of Baptist churches per capita in Britain. In 2000, while carrying out fieldwork in Alltown, I was given the opportunity of meeting and talking with the six Valley Baptist ministers about NRT.3 This chapter draws on my recorded conversations with them and on my participation in informal Bible classes and a local Baptist men's group. I did not set out systematically to research religion (Baptist or otherwise) and NRT, and consequently this is a preliminary discussion that draws on limited ethnographic data. Nevertheless, of interest here is the way in which the Baptists with whom I spoke explore novel and innovative techniques of human conception through ancient texts and autobiographical detail. They draw on both the Bible (the word') and their own intimate experiences of kinship to imagine the social and ethical consequences or implications of particular scientific or medical practices. ## Six Baptist Ministers The Valley ministers are all men: four are in their mid-forties, one in his latefifties and one in his mid-thirties and married with children. They each told me about their previous jobs and careers before they trained to be ministers.4 I have written elsewhere of how people with no vested interest in NRT draw on their own personal experiences, particularly of kinship and intimate relationships, to explore biotechnological intervention in human reproduction (e.g. Edwards 1999, 2000; Edwards and Strathern 2000). Baptist ministers are no exception. In thinking about the possibilities and limitations of NRT, they told me of what they know personally about the making and breaking of intimate family relationships. Mr Young dwells on his unhappy experience as a child, brought up by a stepmother who disliked him intensely and a father who did not notice. Mr Jones talks of his divorce and reflects on the different kinds of connection he feels with his children who live with their mother and his stepchildren who live with him. Mr Unwin muses on the relationship between his granddaughter (whom he and his wife are bringing up') and her father, who absented himself before she was born. Selected and considered autobiographical details illustrate and formulate ministers' views on NRT. ## Preaching with a peep’ The Baptist church'is imagined by the ministers as a network of autonomous churches loosely linked in a Union. This model is envisaged in contradistinction to other religions that are said to have an overarching and hierarchical authority in terms of both doctrine and administration (see Cross 2000). The Valley ministers all emphasize the fact that the minister of a local church is chosen by its congregation. They talk of the matches that are made between church and minister, and of the autonomy of the church in its choice of minister. Mr Unwin describes it this way: .. . churches opt into a system whereby names are sent to them with profiles – perhaps five or six – when they're looking for a minister. The deacons look through and they suss out who they think might be suitable. They recommend to the church that they invite that person and then that person goes and we have the famous phrase preaching with a view' – with a view to being appointed. We also have a phrase preaching with a peep' which means they invite somebody to preach as a kind of a pre-preach, if you know what I mean, because it's their choice, so they want to be sure. In emphasizing the autonomy of a church in choosing its minister, the ministers also underline an affinity to the church in which they have ended up – and an incompatibility with those they declined. Mr Telford, for example, describes how he was initially put in touch with a church in Leicester, which gave him a unanimous call to be their minister. But he tells me, I felt that that wasn't really right for me or for them because it was a church in a very, very strong multiracial area – very, very alien to what I had been used to. I felt that they would be better with a reverend who had a bit more experience of working in a multicultural city'. Mr Barnes declined the offer of a ministry in a poor area of Newcastle because he felt they needed somebody with more social work experience. Ministers talk of a calling' both into the church more broadly and into their own church more specifically. This calling becomes apparent to them through their discussion with peers and mentors, their reading of the Bible and prayer. Serendipity also plays a part in calling' and in the will of God, although I doubt the Baptist ministers would describe it as such. Mr Rose, for example, tells of the way in which he was matched' with his church: My father-in-law is a lay preacher and he preached here and in so doing he learned that they were looking for a minister. They were in a – it's called an interregnum in Baptist circles, when you have no minister. So he learned that and he also knew that we were considering finding ways of coming back to England. So he made that connection and he asked the people here if they would entertain a profile from someone in the States. So I sent them a profile and I didn't know whether it would work out. But it did work out. Local churches are, in Mr Rose's words, self-governing' and work on a consensus model', with members coming to an agreement on where they stand' on a particular issue. Issues in need of clarification emerge from the preoccupations of church members. Individual churches, I was told, are able to define their position' on certain subjects and the local congregation seeks the mind of Christ together'. I ask the ministers if there is a Baptist line' on NRT. Mr Unwin tells me that, as far as he knows, there has been nothing published in the Baptist Times or by the interdenominational Evangelical Alliance about cloning or IVF'. But, he explains, it is very difficult to keep abreast of everything and ministers with finite time and resources, and working on their own, struggle to keep up'. They have to make decisions about the issues' on which to focus. What gets to be an issue, of course, is of anthropological interest. Mr Unwin tells me that the previous day he preached on Harry Potter: Should we be recommending our children to read books about magic or shouldn't we?’ It is not an issue for him, he explains, but it is for some parents: ‘So it's good to have teaching on it and to look at the Bible and say “well what does the Bible say about these issues?" Autonomy emerges, then, as a valued and valuable feature of the Baptist church: ministers identify the autonomy of local churches in choosing their minister, in what the minister preaches and in the position they take on a particular social issue. Ministers connect the doctrinal independence of local churches to their financial independence. To return to my conversation with Mr Unwin:⁵ Unwin: All Baptist churches are totally independent – they own their own property. You see in the Methodist church it isn't like that – well certainly not in the Anglican or in the Roman Catholic Church. But we own our own property. We make our own decisions. Now if we were to make certain decisions, the Baptist Union could say: Look, hold on a minute'... and they could say that they don't feel it's right that we should stay in the Union. If we wanted to stay in, we would change it [our decision]. But there is that independence. Edwards: So does that also go for matters of ethics or morality? Unwin: Yes. Edwards: So I could be finding a lot of diversity within a Baptist kind of teaching? Unwin: Yes, but the thing is you're talking to ministers and I think that we're more likely to agree having trained at probably no more than four different colleges. Whereas if you were talking to members – but, then again, you'd only be getting loads of individual opinions anyway, wouldn't you? Edwards: Would I? But that's the interesting thing. Would I be getting loads of individual opinions, or would I be getting also things that were informed by membership of the Baptist church? Unwin: I suppose you could take the view that gradually a minister is bound to put across his own view and take a large part of the congregation with him, if they like him and they trust him and he is convincing. But I think it does work both ways. From this perspective, ministers are more likely to think alike than their congregation, and they may, with charisma and trust on their side, influence their congregation. But ultimately each church is independent and comprises individuals with their own individual opinions, and the individuality and independence of churches and persons are positively valued. The close and mutually informative relationship between minister and congregation is something that Baptist ministers recognize as special to Baptism. I was told over and over again that there is no one Baptist line, and that the Baptist Union is careful not to say, This is a Baptist response'. So what holds Baptism together? What is it that members perceive themselves to share? I want to look a little closer at the idioms of kinship through which the church' and belonging to it are conceptualized. ## The Family of God For The Valley Baptist ministers, God has ultimately given human beings the tools and means to intervene in human suffering. He has provided the ability to overcome infertility and allowed human beings to put right what has gone wrong with nature. Nature, as we shall see, is heavily circumscribed within heterosexual marriage, which is in itself naturalized. There is a general agreement that heterosexual and married couples should be able to use NRT, and techniques such in vitro fertilization (IVF) and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) are acceptable ways of achieving a pregnancy. There is less agreement about the use of donated gametes, but, as we shall see, it is not dismissed out of hand. Baptists have a powerful and prominent precedent for playing down the significance of biological connection in creating families, and it is one that they readily mobilize. Baptists describe themselves as belonging to one family, alternatively called the family of the Church, the family of God, the family of the Word or the family of Christ. God is the father, the church the mother, and members of the', or a', church are brothers and sisters in Christ. Relatedness forged through the word', like that forged through biogenetic connection (as described by David Schneider (1968, 1984) for North Americans), is not optional. One can neither choose to be unrelated nor ignore its obligations. Belonging to the family of the word' also entails codes of conduct which include mutual support and an avoidance of gossip or criticism. Consider Mr Telford's description: Telford: When I talk about the family of the church I mean everybody who comes to Trinity, from those who are just a few months old, to those who are in their late nineties, men and women, married and single, everybody for me makes up the family of the church and when we talk about the family of the church, we constantly emphasize the importance of great relationships between all of us related in the family of the church ... the new testament says that the apostle Paul used to talk about us being brothers and sisters in Christ, which is actually quite a helpful term. Most friendships are made with people of similar interests ... but we're not talking [here] about Christian friendships, we're talking about something a lot deeper. We're talking about a relationship that's as close as a brother and a sister ... I mean, we say things like you can choose your friends', but actually, when you become a Christian and you become involved in the church, you can't choose your friends in a sense because you are a family. So you're brothers and sisters, like it or not. Edwards: That's interesting. But of course families are marked as much by conflict and falling-out as they are by love and care. Telford: That's right, so we are much more like a family. I mean we have problems in the church, people don't always hit it off, but we're always working together for all the pluses of good relationships and emphasizing to people the importance of liking one another and supporting one another and encouraging one another, being careful not to gossip, criticize and all the other things that spoil family life, and where there is breakdown, we can bring healing and reconciliation. So yes, much more like a family than a series of friendships. Similar kinds of effort are required to make and sustain both the kinship described by Schneider and the kinship described by these Baptist ministers. Both are deemed non-negotiable, both are marked by diffuse, enduring, solidarity', both, unlike friendship, are neither chosen nor entered into voluntarily, both substantialize and essentialize relatedness, one in blood the other in the word. Mr Jones puts it this way: We might draw on a metaphor – if you want to say that blood is thicker than water in an understanding of family ties, then that would [give] some understanding of Christian faith. We might be very different people with different lifestyles but that is the ideal of the Church – people from diverse backgrounds – and their common factor would be their faith in Christ and their experience of God. In that sense, we might say we are in the same blood family, aren't we? The family of Christ, that is the metaphor we are drawing on. The collectivity of the church and the way in which relatedness between members is conceptualized borrows from a particular kind of kinship thinking and at the same time expands it. Mr Telford draws our attention to the way in which kinship forged through the word is as given or non-negotiable as that forged through blood – you can choose your friends, but not your family' – and Mr Jones expands the common idiom of blood being thicker than water to convey the thickness (and stickiness) of the connections between those who put their faith in Christ'. The family of God, or of the word, does not replace or subvert the family of blood, but instead extends it. I want to suggest that when it comes to NRT, Baptists already have a favourable take on the non-biological family. There is a pre-existing and central place for the creation of the family' through will, shared sentiment and affective ties. Mr Unwin draws on the Bible to make his point. For him, the family of the word is more important' than the biological family. He finds evidence for this in the Bible in the way in which Jesus, while dying, allocates John to Mary as her son, and on other occasions proclaims his true mothers and brothers as those who hear the word and obey it'. Mr Unwin draws an analogy between the family of the word and the family that cares for and nurtures the infant. For him, the preference of Christ for the family of the word' weakens the biological thing'. To continue: Edwards: Yes. But what do you think about this emphasis at present on tracing biological parents? Increasingly with DNA testing we can trace biological fathers say Unwin: \_I hate the word father in that sense, I really do! Hate is too strong a word, I really don't like it. Edwards: For you, the father is the one that brings you up, who nurtures you, who wipes your nose \_? Unwin: \_ of course we call God father, that is one of the names which Jesus gave to us and it is very important to us and so I would rather we had a different phrase which meant, how can I express it, the male biological. Edwards: The genitor? Unwin:Yes, okay, the genitor. To me it is an absolute contradiction in terms – if you're talking about somebody like the father of my granddaughter who, upon one phone call, never wanted to know, and has never been seen since – to mix the terms biological and father is a total contradiction of terms to me. Edwards: That's interesting. But do you think culturally we do this? There does seem to be an emphasis on biological links. Unwin: It prompts kidology doesn't it? The kidology is that the word father, meaning genitor, actually has some meaning, in terms of caring for and being part of your family. To me that just isn't true. Then it leads to this kidology which is if I trace my “real" father, my biological benefactor, that I will discover something about myself', and I think that what so many people discover is just huge sadness, especially where fathers are concerned. I have no statistics on that. Mr Unwin has both the Bible and his own experience of bringing up his granddaughter with the lack of interest or care shown by her (biological) father as evidence that a distinction should be made between a (real) father and a male biological'. Parents are the people who bring you up and the biological thing is weaker' than the affective ties forged through care and attention. The Baptist ministers are predisposed to unpack the component parts of kinship in a way that creatively undermines the privileging of biogenetic connection. This, together with an understanding that human capacity and capability are given by God and that little happens without his knowledge, means that they can accommodate many of the possibilities presented by new conceptive technologies. From one perspective, it figures that the sperm donor, like the absent father, has less claim to being a father than the man who brings up the child. But as we shall see below, when ministers look at such a procedure from the perspective of the sacred bond’ of marriage, then the sperm donor presents an unwanted and unwarranted intrusion. Furthermore, the sacred bond of marriage' privileges the heterosexual couple, and indeed Scriptures and personal experience can now be drawn upon to place limits on the creative possibilities. ## Intricately Woven Over and over again I was told that life'starts when God knows. God is aware of, and works upon, the embryo or the foetus in the womb. Evidence, I was told, is found in Psalm 139. Several of the ministers turned to it in one of the number of bibles in their living room or office and read it to me; Mr Rose quoted it from memory: For it was you who formed my inward palms, you knit me together in my mother's womb, I praise you for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Wonderful are your words that I know very well. My frame was not hidden from you when I was being made in secret, intricately woven in the depths of the earth. Ideas about the beginning of life' emerged frequently in my conversations with the ministers about NRT. It has clearly been a topic well rehearsed in debate about abortion, and ministers acknowledge contestation within the church over how or when the beginning of a human life is defined. For some, I was told, it may be at fertilization, for others it is when the embryo attaches to the wall of the uterus, and for yet others when the foetus starts moving. All agree that the Bible suggests it is earlier rather than later and that there is evidence in the Bible that life even begins at conception. Ministers also acknowledge, however, that there are different and competing expertises. According to one minister, a theological understanding of the beginning of life' may differ from a physiological understanding. And in the words of another: Raising the question for me, it would be about when does that embryo become sentient – when does it know it exists? That is a question we can't answer because you can't take newborns in the womb and say at what point, three months [or] six months. In terms of more theological implications about when [life begins] for God, I would have to say that for God it occurs at conception. My reason for saying that for God it is at conception is because a lot of the psalms talk about being known in the womb and about God ordaining life and so. These kinds of concepts of being known by God, even before birth, [mean that] for me, God knows the individual. Of interest here is the way in which the esoteric runs into a social pragmatism. Arguments about the omnipresence of God are interspersed with and supported by rationalizing arguments about demand and supply. Mr Unwin comments: I find that one of the great mysteries, one of the great ridiculous things really, about our society [is] that abortion has been allowed to go rampant, in my own view, in society, and yet there is such a desperate need for babies to be adopted. I think to myself why are we so crazy? Why are we killing off all these unborn infants and yet there are homes desperate for them?' In the rhetoric of another minister: How can situations such as surrogacy arrangements be concocted when abortion is condoned'. There is a constant tussle between tenet and pragmatism. The needs and lived experiences of church members and the responsibility of ministers for their pastoral care require some doctrinal imagination. Imperatives to alleviate suffering and the responsibility of human beings to use the capabilities provided by God cut across certain interpretations of the word'. NRT reveals the fault lines. Take Mr Young's comments on embryo research: In terms of the embryo thing, I personally wouldn't have a problem with the embryo research. I mean, I wouldn't want to go to Alder Hey6 and have rooms and rooms and rooms of embryos just in case we wanted to do a little bit more research. Equally, I wouldn't want them produced to order. So it's about the necessity rather than the desire and I think, for me, the whole feel of scientific and medical research is this thing about necessity. The cruelty to animals – I couldn't knowingly do something to an animal that would cause it great pain and suffering but, equally, if there was a choice between doing it to me or one of my children, or doing it to an animal, I am sorry but the animal is going to lose every time. In the same way, if we can learn stuff about improving humanity on a cluster of cells, which is living by definition but has no conscious knowledge of its existence, then the group of cells is going to lose every time. But I hope that is because it is the only way we can do it. New reproductive technologies are put into a technological bag that for one minister includes plastic surgery, surrogacy, Viagra, and broken families'. They are located in a world where one third of the population are hungry', and at a time in the UK when benefits to families are cut'. Ministers explore what they do not know about NRT through what they know about present-day inequalities, as well as through what they see as technological enhancement and enchantment at a time when technology appears unable to solve or resolve fundamental problems of poverty. Nevertheless, Baptist thinking creatively accommodates technological innovation in conception and it does so in a number of ways. First, the productive and positive activities of human beings are willed by God: in the context of NRT I was asked, Is this not God's will?', or told that It must be God's will'. God, the argument goes, has given human beings intelligence and capabilities which include their ability to develop technologies of assisted conception. They may, of course, from a Baptist perspective, be applied in good or bad ways, but there is nothing intrinsically wrong in them. Second, the most significant social collectivity for Baptist ministers is the family of God' or ‘the word', and this family is created through adoption. The prior notion that human beings are adopted into the family of God provides a precedent for demoting biological relatedness. Third, God is known to work on persons prior to birth – to begin to knit them together' in the womb. I suggest that, if this is the case, then it is of little consequence how the embryo got there: that is, if it is implanted or created in a Petri dish. ## Biological Adultery The sacred bond of marriage' was a constant companion in my conversations with Baptist ministers. All the ministers see a place for NRT in the context of the married heterosexual couple unable to conceive a child. But, like the rabbis in Israel (Kahn 2000), some are concerned with the adulterous link implied in the substitution sperm. Mr Telford returns several times to the question of why using donated semen is a problem. The procedure may be unproblematic spiritually, he says, but it is a problem biologically. He explains that with what he calls simple IVF’ (using the gametes of the married couple and would-be parents) there is a 'biological completeness'. Involving a third party, however, is 'biological adultery'. Telford: I'm not comfortable with any third party involvement. Edwards: Whether that was an egg donor, or sperm donor, or a surrogate? Telford: Yes. Edwards: Why is that? d: I think if a wife goes out and sleeps with somebody else and gets pregnant, we call it adultery. I wrestle with the problem of whether this is actually biological adultery where you're introducing a third party. I also have enormous difficulties with relationships – father, mother, child – and then the third party – husband, wife, child, third party. I find that that makes it enormously muddled and complicated for the child, presumably, as he or she grows up. The amount of information they get about the donor – I'm not sure about that – whether to make that broadly available, or whether to wait till they are eighteen, or what. So I do wrestle with this concept. Firstly on the grounds that it seems to me to be biological adultery, but secondly because of the muddle and complexity and pain that you are introducing to three or four-fold relationships. Telford struggles first with the intrusion on the bond between the married couple, and then with the additional and surplus link between the child and the sperm donor. I have written elsewhere of the analogies people draw between adultery and the substitution of gametes (Edwards 2000, 2004). There is a literalness in the way in which donated semen, for example, has the potential to forge an adulterous link. Similarly with surrogacy: Is there any difference', Mr Telford asks, between a husband going off and getting another woman pregnant and surrogacy? They're not sleeping in a bed together, and they have gone through the test-tube process, but it's still there'. While the problem might be couched in terms of biology or relationships, an overriding concern seems to be with the interjection of a third', unconnected, outsider into the relationship between husband and wife, which has the potential to desacralize the bond. This argument is embedded within an explicit commitment to pastoral care. Mr Telford goes on: Having said that, I do have enormous sympathy for couples who haven't got children, for whatever reason, and who want them. I don't want to come across as being harsh or unfeeling because I can imagine the terrible pain that there is and we've been so fortunate – we've had two lovely girls without any problems at all. So, I mean, my position, and the Christian position I'm sure, is enormous sympathy for couples who are childless for whatever reason. I mean, they get married with the hope of having one, two, three or six children and find out that they can't. It must be enormously painful for them. My heart goes out to them, it really does. The ministers feel keenly their obligation to keep abreast of current affairs and to be knowledgeable about the contemporary world. This is related to their role in, and concern with, the pastoral and spiritual care of their community. They need to have one eye to the future when members of their church may require access to fertility services and seek guidance from them. Their willingness to speak with me about these issues, and the care and thoughtfulness with which they engaged with my questions, was driven by a strong sense that they ought to be informed on behalf of those they serve. ## Situated Morality I was struck by way in which Mr James described his training. He is completing a degree in contextual theology, with a part-time ministry in The Valley as his placement – a sort of on-the-job training'. In his words: A lot of what we do practically, relates to constant theological reflection and I think the difference between applied theology, as I would understand it, and contextual theology is that rather than applying your theology to context, you actually let the context speak and shape the theology ... It is a different way of doing theology from the old style. You used to learn lots of doctrines and how it is supposed to be politically. This – the education model – is much more about, you know, learning [sic] people to think for themselves. The notion that the context shapes theology is significant.7 The Valley ministers concede that it is difficult to have hard and fast rules about what should and should not be allowed in terms of biomedical intervention in conception and pregnancy. Mr Young describes himself as a conservative evangelical', and explains what this means with reference to his views on abortion: I would be definitely flying against the wind [because] I would not say that there should never be abortion, because I think that there are circumstances where that is right ... I think if you were to take a straw poll and people were to take their gut reactions, I think that I would probably be seen as going with the normal flow.... One of the first things that I did when I came up here was to do a bible study on ethics and I had a few people saying, euthanasia no', abortion no', 'divorce no', but where that touched their lives, it put a different perspective on it. You can be very sort of hard and fast and then your daughter, who is not able to conceive, comes and says I'm going for IVF. Mr Young is both flying against the wind' and going with the flow': out of tune with dominant Christian ideology and in tune with people in their daily lives faced with contingency and dealing with contradiction. Of interest is the way in which The Valley ministers acknowledge the situational nature of morality. They reflect on NRT from a range of perspectives and from the point of view of a number of actors. I have written elsewhere of how other residents in this part of England reject or disagree with specific biotechnological interventions in human conception, but at the same time acknowledge that were they in a different position' they would think differently. They also, with great alacrity, shift perspectives and imagine the same innovation from the point of view of a different person: the gamete donor, the surrogate mother, the involuntarily childless couple, the ensuing child, the doctor, and so on. I imagined that Baptist ministers would have less leeway in their imaginings: that their exploration of NRT would be within moral frameworks already circumscribed. To a certain extent this is the case, but only up to a point. The Baptism on which I have focused here appears to support some doctrinal flexibility without compromising certain bottom lines (which in themselves and in their turn are fuzzy). Ministers either echo the sentiments of their congregation as voices of their own, or persuade otherwise and pray for change. The Valley Baptist ministers, like other Valley people, readily rationalize and justify technological innovation in human reproduction. Their own religious technologies allow for an incorporation of reproductive techniques that encourage the heterosexual married couple to go forth and multiply. ## Notes 1. The Valley' covers an area that roughly corresponds to the region of local government. I have been working as an anthropologist in Alltown, one of the three Valley towns, on and off since 1987. 2. See Bebbington (1994) for a discussion of the different relationship between Baptism and Evangelicalism in Britain and the United States; and Cross (2000) for further details of the particular complexion of the twentieth-century British Baptist movements. 3. I use NRT here as a shorthand for biotechnological intervention in human conception which includes artificial insemination (AI) and in vitro fertilization (IVF), with or without the donation of gametes. 4. Most of the ministers underlined the fact that they had been happy in their previous jobs. I think this might be partly in response to sociological analyses, which emphasize the role of deprivation and anomie in religious conversion (e.g. Robbins 2004). My sense is that in emphasizing the fact that they were happy before deciding to join the ministry they are refuting such simplistic causal arguments. 5. Here and below I present a lengthy quotation from our conversation with the aim of indicating how ideas lead on from others. I use the following conventions in the transcripts: \_ at the end and at the beginning of an utterance indicates an overlap in speakers; ... indicates material omitted; italicized phrases or words indicate original emphasis; square brackets indicate my addition. 6. Alder Hey is a children's hospital in Liverpool which was recently in the news because of the discovery' of tissue samples and organs from dead infants and foetuses, which had been taken and stored without the consent of parents. 7. The idea is part of a contemporary zeitgeist and found across a range disciplinary practices: for example, we teach anthropology students that theory emerges from ethnography, and social workers with whom I have worked insist that their practice is shaped by the particular context and by the specific needs of the people in whose lives they intervene. ## References Bebbington, D. (1994), Evangelicalism in its settings: the British and American movements since 1940', in M. Noll, D. Bebbington and G. Rawlyk (eds), Evangelicalism: comparative studies of popular Protestantism in North America, the British Isles and beyond, 1700–1990, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Cross, A.R. (2000), Baptism and the Baptists: Theology and Practice in Twentieth-Century Britain, Carlisle, Cumbria: Paternoster Press. Edwards, J. (1999), Explicit connections: ethnographic enquiry in north-west England', in J. Edwards, S. Franklin, E. Hirsch, F. Price and M. Strathern, Technologies of Procreation: kinship in the age of assisted conception, second edition, London: Routledge. — (2000), Born and Bred: idioms of kinship and new reproductive technologies in England, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (2004), Incorporating incest: gamete, body and relation in assisted conception', Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 10(4): 755–74. (2005), 'Make-up': identity, upbringing and character', Ethnos, 70(3): 413– 31. — and Strathern, M. (2000), Including our own', in J. Carsten (ed), Cultures of Relatedness: new approaches to the study of kinship, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Kahn, S.M. (2o00), Reproducing Jews: A cultural account of assisted conception in Israel, Durham, NC and London: Duke University Press. Robbins, J. (2004), The globalization of Pentecostal and Charismatic Christianity, Annual Review of Anthropology, 33: 117–43. Schneider, D. (1968), American Kinship: a cultural account, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. —— (1984), A Critique of the Study of Kinship, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. Strathern, M. (2002), Externalities in disguise', in Economy and Society 31(2): 250–67. Part III Creativity and the Passage of Time: History, Tradition and the Life-course ## Introduction Eric Hirsch and Sharon Macdonald ## Creativity and Temporality; Creativity or Temporality? Creativity and temporality' was the original title of the conference panel at which the chapters in this part were presented. One question that we raised in our panel abstract concerned the kinds of change over time that might be counted as evidence of creativity'. When was a change deemed creative' and when was it something else? Could change that was merely' the outcome of the passage of time or of the past somehow pressing itself into the present be considered creative or not? And should creativity' be seen as entailing a value judgement about particular kinds of agency that rest in culturally and historically specific interpretations of time? After hearing the original conference papers and the comments of our discussants, Penny Harvey and Marilyn Strathern, it became clear that posing our title as a question – creativity or temporality?’— emphasized these central questions and highlighted key themes running through the papers, in particular those of agency and of how creativity' is defined by both natives' and anthropologists.¹ It also brought to the fore another question that we raised in our conference abstract: why is there so much emphasis on creativity – especially in the academy and in Western societies – at present? We explore these questions below, beginning with a brief consideration of the history of the term creativity' itself and the constellation of notions and social forms with which it is associated, leading to reflection on its contemporary usage and spread. Then, by way of reflection on the three chapters that follow, we look at some further implications of the relationship between creativity and temporality that are opened up by our creativity or temporality' perspective. ## A Temporal Perspective: From Creative to Creativity The adjective creative', according to the Oxford English Dictionary, only entered conventional English usage in the seventeenth century. It did so alongside the development of particular conceptions of personhood which emphasized not only the idea of individual difference or individuation', but also a moral obligation to express that difference, and thus to work on' the self to realize individual distinctiveness (Taylor 1989: 375, 159). Such conceptions put new levels of emphasis on individual responsibility and the capacity for making opportunity, rather than seeing life trajectories as divinely plotted. Personal accumulation of wealth and success became conspicuous social values, and failure to take responsibility for the self, or take opportunities', could be met with disapproval. Ian Hacking (1995, following Douglas 1992) points to Locke's theory of personal identity (first published in 1689) – where he considers two concepts of identity – as a key formulation of these values. Central to the theory was the choice of the word person' for what Locke called a forensic concept', constituted via chains of memory and responsibility (Hacking 1995: 146). (Man', by contrast, was chosen as a concept because it referred to bodily continuity in Locke's terminology.) These new conceptions of identity were part of the enterprise society – marked by new practices of commerce, law, property and trade – that was taking shape at the time (ibid.: 146). This was a society in which people were called upon to be creative' in the sense of taking individual responsibility and realizing their immanent potential. The expressivity of this notion of creative' was subsequently expanded into the realms of art and literature during the Romantic period of the late eighteenth century. Here it was coupled with the idea of the imagination, which was understood as a mental faculty capable of acts of creation testifying to individual distinctiveness and personal identity. The Romantics sought further to distinguish between ‘the merely reproductive imagination, which simply brings back to mind what we have already experienced ... and the creative imagination which can produce something new and unprecedented'(Taylor 1989: 378–9). This characterization of creative’ as requiring novelty informs much subsequent discourse, though it remains contested and the subject of much philosophical and other discussion. Bergson's creative evolution', for example, is an attempt to expand the notion into the realm of early twentieth-century science (Ingold 1986: 173–221; this volume Introduction to Part I). By the end of that century, creative' had taken on other meanings too, as in the domain of financial matters – creative accounting'. Despite the variability in the meanings of the term, there are two other points about the historical emergence of its use that we might note here, for they are important in subsequent characterizations of creative'and creativity', and have a bearing upon considerations of creativity or temporality. The first is the objectification of imagination' – the idea that there is a specific mental faculty or locus in which novelty might be produced. This lays the ground for creativity' later coming to be regarded as a distinctive quality, with a presumed mental location, rather than simply a temporal realization; and becoming a suitable topic for psychological – and even neurological – investigation. The second is the objectification of time that has implications for the creative working out of individual distinctiveness. Life-narration emerges as a key mode of self-expression, one capable of relating memory and the actions of the individual to the temporal unfolding of events (Taylor 1989: 289). The concept of creativity' itself only really became conventional well into the period of the Industrial Revolution, though applied solely to individual artistic matters. Towards the end of the twentieth and into the twenty-first century, however, there has been an explosion of interest in creativity: in defining it as much as exhibiting it. In part, this seems to be bound up with what some called the end of history' – the triumph' of a neoliberal vision of the world that displaced the old certainties about East and West, capitalism and communism, society and individual – and the dominance of a world view in which the individual' reigns supreme. In such a world view, transnational corporations are typically conceptualized as larger versions of the private individual – super-private and super-individualistic; and changes of scale between the individual person and private company seem irrelevant. There is only a magnification or diminution along the same scale of virtues' (Strathern 1992: 141–2). A key aspect of this creativity explosion'– or cult of creativity' (Eriksen 2005) – is that creativity comes to be expected and even demanded, widely and coercively. Where individuals' reign supreme, it seems, they need to demonstrate what is perceived to be the highest achievable good: creativity (Osborne 2003: 508; Liep 2001). What creativity is, though, is far from certain. ## Creativity as a Particular Form of Agency Considerable philosophical attention has been accorded to attempting to define what is meant by creativity' (see, for example, Beaney 2005: ch. 6). Such discussion typically focuses on questions of novelty (how new' and original' does a product have to be to provide evidence of creativity'?), value (is anything new ‘creative' or does it have to be in some sense worthwhile?) and agency (e.g. is intentionality a prerequisite?). Such debate informs Kirsten Hastrup's discussion of creativity and agency below, though unlike most philosophical debate, Hastrup emphasizes the social nature of creativity and, in turn, the performative nature of the social. This has the effect of reframing conventional questions. In relation to time and novelty, Hastrup's account puts particular emphasis on anticipation rather than intentionality. The latter, she argues, inevitably casts creativity as a matter of individual agency; whereas anticipation is an inherent feature of all social action – we act in anticipation of future events. Creativity, however, parts company from that which is anticipated: it is eccentric'. Nevertheless, this does not mean that it is rare or characteristic of only some kinds of societies, for Hastrup (following Bateson) regards the social as inherently flexible and therefore as containing uncommitted potential for change' (Bateson 1972: 497). Because ‘all social worlds have such uncommitted potential', all societies, according to Hastrup, manifest creativity. While Hastrup's careful analysis is very useful for clarifying ways in which anthropologists might understand and use creativity' and allied notions, as well as showing how all societies can be understood to be creative, there remains a question over whether certain cultural conceptions of personhood, agency and temporality lead to particular kinds of concerns over creativity, as we have suggested above. As Penny Harvey and Marilyn Strathern (2005) point out in their reflection on the conference contributions, there is variability across cultures in which kinds of events are understood as evidence of human agency and creativity and which are regarded as outcomes merely of the passage of time. Particularly characteristic of so-called Euro-Americans' is intense concern ... in how they will get into the future... An existential crisis is made out of what is going to occur anyway. There is a strong need felt to propel oneself forward: there is a distinctive value accorded to speed and tempo in this regard. An outcome of this is the recent value accorded to flexibility that Eriksen (2005) critically assesses. The reason for this valuation is because the future is regarded as something that has not happened yet, as a new' time. The existential dimension presents itself in enticing questions: what am I going to be, what kind of world will it be? ... The concept of creativity thus augments the scope of human agency, a potential that Euro-Americans see as lying in the passage of time. What is so distinctive about these Euro-American values is that they divide people that use time in this productive sense, from those who do not. A consequence of this division is that certain matters follow: Not all potential is realised Not all moments into the future are innovative Not everyone is creative Not all societies and cultures are creative (Harvey and Strathern 2005: 109) Hence, the current Euro-American' obsession with trying to identify, define and capture productive uses of time and the creative – and its associated downgrading of that which is not judged to be so. Some of the implications of such notions for those living in Western societies are well illustrated by Cathrine Degnen's study of older people. The aged, with less future and uncommitted potential ahead of them, do not conform to the desired ideal of the creative self; and, as Degnen describes, they easily find themselves defined as inhabiting a different – non-productive and non-creative – temporality from that of younger people. Her sensitive analysis highlights the ways in which older people frequently employ narrative styles that differ from the linear self-narratives that emerged alongside dominant modern Lockean notions of personhood. While part of her own anthropological aim was to recover the status of creative'for such alternative styles, she shows how they can nevertheless feed back into stereotypes of old age. In so doing she raises important questions about anthropological attempts to identify and celebrate agency and the creative. Such attempts may, she suggests, fail to recognize important aspects of people's experience, including their own senses of loss. ## Creativity and Tradition Despite the overwhelming emphasis on novelty and the future in Western understandings of creativity, all three of the chapters that follow show that to be accorded the status of creative', actions must be perceived to be part of some kind of larger whole' (Hughes-Freeland) rather than as cut loose from the world (in which case [they] would register as madness)’ (Hastrup) – as the actions of some of the older people in Degnen's study are indeed sometimes judged to be. This is a point well recognized by many Western artists and philosophers, who have tried variously to define the degree and nature of the relationship to what has gone before that a thing or action should have in order to be deemed creative. One particularly interesting commentator, partly because of his unusually strong assertion of the importance of tradition over that of individual personality, was T.S. Eliot, as discussed by Felicia Hughes-Freeland. Like Degnen's account of the alternative temporalities of older people, Hughes-Freeland's attention to T.S. Eliot's ideas is important, among other reasons, for highlighting some of the variations within the Western context. For T.S. Eliot, creativity was as much if not more about being part of a tradition as about breaking free from it – a conception that entailed seeing the artist as embodying tradition, and time not as linear but, to a degree, as cyclical, with present actions altering the past as much as vice versa. If T.S. Eliot's assertions about creativity to some extent surprise by denying the strong emphasis on individual creativity and novelty that Western artists more usually hold, Hughes-Freeland's discussion of Javanese dancers serves to disrupt further some of the ways in which creativity is typically understood in the West. As she points out, Westerners typically see Javanese dance as involving the effacement of individual creativity and the valuation instead of self-discipline and the accurate following of tradition. Her argument, however, is that this opposition is unhelpful, for it is in the achievement of total immersion, in ‘getting it right', that the dancer may become creatively free and transcend ... any mechanical movement determinism'. With respect to choreography too, she shows that innovation is not always apparent, and technical expertise can dissimulate newness behind the appearance of similarity'. So whereas creativity in dominant Western conceptions is generally identified via visible products', such as artefacts and performances, in the world of Javanese dance, identifications of innovation' do not necessarily reside in the outwardly new. ## Contesting the Future As well as entailing particular though variable relationships to tradition, what constitutes creativity is often simultaneously a contest about how the future should materialize. According to Western evaluations, the future should appear as new – but not entirely new – and as a newness that others find convincing and compelling. This is glossed as creativity, while others, such as Javanese court dancers noted above, require much greater visible adherence to tradition. Among other contributions to the original conference panel, Cristina Grasseni (2005) showed how future temporalities in the competing foodscapes' of Italy are highlighted in public debates surrounding so-called ‘slow food' and the fast genes' of genetically modified crops. And Joy Hendry (2005) described how Indigenous Peoples' seek to demonstrate through their material forms that they are capable of newness and change, and that they are not static' as they are conventionally shown to be in museum exhibits. To act and appear as capable agents, these peoples feel compelled to demonstrate their creativity. Nevertheless, as James Weiner showed in his conference contribution on indigenous tribal names in North Queensland, Australia, there can also be strong legal and political pressures against innovation – even where this is itself traditional' – in the contexts in which some indigenous peoples live. An outcome of a world dominated by the Western view of the future as unknown, as potentially new, is that people seek to enter that future as capably as they can. ‘Wasting time', not using all one's time productively, becomes tantamount to a relinquishment of responsibility and opportunity. Being flexible is an idiom most appropriate to such a temporal orientation: one is not constrained by context or convention, and the new technologies of the internet, DVD, video, and so on, seem to enable such a vision. However, as Thomas Hylland Eriksen (2005) argued, taking his cue from Bateson, flexibility is only really possible when all the gaps in time are not filled. And this, it seems, is one of the implications of the associated explosion in audit culture – associated, that is, with the similar emphasis on creativity – and the regimes of trust it is meant to foster. According to audit culture, trust can only be attained if all relevant knowledge is rendered visible, as Alberto Corsín Jiménez (2005) pointed out in his conference contribution. But the attempt to render such knowledge evident (e.g., as isolated value-episodes in the internet language of XBRL) is analogous to trying to fill all the temporal gaps: ironically, such attempts are antithetical to the very social life and social relations they are meant to sustain. ## The Irony of Anthropological Practice As anthropologists, we are sensitive to these limitations of Western notions of creativity and temporality. At the same time, though, these notions inadvertently enter our ethnographic accounts in quite fundamental ways. The Malinowskian myth of the creative, heroic ethnographer who forges a new beginning with his or her version is one in which we all precariously participate and which we seek, albeit critically, to reproduce. But as Hastrup reminds us, it is a myth nonetheless. And yet myths, like other ways in which our perceptions of the presence of time' (Wagner 1986: 81–95) are manifested, are an inescapable feature of social relations. There are no ultimate beginnings, just as there is no definitive creativity. Lives are lived, just as much as they are described and interpreted, with respect to unique configurations of past, present and future, that is, in relation to what Wagner calls organic time'. These are constraints we can only accommodate as much as we seek continually and creatively' to surpass them. The chapters that follow demonstrate this tension vividly. ## Notes 1. A full set of papers, with the exception of that by James Weiner which could not be completed in time, has been published in Cambridge Anthropology vol. 25 no. 2, 2005. This includes an afterword by Penny Harvey and Marilyn Strathern based on their discussant comments, and a short introduction on which the present contribution is based. We are grateful to Cambridge Anthropology for allowing us to reproduce this, and the following chapters, here. ## References Bateson, G. (1972), Steps to an Ecology of Mind, New York: Balantine Books. Beaney, M. (2005), Imagination and Creativity, Milton Keynes: The Open University Press. Corsín Jiménez, A. (2005), After Trust', Cambridge Anthropology, 25(2): 64– 78. Douglas, M. (1992), ‘The person in an enterprise culture', in S.H. Heap and A. Ross (eds), Understanding the Enterprise Culture: Themes in the Work of Mary Douglas, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. Eriksen, T.H. (2005), New work, flexibility and the cult of creativity', Cambridge Anthropology, 25(2): 95–107. Grasseni, C. (2005), Slow food, fast genes: timescapes of authenticity and innovation in the anthropology of food', Cambridge Anthropology, 25(2): 79– 94. Hacking, I. (1995), Rewriting the Soul: Multiple Personality and the Sciences of Memory, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Harvey, P. and Strathern, M. (2005), Afterword', Cambridge Anthropology, 25(2): 108–10. Hendry, J. (2005), ‘Creativity as evidence of having persisted through time', Cambridge Anthropology, 25(2): 36–49. Ingold, T. (1986), Evolution and Social Life, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Liep, J. (2001), Introduction', in J. Liep (ed), Locating Cultural Creativity, London: Pluto Press. Osborne, T. (2003), Against “creativity": a philistine rant', Economy and Society, 32(4): 507–25. Strathern, M. (1992), After Nature: English Kinship in the late Twentieth Century, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Taylor, C. (1989), Sources of the Self. The Making of the Modern Identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Wagner, R. (1986), Symbols that Stand for Themselves, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.