# Performing the World: Agency, Anticipation and Creativity Kirsten Hastrup In this chapter I shall explore a set of theoretical issues related to the way in which social worlds are performed; by this I mean that social worlds have no existence outside of practice and performance – however much they seem to be systematic in some sense or other. By their unique and unrepeatable acts, people actually contribute to a perceived pattern; social life is routinely choreographed by the ceremonial animal (James 2003). Stressing the performative rather than the semantic or the cognitive aspects of social worlds is – among other things – to acknowledge the prominence of time and temporality in their make-up. I shall argue that our apperception of the social depends on a sense of closure that is belied by life itself – always spilling over into new histories, new ways of thinking and new complexities. New histories are made in diverse ways, but in this chapter I shall concentrate on the processes of anticipation and creativity. The former is seen as an inherent feature of all social action, while the latter is eccentric in relation to the pattern as perceived. The baseline of my argument is that humans are social to the core. This is the legacy of European social anthropology, and with it goes a wholeness of vision that allows for comprehensive analyses of social forms, individual actions, collective beliefs, material restraints and creative expressions. The point is that there cannot be a “non-social" anthropology, a human science which sets aside the kind of “sociality" we find celebrated in the humanities, in poetry, religion or music', to quote Wendy James (2003: 301). This implies that even creativity is a profoundly social fact – as eccentric as it may be. Addressing matters of action and creative social processes responds to the long-felt need to reintroduce time and temporality into a scientific practice that is so detemporalized that it tends to exclude even the idea of what it excludes' (Bourdieu 1990: 81). My argument will start in a discussion of the eventness of being, with a view to identifying social agency and its temporality. I shall proceed to a discussion of the illusion of wholeness that pervades social life, with a view to establishing the role played by anticipation; after that I shall discuss creativity as an accordion of meaning. I shall conclude with some intimations of imagination as the link between action and history in a more general sense. ## Agency: The Eventness of Being Evans-Pritchard (1961) once noted that history is what reveals society for what it is; effectively this implied that time was an all-important parameter in the identification of social worlds. More recently, it has become acknowledged that the social is not only revealed over time, but also constructed with time (Bourdieu 1990; Fabian 1991). In anthropological accounts, the succession of moments and the duration and density of events have most often been subsumed under the presentation of a configuration; this is a feature of narrative, as we know (Ricoeur 1991). The challenge now is to highlight the occurrence of life and the variety of ways in which people construct their reality with time – in anticipation of an outcome or in the interest of invention. Social life and individual action are closely intertwined with anticipation and creativity. Let us start with the observation that living is essentially unrepeatable; borrowing a term from Mikhail M. Bakhtin (1993), one could claim that the essence of being is its eventness'. The rationalist legacy had made us think that to truly understand a particular action we have to split it into its content or sense on the one hand, and its historical actuality on the other. However, no action exists beyond one's once-occurrent' experiencing of it (Bakhtin 1993: 2). The act is real only as an indivisible whole. It is in its entirety that the action contributes to the process of biography and history, where it has no meaning independent of the moods it releases and the motives it embodies. Being consists in being engaged in a reality of unique, unrepeatable events, and unique, once-occurrent experiences that are real only as wholes. The events exist only in the moment of their realization and our experience. Similarly, thinking is not something that more or less successfully attaches itself to and reflects upon action. It is part of an action or even an action in its own right; according to Geertz (2000: 21), thinking is the most consequential of social acts. To acknowledge the eventness of being is to acknowledge the undivided experience of meaning and action as a social fact. The eventness of being gives new substance to the idea that being is becoming. Often these two terms have been seen as opposed, ‘becoming' referring to an unsteady state, leading, hopefully, to a steady state of 'being'. But as Friedrich Nietzsche (1991) realized, these two states are but one. One becomes what one is through a process by which the individual incorporates and accommodates experiences. One's identity is not dependent on being always the same', but on being consistently true to oneself and being able to incorporate new experiences (Ricoeur 1992). All of a person's actions, including those performed against better judgement, contribute to his or her character. The general point is that the self has no essence, only character, emerging from one's actions – not the other way round (Hastrup 2004a). What I am has to be understood as what I have become (Taylor 1985: 47). The emergent nature of character and the eventness of being shed a peculiar light on the relationship between self and time, which in a sense are but abstract notions for agent and action. Agency points to the power to act responsibly within a particular social world – certainly not exclusive to Western subjects – with a view to both past and future. Curiously, what is often left out of theories of agency is the notion of time; however, the emergent nature of character implies that the agent is constantly in a process of reconciliation with the past. There may be actions one regrets, and events one would rather forget – yet on the whole, the past is what has led to the present, and only now' is one able to change this course, and project oneself into the future. In the process of appropriating the future, through one's actions, the nature of the past is constantly reinterpreted – this, we know also from the plays on stage, in so many ways mirroring social life in general (Hastrup 2004a). As the plot progresses, previous occurrences gain renewed significance. And the suspense of form – being the diacritical feature of dramatic illusion – makes this process end only with the curtain (Hastrup 2004b). This also pertains to our lives; only when there is no future left would we be able fully to comprehend our story – and with it our character. Then, of course, it is too late to restyle it. Incidentally, this is why the writing of autobiographies may imply a symbolic death (Hastrup 1992b). To the extent that we cannot say of all the constitutive events of our lives that thus I willed it', we have to accept that we cannot will the future either. The eventness of being and the emergent nature of character make such control impossible. The future is orchestrated by many partly unknown players whom one cannot direct at will. This is a lesson well taken from Shakespeare's drama, whose characters are constantly caught up in their own acts. In Macbeth, the protagonist is caught up in the history he himself has orchestrated but cannot control. His command, Let every man be master of his time' (III. 1. 40), gradually loses conviction. If the question for Hamlet is to be or not to be, for Macbeth it is to kill or not to kill. Macbeth finds himself in a state of liminality, or interim, as he says (I. 3. 154). In Julius Caesar, Shakespeare's idea of this interim is powerfully depicted by Brutus: Between the acting of a dreadful thing And the first motion, all the interim is Like a phantasma or a hideous dream. (Julius Caesar II. 1. 63–5) Who does not know this feeling from experience? Few have planned a murder, but many have considered whether to apply for a particular job, for example and found themselves in a temporal crisis akin to Macbeth's: ‘a moment that seems exempt from the usual movement of time, when the future is crammed into the present' (Kermode 2000: 205). The interim is saturated with ontological uncertainty. Acting temporarily solves it. This goes for social acting in general, I would suggest, where the present' is always the momentous unknown (Strathern 1992: 178). Causal explanations in history are often reduced to an identification of precedents – and more often than not the most recent and the most exceptional among all the events that preceded the phenomenon to be explained (Bloch 1956). From an anthropological perspective, the anticipated future plays an even more significant role in the understanding of history than preceding events, even if past experience does infiltrate anticipation (Hastrup 2004c). History is created by people, who act in character' within a plot-space that they may only partly comprehend, but to which they inevitably contribute their actions. This poses the question of the extent to which humans are really the source of their actions – a question already raised by classical tragedy. As Vernant has said about the world of Aristotle's dramas, the individual who commits a crime is also its victim: The action does not emanate from the agent as from its source; rather it envelops him and carries him away, swallowing him up in a power that must perforce be beyond him since it extends, both spatially and temporally, far beyond his own person. The agent is caught in the action. He is not its author; he remains included within it... (Vernant 1992: 44) Clearly, Macbeth was to some extent caught in his actions and thus swallowed up by his destiny; yet he also remained a responsible moral being. This feature not only relates to literary characters, whom the author can mould freely; we have seen how even the players of these characters become swallowed up in particular moral horizons and actions, once they take the internal perspective of the character. The attempt to prove that any moral (or other) justification for action will always conflate with the rational, epistemological explanation is bound to fail. Intentionality has to be separated from agency (Singer 1993: 44ff.). Intentional subjectivity often resorts to the metaphor of will', which displaces agency from the social to the individual domain. The agent may refer to intentionality in describing the action, but it is a description that includes the consequence of the act, and hence cannot be taken as its cause. Attribution of intention provides a justification, while attribution of agency is an assignment of responsibility (Davidson 1980: 48). Agency, therefore, is not reducible to intentionality, however much this provides the agent with a metaphor for the act. The inherent problem in many discussions of agency and will is apparently the notion of will itself. One ‘wills' so much for so many reasons, and within such different social contexts and moral horizons, that the concept of will itself is severely weakened as a rational explanation for action. By itself, will' explains only a fraction of the course of events, be they on the level of biography or world history. Willing something, and not just willing, is the key; the objective of the will is never simply a formally defined goal, but a fulfilment of desires and anticipations that are imbued with emotional and moral values of which one is rarely aware. Indeed, awareness may result in willing nothing, as we know from Hamlet, because it makes us realize that there is no simple, unified goal of human action, no shared master motive that will eventually result in eternal bliss, if reason could only reign. ## Anticipation: The Illusion of Wholeness In a precursor to this chapter I have discussed illusion' as a key to understanding how society is realized in the actions of people, engaged in a gradual fulfilment of what they see as the current and relevant drama (Hastrup 2004b). Illusion is to be understood in the theatrical sense of suspense of form' rather than a suspense of plot; what makes the drama gripping (for both players and audience) is not uncertainty about outcome, but the process of getting there. Until the drama is over, the participants act in the interest of completing the story. This also applies to other social spaces, where agents gradually realize what they perceive as the play' through their actions. They play their part in a plot that transcends them because they are linked in space and time to other people, other moments and other stories. Conversely, the self emerges as a character within a plot structure that is always deeply social, as I suggested above. Social reality is not reducible to either the whole or the parts. The notion of plot structure is originally owed to Aristotle, who in his work on drama simply defined it as the organization of events. The plot is the first principle and, so to speak, the soul of the drama' (Halliwell 1987: 37–8). For Aristotle, the plot structure is the organization of events into one whole drama and it is therefore only when the drama is over that the actions take on their true significance (Vernant 1992: 36). Characterization is secondary to plot because it is included only for the sake of the actions; in other words, the actions are not there to portray the characters. We cannot fail to notice the likeness to social life in general: we do not act in our daily lives in order to portray ourselves, but through our actions our character' stands out, more or less clearly. By stressing the pre-eminence of plot, Aristotle simply built upon the pre-eminence of action in real life (Freeland 1992: 112). For the player, the connection is embodied; the wholeness of the plot is present in the individual action. There is only one action at a time, a hypothesis of character existing, as the actor Simon Callow explains, on the interface between you and what the author has written'(1995: 164). Through the embodiment of the play, players may even get to know the individual characters better than the writer; the writer wrote the characters with all due concession to the plot, but the players are them (ibid.). Their actions are real in this sense. If it is an imitation of action, it is still an imitation in action, as well. The emphasis is on the making of the representation, not on representation itself. It is an activity that deeply affects the player for whom imitation'becomes a lived experience. As Callow puts it, the player finds him- or herself in a state of ontological flux' (ibid.: 171). The notion of ontological flux implies much more than simply switching between being oneself and impersonating another. For the actor, action is one whole thing, and there is little discussion of the primacy of either action or character; both are constituted within a plot that lends coherence and meaning to individual actions, while also achieving its reality from these very actions. The suspense of form premeditates a kind of cultural engagement – to use Michael Herzfeld's notion (1997: 3) – that breaks away from any notion of cultural determination while also giving room for an illusion of wholeness. In the drama, the representation of action (the act) and the organization of the events (the plot) fuse and make one whole play, a world. This actually qualifies the nature of imitation' at a vital point. The play achieves its realistic effect not by copying, but by making the audience vicariously experience real actions as intelligible only by way of emplotment – that is, by making a whole configuration out of successive events (Ricoeur 1991). In actual social life each moment and each action both expose and betray the absent social order'. The rhetoric of regularity is denied by the social experience that precedes it (Jenkins 1994: 452). All social fields, ranging in scale from the global community to villages and families, depend on illusion (as suspense of form) to be real. To accept the rules of the game' an illusion of a whole, ordered by certain conventions and of a shared interest, is a precondition (Bourdieu 1990: 66ff.; 1996: 166ff.). The point is that by investing their own interests and actions in filling out the form, social agents make the community happen. Without a sustained (and shared) illusion about the social space in which one participates, no action makes sense. Society is a suspended form that precipitates particular actions, through which the illusion is gradually realized. Indeed, society does not exist except in its permanent seeking of form; in other words, a social space – be it a nation state, a university conference or a construction site – has no ontological status as a whole apart from what is collectively attributed to it and made manifest in action. Conversely, social spaces are naturalized and allowed to exert physical force over individual action. Action is never simply a reaction to what has already happened; it is also a mode of acting upon anticipation. Agency in this sense, I would argue, is closely tied to a vision of plot, to the anticipation of a story, a line of future development. It is a profound matter of responding; response being made within a moral horizon and within a social context that we interpret and project forward as we go along. Anticipation is also potentiation' (Strathern 1992: 178). Without a sense of plot, meaningful action would be precluded. The sense of plot is what integrates individual actions into a larger vision of the world, filled out imaginatively and acted upon. In that sense any social action is a creation, contributing to a history that outlasts (and outwits) our imagination. We perform a world into being, acting as much upon anticipation as upon antecedent. We may even speak the world into occurring, because speech in itself is an act; words are thoughts in action (Berry 1992: 17). Words are not simply expressions of the world, they are means of dealing with it – after which it is no longer the same. Speaking – like seeing and thinking and other processes by which one appropriates the world – is bound up with time and history. To understand a mode of action or a form of life, we must bring figure and ground, or the passing occasion and the long story', into coincident view (Geertz 1995: 51). The unique event of the act and the long story' of the plot belong together. The ‘frame' is always part of the event; the larger plot is incorporated into individual agents. It is not for them to fully comprehend their actions because the descriptions that are available to them from inside their experience cannot at the same time bring the complete story into view. The illusion of a social whole is an efficient framework for social action; its efficiency is constantly reaffirmed in practice, where agents realize the whole as they engage in unique actions – with a view to a perceived plot and in anticipation of particular responses. In this sense, time is an integral part of what looks like pattern – but can only be so in retrospect or in anticipation. This, I would argue, is part of the reason why time and temporality tend to recede from view – for social agents and theorists alike – namely that the frame moves along with the act. The eventness of being concedes to the illusion of wholeness. ## Creativity: The Accordion of Meaning If anticipation is creative in the sense that responsible social action always contributes to the (re)shaping of the social, creativity as such must mean something different. Evidently, there are many possible ways of defining the notion of creativity; initially I shall take it to describe a way in which perceived newness enters the world (Hastrup 2001). Creativity is not cut loose from the world (in which case it would register as madness), nor is it simply a competent response to anticipated outcomes (putting it on a par with agency). For creativity' to retain a separate meaning, it must comprise both the unexpected and the recognizable, both newness and anticipation. The creative agent is one of those gifted individuals who have bent the culture in the direction of their own capacities', as Ruth Benedict has phrased it (1932: 26), echoing Sapir, who suggested that creation is a bending of form to one's will, not the manufacture of form ex nihilo' (Sapir 1924: 418). In this respect it differs from magic, which Mauss identified as precisely that: a creation ex nihilo (1972: 141). Creative agency brings the unprecedented into effect by way of imaginative power and thus expands the community's awareness of itself. The expansion is possible due to the inherent flexibility of the social. Bateson has defined flexibility asuncommitted potential for change' (1972: 497); and I would argue that all social worlds have such uncommitted potential – outside of the commitment to uphold the illusion of wholeness and dramatic closure. The illusion is necessary for the social' to make sense, and for individuals to see themselves in the frame. This illusion provides a safety net for creative agents to experiment with form. Bateson provides the parable of the acrobat on a high wire to illustrate his point about flexibility (ibid.: 498). To maintain his position on the wire, the acrobat must be free to move from one position of instability to another, and his arms must have maximum flexibility to secure the stability of more central parts. If the arms are locked, the acrobat will fall. During the period when the acrobat is learning to walk on the wire, and thus learning to move his arms in an appropriate way, a safety net is necessary; this gives him the freedom to fall off the wire. Freedom and flexibility in regard to the most basic variables may be necessary during the process of learning and creating a new system of social change' (ibid.). Both freedom and flexibility are provided by the social. Thus, even the lonesome and eccentric acrobat depends on a sense of the communal to engage the high wire. In general, creativity deliberately parts company from anticipation; the former presents the truly discontinuous, while the latter is at most inadvertently transformative (Friedman 2001). An example of such transformation is found in Sahlins' work on the historical reworking of Hawaiian mythical themes (1981). The point is that social creativity cannot be a mere fact of novel combinations, making it a wholly intellectualistic enterprise (Friedman 2001: 60). It must also contain a sense of semantic and emotional newness, in which others are prepared to take interest – and invest themselves – in spite of its being unprecedented and discontinuous. The reason for action, whether or not on the high wire, is not of course located in the mind alone. There are lots of hidden causes and preconditions, many of which are beyond cognitive understanding. Once again, fieldwork teaches a lesson. By engaging other worlds, ethnographers experience how they are caught in a web of apparently irrational behaviour. They act as if out of their mind', or as if they are not really themselves. They are not, of course, if by selves' we refer to fixed ontological beings. Through their own sensation of acting between' worlds, anthropologists experience a glimpse of a larger truth of people being concurrently engaged in incontinent actions', that is, actions that go against better knowledge, as it were (Davidson 1980: 21ff.). Most often, such actions are deemed out of the ordinary, out of the domain of reason. Yet – as irony does in the domain of language – such incontinent actions show the potential crack in individual agency and the creative surplus in any moment. We may add to our understanding of this crack if we consider the proposition made by Donald Davidson (1980: 43ff.) that the identification of an action involves a third event' – which is where irony, individuality and unpredictability reside. Agency plays accordion'between intention and consequence. Davidson's example is the statement that Brutus killed Caesar by stabbing him'. It seems clear enough that the stabbing resulted in Caesar's death (thus linking agency to causality), but we still have that third event' whose relation to other elements of the sentence is unclear, namely the killing itself. Killing is not a description of the act, but a concept compounded of the intention and consequence of the act of stabbing. In fact, most actions are described in terms that include their consequences. This gives rise to a recurrent mistake: The idea that under the assumed circumstances killing a person differs from moving one's hand in a certain way springs from a confusion between a feature of the description of an event and a feature of the event itself. The mistake consists in thinking that when the description of an event is made to include reference to a consequence, then the consequence itself is included in the described event. The accordion, which remains the same through the squeezing and stretching, is the action; the changes are in the aspects described or descriptions of the event. (Davidson 1980: 58) Once we describe particular events or speak of agency, we incorporate a good many things that have little to do with the simple bodily act, and much to do with ways of perceiving oneself in social space in a constant process of reorientation through actual social performance. I would suggest that creativity resides in the ability to play the accordion – to act – without incorporating an anticipated consequence into the perception of the action, or to make the event break free of the frame while still allowing it to be recognized. In that sense creativity belongs outside of historical time; it refuses simply to realize a preconceived illusion. ## Imagination: The Link Between Action and History In this final section I shall tie together the preceding paragraphs by suggesting how agency, anticipation and creativity are linked up with imagination, and how imagination itself plays with time. Gaston Bachelard suggested that A phenomenology of imagination must do away with all intermediaries ... it is not a question of observing but of experiencing being in its immediacy' (Bachelard 1994: xx). In this view, imagination is an inherent element in the eventness of being as defined above and is part and parcel of the immediacy of agency. Imagination and agency are two sides of the same coin. Immediacy transcends the moment, however. As Richard Kearney has it: Imagination promises to present “absent" value in the immediate here and now. It encourages consciousness to defy historical postponement of meaning. Imagination resolves to create its own meaning, out of nothing, even if it has to invent an unreal world in which to do so' (Kearney 1998: 6). In any historical moment, imagination is a precondition for anticipation and for the illusion of wholeness – both of them preconditions for social action. The challenge for anthropology is to invent a language that will not betray this insight by subsuming the eventness of being under narrative closure. Let me approach this by way of an example. All of us know Malinowski's now almost mythical arrival story: Imagine yourself suddenly set down surrounded by all your gear, alone on a tropical beach close to a native village, while the launch or the dinghy which has brought you sails away out of sight. . .' (Malinowski 1922: 4). We also know that being alone' was maybe not a social fact, but a mental one. What I want to stress in particular is his invocation of beginnings: Imagine further that you are a beginner, without previous experience, with nothing to guide you and no one to help you' (ibid.: 4). Beginners are normally qualified as unskilled (as yet); they do not have the corporeal knowledge necessary for acting appropriately in the situation. We know what Malinowski means because we recognize the feeling of beginning'. Closer inspection, however, reveals that Malinowski profoundly misleads his readers in the interest of presenting himself as a hero. No one is without previous experience, and there are lots of people in the field to help you. They may not help you directly or knowingly in your immediate interest, but in pursuing their own interests they are there for you to engage with. What, then, is Malinowski's point in casting himself as an absolute beginner, apart from underscoring his act of heroism? Without being too speculative, I think it is safe to suggest that by emphasizing the beginning, he establishes a zero-point by which one can measure his later perfection. The beginning is constructed retrospectively at the precise moment it is described. We need pasts to tell our stories of fulfilment; this also applies when we are telling stories of our own discoveries or theoretical innovations. Thus, anthropological creativity itself works through a particular play on temporality. The problem lies in the introduction of a narrative deception that configures the beginning' as absolute, when actually its consequence becomes part of the description of the event. At a general level, narration is always a construction with time – as is social life. In most cases, narratives depend on linear representations of time (Ricoeur 1984); this implies that they are generally related to the directional. It is part of the Enlightenment legacy that history was also seen as directional or progressive, as the story went (Hastrup 1992a). History and the writing of history became conflated, and the early anthropologies conceptually transformed difference in space to distance in time (Fabian 1983). This is a well-known story, which was targeted in the critique of modernism. The critique was not without merit, but perhaps it went too far in suggesting that no history has a direction – even if direction can be established only retrospectively. The moments that make up history are total historical facts', in a similar manner as those undivided actions discussed above. They are simultaneously action and meaning, past and future, and are generally portrayed in categories that incorporate the consequences in the description of the events. For true creativity (historical discontinuity) to happen or to be perceived, the storyline must be broken. In this case, the microhistory of the act cannot simply amplify the macrohistory of social structure – to use Sahlins' notions (2005) – but must challenge it. Language is inherently deceptive because it tends to portray the world in categories that make us believe that even actions are fixed and ordered, while in fact they are accordions in perpetual movement. Thus language itself privileges the safety net over the flexibility of the high wire. The latter, however, is found in the mode of irony. Irony embodies a certain detachment from the world as represented in ordinary language and speech, and facilitates the imagination of a possible otherness. Irony plays with the possibility of limitless alterity' (Rapport and Overing 2000: 212). Ironic imagination is a universal human capacity for expressing and exploring the possibilities for reforming practice and refining knowledge. Irony treats the world as inherently contingent, and it therefore comes closer to experience than those categories that are normally used to describe it; yet irony only works within a language that provides the safety net for the explorer of new ways of understanding, new tightropes of achievement – just as creativity works within a social field where most of the time the appropriate actions can be anticipated. I would suggest that social creativity is irony in the mode of action as well as speech. For both anticipation and creativity, imagination provides the link between action and history – because imagination is what makes present actions meaningful by making anticipation possible; and because imagination also makes the creative agent perceive that intention and consequence are not one and the same. As distinct imaginative modes, anticipation and creativity work upon different temporalities: the first relates to perceived continuities; the second hinges on discontinuity. To explain how the world works is to make new connections between individual imagination and social facts', and between the unique event and history. One such connection that often passes unacknowledged concerns the excess of social experience at any point of time, that is, experience which is not captured by current categories, and which potentially points to alternative ways of seeing things and acting on them. This historical surplus’ comprises possible sites of social resistance or creativity, as the case might be. In both cases, we can see how temporality and imagination are inseparable from human agency and the eventness of being. The future is crammed into present action, just as the past is. ## References Bachelard, G. (1994), The Poetics of Space, Boston, Mass: Beacon Press. Bakhtin, M.M. (1993), Towards a Philosophy of the Act, Austin: University of Texas Press. Bateson, G. (1972), Steps to an Ecology of Mind, New York: Balantine Books. Benedict, R. (1932), Configurations of culture in North America', American Anthropologist, 34: 1–27. Berry, C. (1992), The Actor and the Text, London: Virgin Books. Bloch, M. (1956), The Historian's Craft, Manchester: Manchester University Press. Bourdieu, P. (1990), The Logic of Practice, Cambridge: Polity Press. (1996), The Rules of Art, Cambridge: Polity Press. Callow, S. (1995), Being an Actor, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Davidson, D. (1980), Essays on Actions and Events, Oxford: Clarendon Press. Evans-Pritchard, E.E. (1961), Anthropology and history', in Social Anthropology and Other Essays, New York: Free Press. Fabian, J. (1983), Time and the Other. How Anthropology Makes its Object, New York: Columbia University Press. — (1991), Time and the Work of Anthropology, London: Harwood Academic Publishers. Freeland, C.A. (1992), ‘Plot imitates action: Aesthetic evaluation and moral realism in Aristotle's Poetics', in A.O. Rorty (ed), Essays on Aristotle's Poetics, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Friedman, J. (2001), ‘The iron cage of creativity: An exploration', in J. Liep (ed), Locating Cultural Creativity, London: Pluto Press. Geertz, C. (1995), After the Fact, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. (2000), ‘Thinking as a moral act', in C. Geertz, Available Light, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Halliwell, S. (1987), The Poetics of Aristotle, London: Duckworth. Hastrup, K. (1992a), 'Introduction', in K. Hastrup (ed), Other Histories, London: Routledge. (1992b), Out of anthropology. The anthropologist as an object of dramatic representation', Cultural Anthropology, 7: 327–45. (2001), Othello's dance: Cultural creativity and human agency', in J. Liep (ed), Locating Cultural Creativity, London: Pluto Press. — (2004a), Action, Anthropology in the Company of Shakespeare, Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press (Copenhagen University). (2004b), All the world's a stage. The imaginative texture of social spaces', Space and Culture, 7(2): 223–36. — (2004c), Getting it right: knowledge and evidence in anthropology', Anthropological Theory, 4(4): 455–72. (2005), 'Social anthropology: Towards a pragmatic enlightenment', Social Anthropology, 13(2): 133–49. Herzfeld, M. (1997), Cultural Intimacy, London: Routledge. James, W. (2003), The Ceremonial Animal. A New Portrait of Anthropology, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Jenkins, T. (1994), Fieldwork and the perception of everyday life', Man, 29: 433–55. Kearney, R. (1998), Poetics of Imagining. Modern to Post-Modern, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. Kermode, F. (2000), Shakespeare's Language, London: Allen Lane. Malinowski, B. (1922), Argonauts of the Western Pacific, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Mauss, M. (1972), Towards a General Theory of Magic, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Nietzsche, F. (1991), Ecce Homo. How One Becomes What One Is, Harmondsworth: Penguin Classics. Rapport, N. and Overing, J. (2000), Social and Cultural Anthropology. The Key Concepts, London: Routledge. Ricoeur, P. (1984), Time and Narrative, Chicago: Chicago University Press. — (1991), Life in quest of narrative', in D. Wood (ed), On Paul Ricoeur. Narrative and Interpretation, London: Routledge. — (1992), Oneself as Another, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Sahlins, M. (1981), Historical Metaphors and Mythical Realities. Structure in the Early History of the Sandwich Islands Kingdom, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. (2005), Structural work. How microhistories become macrohistories and vice versa', Anthropological Theory, 5(1): 5–30. Sapir, E. (1924), Culture, genuine and spurious', American Journal of Sociology, 29: 401–29. Shakespeare, W. (1994), Complete Works of Shakespeare. The Alexander Text, London: HarperCollins. Singer, A. (1993), The Subject as Action. Transformation and Totality in Narrative Aesthetics, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. Strathern, M. (1992), ‘Reproducing anthropology', in S. Wallman (ed), Contemporary Futures, London: Routledge. Taylor, C. (1985), Sources of the Self. The Making of Modern Identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Vernant, J.-P. (1992), Myth and tragedy', in A.O. Rorty, (ed), Essays on Aristotle's Poetics, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.