# Back to the Future: Temporality, Narrative and the Ageing Self Cathrine Degnen ## Introduction Western stereotypes about old age include the notion that older people are lost' in the past.¹ Such representations effectively employ different temporal relations as a marker of oldness itself. In this chapter I explore intergenerational differences in people's relationships with time and how temporality becomes a marker of social difference and distinction. While I argue on the one hand that such notions contribute to the stigmatizing of older people as no longer fully adult, on the other hand, subjective temporal positioning does appear to shift as people age. The ageing self exists in a time universe which differs from that of younger and middle-aged adults, not just in its frames of reference, which determine how people position themselves, but also in the extent to which the past informs the present, as well as in a certain insouciance about the future. This difference offers insight into a temporal positioning of the self that may be unique to this part of the life-course. This chapter explores the dynamics of these differing temporal relationships and their implications for the construction and maintenance of the ageing self. In particular, I examine the characteristics of narrative style used by the older people I came to know during the course of my fieldwork; I consider the ways in which these characteristics challenge narrative conventions and temporal ordering; and I call into question my own initial supposition that these narrative styles were a creative form of resistance to social stereotypes. ## Theorizing the Construction of Self One thread of anthropological research on the self has emphasized both the contextual and shifting nature of selfhood and the central role of narrativity in constructing the self. This approach to understanding the creation of a sense of self is predicated on a processual and interpretive framework, led by influential authors such as Rosaldo (1980, 1984), Turner (1985) and White and Kirkpatrick (1985). This paradigm perceives the self as created in its telling, in its performance and in its reception by others (Bruner 1984) through time in a particular sociocultural context. Self formation is not a uniform nor a necessarily chronological process (Boyarin and Boyarin 1995: 28), but is rather experienced as a cyclical, multi-stranded web of relations. Senses of self vary depending on whom they are being performed for, and the self is forged in a dialectical relationship with others. Temporality (experience of and experience within the passage of time) figures powerfully in the creation of the self because narrations of the self occur not once, but repeatedly in many moments. The self is in perpetual motion and is constantly being reinterpreted and recreated across multiple moments in time. Indeed, it behoves us as ethnographers to remember that such moments include the research context, created during interviews and participant observation. By narrating experience, individuals create self-representations which are neither unitary nor fixed, but rather fragmented and partial, as well as perpetually under construction (Peacock and Holland 1993; Bruner 1984, 1986).2 As a result, how the self is narrated depends on circumstance, level of discourse and context. While authors of anthropological literature concerned with the self, experience and subjectivity have paid careful attention to cross-cultural differences in these topics, they have given little consideration to the impact ageing may have on the construction and experience of self. Indeed, it strikes me that a middle-aged, universalized self is taken as the baseline for discussion about experience, but that the losses of unprecedented seriousness ... [such as] retirement ... death of lovers, friends and kin' (Thompson 1992: 27) faced by older people are largely absent from the literature. Perhaps under such conditions a certain rewriting of the self could be anticipated, but this possibility has gone largely unexamined.3 In a separate body of literature concerning the anthropology of old age, questions about personhood and the self have been framed in a very different way. Here, issues of dementia, role-loss or loss of status have been of central concern. While research on these topics has been valuable for expanding our understanding from a cultural perspective of pressing issues such as Alzheimer's disease (Herskovits 1995), it can also reproduce a problematic tendency to see the self and personhood in old age only in terms of fragility and decay. Such a powerful paradigm ultimately reproduces the notion of old age as a problem' and is at the expense of the majority of older people who are neither demented’ nor needing care. Drawing on the theoretical insights offered by these two areas of anthropological research, respectively on selfhood and old age, I aim to explore how aspects of the self particular to old age but not specifically linked to illness or disability, such as temporality, identity and narrativity, play out in everyday life. Such an approach is necessary in order to better understand what the future and the past actually signify in older people's notions of self. The ethnographic examples on which I draw come from fourteen months of fieldwork (2000–1) in a South Yorkshire village called Dodworth, near Barnsley. The village is situated in an area that used to be known for coal mining. Until the late 1980s, coal was still being mined on a large scale in and around Dodworth. The subsequent closure of the mines caused deep socio-economic and cultural rupture. How people make sense of their lives under the erasing pressures of post-industrialism is a question that runs alongside and fundamentally intersects with my interest in the experience of ageing. The demise of the mining industry and subsequent social transformations that these erasures provoke also bring into focus the ways larger global changes play out on the local level. Issues orbiting around selfhood become particularly relevant within this context as the excruciating shift out of heavy industry into post-industrialism threatens the foundations on which the self was written and understood locally, quite apart from those reorientations due to the subjective experience of old age itself. Here I can only signal the importance of this circumstantial background, which I have examined more fully elsewhere (Degnen 2003). I turn now to an exploration of the distinctive forms of temporal experience and orientations to the future in the experience of the ageing self, as they emerged from this fieldwork. ## Narrative Style Researchers have commented on the extent to which older people engage in what Myerhoff has termed narrative activity', something she describes as intense and relentless' (1979: 33). Hazan writes that The invisible social worlds’ (Unruh 1983) of the elderly are ... often based on ritualized forms of talk (e.g. story-telling, discussion groups, proverbs, etc., .. .) ... the question of why elderly people are so pre-occupied with the oral, and the various forms this preoccupation takes in the postmodern, could arguably define a new agenda for a sociology of ageing that is sensitive to its narrative moment ... (Hazan 1996: 27) My research experiences were similar in this respect to Myerhoff's and Hazan's. I spent a great deal of my time during fieldwork happily listening to such forms of talk and spontaneous narrative accounts, both inside and outside the interviewing context.4 While the content of these narratives has been central to my work, I turn my attention here to three distinctive characteristics of narrative style among my research participants. These are shifting temporal frameworks, irrelevant' information and the decoupling of background information from narrative accounts. ## Shifting Temporal Frameworks The first distinctive characteristic of narrative styles employed by many of the older people who took part in this research has to do with the movement between past and present and their mutual integration. For example, one afternoon in July 2000, Anne and I were sitting together at her kitchen table having a cup of tea and catching up, having not seen one another for about a week. We had known each other by then for about six months and usually met at least twice a week, often for several hours at a time. I was telling her about things I had been up to or that I was worrying about: trying to find someone to remove the rotting timbers and the stone slabs that formed my kitchen floor and replace them with a new wooden floor before they collapsed; the wedding I had been to in Lyme Regis; and a parttime teaching job I had been commuting to in Hull. In marked contrast to my talk about the present, Anne listened politely and then went on at length about how her husband had told her once they started dating and then once they were married that she could not go out with her girlfriends any more, especially not dancing. He felt strongly that once they were a couple, they would do couple things together. This was something she had trouble accepting at first, but eventually (and especially after having kids) she got used to it. She told me how her granddaughter is enjoying her new job as an assistant at a nursing home and then started talking about the changes in her own life after marriage. This led to her telling me what it was like when her husband, at the age of fifty (over thirty years ago), had to quit his job on the railway and take another job due to his angina. Her narrative about these past moments, events and worries in her life was not at all self-consciously different from when she was talking about the present or listening to me speaking about it, but rather was seamlessly integrated into our chit-chat about contemporary everyday concerns. Although Anne may weave different historical periods in and out of her narratives, she is by no means lost' in the past and lives a very active, present-oriented life. She does incorporate a great many past events from long ago into her narratives about the present, however, as do the majority of her peers. The temporal frameworks bookmarking Anne's conversation with me shift much more than my own. This aspect of narrative style of older people that I became accustomed to during my fieldwork is different from the one I use myself. It is also distinct from that used by middle-aged and younger adults in Dodworth (which largely parallels my own). It often seemed as though I and the older people I had come to know were speaking in different forms of the same language. By and large, I was employing a linear form whereby small talk is about present-day occurrences, experiences, hassles, problems, worries and pleasures. Conversation is carried out in a more or less reciprocal kind of exchange where both parties get a chance to contribute, which moves the conversation on to further topics. For the most part, however, my research participants used a much more circular form of small talk that brought in a great deal of information from the past, and was recited from a repertoire of narratives that were often strung together in long chains rather than interjected into a conversation where interlocutors alternated between the roles of speaker and listener. Sally, another woman I came to know very well during my fieldwork, made an offhanded comment to me one day about how losing the art of conversation' was one of the consequences of old age. While she did not elaborate further, I believe that more than any other of the people who participated in my research, she is aware of some of the narrative shifts that occur in old age. These narrative shifts are linked to shifts in temporal perspective. However, while Sally talks about them as a loss (not surprisingly, given her overwhelming concern with the experience of disconcerting memory blanks which disrupt her conversation), she was alone among the older people I knew to do so. For this reason I have chosen to conceptualize these shifts as a reconfiguration of narrative style rather than as a loss per se. ## Irrelevant' Information A second aspect of narrative style, the introduction of what I call irrelevant' information, covers a wide range of conversational topics that I encountered during my fieldwork. I have purposefully placed the word irrelevant' in inverted commas since my reflections on this narrative behaviour are premised on the disjuncture between the assumptions of younger and middle-aged individuals and those of older people about what belongs within the parameters of a particular conversation. I intend here not only to problematize the notion of irrelevant' information in narrative strands, but also to examine it as a feature of narrative discourse that emerged periodically among my research participants. What I am talking about are verbal that were experienced as moments of particular social stress. Although intermittent rather than continuous, these stressful moments formed a pattern that was repeated many times throughout my fieldwork. Indeed, the discomfort they occasioned was so marked that in my field notes I came to refer to it as the cringe factor'. In these moments I felt that my own everyday parameters of social discourse were being disrupted in a way that they usually were not when engaged in conversation with younger people. Such feelings indicated that these situations called for closer attention. What was it about the interaction that was provoking discomfort on my part? What could the dissonance reveal about the ways in which old age is constructed in interaction between generations and between individuals? My chosen example of irrelevant' information comes from a woman I came to know named Olive. When chatting one day, Olive told me that she had no one to go with her to the hospital for a diagnostic test that was worrying her. The test was to assess her heart rate after she had experienced a series of troubling falls over the course of a few months. I said I would be happy to accompany her. Olive insisted that I come for lunch first, and then we would go to the hospital together. On the day, after eating together at her home, we went to catch the bus to the hospital. It never arrived, so we went back to her house to call a taxi. This disruption to her plan made Olive anxious. When we got back to her house, it seemed as though she was transforming into a slightly different version of herself, one no longer certain and no longer in charge. Instead of going inside her own home to call a cab, she went directly to the next-door neighbour's house in distress to tell Linda (a middle-aged woman) all about what had happened. Linda came out (rolling her eyes and smiling at me) and went with us into Olive's house. By this point, Olive was so anxious that she could not think how to call the taxi firm or where to find the number. Linda used the telephone book to find the taxi number and then Olive asked Linda to call for her, which Linda did. The taxi seemed to take for ever to arrive and Olive was increasingly tense because it was clear that we would be late for her appointment. Then, when Olive and I finally got to the hospital, I thought we were going to ask for directions for where to go, but she sped off, certain that there was a staircase nearby (and, I think, she thought that a help desk was near the staircase) even though we'd just gone past the help desk and there was no staircase where she insisted there would be. I made her stop when I realized how far we had gone in the wrong direction. By this time we were already ten minutes late for the appointment, adding to her stress. I asked her the name of the department we needed. She said she did not know and started searching through her pocketbook for her appointment slip. Once she found it, she gave it to me without looking at it and I read that it was with the cardiology department. Then, while this was happening, she stopped a man at random in the hallway we were standing in to ask for directions, but began by telling him about the bus and the taxi not coming and being late rather than asking him for directions to cardiology. She was about to tell him all about what a good neighbour Linda is when I put my arm around her shoulders. I think I meant to calm her and help her focus on asking the right' question, but what happened in effect is that I took over the conversation so that she would not embarrass herself with this stranger. I was afraid that he would judge her unkindly as old, senile and incoherent. By the gesture of my arm, however, I gave away much of my own prejudices about the boundaries of old age and aboutold' comportment. Although we found our way to the correct department in the end, what struck me most was my own assessment of Olive's rapid decline into behaviour and a narrative style that is culturally codified as old. Her stream of narrative directed at the stranger seemed to me to be completely irrelevant to the situation and indeed, given the time pressures we were under, counteractive to our goal of finding the correct department. Olive, however, was understandably nervous about the state of her health and what the unknown test would be like or what the results might portend. Furthermore, the irritation of the bus not arriving meant the added expense and hassle of the taxi. Her reactions, however, extended beyond the bounds of nervousness into comportment that I read stereotypically as characteristic of old age, compounded by her narrative style with the stranger that was off-topic and unfocused. Olive's loss of control over her comportment was mirrored in her increasingly fractured discourse and in my perception of her use of irrelevant' information, aspects of behaviour which lead to oldness being attributed to her by her interlocutors. This example also shows how anxiety-producing situations can sometimes threaten the normal ordering of one's relationships with the world. When under too much pressure, the carefully constructed balance of order can start to crumble. To regain some control, Olive appears to seek refuge in the reassuring narration of details of ordinary life. These details provide a sort of soothing framework, even if from the outside they appear jarring and irrelevant'. Such moments reveal a certain fragility of the self, but one that is probably much more evident to the outside observer than to the person herself. ## The Decoupling of Background Information from Narrative Accounts The third and final stylistic characteristic of the narratives of older people that I explore here is a tendency to refer to people and places that are not fully contextualized or explained in the course of conversation. These decouplings mean that it is not always easy to follow a narrative account without learning more about the other people, connections and experiences in the narrator's life. A brief initial example comes from a taped interview with Emma: Cathrine: And you used to help your mom out with her housework after you got married? Emma: Yeah, I used to come to hers every Thursday and I used to bring 'em, but when they started school, I used to be home for coming out. When Emma said 'they started', I knew that by 'they'she meant her two children, even though she does not say so at this point in the narrative and had not spoken of them previously in the interview from which this passage is excerpted. This tendency to decouple background information was common during my fieldwork. I became used to it, mentally filling in gaps in meaning such as this on a regular basis in a variety of contexts as I came to know more about each individual as a person. I was not aware of what I was doing, however, until I visited two of my older friends at home in Dodworth with a younger third friend, Diane, who was visiting me and staying over for the weekend. Both older women included a number of blanks in their conversation which assumed my friend's familiarity with topics such as their family members and local place names as well as local history, seemingly forgetting that Diane would not know any of this, let alone that she had only just met them herself. Diane's confusion and subsequent reaction to them as old dears' made this dynamic much more evident to me. Reflecting on this event made me think that perhaps the context was decoupled from the narrative because the information backgrounding the narrative had become irrelevant to the subjective place occupied by the narrator in recounting her stories. Over the course of my fieldwork, narrative accounts would often open up for a short while without a beginning, ending or context. Stories were told like this as if the listener knew the tale already, leaving much background information unsaid and placing the listener in a potentially confusing position. Sally might call this narrative style part of losing the art of conversation', which implies that the usual rules of narration are transgressed. This transgression can cause discomfort and confusion for the younger listener. Critically, however, the narrative styles I am describing here gave no cause for stigmatization in interaction among older people themselves, but were normal aspects of their conversation. Moreover, although Emma could stereotypically be described as being scattered' on the basis of the blanks in her narratives, she may very well have assumed that I had all the same background information about her life and memories that she did, so that filling in the contextualizing information and constructing an explicitly (rather than broadly) linear narrative was not a priority for her. ## Conclusions Some of the episodes I recount here may seem banal when considered individually, with microscopic attention to descriptive details in the recounting of unremarkable events of daily life. I have demonstrated, however, that as these episodes accumulate, patterns emerge that are lodged in cultural praxis and come to define the limits within which daily life is lived and experienced by older people. Some of these most strongly divergent patterns intersect with the way experience is narrated and with the temporal rhythms that underpin this experience. Ultimately, the decoupling of background information from the narrative being told combine with irrelevant' information and shifting temporal frameworks to destabilize younger interlocutors, leading at times to disruption in the transmission of meaning. This destabilization is due to a rupture between the temporal rhythms and the conventions of narrative accounts and positionality used by older speakers, and those used by younger co-conversationalists. In asserting that there is something distinctive about older people's narrative lives, mannerisms and experiences of time as compared to younger people, I may appear to be reverting to an essentialist argument after trying so hard to lay out an interpretative, processual framework for understanding ageing, lodged in subjectivity and experience. This is not the case. As outlined above, I take the self to be created through narration and dialectical relations. This self in narratives of older people tends to be an ageless self’ (Kaufman 1986) and people rarely identify themselves as old, particularly because ageing and old age are heavily stigmatized in Western societies. Older people are perceived as if they are locked either into the past or into a motionless present. This evokes a particular stereotype about older people – one that turns around issues of temporality, and an interrupted temporality at that. Rather than experiencing the forward motion of time attributed to younger or middle-aged people, those who are categorized as old are, broadly speaking, taken to have stepped out of the flow of time and, in particular, to have their backs to the future and to be preoccupied instead with the past. This does not simply marginalize older people as fringe members of society in a relatively powerless position, but creates a different, lesser category of being human, in comparison to a vision of the middle-aged adult whose temporal positioning becomes the standard against which older people are judged and ranked. The implications for maintaining personhood and full adult status under such cultural pressures are stark. Indeed, it is not a coincidence that ageing is perceived both as a movement out of personhood (Hockey and James 1993: 87) and a stepping out of time, and that ruptures in selfhood and temporality go side by side in cultural constructions of old age. However, while older people are not lost in the past, the past does enter into their narrative accounts and style in a much more fluid way than it does for younger speakers. Past experiences can be used as a way of making conversation, as a way of staking a claim to knowledge based on experience, as a way of maintaining connections and as a way of performing identity. Problematically though, these narrative styles are also taken, among members of the wider society with whom older people interact, as proof that they are old. This is because the particular non-linear features of the narratives, their shifting temporal frameworks and their decoupling from contextual information are read by younger adults as signs of senility and of a loss of self. This may be the case for a minority of older people suffering from pathologies. However, the people I knew in Dodworth, and whose narrative styles I evoke here, were emphatically not suffering from such conditions. Despite this, the patterns and rhythms of their narratives approximated to the stereotyped assumptions about older people enshrined in mainstream notions of old age, in terms of the repetition and temporal flux which meant that a conversation about the present day could quickly shift into a different temporal framework located in the distant past, and back again. There are thus two issues at stake in discussing the construction of self through narrative in terms specific to old age. The first concerns the ways the self is created, worked and reworked through narration, with certain stories being used to say this is me'; the second concerns the ways in which certain stylistic attributes of telling these stories are interpreted by younger people as characteristic of old age itself, with the corollary that people using such stylistic patterns are themselves judged to be old. Rapport and Overing argue that conventions of narration are based on a set of fundamental principles which, following J. Bruner (1990), they call time or sequentiality, narrative voice or “agentivity", narrative structure or canonicality, and point of view or perspectivity' (Rapport and Overing 2000: 287). Through these principles, individuals come to share a collective way of organizing, presenting and remembering information, and so knowing the world. The narrative stock of a culture is thus seen as embodying what are socially recognized to be typical behaviour patterns' (ibid.: 287–8). However, while such ways of knowing the world through shared conventions of narrative are assumed by these authors to be consistent for all members of a particular culture or society, my fieldwork data show that narrative conventions can and do change with age, particularly with a relaxation of the rules delimiting time and linearity. Ironically, this can become a double-edged sword, since the disjuncture between the conventions of middleaged speakers (that narratives should concern the past, present and future; be orderly, linear and thus rational'; and non-repetitive) and those of older speakers (that narratives should convey knowledge about the past; need not be linear; and may be repetitive) ends up reinforcing younger people's assumptions that older people are confused and unreliable sources of information about the present day Finally, and to loop this discussion back to the theme of creativity, I had hoped that an approach to ageing that privileged narrativity and temporality would also permit me to attend to the creative agency that I felt older people would exercise over the stereotypes governing old age. As these stereotypes are so negative, I wanted the older people I came to know to be freed from such stigmatizing labels. While older people are able to a certain extent to resist the deeply negative connotations of old age by refusing to accept the label of old in relation to themselves, over time I came to admit to myself that perhaps their scope for creativity in this respect is severely limited. This is partly because of the ways in which some aspects of the narrative style of older people are interpreted as confirmation of their being lost’ in the past, but also because temporal dimensions do appear to shift for many people as they age. I nevertheless persisted, wanting to see the play with time and the multiplicity of selfhood in old age as creative responses to the pressures imposed on older people to maintain an ordered self despite the physiological and cultural pressures of ageing. In the four years since finishing the fieldwork, I have come to wonder if my affirmative stance may have led me instead to participate in the occlusion of the darker sides of ageing and the fragility of experience on the margins of social life. The circularity of self, other and expectation may indeed mean that my hopes for creative channels out of social stigma were perhaps only an echo of what older people themselves are attempting to achieve (a clamping down on the infringing, threatening aspects of ageing), blinding me to the more tragic aspects of self-erasure experienced in old age. The minutiae of daily life for many of the older people I worked with were genuinely reconfigured by a sense of loss. To leave unspoken the pressures it engendered would be to misrepresent the everyday experiences of these people. These pressures should not be muted for the sake of preserving a uniformly positive portrait of ageing. ## Acknowledgements I would like to express my thanks and appreciation to all the people in Dodworth who participated in the research project on which this chapter is based. My thanks to Ellen Corin for our many discussions about ageing, temporality and the self, and for her reminders to me that difference does not equal inequality; her insight and guidance have added immensely to this chapter. I would also like to thank Colin Scott and Colin Duncan for careful reading of this material as it took shape; Elizabeth Hallam and Tim Ingold for their precise editing work; and Sharon Macdonald and Eric Hirsch for organizing the ASA05 conference panel on ‘Creativity and Temporality' at which I presented a version of this chapter. Funding from McGill Faculty of Graduate Studies, McGill Department of Anthropology, the Radcliffe-Brown Trust Fund and STANDD are all gratefully acknowledged. ## Notes 1. Although I use the monolithic terms Western' and the West' throughout this chapter, I wish to signal here my discomfort with the largely unproblematic way these are usually employed and the homogeneity they imply. Although there are strong cultural similarities and frameworks throughout the so-called Western world, blanket use of the term masks significant differences and nuances between the cultural groups that make up the West, as well as the even more local levels of experience and meaning within these groups themselves. Class, gender and age issues also go unsignalled. On the other hand, it does act as a sort of shorthand to express certain shared tendencies which lie behind the questions posed in this chapter. Additionally, I purposefully adopt the indistinct term older people' rather than elderly' or old' or ‘the aged', in an attempt to move away from labels that demarcate old age in tidy compartments (and that connote chronological age). 2. Not only do individual selves shift, but cultural notions of what is accepted as the self’ are perpetually shifting as well. Several authors (resisting earlier work in the school of culture and personality studies) make this explicit by problematizing the notion that there is a unitary discourse of selfhood pervasive in an entire society' (Kondo 1987: 241). Similarly, Nancy Abelmann argues that by assuming various and blurred epistemologies in the (traditional anthropological) field against a unified selfhood in advanced capitalist societies... we impoverish our understanding of selfhood everywhere (Abelmann 1997: 789). 3. Consideration of some characteristics specific to the ageing self offers the chance to widen theoretical conceptualizations of the Western self. These include dynamics such as the uneven and multi-directional process of selfhood creation and an increasing rigidity in representations of self that I discuss elsewhere (Degnen 2003). 4. As an aside, while people tend not to talk explicitly about the self under normal conditions, the interview context opens up a particular sort of social space to reflect on one's self. This raises important contextualizing points about the presentation, construction and staging of self unique to interviewing. My research, however, was not confined to interviews, which were balanced by as much time spent with older people, just as intensively, outside of the interview settings. ## References Abelmann, N. (1997), Narrating selfhood and personality in South Korea: Women and social mobility', American Ethnologist, 24(4): 786–812. Boyarin, J. and Boyarin, D. (1995), Self-exposure as theory: The double mark of the male Jew', in D. Battaglia (ed), Rhetorics of Self-Making, Berkeley: University of California Press. Bruner, E. (1984), ‘The opening up of anthropology', in E. Bruner (ed), Text, Play, and Story: The Construction and Reconstruction of Self and Society, 1983 Proceedings of the American Ethnological Society, Washington, DC: American Ethnological Society. (1986), Experience and its expressions', in V. Turner and E. Bruner (eds), The Anthropology of Experience, Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press. Bruner, J. (1990), Acts of Meaning, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Degnen, C. (2003), Mining Experience: The Ageing Self, Narrative, and Social Memory in Dodworth, England, unpublished PhD thesis, Department of Anthropology, Montreal, Quebec: McGill University. Hazan, H. (1996), From First Principles: An Experiment in Ageing, Westport, Conn.: Bergin & Garvey. Herskovits, E. (1995), Struggling over subjectivity: Debates about the “self' and Alzheimer's disease', Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 9(2): 146–64. Hockey, J. and James, A. (1993), Growing Up and Growing Old: Ageing and Dependency in the Life Course, London: Sage. Kaufman, S. (1986), The Ageless Self: Sources of Meaning in Later Life, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. Kondo, D. (1987), Creating an ideal self: Theories of selfhood and pedagogy at a Japanese ethics retreat', Ethos, 15(3): 241–72. Myerhoff, B. (1979), Number Our Days, New York: E.P. Dutton. Peacock, J. and Holland, D. (1993), ‘The narrated self: Life stories in process', Ethos, 21(4): 367–83. Rapport, N. and Overing, J. (2000), 'Narrative', in N. Rapport and J. Overing (eds), Social and Cultural Anthropology, the Key Concepts, London: Routledge. Rosaldo, M. (1980), Knowledge and Passion: Ilongot Notions of Self and Social Life, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. — (1984), ‘Toward an anthropology of self and feeling', in R. Shweder and R. LeVine, (eds), Culture Theory: Essays on Mind, Self and Emotion, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Thompson, P. (1992), “I don't feel old": Subjective ageing and the search for meaning in later life', Ageing and Society, 12: 23–47. Turner, V. (ed E. Turner) (1985), On the Edge of the Bush: Anthropology as Experience, Tucson: University of Arizona Press. White, G. and Kirkpatrick, J. (eds) (1985), Person, Self, and Experience: Exploring Pacific Ethnopsychologies, Berkeley: University of California Press. The Creativity of Anthropological Scholarship Part IV ## Introduction Mark Harris During one of the sessions of the conference that gave rise to this volume, a panellist remarked with some exasperation that research is almost the opposite of creativity'. The remark was made publicly and, of all those present at the session, neither I nor anyone else challenged it. There appears to be a deeply and widely felt sense that real creativity lies beyond the realms of science, whether human, social or natural. If it exists in these realms, it is but a pale imitation or a sham. The correct place for creativity, it is often assumed, is in the world of high art and literature. The panellist seemed to be saying that the work of scholarship is about collecting data, applying methods, refining ideas and in general contributing to the accumulation of knowledge. And in the main, it is dreary labour. The production of high culture, by contrast, fizzes along with its own abundant inventiveness. Creativity is understood as typically the preserve of the individual author or artist. Scholarly work, even though often carried out by a single person, effaces individual identity since it is by definition a contribution to a larger body of learning. The research that we do as anthropologists cannot then be creative because it is characterized by various checks on creativity. We have to use theories developed by other people at other times and places; we are trained to avoid the idiosyncratic; we have to fit in with existing scholarship so that our argument is recognizable. To cap it all, audit culture' restricts any residual creative or experimental tendencies (Strathern 2000). Not only do we have to comply with the rigours of scholarship; we also have to do what our managers expect us to do. This bleak picture is, I hope, a caricature. Many contrary examples could of course be adduced, from both anthropology and neighbouring disciplines, reminding us of Collingwood's (1993) insistence that history cannot be done without imaginative empathy. But the idea that research is dull', and that it requires nothing of the creative imagination, persists in various guises. We are thus in a rather odd situation, for while we can study the creativity of others, we are reluctant to recognize it in our own accounts. Whatever creativity the discipline may have remains implicit in the methods and procedures that have driven studies of other people's creativity, such as those described in previous parts of this book. In introducing the present part, I shall argue that the separation of research and creativity is unnecessary – a depressing reflection of certain aspects of academic labour that effectively mystify what anthropologists do and how they go about their work. Given the nature of its inquiry, as the study of humanity, critical reflexivity is not an end point of anthropology but integral to its overall project. Giambattista Vico was the first modern author to make this argument in his criticism of Cartesian rationalism, in his New Science of 1725 (Vico 1999). Vico insisted that the study of humanity requires its own methods and theories, different from those needed for studying the world of nature. Since nature has not been created by humans, he argued, it must always remain to some extent unfathomable. The history of human societies, however, fashioned through imagination and reason, can be understood through the exercise of these same faculties. Central to Vico's thought is the idea that societies and individuals follow a sequence of development that is not random, but logical and cumulative (Berlin 2000). The study of this historically situated progression is critical to the proper understanding of the creative impulse of humanity. In the following I take inspiration from this idea to argue for an expanded notion of the field' to include the creative spirit of research and teaching. What are we discussing, then, under the rubric of the creativity of anthropological scholarship? It could be the range of creative ethnographic writing, taking in such works as Gregory Bateson's Naven (1958), Hugh Brody's Maps and Dreams (2002), Ruth Landes' City of Women (2005), Michael Taussig's Shamanism, Colonialism and the Wild Man (1987); a list less definitive than exemplary. Or it could be the creative and responsible uses to which anthropology can be put by anthropologists, such as in political campaigns, in teaching and in critical interventions in public debate. Alternatively, creativity could be sought in the development of specific concepts or methods in order to analyse more effectively old topics or new social formations, as exemplified in Richard Vokes innovative use of the radio as a research tool in Uganda, or in Amanda Ravetz's exploration of the uses of photography. If creativity is to mean anything it has to be framed by concrete situations rather than abstract propositions. Moreover, we have to decide whether the creative process in anthropology is different from any other kind – bearing in mind Edmund Leach's (1982: 53–4) comment that anthropologists are usually bad novelists. This is precisely the issue that Trevor Stack and Robey Callahan address in their chapter comparing the work of fiction writers, anthropologists and advertising creatives. By way of introduction, I want to refocus on creativity by expanding on and reinvigorating the notion of the field. In particular, my concern is to integrate the activities of teaching and research. Conventionally, the field refers to the location in which an ethnographer conducts empirical research, typically a dense network of people defined geographically. This notion of the field is rooted in structural functionalism and its attendant literary form, the monograph, which focused on the bounded field as a set of relations (Hart 2004). What does a field site mean in contemporary anthropology? Can a monograph capture that place? What form might be better suited? These questions should be practical and methodological, rather than abstract. In the study of Latin American peasantries – my own regional interest – the conventional notion of the field came under attack over fifty years ago. The defining intellectual moment was when Julian Steward organized the People of Puerto Rico project in the early 1950s. New methodological and theoretical questions were catapulted to the forefront of the study of non-tribal peoples caught up in labour migrations, agricultural modernization and class inequality. In this and subsequent work concerning peasantries in Latin America, innovations were made in the form of writing and method; for example, the life history method, used by Sidney Mintz (1960) to look at both personal and global change, and Eric Wolf's (1959) synthetic use of anthropology, archaeology and history to study ethnicity in Guatemala and Mexico. This was not a case of losing sight of the village, but of understanding that it was, in important ways, shaped and constrained by processes and movements of people outside the immediate area. New forms of anthropological engagement were necessary to understand these processes. Fieldwork-based ethnography was too limited. Complementary techniques and sources were required, such as flms, novels, archives and journalism, to express the intertwining of different ways of knowing the world. More recently, another development has produced similar innovation in scope. Although not uniquely responsible, Michael Jackson's Paths Toward a Clearing (1989) pioneered an approach in which experience was foregrounded, both as a participatory method (active involvement in practical life) in the field and an epistemological orientation (phenomenology). This argument helps to open up the stages in which anthropological knowledge is made, running from field site to academy, since it forces a reflection on the move from unarticulated experience to explicitly articulated, representational forms. Moreover, it drew attention away from the text – that is, from preoccupations with writing culture – towards and into the world itself. In my terms, the emphasis on experience is a way of reclaiming Vico's project for the study of humanity, grounding it in what humans share as their common heritage and in what connects them to one another. The field, in effect, comprises the manifold pathways connecting varieties of subjective experience. Another consequence of the experiential turn was to question the boundaries between common-sense knowledge, of the everyday kind that ethnographers collect, and the sort of expert knowledge (for example, of kinship systems) that was supposed to result from specialist analysis by trained anthropologists and that they alone could understand. The focus on experience threatened this division by refusing to allow that knowledge, since it is always connected to perception and sensation, could ever escape the world. Moreover this radical empiricism', as Jackson (1989) called his approach, forced a consideration of whether an ethnographer's apprenticeship in another way of life is really any different, in principle, from a child's learning the business of life amongst family and neighbours. Is the fieldworker's education so different from the interpersonal encounters in which all social and cultural life subsists? Although they are organized and valued differently, they intertwine in ways that reveal an innovative dynamic that has always been important to anthropology. I shall illustrate this point briefly by turning to the relation between creativity and teaching, again with reference to the notion of the field. It is uncommon for anthropologists to reflect on their teaching experience, and even more uncommon for them to write about teaching as a creative exercise. I could not, for instance, find anyone willing to present a contribution on teaching to the conference session on the creativity of anthropological scholarship' on which this part of the book is based. There are, however, some exceptions in the history of anthropology. Edmund Leach, who had much to say about the clear communication of ideas – especially in teaching – and devoted significant time to students (Hugh-Jones 1989; Tambiah 2000), said in his fifth Reith lecture, delivered on BBC radio in 1967: Certainly the young need to be educated; they need to be taught to gain confidence in the astonishing power of their imaginations. But they don't need to be loaded down with the clutter of useless information which is all that traditional scholarship has to offer. Only those who hold the past in complete contempt are ever likely to see visions of the New Jerusalem. (Leach 1968: 76) Although this passage was of its time and spoke to the generational tensions of British society in the 1960s, it should still provoke any teacher who wishes to release the power of students' imaginations. I assume that pushing the past to one side (which is to say that conservatism is a matter of choice and not of scholarly necessity) and working things out for oneself is creative. Indeed, I believe the spirit of Leach's argument is that nobody learns without trying something out for him- or herself. With this experimental approach to pedagogy, Leach saw anthropology as a personal skill requiring training, and not as a series of theories or facts to be learned (Leach 1984). Yet how can this approach possibly work as a teaching programme in universities, policed as they are by quality assurance and audits? There have been many examples in Britain over the last decade or so, but few of them have been reflected upon sufficiently to make their way into print (see, for example, the C-SAP website; Grimshaw et al. 2000; Ingold with Lucas forthcoming). Interestingly, these experimental programmes have taken place mostly in departments of anthropology linked to a specialist centre: visual anthropology (Manchester, see Ravetz, this volume, Chapter 12), ethnomusicology (Belfast), computing (Kent). At the heart of these moves is an attempt to make the teaching process more like the research process. This is to encourage students to become researchers, discovering their subjects for themselves, with their teachers guiding them along the way. There is nothing new about seeing teaching and research as complementary activities, but this has been more from the point of view of the academic than from that of the student. The recent switch towards a more student-centred view has been motivated by a theoretical emphasis, noted above, on the experiential aspects of social life. Learning, according to Tim Ingold (forthcoming), is an exploratory practice that generates its own knowledge and understanding. If this argument works for learning in social and cultural life, then why should it not be applied to more formal educational environments, such as the teaching of anthropology? In this light, learning becomes tantamount to acquiring the skills of perception, observation and imagination. Together with Ray Lucas, Ingold has taught a course at Aberdeen along these lines. It naturally raised a host of questions, not least of which was how to assess student work. But in its rejection of the division between learning and research, theory and practice, discovery and creativity, it forces an awareness of the process of making an anthropological argument. It throws into relief the changes a student undergoes in the course of learning, along with the methods and resources used and social relations engaged to make progress. Learning then becomes a journey in which knowledge is not so much passed down ready-made as continually produced under conditions that, far from being obscured and mystified, actually propel students forward. The same kind of journey is entailed in postgraduate and established academic work, even though we may wish to deny or distort it. All these points come together in a superb article by Alberto Corsín Jiménez (2004), which considers the author's experience of researching mining communities in Chile, in the same place as the university where he was also working. As well as teaching his students the classical texts, he engaged them with some of his own research to the extent that some of them became his informants – hence the title of his essay, teaching the field'. However, they were also throwing back at him some of the concepts and theories first encountered in teaching. This, he argues, was a reduplication of knowledge' that reversed the normal flow of information from the field of observation to the analytical field of writing up. Students used ideas they encountered in teaching to make sense of their own lives and those of others. Corsín Jiménez argues that this aspect of teaching gives it a special ethnographicness', uniting the different fields of anthropological work such as the fieldwork site, the canteen, the seminar room, office, and so on. Ethnography does not produce knowledge as such; rather it mobilizes knowledge across places (Corsín Jiménez 2004: 154). Following Marilyn Strathern (1995), this can be seen as a rescaling of knowledge', that is, a movement between orders of signification. The notion of the field in this argument is reinvigorated through its emplacement with the ethnographer (who could be the student or the professional anthropologist) as he or she moves between different contexts and relations. The field is like a map on which paths of knowledge are inscribed, echoing Ingold's (2000) argument that knowledge-finding is a form of wayfaring or the tracing of a continuous line. Newly established teachers, fresh from their recent doctoral fieldwork, make better teachers, according to Corsín Jiménez. They are keener to engage in the ethnographicness of teaching, to encourage students to think with and apply the categories and concepts of ethnography (Corsín Jiménez 2004: 155). Older teachers are likely to be less conversationally inclined, which is to say that they might be further from the dialogic and relational contexts of participation in their field site, though they may otherwise be better read and intellectually more rigorous. This contention is not as polemical as it seems: it was made by Edmund Leach in his 1967 Reith Lectures – no teacher of young people, Leach declared, should be over forty-five years of age. Teaching, Corsín Jiménez tells us, is the paradigmatic form ... of anthropological knowledge' (2004: 159). In the terms I have introduced here, fieldwork is not grounded in a specific location. We can open out the notion of the field to include the work of teaching, where a teacher and student also engage in the activity of ethnographic labour (deploying concepts in new contexts and making the effort to explain an unfamiliar argument). And if we see the university contexts in which we work as another kind of field, then we can open up the movement of knowledge to methodological scrutiny. I have shown briefly how research and teaching have been subject to innovations and reflections that have moved beyond a restricted notion of the field and academic labour. These developments have been methodological in character and have been intended to demystify the conditions in which ethnographers come to understand their subjects. The movement, as Corsín Jiménez shows, is between different orders of understanding. Instead of squashing the creative process into an end point, such as the written ethnography or the classroom lecture, we can see it as a continuous path connecting places and persons. Those paths are anthropological ways of knowing. So long as we persist in seeing a specific kind of fieldwork as the initial experience of anthropology, I believe we reduce the creative potential of the discipline. This understanding of fieldwork is too often linked to the toolbox image of methodology, as though it consisted of an assortment of instruments to be picked up and put down, or left lying around in the field, rather than embodied skills requiring education, inseparable from their users. I do not mean to negate the significance of fieldwork or its data, or to imply any antiscience sentiment. On the contrary, I maintain that the creativity of anthropology lies in its fidelity to experience and the world, and its revelation of the connections of subject and object. The three chapters here provoke a rethinking of methodology. They argue for more openness and more analytical attention to the process of making anthropology. While the discipline is no longer committed to the kind of fieldwork-based ethnography that aimed to uncover social structures and reveal their functions, it is not yet clear what has replaced it. This is partly due to the growth and subsequent partitioning of anthropology into subdisciplines. A common aim has become fragmented. The chapters in this part, in their different ways, reveal what an eclectic and methodologically sophisticated anthropology could look like (and there are other examples, to be sure). Each one engages in a conversation between anthropology and another subject: radio broadcasting, photography and creative writing. This framing is intended to be an advance on the anthropologies of...'that turn every other subject into an object of investigation. Instead we have anthropology and...'. Every such combination opens a debate, an interrogation perhaps, but always on a more equal footing. This explicitness concerning method and theory is a formalization of what has always been at the heart of anthropology. With its two-sided nature, one foot in the field and the other in the academy, anthropology's creative motor has been its unique and ambivalent identity. As Grimshaw and Hart argue (1996: 54): it might be said that, compared with the other sciences and humanities, anthropology has remained in important ways an anti-discipline – taking its ideas from anywhere, striving for the whole, constantly reinventing procedures on the move'. Nevertheless there is an opposite tendency with which anthropologists struggle: the move to formalize these informal procedures, and to institutionalize the anti-discipline – in short, to keep anthropology going as a university-based subject. The following chapters exemplify this struggle and the innovative and improvisational spirit of anthropology. They are not so much concerned with creativity per se in anthropological scholarship as with some aspects of the way in which anthropology can work creatively. ## Acknowledgements. I thank David Mills for his reading of a draft and his astute comments, and the Leverhulme Trust for the funds that made writing a pleasurable experience. ## References Bateson, G. (1958), Naven, Stanford, Calif.: University of Stanford Press. Berlin, I. (2000), Three Critics of the Enlightenment: Vico, Hamann, Herder (ed H. Hardy), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Brody, H. (2002), Maps and Dreams, London: Faber and Faber. Collingwood, R.G. (1993), The Idea of History, revised edition, Oxford: Clarendon Press. Corsín Jiménez, A. (2004), Teaching the field: the order, the ordering and the scale of knowledge', in D. Mills and M. Harris (eds), Teaching Rites and Wrongs: Universities and the Making of Anthropologists, Birmingham: CSAP. C-SAP (Centre for Sociology, Anthropology and Politics), http://www.c-sap. bham.ac.uk. Grimshaw, A. and Hart, J.K. (1996), Anthropology and the Crisis of Intellectuals Cambridge: Prickly Pear Pamphlets. -, Harris, M., Ravetz, A., Solomons, N., Liebnit, M., Grasseni, C., Walker, N., Ward, C. and Dibb, M. (2000), The Child in the City: A Case Study in Experimental Anthropology, Manchester: Prickly Pear Pamphlets 13. Hart, J.K. (2004), 'What anthropologists really do', Anthropology Today, 20(1): 3-5. Hugh-Jones, S. (1989), Edmund Leach 1910–1989: A Memoir (unpublished manuscript), King's College, Cambridge. Ingold, T. (2o00), The Perception of the Environment, London: Routledge. - with Lucas, R. (forthcoming), 'The 4s (anthropology, archaeology, art and architecture): reflections on a teaching and learning experience', in M. Harris (ed), Ways of Knowing? New Anthropological Approaches to Method, Learning and Knowledge, Oxford: Berghahn Books. Jackson, M. (1989), Paths Toward a Clearing, Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Landes, R. (2005), City of Women, Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. Leach, E. (1968), A Runaway World?, London: British Broadcasting Corporation. — (1982), Social Anthropology, London: Fontana. Mintz, S. (1960), Worker in the Cane: A Puerto Rican Life History, New Haven Conn.: Yale University Press. Strathern, M. (1995), The Relation: issues in complexity and scale, Cambridge: Prickly Pear Pamphlets 6. — (ed) (2000), Audit Cultures: Anthropological Studies in Accountability, Ethics and the Academy, London: Routledge. Tambiah, S. (2000), Edmund Leach: An Intellectual Biography, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Taussig, M. (1987), Shamanism, Colonialism and the Wild Man, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Vico, G. (1999) New Science (trans. D. Marsh, introd. A. Grafton), Harmondsworth: Penguin. Wolf, E. (1959), Sons of the Shaking Earth, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.