# Creativity in Advertising, Fiction and Ethnography Robey Callahan and Trevor Stack You’re asking about creativity here [in the creative department of this advertising agency], but you know it's really everywhere. People use it every day to do all sorts of things. Verity, an art director More than seventy-five years ago, Edward Sapir (1993: 23–39) went to some trouble to define for his students the term culture', in part to distinguish between what we may call culture-as-elite-tradition' and culture-as-academicabstraction'. Anthropologists in his day, he notes, often found themselves drawn to the ritual specialists among the peoples they studied – fascinated by the relative sophistication of their knowledge of local origin myths, curing lore, judicial precepts and supernatural esoterica. As much as we may wish to believe otherwise, things have not changed all that much in the intervening decades. For many of us, information gleaned from such specialists forms a rather disproportionate share of our ethnographic data and enjoys a level of evidentiary privilege in our accounts that is frequently at least on a par with its local valuation. Yet precisely because elite forms are generally esteemed locally, this preferential treatment need not skew our interpretations unduly. In fact it can often provide us with sufficient material to do a rough sketch of a group's culture-as-academicabstraction – to get an initial feel for its dominant cultural patterns, even if that depiction were to need later refinement in the light of analyses of the significance of more quotidian behaviours, including those implicated in the transmission of elite forms. Like culture', creativity' is a troublesome but useful word.¹ In the epigraph above, Verity reminds us that human beings are by nature creative. We produce on a daily basis innumerable micro-innovations, reflexive adjustments to the ephemera of our physical and social environments. Any one of these micro-innovations would no doubt deserve to be seen as an example of creativity. However, while it may receive impetus and direction at least partly from prevailing cultural patterns, and while it may prove of definite benefit to its creator, it would not in itself necessarily be of lasting cultural value. To acquire such value, according to Sapir it would have to gain currency beyond both the moment and the individual. At the opposite extreme to the micro-innovations of everyday life, we encounter examples of creativity of another intensity entirely – examples we may sense as unequivocally cultural in character, as pertaining to culture-aselite-tradition, high culture' or expressive culture'. We refer to institutionalized or conventionalized forms of novelty, which under other circumstances would likely be classed as dangerous eruptions of lunacy. Our purpose in this chapter is to examine the experiences of creativity for those who produce culture-as-elitetradition (cf. Amabile 1996: 5–15; Freud 1970 [1908]; Gardner 1982: 352–68). We focus on three such forms: advertising, fiction and ethnography. We are concerned, however, less with the obvious' creativity of the final products of these forms (ads, novels, ethnographies), than with the practical steps people take to come up with relevant ideas and how they commit those ideas to paper in the hope that they will eventually achieve wider circulation. These practical steps, many of which are more or less established tricks of the trade', themselves exemplify creativity at work. Many of them are clearly cultural in both source and ultimate significance; others are of a more ambiguous character, seeming, perhaps to some, too individual' or psychological' to warrant anthropological attention. What, though, if we follow Sapir's thinking more closely? If we do, we find that even the most personal of such creativity-enhancing techniques is likely to bear the impress of prevailing cultural patterns. In other words, any given method may be useful only to a single person and only for a limited time, and yet within it would be manifested something of the logic underwriting more or less established tricks of the trade – a logic which would also reflect wider cultural patterns. Indeed, even if that method subsequently proves of no discernible consequence to culture, its presence nonetheless contributes, if only for one individual at one moment, to the often amorphous feeling that those tricks of the trade and those wider cultural patterns are inherently sensible. Inspired by Urban's (2001) work on metaculture, we take the quest for newness to be a key motive-bearing schema (D'Andrade 1992) of the culture-as-academicabstraction -in Sapir's sense - of modernity. We therefore expect to find it expressed not only at the level of metaculture (and the elements to which metaculture refers), but also within the more intimate, everyday experiences of individuals operating creatively, in whatever capacity. In other words, this core cultural pattern – the drive for novelty – motivates our elite forms, the techniques that give rise to those forms and, beyond them, our more general attitudes towards life. Even core patterns within a culture, however, can manifest themselves in different forms. For instance, Strauss (1992) demonstrates that although both blueand white-collar workers in America are motivated by what she calls a general success’ schema, this central pattern of American culture is expressed quite differently, in both practical and ideational terms, on either side of that particular economic class divide. The same may be said about the quest for newness'that broadly characterizes modernity. While as an abstraction the idea has heuristic utility, its real-world instantiations vary in intensity and quality among particular domains – our focus here being on the three domains of advertising, fiction and ethnography. Undoubtedly there are many ways one could proceed to compare and contrast the manifestations of the quest for newness within these three domains. One could, for instance, examine the finished products that emerge from them – the different forms of culture-as-elite-tradition we routinely consume by way of a wide range of media. Our concern here, however, is with the practical steps people take to stimulate their creativity in order to produce these forms of culture-aselite-tradition. Among these practical steps we shall also encounter differences in people's attitudes towards their particular brands of creativity – their ideas about the creative processes behind their productions. Understanding these steps and the reflexive commentaries that give them practical sense is, we have found, easier if they are conceptualized in terms of the spaces, literal and figurative, in which producers operate. We organize these various spaces according to two axes of variation. The first runs between two contrasting modes of creative thinking, which we call flux mode' and focus mode', with the former (more often) being punctuated by what are commonly known as eureka moments'. The second runs between contrasting manners of being in the world, which we call engagement' and disengagement'. Although there is always slippage in practice, flux mode, in which the conscious mind is usually (but not always) occupied in matters other than the creative problem at hand, most often occurs during engagement, a species of openness to the world and its distractions. Focus mode, in which the creator is actively putting pen to paper (or fingers to keys), is most often characterized by disengagement with the wider world, a kind of deliberate and controlled desensitization to ambient confusion.2 At various points in between, we find what we may call focused-flux mode', in which (usually) two or more creators conjointly contrive to generate a hybrid space between engagement and disengagement, a sort of halfway house in which the eureka powers of an individual's flux mode can potentially be kickstarted and partially directed towards the creative problems at hand.³ Through analyses of such spaces we may gain insights into the mysterious workings of the creative machine' – the myriad ways culture and psychology commingle and from which new things of wider cultural import may arise. We begin our survey with a focus on the spaces, physical and mental, in which advertising creativity occurs. As this particular creative domain is likely to be least familiar to our readers, we include in our discussion some relevant background information.4 ## Advertising The core product of any advertising agency is creativity that helps sell things, and this commercial end strongly influences the spaces in which such creativity occurs. The people largely responsible for producing this form of creativity are collectively known in the industry as creatives'. Although much in this section pertains to all types of advertising creativity, here we are concerned particularly with the efforts of creatives working on direct-marketing ads – think here of anything with a call to action' (e.g. almost all junk mail' and any television ad with a telephone number that viewers are urged to call now!’). Creatives come in two main varieties: copywriters, whose focus is the text of ads; and art directors, whose remit is their design. Normally, each team in an agency's creative department comprises one copywriter and one art director, and any given advertising job begins life for such a team with a brief’ devised by agency middlemen (account handlers') in conjunction with representatives from the company commissioning the ad. A typical brief contains information about the product at hand, its benefits, its intended audience, the type of advertising desired, the available budget, production timings, past creative treatments (and results data, if available), branding issues, legal disclaimers, and so forth. Key amongst all this information is the proposition’, or central selling message (e.g. consolidate all your debts into one easy monthly payment' or ‘sponsor a child for £2 a month’) of the ad-to-come. It is up to the creative team to transform a brief’s proposition into an advertising concept’ – a clever and concise idea that makes that proposition interesting and appealing to potential customers, and an exciting fusion of text and design that stands out in a world of commercial clutter long enough to have the chance of making a sale. Of the three creative domains examined in this chapter, it is within advertising that we find creative modes (flux, focused flux and focus) and manners of being (engagement and disengagement) most powerfully demarcated in experience. Flux, as we have noted, foregrounds the originality arising from eureka moments. When, for whatever reason, a new approach to a particular project is deemed necessary, the assigned team will make use of a wide range of creativityenhancing and idea-generating techniques to form new concepts that meet the brief's proposition.⁵ Most of these techniques require creatives to withdraw from the routine spaces of their work – to free themselves physically and mentally from the more mundane tasks (and reminders of such tasks) that clutter the bulk of the working day, in order to open themselves up to the stimulating distractions of engagement. Focus, on the other hand, emphasizes technical expertise over originality. For copywriters this means grammatical proficiency and a facility with registers and literary genres; for art directors, this refers to visualization skills and a fluency with media and formats. Here, the role of creatives is either to follow through with ads based on new concepts, or to refine existing ads organized with reference to already proven concepts in ways that, it is hoped, will generate even stronger consumer response. On the whole, the tasks of focus mode occur within the everyday physical and mental spaces of agency life; for copywriters this normally means at a desk and in front of a computer screen. Although some creatives work better in flux and others in focus, these two modes are not mutually exclusive. Rather, they are both key phases of the overall creative process. Those refining old ads have their eureka moments too, even if such moments tend to be less pronounced and celebrated; and those creating new ones rarely seriously consider concepts which fall beyond their technical skills (or the project's budget) to realize. On rare occasions, one or both members of a creative team, after receiving a brief, may be required to do some fieldwork – perhaps spending a weekend away at a luxury Highland retreat' to help sell a timeshare, or a longer period travelling to Africa to help sell a development charity. Such research excursions are periods of great flux and engagement for creatives, as the new spaces and stimuli provide fruitful ground for new ideas and connections. More usually, however, creatives must contrive their own spaces in which to work. After a creative team has received a brief calling for a new approach, they play about with a few initial concepts, but these tend to be the most manifestly obvious possibilities and so are usually rejected, for there is always the fear that they may have been done before, perhaps many times. More often, the team will return to other tasks needing their attention, such as refining other projects in later stages of production. After a significant delay, they will regroup in focused-flux mode to direct their attention to the new project. For such a brainstorming session, a novel setting (e.g. cafe, pub or empty meeting room) is often preferred, both because the team is less likely to be disturbed by others and because a change of scene itself can help stimulate the flow of ideas. Some creatives also brainstorm on paper with spider diagrams, pursuing clever metaphors or tantalizing puns across the page. Most pore over old ads, industry magazines and photo sourcebooks, searching for something they will only know when they see it – an image or a turn of phrase that sparks a new thought. Should useful concepts still not be forthcoming, a larger ad hoc brainstorming session may be formed. Here, the greater number of participants can enlarge, often geometrically, the number of possible creative answers' to the brief. Although the flow of ideas in such a group is often rather chaotic, with each person throwing out ideas as they come, sometimes a modicum of organization is imposed upon this anarchy via some form of turn-taking (e.g. moving clockwise or anticlockwise around the room or tossing a ball randomly from one participant to another). Returning to the issue of the delay between receiving a brief and actually beginning to brainstorm it, we see that it is of no small significance to understanding flux mode, particularly its more enigmatic aspects. Verity tells us that during this delay the facts of the brief drift back to a mulling point' in her mind where they are actively, if unconsciously, sorted and creatively pondered.6 Wherever she goes, she keeps herself open to the aesthetics of everyday life, very sensitive to images and colours and ideas', and she views this openness as enhancing her creative powers. Ideas, for her, often come surging forth from that mulling point when she is in motion – walking or cycling, for example – and she suggests that increased serotonin levels may be involved. Others present a similar view of their eureka moments, although Verity was one of the few to identify the source of her inspiration with such clarity. Jason holds that his moderate dyslexia helps him to see the world from a different angle’ and so to generate better, more interesting ideas. He is, in his estimation, naturally more adept at entering what we are calling flux mode'. Often, such eureka moments come unbidden. One can nevertheless increase their likelihood by reminding oneself of the task at hand and then doing something else entirely unrelated. Robert, for instance, tells himself he needs to solve a creative problem just as he is starting a session at the gym. He then forgets' about it, gets on with his exercises, and, as often as not, is rewarded at some point during or after his session with one or more solutions which seem to have come out of the blue. Movement, characterized invariably by engagement and often by flux, can in itself be stimulating: Nigel often experiences eureka moments on his motorcycle; Mark, while riding home on the train or walking his dogs. Many creatives find that ideas come to them in sleep, when only their minds are in motion. Inspiration, in sum, appears at times to arise as a result of active, conscious (and often social) commotion; and at other times, of passive, unconscious, quasimagical (and seemingly private) mental activity. In either case, the eureka moment usually occurs when flux is in the ascendant, at a physical or mental remove from the day-to-day routine of the office. Universally, it is experienced with delight (or at least relief) – as a puzzle solved, a new connection made, a brief cracked’. Focus mode for creatives normally occurs in the office setting. Unless they wish to take their work home with them or remain after hours (as some do), they must find ways to respond to interruptions by others while simultaneously disengaging from the distractions which inhibit the realization of their work – the transformation of concepts into ads. While different creative modes of operating in advertising are explicitly distinguished, it is also recognized that one can become stuck' in focus mode. Working on another project, or re-entering flux (perhaps simply by going out for a coffee), can help. The industry is keenly aware that creatives need ‘space' in which to operate, so they are often given considerable freedom of movement relative to their co-workers. Many behavioural eccentricities are likewise tolerated so as not to stifle their creative capacities. However, the fact remains that an agency's creative department forms part of a larger, highly structured, commercial environment. Delivering the goods on time is ultimately what counts, so creatives must be able to switch between creative modes effectively on demand. Yet they are only human, and while most achieve a sense of fulfilment when they produce good ads, many do not feel their needs as creative people are fully met within such a mechanical' environment. Some seek recognition for their talents within other creative domains. Copywriters, for instance, may take to penning poems, plays and novels. Within such diversionary activities, they are free to move as they wish among creative modes, and worries over deadlines rarely disturb their efforts. Let us now consider the creative spaces which give rise to works of fiction. ## Fiction The process of taking a novel from an initial idea to the bookshop shelf is long and complex, and not unlike the conception, gestation and birth of an ad. Whereas in advertising, however, we saw a relatively strict division of creative modes organized within a highly institutional setting, here in fiction we find individuals who enjoy a great deal of freedom in how they arrange their creative endeavours. It is, as novelist Emma explains, ‘a part of life under their control as opposed to work where you do what others say'. It would indeed be difficult to imagine writing fiction – at least of noteworthy quality – under the factory' conditions found in advertising agencies. For one thing the ideas underwriting novels are far more complex and harder to come by than the concepts which give sense to ads. There are, of course, exceptions: successful writers are often more closely tied into relationships with publishers, and they may routinely experience the anxiety of deadlines. In general, though, any pressure most fiction writers feel is of their own making. Although hopes of financial reward and critical recognition form part of most writers' motivation to write, the act of writing fiction for many is mainly an act of personal exploration. This is certainly why some advertising creatives choose to write fiction in their spare time – it is difficult to imagine wanting to produce ads as a hobby. The poet Annie Sexton says I do not write for ... [others]. Nor for you. Not even for the editors . .. Reaching people is ... important, I know, but reaching the best of me is most important right now' (Amabile 1996: 10). Kevin, a novelist and chief editor at a publishing company, likes the process [of writing itself], the feeling of subsuming [himself] in ideas – it becomes like waking dreaming, when the process is going really well, and the ideas and words are flowing ... Writing for [him] is a form primarily of expression, but also of escape'. The image of the fiction writer as someone disengaged from the wider world, working away in a room of his or her own, is a quite common and largely accurate sketch of focus mode. Certainly some such practitioners, like Juan Rulfo (1992: 383), may write solitarily in focused-flux mode until something appears – a word that provides the key' to what is to follow. (We are reminded here of advertising creatives and their spider diagrams.) Others may join groups or take classes in which something akin to focused-flux mode likewise predominates. Still others may conceive of their writing as social, at least in the sense that they engage with imaginary' characters and their worlds. Yet all write in some sense alone most of the time, and this is what we should expect given that their motives often arise from an interest in self-exploration. While Marjorie, a novelist and former copywriter, says, I guess any kind of writing is solitary except maybe advertising which is best when it is a collaborative process', Kevin tells us that only in the process afterwards, involving feedback and revision, can other people help you out'. Creating a room of one's own' – a space of disengagement and focus – is something every writer must be able to do.7 Mary, a fiction writer, finds herself all too often distracted by kids, drum and bass, life, telephone, lists of other things ... [she] should be doing, housework, earning a crust, doing questionnaires on writing'. Yet she still somehow manages, usually in the quiet of an odd late night, to carve out the space she needs. Marjorie's room has a sleeping cat or two, a few windows to look out every now and then, a green plant on ... [her] desk, an area to pace, [and] lots of books'. Novelist Francisco reminds us, however, that if you decide that it is a room of your own, of course it is'. In other words, a cafe, public park or library may work' for some writers. Thus, Kevin tells us: Normally I like it quiet – no music or television in the background, [t]hough I must admit there is a certain something about being in a public place.' Some writers are quite sensitive to colours and lighting and so arrange these environmental aspects to best effect. Others have music playing, often on repeat, quietly in the background to help stimulate a feeling of disengaged tranquillity and a sense of timelessness. For some, steadily sipping coffee or smoking is particularly conducive to focus. For others, a coffee or cigarette break can signal a small shift into flux, a temporary reprieve from the tyranny of the page or screen. On the whole, however, most eureka moments, big or small, occur outside the room' – in flux and engagement. None of our interviewees mentioned the disorientating effects of alcohol or drugs, but clearly some authors (e.g. Aldous Huxley, Ernest Hemingway, Ken Kesey, Hunter S. Thompson and Paul Bowles) have found insight in intoxication (cf. Pritzker 1999: 731–3). More often, it seems, inspiration emerges at unexpected yet otherwise unremarkable moments, when anything – sight, smell, sound, taste, touch – can take on extraordinary significance and elicit a response, a connection sought or unsought. Kevin explains: Generally I will be doing something banal and not very stimulating: showering or shaving or driving a well-known route. This opens my mind to other concerns. I've had some of my best ideas while brushing my teeth.' Ethnographer/fiction writer Jeremy tells us: Pretty much all of my ideas arise .. . when I am detached from the writing process in some way, engaged in some non-intellectual activity such as gardening, walking, sometimes lying in bed at night or first thing in the morning.' Marjorie says: There is no pattern to ideas “coming into my head". It has happened when reading, walking, sitting outside.' For Mary, riding a bike is good for letting the mind flow freely'. Fiction writer and ethnographer Steve has, like advertising creative Nigel, had some of ... [his] best ideas ... while riding a motorcycle'. Emma finds train travel particularly stimulating and concludes that most people are moving at the time' when they have their flashes of inspiration. Fiction writer/ethnographer Hannah discovers her inspiration in both flux and focused-flux modes. She tells us: Any circumstance might trigger an idea... It's not the specific circumstance but more so one of two things: a) down time completely independent of a specific writing project such as a long plane ride or free time at home or b) a situation where I am brainstorming with others in an artefact rich environment where we are building on each other and the material context. Suspicious of mystical readings of eureka moments, novelist James holds that most writers probably tend to view life through the prism of its potential for their fiction, picking up on literary structures cropping up in real life'. Such a claim reinforces our view that focused-flux mode need not occur only in brainstorming groups. Consider, for instance, the expert photographer who sees, with requisite diminution of (among other things) peripheral vision, the world in terms of its potential to yield striking and saleable images. While for a novelist this ability may well represent a shift towards the esteemed mature art' phase characteristic of, say, a later Graham Greene, for an advertising creative it all too often signifies a transition to what is somewhat disparagingly known as the pipe and slippers' stage of a career – a period in which veteran reliability and technical skill supplant youthful exuberance and marketable spontaneity.8 Though we have seen that some advertising creatives on rare occasions undertake something akin to fieldwork, their research is normally much more ‘bookish', drawing on old ads, their briefs and other supporting materials (most products for which they devise ads are not terribly complex, but they must still understand them in order to make ads for them). Most fiction writers emphasize the importance of reading good’ works of fiction as the best general starting point, and most also draw inspiration from non-fiction sources. Many engage in their own forms of fieldwork. Blanca, a novelist (and ethnographer), spends considerable time in the settings she describes, eating the food, meeting the people, taking photos and even making audio recordings – all in order to help her future readers suspend disbelief. Yet research is clearly not a prerequisite for such writers. Carolyn, another novelist/ethnographer, does some research for her fiction, but she tells us: [I only really need] my brain, my imagination and my computer.' Kevin has found in the past that too much research into one subject can lead him astray, to abandon his original plans in favour of others. Mary has found that her readers prefer the works she just wrote off the top of ... [her] head' to those she has researched: she assumes the former come across as less contrived'. More common and seemingly much more productive for fiction writers is a less programmatic approach, one in which they simply ‘dirty themselves', to use Francisco's words, in social interaction. Marjorie reports that a particular scene .. . witnessed or a conversation . .. overheard' can spark her creativity, and she is by no means alone. Emma is not unusual in collecting scraps from newspapers' and writing down her dreams on waking'. Whatever form of research a fiction writer pursues, odds are that he or she will keep a journal to record random thoughts and ideas which may at some point prove useful in resolving as-yet-not-encountered creative problems. In advertising, the vast majority of eureka moments are rather ‘small'. They involve transforming simple selling messages into entertaining concepts. Fiction writers, too, experience a great many such small flashes of inspiration, most often to help them over the sorts of minor hurdles which inevitably arise, for example, to resolve a contradiction in a character's motivation, to rationalize a temporal sequence, to introduce pivotal pieces of information with the most effective degree of emphasis. A big' eureka moment that provides a powerful grounding idea for an entire novel is another matter entirely. Such a moment, according to Kevin, is universally rare and envied, but hardly essential', for one can always find form in strict adherence to genre. It may be of central importance to the creativity behind an ethnography, however, so now we turn our attention to this rather peculiar literary form. ## Ethnography Long gone are the times when one could produce a simply descriptive (or at least largely descriptive) ethnography. Nowadays, a strong mixture of theory and data, united by a guiding and ideally novel theme, is required in order for the thing to count as a worthwhile contribution. When Callahan returned from his doctoral fieldwork in Yucatán, his advisor told him that he should not feel under too much pressure to begin writing his thesis straight away; rather, he should give himself six months to let things settle' in order to get a sense of perspective'. After trying to write in both the USA and the UK, he returned to Mexico in search of his muse. The first night there, while dazedly awaiting sleep in a cheap hotel in Cancún, he had a big eureka moment – the outline of his thesis appeared to him in a flash, with startling clarity. At that instant, a great weight lifted, and everything began to come (relatively) easily. We anthropologists, however, if we are to believe books on how to write ethnography, conceive of our creativity largely in terms of focus and disengagement. Not only do such books rarely touch on the subject of eureka moments, we also seem hesitant to acknowledge the true extent of the creativity behind our works. Perhaps talk of flux and engagement seems too unempirical, too much of a threat to our authority as social scientists. Yet we regularly read with a critical (and creative) eye the published works of our predecessors and contemporaries, and in classroom discussions, conferences, symposia, cafes and pubs we routinely enter into focused flux, much as advertising creatives do in brainstorming sessions. Ethnographer Mark, for whom newspapers and documentaries also contribute importantly to the mix, concludes: We have to deal with the world around us, and the world around us is very good at giving us ideas.'In common with advertising creative Verity and novelist James, he sees the eureka moment as a rather complex entity: it is not actually a spontaneous thing that just pops up (“look at me, I am your idea!!!"), but rather takes hard work and a sponge-like soaking up of ideas around you, both academic and popular'. Most important of all, though, for our own special brand of creativity is the pure flux at the core of the fieldwork experience. In it we dirty' ourselves, to borrow again from Francisco, in social interaction. But unlike most fiction writers, we do much more than simply dip our collective feet into the water. Our immersion in – or better, our exposure to – alien socioscapes is often so intense that it cannot help but inspire us. Like special versions of Victor Turner's edgemen', we find ourselves freed from the world of status incumbency and role-playing' in which we have previously lived our lives, and enter into vital relations with [a much wider range of] other men [and women] in fact ... [and] imagination' (Turner 1969: 128).º Like fish who have just come to suspect the substance of the water in which they swim, we are confronted with profound glimpses into the surprising contingency of existence. In fieldwork we quickly lose control of events. We are rendered, whether by choice or default, vulnerable to all manner of disorientating happenings: suspicion of our motives; simmering hostility, stigmatization and perhaps even overt physical violence; unwelcome interest from authorities and gossips; political and perhaps even sexual intrigue; illness and personal traumas there and back home; and unexpected displays of kindness from odd quarters. It can be a heady mix. Some of us take a long time to recover, or at least to gain any kind of useful purchase on the experience. Our time in the field is often one of near-continuous flux and engagement. Carolyn, in common with many of us, found that, with all the things [that] happen . .. in fieldwork', she hardly ever had time to withdraw and reflect – to disengage and focus on writing field notes. Like a fiction writer's journal, an anthropologist's field notes represent a sort of halfway house on the road to a publishable piece, and yet they are so much more. Within the relative safety and distance they provide, the many failures and triumphs of daily life in the field are brought into some semblance of temporary order, for ends not simply academic. The task of writing field notes is more than one of recording, and perhaps codifying, data on a piecemeal basis. It requires a sort of room of one's own' for many, although the walls' of that room' usually need not (and cannot) be as solid and impenetrable as those of our room back home'. Yet the field note space can also be a vital form of personal therapy – a way of communicating, even if only in fantasy, with those who share our own values and norms and who may sympathize with our plights in ways our subjects perhaps cannot. The writing stage' in anthropology is normally considered quite separate from the fieldwork stage'. Before writing of the ethnography proper can begin, however, the ethnographer must have some grounding idea to guide his or her efforts. For Trudy, as for most ethnographers, this idea begins life within her original proposal, and then develops and changes as ethnographic material is collected'. If a big, transformative eureka moment did not emerge in the flux of the field, then ideally it should come, unbidden yet desired, afterwards. Assuming that it has come, there remains the task of finding the right conditions in which to write. Andrew, an ethnographer/novelist, speaks of the need to strike a balance between ‘emotional proximity' (as a stimulus to writing) and critical distance' (as a stimulus to writing ethnography). The writing stage often takes place at great physical remove from the field. For some ethnographers this distance is essential for focus, and their flux periods occur while wading through field notes or simply going about their lives, as they do for advertising creatives and fiction writers. Their rooms’ resemble in most respects those of the fiction writers we have already met: some prefer the solitude of office or home, while others find comfort and focus in the white noise of public spaces. For Mark, it is a combined space of focus and flux – a quiet place that is also somewhere .. . you can just let your notebooks, binders, documents, records, what-have-you explode'. Some ethnographers, however, feel drawn to write some or all of their ethnographies in the field and find it possible to achieve a sense of distance by other means. While for Jeremy there is a certain clarity in thinking about something from afar.. ., there are benefits ... in being present [in the field] and ... detached [in some other way]'. Stack wrote his doctoral dissertation in the field, but enjoyed a good deal of privacy in that west Mexican town, full of large and often empty houses – many residents having left to work in California while other houses were owned by weekenders from the city. Callahan, by contrast, had much less privacy in his Yucatecan village, but still felt somewhat detached by the simple fact of writing in English. Again, there are many ways of building a room of one's own'. At the end of the day, every ethnographer, in common with every advertising creative and every fiction writer, has his or her own ways of creatively accomplishing the tasks before him or her. Some of these methods are uniquely personal and perhaps not even open to conscious reflection; others are more or less culturally established. All arise from and give new life to our abiding sense as moderns that newness is inherently valuable. ## Conclusion All cultures emphasize tradition and novelty to some degree. One cannot, in any meaningful sense, have one without the other. The innovation can only be recognized and acknowledged as such by contrast to the standard from which it deviates. However, some cultures are far more resistant to novelty, while others feel its seductive pull in nearly every domain of life. Sapir (1993: 28) notes that, among the Navajo, a chant perfectly rendered in line with traditional expectations may accord prestige to the performer. We know that among ourselves, a clever ad, a thought-provoking novel or a ground breaking ethnography may bring recognition and respect to its creator. Modern culture's ‘quest for newness' not only finds expression in the elite forms consumed by various specialist and non-specialist audiences; as we have seen, it also gives the creativities implicated in the production of those forms their peculiar characters. While we could have focused solely on the products of creative activity for evidence of this ubiquitous pattern, we have chosen to investigate the differences in the creative processes behind the products. Time and again we have seen the importance of mimesis, of the replication of tradition, of the mastery of generic forms, in the creation of novelty: advertising creatives draw on past ads, particularly those which have proved commercially successful, to give direction to their own works; fiction writers stress the importance of reading ‘good' books as a guide to producing good' fiction themselves; and ethnographers emphasize a familiarity with relevant academic works and evince a desire to situate their own efforts within the literature'. Yet caught as we are within warp and woof of modernity and its quest for newness, we are just as much impelled to reproduce novelty as the Navajo specialist, whose culture underscores the potency of tradition, is impelled to seek distinction through the careful replication of past forms. Reproducing novelty means embodying the practical steps, shared or otherwise, that liberate the individual to whatever degree from the burdens of tradition, and that leave him or her more open to unexpected turns of thought. It also means reflecting to some extent upon such steps, dispensing with some of them and modifying others in order to become better and more reliable creative producers. In each of the three domains explored in this chapter, we have witnessed what are clearly shared, properly cultural' techniques – tricks of the trade. Yet we have also witnessed at first hand the soft borders between shared culture and individual psychology. Across the domains of advertising, fiction and ethnography, we have encountered both similarities and differences in people's experiences of creativity. In all cases we have seen that the creative process entails movement between spaces, literal and figurative, which are broadly characterized either by flux and engagement (and, sometimes, eureka moments) or by focus and disengagement, along with occasional forays into the middle ground of focused flux. There are differences too. In advertising, for instance, we find a great deal of attention paid to creative techniques involving collaboration. (Advertising is also probably the most creative when it comes to creating new ways to be creative.) The solutions of fiction writers tend, like their writings, to be more private and idiosyncratic. Yet both advertising creatives and fiction writers share a high regard for creativity, and they view themselves and their best works as sometimes clever, sometimes profound and sometimes simply entertaining – but always innovative. Our own brief explorations have led us to suggest that we as ethnographers too often downplay the importance of creative processes that draw their special qualities from the unique intensity and flux of our dirtying' exposure in fields foreign to those of our ‘normal' lives. Although Jeremy, along with many of us, is ‘strongly motivated by a sense of scientific creativity', it seems that we are at the same time somewhat suspicious of thinking about our work as being fundamentally creative. Perhaps, though, we can serve ourselves, our discipline and our audiences better not only by acknowledging our creativity, but also by actively seeking to enhance it, both through paying greater attention to our own traditional creative spaces' and through opening ourselves up more to the tricks of other creative trades. We anthropologists are, after all, what Barth (1967) calls entrepreneurs’. We are unifiers of disparate domains of value, translators, linkers and innovators. In short, we create. ## Acknowledgements We are grateful to the participants in our study, some of whom kindly offered feedback on earlier drafts of this chapter. Callahan would like to thank, in addition to his co-author, Jim Gilbert (a good friend, excellent writer and unusually creative force) for his help. ## Notes 1. Useful collections and syntheses of literature on creativity include Vernon (1970), Glover, Ronning and Reynolds (1989), and Runco and Pritzker (1999). One of the few anthropological collections is Lavie, Narayan and Rosaldo (1993). 2. Csikszentmihalyi (1990) uses the term flow' for the state in which individuals – on their own or in groups – manage to remain focused on something and to pursue that thing in a particular direction. In other words, he uses flow' for what we call a state of focus'. He gives little importance to what we call flux', which is a very different kind of mental movement, not in one direction but in several shifting directions. 3. Our discussion of modes of being in the world has obvious resonance with the literature on phenomenology (e.g. Heidegger 1977), while the notion of the mind working below the level of consciousness is resonant with psychoanalysis (e.g. Brophy 1998). We intend to address these literatures in future publications, together with the political economy of creativity (e.g. Negus and Pickering 2004), the history of the concept of the creative imagination'(e.g. Engell 1981) and the critique of authorial intention in literary studies (e.g. Barthes 1977). 4. This information is derived from Callahan's observations from his time as a copywriter working in agencies in Edinburgh and London. The material on which our study is based is drawn from taped interviews with, and completed questionnaires from, more than two dozen respondents. 5. Some of these techniques are discussed in O'Looney et al. (1989: 314–17). 6. Verity's comments here are a beautiful rendition of the mathematician Poincaré's (1970 [1924]: 81–8) experience of his own creative processes, later developed by Wallas (1970 [1926]) into his theory of the stages' of creativity: preparation, incubation, illumination and verification. Particularly relevant is their concept of incubation': after an initial conscious attempt at creativity, usually fruitless, ideas continue to gestate unconsciously or semi-consciously (cf. O'Looney et al. 1989: 314). 7. Some writers, like Julio Cortázar, enter into extreme states of disengagement, separating themselves from others and the world for lengthy periods of time (Cortázar 1998 [1977]). This is less common, but not unknown, among academics, who are afforded such spaces in sabbaticals. 8. This, of course, raises the issue of creative peaks'. More specifically, the sorts of creativity valued in fiction, as indeed in ethnography, mean its practitioners tend to peak creatively rather later in life than those working in advertising. 9. Our use of Turner here is inspired, though to a somewhat different purpose, by Shostak (1992: 54), who provides one of the few anthropological accounts of creativity. ## References Amabile, T.M. (1996), Creativity in Context: Update to The Social Psychology of Creativity, Boulder, Colo. and Oxford: Westview Press. Barth, F. (1967), The Role of the Entrepreneur in Social Change in Northern Norway, Oslo: Universitetsforlaget. Barthes, R. (1977), Image, Music, Text (trans. S. Heath), New York: Hill and Wang. Brophy, K. (1998), Creativity: Psychoanalysis, Surrealism and Creative Writing, Melbourne: University of Melbourne Press. Cortázar, J. (1998 [1977]), Julio Cortázar (entrevista con Joaquín Soler Serrano), Madrid: Editrama. Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990), Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience, New York: Harper Perennial. D'Andrade, R.G. (1992), ‘Schemas and motivation', in R.G. D'Andrade and C. Strauss (eds), Human Motives and Cultural Models, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Engell, J. (1981), The Creative Imagination: Enlightenment to Romanticism, Cambridge, Mass. and London: Harvard University Press. Freud, S. (1970 [1908]), ‘Creative writers and day-dreaming', in P.E. Vernon (ed), Creativity: Selected Readings, London: Penguin Books Gardner, H. (1982), Art, Mind, and Brain, New York: Basic Books. Glover, J.A., Ronning, R.R. and Reynolds, C.R. (eds) (1989), Handbook of Creativity, New York and London: Plenum Press. Heidegger, M. (1977), Basic Writings: From Being and Time (1927) to The Task of Thinking (1964) (trans. D.F. Krell), New York: Harper & Row. Lavie, S., Narayan, K. and Rosaldo, R. (eds) (1993), Creativity/Anthropology, Ithaca, NY and London: Cornell University Press. Negus, K. and Pickering, M. (2004), Creativity, Communication and Cultural Value, London: Sage. O'Looney, J.A., Glynn, S.M., Britton, B.K. and Mattocks, L.F. (1989), Cognition and writing: the idea generation process', in J.A. Glover, R.R. Ronning and C.R. Reynolds (eds), Handbook of Creativity, New York and London: Plenum Press. Poincaré, H. (1970 [1924]), 'Mathematical creation', in P.E. Vernon (ed), Creativity: Selected Readings, London: Penguin Books. Pritzker, S.R. (1999), 'Writing and creativity', in M.A. Runco and S.R. Pritzker (eds), Encyclopedia of Creativity, San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press. Rulfo, J. (1992), Toda la obra, (comp. C. Fell), Mexico City: Archivos. Runco, M.A. and Pritzker, S.R. (eds) (1999), Encyclopedia of Creativity, San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press. Sapir, E. (1993), The Psychology of Culture: A Course of Lectures, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Shostak, M. (1992), ‘The creative individual in the world of !Kung San', in S. Lavie, K. Narayan and R. Rosaldo (eds), Creativity/Anthropology, Ithaca, NY and London: Cornell University Press. Strauss, C. (1992), 'What makes Tony run? Schemas as motives reconsidered', in R.G. D'Andrade and C. Strauss (eds), Human Motives and Cultural Models, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Turner, V. (1969), The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure, New York: Aldine Publishing Company. Urban, G. (2001), Metaculture: How Culture Moves Through the World, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Vernon, P.E. (ed) (1970), Creativity: Selected Readings, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. Wallas, G. (1970 [1926]), ‘The art of thought', in P.E. Vernon (ed), Creativity: Selected Readings, London: Penguin Books.