# (Re)constructing the Field through Sound: Actor-networks, Ethnographic Representation andRadio Elicitation'in South-western Uganda Richard Vokes Anthropology and Science Studies' Over the last decade or so, a number of anthropologists have begun to engage critically with the ‘science studies' of Bruno Latour. Particularly for those anthropologists working in the field of science and technology studies, and especially in the sub-field of medical anthropology, Latour (and Callon's) concept of the actor-network' has proved particularly useful for analysis, and has opened up new ways of thinking about interconnections between people and the material objects of science (not only DNA, viruses, plants, animals and the like, but also the apparatus, machines and other objects which furnish the scientific laboratory'). At the heart of the actor-network model lies an attempt to dissolve any categorical distinction between people and non-human social actors, both of which are included within a single category of actants'. As Latour argues at length in We Have Never Been Modern (1993), such a distinction is little more than artifice, one that has been particularly influential in Western scientific thought from the Enlightenment onwards, but which is nevertheless problematic. Instead, he draws attention to the complex ways in which people and other orders of actants continually constitute and reconstitute each other, in an endless production of different sorts of hybridities'. The argument is that while human action endlessly shapes and reshapes the material world, so too the objects of that world impact upon both the individual human body and the social domain. So fundamental are these interactions, Latour argues, that it makes little sense to privilege either people or non-human actors' over the other. Instead, the two must be conceptualized as equally important elements within identifiable assemblages – or actor-networks – of relations. These ubiquitous assemblages, and not people or non-human actors alone, produce social effects (see also Latour 1996). Science studies emerged as a distinct area of anthropological concern in the mid-1990s. Following the various critiques of the politics and poetics of ethnography that had occurred in the preceding two decades, many anthropologists were at that time attempting to redefine their objects of analysis, away from studies of (apparently) politically powerless, territorially and temporally bounded, non-Western others', towards a focus on ‘multiperspectival points of view, local and transnational sites ... the changing velocities of space and time, the historical conditions in which capitalism [has been] reshaping global power on an unprecedented scale, and the historical conditions of Western theory and practice' (Weiner 1993). It was in pursuit of the latter part of this agenda, in particular, that a number of anthropologists began to study the sites of scientific production themselves, and this led them to engage with actornetwork theory. For one thing, Latour himself had first developed several of his key ideas through an ethnographic study of a neuroendocrinology research laboratory at the Salk Institute in California. His seminal work (with Steven Woolgar) Laboratory Life (1979) was one of the first detailed ethnographic accounts of scientific practice to appear in print. But more importantly from the anthropological point of view, the concept of the actor-network provided a model for theorists to think about scientific innovation not only as an outcome of technical processes, but also as a combination of the technical and the social. It drew attention to the fact that the instruments used in any given experiment are not neutral windows on the world', but are instead – as are all objects of material culture – socially located. Furthermore, they are used in clearly demarcated and socially meaningful spaces: laboratories' (including not just designated rooms and buildings, but any space in which deliberate experimentation takes place). In addition, within the experimental context they are used – through the execution of certain well-defined practices – to produce yet more types of objects known as data. Thus the experiment itself is an assemblage that yields additional hybrids as its outputs. A wide range of social constructs, from the scientist's own academic training to departmental funding agendas, subsequently combine with these new outputs to produce yet more effects: research outputs, patents and the like. The argument can be extended here to ever widening scales or ‘levels' of complexity. Thus, depending on the length to which one wants to take the analysis, one could widen the scope to include such additional factors as state research strategies, disciplinary objectives, and so on. Indeed, so extensive can these networks become that the challenge for analysts is to decide at what point they should be cut' (Strathern 1996), while still doing justice to the object of study. From the mid-1990s onwards, anthropologists working in the field of medical anthropology, in particular, found this way of thinking particularly useful for unpacking a specifically social dimension of scientific practice. The present chapter, however, is not a contribution to the anthropology of science. Instead, it is an attempt to explore some of the broader implications of actor-network theory for the discipline of anthropology as a whole. I show that the types of practices identified by earlier theorists as central to the scientific method can also be seen as fundamental to anthropological work. Specifically, I will demonstrate that all ethnographic fieldwork involves the mobilization of both people and things into networks of relations that actor-network theorists would term hybrids. In effect, all anthropological representations emerge out of precisely these sorts of assemblage. I will explore this argument through a detailed discussion of the history of elicitation'research techniques in ethnographic fieldwork: those interviewing methods in which objects are used as a means of focusing responses around a given topic or issue. In particular, I will discuss the new technique of radio elicitation', a method of interviewing I developed during twenty-seven months of fieldwork in rural south-western Uganda between 2000 and 2005.¹ However, I will go on to argue that these insights concerning elicitation have further implications for all types of anthropological fieldwork. ## Representations, People and Things In the two decades or so since the emergence of the textual critique’ in anthropology, issues of representation have become key epistemological concerns for all anthropological fieldworkers. Once the preserve of specialist sub-disciplines such as visual anthropology and museum ethnography, debates surrounding the politics and poetics of portraying cultural others' – in textual, visual or other forms – have preoccupied ethnographers from across the anthropological spectrum and beyond (Clifford 1988; Clifford and Marcus 1986; Marcus 1998; Marcus and Cushman 1982). Nevertheless, over the last twenty years, the locus of these debates has shifted significantly. Responding to the critique of naive realism', which was one of the early strands in the crisis of representation', many ethnographers initially explored various concepts of reflexivity as possible means of forging more representative accounts of the field (cf. Austrin and Farnsworth 2005: 149). In an effort to disrupt both the conventional objectivism and the political naivety of previous styles, this new generation of ethnographers frequently included elements of multi-vocalism or dialogism in their written accounts (for critical discussions of these attempts, see Crapanzano 1990; Tedlock 1987). In most instances this dialogism took the form of local voices' appearing alongside that of the anthropologist (for an overview of this literature, see Clifford 1988: 41–54). In others it involved the anthropologist developing multiple authorial positions of her own (Wolf 1992). Such approaches, however, soon came under attack for being themselves politically naive, guilty of overestimating the ability of any local voice to compete with that of the anthropologist (see, for example, Fabian 1990: 763–7; Marcus 1998: 112–14). After all, practically all ethnographies continued to be edited only by anthropologists themselves, and all continued to be subject to the textual and stylistic constraints of Western publishing conventions. Such dialogical approaches therefore proved to be somewhat short-lived. They were soon replaced by alternative experimental styles, each of which tried to further the twofold agenda of producing both more critical and more politically engaged ethnographies. One key development here involved a problematization of the entire genre of ethnography, a move which led to a number of anthropologists experimenting with alternative generic styles, including poetry and fiction (Fabian 1990; Geertz 1988; Taussig 1997, 2004). Another took the form of a general reassessment of the political position of ethnographic readers, with a view to engaging them in different sorts of ways. Thus, rather than simply imparting knowledge' about other cultural groups – a knowledge now known to have been implicated in the processes of colonial domination – ethnographers tried to elicit other sorts of responses from their readers: sympathy, empathy, and so on (Jackson 2004; Prattis 1985). These various experimental approaches have made important contributions to the overall anthropological project. Nevertheless, all have also made one key omission. Specifically, by only emphasizing the social and political dimensions of ethnographic representation, the new' ethnography has failed to attend to the role of material objects in shaping the construction of those representations. Yet if the new ‘science studies'have taught us one thing, it is that the agency of objects is crucial to the production of all empirically based academic knowledge. This much is demonstrated by Latour, in one of his key explorations of the processes through which scientific knowledge is constructed, an essay that describes a fieldwork trip in which he participated to the Boa Vista forest, on the edge of Brazilian Amazonia, in 1991 (originally published in 1995, the essay is reproduced in Latour 1999: 24–79). The purpose of the expedition – which included a pedologist, a botanist, a geomorphologist and Latour himself (as observer) – was to determine whether the Boa Vista forest was advancing into, or retreating from, adjacent savannah regions. At the outset, the presence of isolated trees, located several metres beyond the treeline of the forest proper into the savannah zone, appeared to pose an intractable problem. From the pedologist's point of view – and following a general theory of soil fertility according to which earth necessarily degrades from rich to poor, from clay to sand – the presence of such outliers surely indicated a retreating forest. For the botanist, on the other hand, the fact that some of the outlying trees were savannah species, and that examples of these species could also be found several metres into the forest proper (within which, by rights, they should not have been able to survive for long), suggested that the forest might instead be advancing. Latour's purpose in his essay on the expedition is to examine the ways in which each of the three scientists – with his or her own theoretical frameworks and methodological procedures – goes about collecting the evidence deemed necessary for answering this particular research question, of whether the forest is retreating or advancing. The resulting account is a fascinating description of the variety of ways in which different disciplinary practitioners approach a single problem. Yet it also highlights how these approaches nevertheless share certain key features. Specifically, each involves the scientist literally placing – or inscribing – some preformed symbolic template onto the physical world of the forest/savannah. Thus the pedologist places a series of strings and posts across the forest floor in order to recreate a grid of transects he has already drawn on a piece of graph paper. The botanist pins numbers on trees to map out samples that correspond to her predefined classifications of species, and so on. The purpose of these various techniques of inscription is for the scientists to fix, and to give meaning to, various physical objects that are then removed from the forest/savannah by the researchers. Thus the inscription of transects recasts the individual lumps of soil that the pedologist goes on to remove as ‘samples' (of given locations). Similarly, the tagging of trees recasts the individual leaves that the botanist collects as examples of species distribution. All this is significant, as these same objects subsequently go on to form the very basis of the scientists’ research accounts, providing the necessary evidential foundation for the various tables, graphs and conclusions they construct. (The forest, it turns out, is probably advancing after all. The scientists conclude that this is possibly the result of the activity of earthworms, although further research would be required to confirm this.) For Latour, this example of a small research trip to the Boa Vista forest demonstrates, contrary to common sense Western understandings of cognition, language, and so on, that symbolic representations are not necessarily ontologically distinct from the physical world to which they refer. Rather – within the limited domain of academic scientific knowledge, at least – the two exist in a necessary state of complex and dynamic interaction. Just as symbolic constructs are invariably inscribed within the physical world, so too the incorporation of specific objects of that world is central to the construction of further symbolic schemata. In this sense, all scientific representations (at least) are necessarily hybrid; all require some process of incorporation of material objects in order to be convincing. To put it another way, all accounts are translations of the networks of relations – of both human and non-human actants – that have brought them into existence. Hence they are all actor-networks'. This conclusion has important implications for theorizing the process of anthropological fieldwork as well, whether or not one thinks of anthropology as a science. Certainly most anthropologists would not, as the pedologist and the botanist in the above example, inscribe preformed symbolic schemata onto their objects of study. Although more or less all ethnographers, especially those newly arrived in the field, do create maps, genealogies and the like, often according to preconceived categorical criteria, rarely do they attempt, as the botanist with her markers, literally to inscribe these on the reality to which they refer (you can peg labels to trees, but not, under normal circumstances, to people).² Nevertheless, many anthropologists frequently mobilize material objects as part of the normal process of ethnographic fieldwork. Furthermore, the presence of these same objects is also key to the later construction and stabilization of ethnographic representations. Thus, ethnographies are no less hybrid than the accounts produced by pedologists and botanists. Ethnographies, too, are actornetworks. ## Fieldwork, Elicitation and Objects All ethnographic fieldwork – all, at least, that is practised within a Malinowskian or Boasian tradition – involves a necessary mobilization of material objects. To begin, I want to draw attention to those interviewing strategies commonly bracketed under the term ‘elicitation'. Interviewing techniques that involve some element of elicitation – that do not ask questions directly of the respondent, but instead seek his or her thoughts on a given practice, event or issue through the use of an object connected with it – have a long history in anthropological field research. As early as 1915, Malinowski remarked: my experience is that direct questioning of the native [sic] about a custom or belief never discloses their attitude of mind as thoroughly as the discussion of facts connected with the direct observation of a custom or with a concrete occurrence' (1915: 652). This effect was most easily achieved, Malinowski argued, through the use of some object associated with that custom or occurrence. A quarter of a century later, Siegfried Nadel's guide to fieldwork interviewing made a similar point. Basing his discussion on the Royal Anthropological Institute's Notes and Queries of 1929, Nadel argued that asking abstract questions of a respondent did have some utility, in that answers often revealed normative principles. However, if one wanted to understand how respondents actually thought and behaved in practice, then it was necessary to have them talk about real-life events. This reflected the fact that ‘the trend of native [sic] languages, and indeed of the native mind in general, is towards the concrete, and consequently . . . a discussion centring on concrete instances and events is usually more likely to yield reliable information' (Nadel 1961 [1939]: 320). Again, such instances and events were best approached, Nadel thought, through the various objects and paraphernalia associated with them. These acted, in the interview context, as essential aidesmemoire. It was not until the early 1950s, however, that elicitation interviewing techniques began to gain widespread appeal. At that time a number of more psychologically minded – especially American – anthropologists became interested in various techniques of projective' interviewing, which were at that time in vogue in clinical psychology. Projective interviewing was, in essence, a form of elicitation (cf. Whyte et al. 1982: 118). In clinical psychology interviewing, the types of objects used tended to be of the researcher's own making, designed to offer some insight or other into the inner personalities’ of individual respondents (the most famous of these was the Rorschach ink-blot test). However, among anthropologists, given their more empirical predilections, it was held much more useful to use artefacts derived from the social environment under investigation. They were also much less concerned with their respondents’ inner selves' than with group sentiments and socially constructed world views. Thus they were more likely to turn to artefacts such as productive tools, ritual implements and the like (Kemp, in Ellen 1984: 234). However, the key development in the history of anthropological elicitation occurred from the mid-1950s onwards, as a growing number of anthropologists began to advocate the use of photographs as an especially good artefact around which to structure sociological interviews. Of particular importance here is the work of John Collier (especially 1967; see also Ravetz, this volume, Chapter 12). Notwithstanding their Eurocentric and at times overtly racist language, Malinowski and Nadel were right, as others since have been also, to draw attention to the advantages of elicitation techniques for the anthropological researcher. On the one hand, getting a respondent to discuss a specific practice, event or issue through a physical object invites a degree of self-expression over and above that which could normally be achieved in an interview context. In other words, this technique certainly does help the anthropologist to elicit' fuller and more detailed responses than might otherwise be possible. This is especially true if the respondent has particularly strong views about the practice, event or issue in question. But it is also a function of the fact that people simply feel more relaxed if they do not perceive themselves to be the object of the interview. After all, with the introduction of an extraneous object, one is questioning the respondent about something, rather than questioning him or her directly. And this also makes note-taking easier, because the anthropologist is ostensibly taking notes about the object, rather than about the respondent him- or herself. Also from the interviewer's point of view, the use of an object helps to structure the interview, by providing a concrete and explicit point of reference to which one can constantly return, should the interview drift too far from the main topic of interest. In addition, the introduction of the artefact tends to heighten the respondent's self-expression (hence the term elicitation'). This is because the object tends to dominate the interview space, and thereby invites the respondent to take the lead in interview discussions. It is also important that the object can be looked at, touched, smelled, tasted, or – as in the case of radio, described below – listened to. In his seminal work on photo elicitation' John Collier argued that the use of photographs as objects for elicitation confers further advantages still (over the use of other types of artefacts for the same purpose). Collier talks of the hypnotic pull' of the photograph, as something that triggers particularly heightened selfexpression, to the point where a respondent might betray very great confidences’ (Collier 1986: 107). For example, he talks poetically of the photograph's ability to momentarily place the informant back on his [sic] fishing boat, working out in the woods, or carrying out a skilled craft' (ibid.: 106), such that he momentarily forgets himself. Further, he argues that the peculiar qualities of photographs mean that this heightened self-expression can be maintained over a number of interviews (whereas other artefacts tend to provide diminishing returns in this regard). However, the key difference between photographs and other types of artefacts stems from the particular social effects they create. According to Collier, photographs create a peculiarly intense interaction among informants as they are passed round, and as discussions take place over their content and meaning (ibid.: 105–7). This inherent contestability of the photographic image is of more than just observational interest for the anthropologist. It also creates a possibility for more dialogical approaches to interviewing, in which the anthropologist's own interpretations may be explored in relation to those of his or her respondents. Thus from the time of Malinowski onwards, anthropologists have made regular use of interviewing techniques in which questions focus on the discussion of material objects. In other words, ethnographers have often found it useful to approach other social and cultural worlds indirectly, through various kinds of objects produced by the people being studied. In this, the objects in question are cast as key mediators, a crucial bridge between the anthropologist's own perspective and that of the people among whom he or she works. They are, as an actor-network theorist would put it, agents of translation between the two perspectival domains. Yet as such, they also exert an influence on the descriptions that result, shaping representations in important ways. In the remainder of this chapter I wish to explore this notion further, through a discussion of the use, in my own work, of the method of radio elicitation'. ## Radio Research in South-western Uganda Over the course of twenty-seven months of fieldwork in the village of Bugamba, south-western Uganda, I conducted a wide-ranging project of radio and media research. Reviewing the data from this project some months later, I realized that it was possible to identify three distinct methods that I had used, throughout the project, to examine local uses of radio. The first involved what might be termed radio walks'. As the phrase suggests, these walks involved me moving around the village along a predetermined route about three miles long. The route was designed to take me past a range of households of different socio-economic status, as well as through various public spaces, through the swamp and hilltop rangelands (this part of Central Africa being characterized by steep hills and valleys), across the road (at various points), past the church, past the school, and around several bars and shops. Walking with a notebook and pen, the idea was to build up a record of the village soundscape', by noting down all the sounds that could be heard along the way. Particular attention was paid to radio noise, and whenever I came across a radio playing, I did my best to ascertain from where it was coming, what station was playing and – where possible – what programme was being listened to. I also tried to ascertain who was in control’ of the set, how many people were listening to it and what other things they might have been doing at the same time (i.e. whether or not they were listening exclusively, or were doing so while cooking, digging, etc.). I repeated these walks along more or less the same route – although at different times of day and night, and (eventually) at different times of year – on dozens of occasions. I should note here that I did not begin these walks' until some months into my fieldwork, when people were already used to my presence, and when the sight of me moving around no longer caused people to break their usual routine. In this way, I was able to build up a detailed, and objective, picture of the village soundscape, how this changed over time, and how radio noise was located' within this. The second method I used involved what might be termed unstructured radio elicitation'. To begin with, this involved little more than sitting with people as they listened to the radio as part of their normal daily routines. On these occasions I would try to keep very quiet and still, often sitting in a corner – even in the shadows – so as not to break the flow of people's interactions with the radio, or with each other in the listening group. At this stage my actions were effectively the same as those of any researcher trying to do a typical reception' study. As time went on, however, I began to pose one or two questions to the listeners, related either to the physical radio set or to the content of the programme then playing. Gradually, over very many of these sessions, I began to take control' of the listening situation, by asking more and more questions of the other listeners. Although I never had control over the radio set, or the content of the radio broadcasts, I could use certain types of shows – health programmes, political broadcasts, for example – as anchors for questioning on those same topics. Little by little, I began to introduce a notebook to the sessions as well. Of course, the whole interviewing effect was easier to achieve in certain listening environments than in others. In this regard, it was especially important how other listeners placed me. For example, the process worked more naturally when I was in a listening group in which I seemed to belong' (for example, in a group of young Catholic men) than when I was in a group to which I clearly did not (such as a group of elderly Protestant women). The intended effect was also achieved more easily with certain types of programmes than with others. For example, phone-in shows proved much better than music programmes. The time of day also made a difference. The third of my methods involved a more formal mode of radio elicitation' based on the classic focus-group model. To begin, I would invite to my house a number of people whom I had pre-selected to comprise a representative sample based on age, gender, religion, or whatever. Gathering them in my living room, I would place a radio on a central table and play them a series of clips from various radio shows, which I had edited down in advance. At the end of each clip I would ask the group a series of prepared questions on the material they had just heard. In this way, I was able to generate discussion on often quite focused subjects, with my role being recast as that of facilitator. Most of these sessions involved selections from various sorts of cultural-historical' shows.3 However, I would also use other clips, which were often selected to be as provocative as possible (for purposes of generating debate). For example, for one session I did on local politics, I selected part of an interview which had just been recorded for Monitor FM in Kampala with Milton Obote. This was purposely designed to cause as much debate as possible.4 Obviously, a high degree of judgement is required in these matters, and for this reason I conducted most of these sessions towards the end of my fieldwork, when I knew all my respondents very well. This was also important given my desire to tape the discussions in all these sessions, rather than to use a notebook and pen. Judging from my experience of using these methods, I would conclude that the claims Collier makes for photo elicitation are equally applicable to radio elicitation'. Like photographs, radios certainly do have something of a hypnotic pull'. Indeed this may be even more pronounced with radio, given the content of much radio programming (and especially that of international broadcasters). Even the simplest radio set has the ability to bring in exotic stories from imagined, faraway places. I am reminded of Graham Furniss's anecdote at the beginning of African Broadcast Cultures, in which he recalls once meeting an old Hausa man, in the remote mountainous part of the Nigeria-Cameroon border, who, as a result of having listened to the BBC World Service, had developed a particular fascination with the politics of Pakistan (in Fardon and Furniss 2000: 2). Like Collier's photographs, radio sets also generate an intense sociality, in that they too are handled and passed around, and broadcasts also generate keen discussion and debate among groups of listeners. Furthermore, unlike photographs, which are usually seen in very specific, often quite formalized contexts, radios are everywhere in Africa, a common part of the normal, everyday flow of social relations. Thus an anthropologist trying to construct dialogue around a radio programme is employing a medium of sociality with which people are already familiar and comfortable. From the anthropologist's point of view, the nature of radio programming means that radio is often the primary medium through which people gain knowledge of, and in a sense interact with, the outside' world (and by extension with outsiders'). In addition it is noteworthy – and of greatest relevance to an anthropologist in the early stages of his or her fieldwork – that radio programmes are the medium through which most people have their most regular exposure to multilingual environments (ibid.: 3–7). More importantly for my discussion here, the three methods outlined above demonstrate different ways in which the radio, as both material object and broadcast signal, might be mobilized in the course of ethnographic fieldwork. In the first instance, that of the radio walks', no direct contact was made with any radio set or with any listening group. Instead, the sound from the sets was used indirectly to map out such things as villagers' uses of space (in particular their public and private domains), as well as the types of interactions and activities associated with those spaces. In the case of unstructured elicitation', again no contact was made with the radio itself. This time, however, the radio sounds were used more actively to manipulate relations within the listening environment. This was done somewhat speculatively at first, but more and more boldly as I began slowly to take control of the various listening groups (in the sense of my controlling' the flow of conversation). Finally, with the third method, that of radio elicitation' proper, I made direct contact with the radio set, as I actively manipulated – or re-versioned’ – its signal, with a view to steering the focus group conversation in a particular direction of my own choosing. Each of these shifts was facilitated by a conscious reflexive shift in the positioning of myself as ethnographer, by a change in the constitution of the ethnographic I'. In the case of the radio walk, the I' was that of the (metaphorical) spy, one who seeks to gather information primarily through overhearing rather than intervention. In the method of unstructured elicitation, I became instead the professional stranger, one who intervenes – from a position of ignorance – in pursuit of elucidation. Finally, with the method of structured radio elicitation, the I’ had become that of the scientist, one who is able to recreate reality – under controlled conditions – in order to isolate specific and predefined objects of research. (In this sense, the setting of the structured elicitation sessions had indeed become my own laboratory'.)⁵ Over the course of these researches, there were also key shifts in my interaction with the radio set itself. I had ever greater contact with it, and made increasing interventions in the flow of radio – and radio-related – sounds. Or to put it another way, I mobilized the radio to assemble different sorts of hybridities in each of the different methods. The prediction here, from the point of view of the actornetwork theorist unwilling to cast the social world as an outcome solely of human agency, would be that over the course of these shifts the radio would gain more and more social agency in its own right. In other words, it would become an increasingly important agent of translation between the social world and my descriptions/representations of it. As a result, these descriptions/representations would become, to an ever greater degree, accounts of hybrids. And this was indeed what transpired. Looking back over my notes from the radio project with the benefit of hindsight, I realize that the radio did indeed become more and more important over time. Thus in my notes from the radio walks, the radio – and its signal – is scarcely mentioned. Apart from a few words of general description, on issues such as where the set was physically located, who owned it and what station was playing, these notes are taken up with descriptions of social activities and social relations. Consider, for example, the following excerpt from Radio Walk' (17 September 2000, 5.50 p.m.): Crossed the swamp by the bridge behind Bwente's house, [took the] path through [the] orutookye [plantation] behind her compound. Radio playing – I think it's Bwente's own – very loud, tuned to Radio West, ebirango [announcements].6 All present listening, in between discussions. As I come into view, I'm greeted by Bwente, sweeping the compound. Tells me that Bakyenga is not around [Bakyenga is Bwente's son, and my current research assistant]. Also present = Florence [Bwente's daughter], six small kids, Modesta [a neighbour], Tweheyo [a friend], several other old men I don't know. Modesta and men sitting in a line along the small wall. Stop to say hello, Florence translates [this being just a few months into my fieldwork, my own Runyankore was not very good]. She tells me that Modesta and the other men are here to talk about a cousin who has just died (not Tweheyo, he was just passing). Seems to be some dispute about land; part of it is adjacent to Bwente's plot, and they are thinking of putting in a new boundary marker, but there have been some problems ... [and so it continues]. As I move into the unstructured elicitation, however, these general descriptions are replaced with more and more detailed accounts of both the movements of the radio set and the content of its broadcasts. Furthermore, throughout the notes from these sessions, descriptions of the radio are more or less interspersed with descriptions of discourse and social activity: Returned home from interview with Busenene, wrote up notes etc. Grace [the head of our household] out, probably drinking up in the trading centre. Not much going on, so decided to have another go at radio interviewing. Kekyerunga [our house girl'] is cooking with my radio on, listening to a health phone in show for young people on Capital Radio (talk interspersed with songs – Britney Spears again!!).7 Also Bob and Aruwo [Grace's sons], Rukanga [a young man who lives at our house], Ziwade [a young man who lives nearby]. As I’m sitting, a couple of others drift in (attracted by the radio?) – Sebugirigiri's new herd boy (name?) and Tweheyo's eldest son (name?). They're all sitting around the hill bit at the back of our house, a couple of them on the veranda. Kekyerunga is preparing the food, others just talking etc. Ziwede holds the radio. Aruwo etc. dancing. I sit on a stool on the edge of the group, don't really say anything. A caller to the health show asks a question about condoms is it true that you can still get HIV while using one'? Rukanga says that he's heard that as well. Ziwede says that Kihura Nkuba says that as well [Kihura Nkuba is a prominent commentator on another local radio station]. He thinks that condoms are useless. I come in and ask if they're told anything about condoms at school? Rukanga says that they talk about it all the time. There is a teacher there who gives classes in health issues. Rukanga goes over and takes the radio off Ziwede and continues, saying that there is also a government health advisor who visits the school from time to time. And since the current chairman has taken over, there is also talk about HIV/AIDS at some public meetings etc. (some connection here between holding the radio and speaking? I notice throughout the session that the person currently holding the radio seems to talk the most about the issue at hand?) The next caller to the phone-in asks if someone suffering from malaria is more likely to contract HIV/AIDS? ... [and so it goes on]. (Excerpt from field notes, 1 May 2001) Finally, by the time I get to the structured elicitation, the transcripts refer primarily to the radio output.8 Furthermore, where other people ‘speak' in the transcripts, their words are completely dependent on the radio content, in that what they say simply cannot be understood independently of it. The following excerpt (from transcript of ‘structured radio elicitation' session, 31 January 2001) is taken from a session which aimed to open up discussion of the Virgin Mary, and local practices of Marian devotion. The group – all older women – are being played, and are responding to, a section from a lecture broadcast some months earlier by Kihura Nkuba.º Presenter: To repaint the Sistene Chapel in Vatican, in St. Peter [sic] Square. St Peter's Basilica – there is a special chapel that had ancient images of a black Jesus and a black Mary and Pope Julius II... Participant 1: Black! Huh! Participant 2: No! Huh! This guy [Kihura Nkuba] tells lies! [Group laughter] Presenter: ... commissioned Michelangelo to repaint the Sistene Chapel and change the images from black to white. Michelangelo uses the image [sic] of his auntie as Mary, his uncle as Jes .. ., as Joseph, and an anon child as Jesus. That is why some pictures of Jesus show him with blue eyes, others show him with brown eyes, others show him with black hair, others show him with brown hair, others show him short ... And Jesus was not white. Participant 3: Eee! Is it so? Participant 1: No! Presenter: So in that year, up to today [sic], if you go in that museum in Berne in Switzerland, there is an image of a black Madonna and child, a black Mary and a black Jesus. If you go in Nuestra, in Spain [sic], Our Lady ... or in the Pyrenees, a black Madonna and a black child. If you go in Kazan, in Russia [sic], Our Lady of Kazan, a black Madonna, a black Mary and a black Jesus, and in fact in Poland, they have what they call [sic], Our Lady of Shostakova. Participant 2: Also here, also here. Up there, there in the hills. There, there, up in Ntungamo [District]. It's the truth. That one [indicating informant 1], she'll tell you ... Presenter: Every year the Pope celebrates mass in Poland, before the feet of Our Lady of Shostakova ... [and so it continues]. Comparing the three examples presented above, it can be seen that the radio – as both physical object and broadcast signal – has indeed become more and more active, playing an ever greater role as an agent of translation. Further, the notes themselves – as descriptions, representations of fieldwork – have also changed. Whereas in the first example they refer primarily to a social world, by the third example they reference a hybrid network of people and machine. In other words, they have become an account of hybridities. ## Conclusion Of course it does not end there. In the above example radio acts as an agent of translation between the world of the village and my representations of it by inscribing other sorts of objects, initially a notebook, but later an audio cassette tape as well. And these objects will in due course go on to be agents of translation themselves, in the subsequent construction of further sorts of representations, namely academic ethnographic accounts. After all, only with reference to the inscriptions in these notebooks, audio recordings, and so on, can such accounts be drawn up. More radically, one might note that when ethnographers refer to the field', they are referring not so much to some specific place and time (the location of their fieldwork during the time they were there) as to a series of objects – notebooks, cassette tapes, and so on – which, although inscribed in that place and time, are now most likely locked away somewhere in their university office. This is not to say that their accounts convey nothing of the empirical reality of the field site during the time of their visit. Rather, it is to suggest that how much they convey, and how convincingly, depends on the qualities of those objects, not least on how well and in what ways they had been inscribed – possibly by other sorts of objects – in the first place. Yet neither, of course, does it begin there. After all, these chains of translations between the material world and representations of it do not begin with the anthropologist. On the contrary, they are the very stuff of all human social life. I am here reminded of my radio walks, and the people I observed on them, often gathered in groups around some radio noise. Such groups tend to form around radio signals wherever they are playing, given the association between broadcasting noise and public space. In this sense radio noise is used to mark out – physically to inscribe' – domains of public and (by association) private space in the village if Bugamba, which then become meaningful for social praxis. In other words, even before the radio was mediating the relationship between the world and my descriptions of it, it was already doing exactly that for local people. To go still further, the radio's capacity to mark out domains in this way is itself the outcome of an earlier set of translations, in which broadcasting posts' had been used, by the British authorities from the early 1940s onwards, as a tool of education' for rural Ugandans.1º Located outside administration buildings, these posts established an initial connection between public space and broadcasting noise. And no doubt earlier sorts of translations had had similar effects beforehand. Indeed it might even be argued, as some actor-network theorists have done, that such chains of translations continue in all directions, possibly ad infinitum. The assumption is that these chains are always present, even though the terms of each individual translation might themselves become erased. A key problem for the analyst is then to decide at what point to stop. Where can we cut the chain'without doing violence to the object of study? This broader question is beyond the scope of the present chapter. Instead, my intention has been to highlight a few of the ways in which physical objects have exerted – and continue to exert – an influence on anthropological representations of the world, by acting as key agents of mediation between the two. Over the last couple of decades, many anthropologists have posed the question of whether or not, or in what ways, anthropological methods resemble those of the hard sciences'. I have shown that in one key way, at least, anthropological representations do resemble those of the pedologist or the botanist, in that they too involve a mobilization of both symbolic schemata – our own, and those of our informants – and various sorts of physical objects as well. Whether or not we always acknowledge the fact, anthropological accounts are just as entangled in the material world. ## Acknowledgements The research on which this chapter is based was funded substantially by the Economic and Social Research Council, UK (grant nos: R00429934453 and PTA-026–27–0254). Specific elements of the project were additionally funded by the Tropical Agriculture Association, the Godfrey Lienhardt Fund (Wolfson College, Oxford), the Radcliffe-Brown Fund (of the Royal Anthropological Institute), the Vice-Chancellors'Fund (University of Oxford) and the Ioma Evans-Pritchard Junior Research Fellowship (St Anne's College, Oxford). I would like to thank all these funders for their generous support. An earlier version of the chapter was presented to the North-East Africa Seminar at the Institute of Social and Cultural Anthropology, University of Oxford, in March 2004. I would like to thank Professor Wendy James for the invitation to speak at the seminar, and all those who took part for their useful questions and comments. ## Notes 1. The fieldwork for this project was conducted in Bugamba Village, Rwampara County, Mbarara District, in five separate periods between March 2000 and May 2005. 2. One exception might be ethnographers'field photos. Much contemporary photographic theory has argued that all photographic practices can be understood as acts of inscription (see, for example, Bean 2006; Ravetz, this volume, Chapter 12). 3. The cultural-historical' format has become particularly popular in southwestern Uganda following the establishment of the Greater Africa Radio (GAR) station in Mbarara Town in March 1999. The highlight of GAR's programming was a nightly show, hosted by the station's charismatic owner, Kihura Nkuba (lit. the unveiler of thunder'), which took the form of a lecture on some point of local historical or cultural interest. 4. The interview was very controversial in Uganda at the time because it was the first time that the former President's voice had officially been allowed to be broadcast in the country since his deposition in the mid-1980s (although there is some evidence that his supporters had broadcast speeches before that, using a range of illegal shortwave frequencies). 5. I thank Terry Austrin for clarification of these points. 6. Ebirango are broadcast several times a day on all Ugandan radio stations, to announce births, deaths and marriages. Throughout all parts of the country, they are an essential means of information and communication, especially among dispersed families. 7. A note here on languages: Capital Radio broadcasts throughout Uganda, mostly in English. For example, the health phone-in show being discussed here is in English. The group I am with includes a number of senior school students who speak English, and they translate the show's content for the others present. Discussion between the group then proceeds mostly in the local language, Runyankore. My own interventions involve a combination of both English and Runyankore. 8. As noted above, I did not write notes during these sessions, but instead recorded them on a digital sound recorder. 9. Another note on languages: for various reasons the lecture itself was given in English but simultaneously translated into Runyankore. Thus the original broadcast – and therefore the tape being played back here as well – included both the English and the Runyankore versions. For ease of transcription, I transcribed the original English lecture. However, the women – none of whom spoke English – were instead listening to the Runyankore, and responding in that language also. Their words here are my own translations of their responses. 10. In Uganda, as elsewhere in British colonial Africa, public radio was introduced following the publication of the Plymouth Report in 1937. At that time, the cost of radio sets was prohibitively high (the most common form of radio, at that time, was the crystal set). Thus the authorities decided to disseminate broadcasts via listening posts' – loudspeakers attached to flagpoles – a majority of which were sited in the grounds of local administration buildings (gombolola). These remained the primary mode of radio delivery until the advent of mass-produced (and cheap) transistor radios in the mid-1960s. ## References Austrin, T. and Farnsworth, J. (2005), Hybrid genres: Fieldwork, detection and the method of Bruno Latour', Qualitative Research, 5(2): 147–65. Bean, R. (ed) (2006), Image and Inscription: Essays on Contemporary Photography, Toronto: Yyz Books. Clifford, J. (1988), The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Ethnography, Literature and Art, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. —— and Marcus, G. (1986), Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography, Berkeley: University of California Press. Collier, J. (1967), Visual Anthropology: Photography as a Research Method, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. — (1986), Visual Anthropology: Photography as a Research Method, revised edition, Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. Crapanzano, V. (1990), On dialogue', in T. Maranhao (ed), The Interpretation of Dialogue, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Ellen, R. (1984), Ethnographic Research: A Guide to General Conduct, London: Academic Press. Fabian, J. (1990), Presence and representation: The Other and anthropological writing', Critical Inquiry, 16: 753–72. Fardon, R. and Furniss, G. (2000), African broadcast cultures', in R. Fardon and G. Furniss (eds), African Broadcast Cultures, Oxford: James Currey. Geertz, C. (1988), Works and Lives: The Anthropologist as Author, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press. Jackson, M. (2004), In Sierra Leone, Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Latour, B. (1993), We Have Never Been Modern (trans. C. Porter), Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. - (1996), Aramis, or the Love of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. — (1999), ‘Circulating reference: Sampling the soil in the Amazon Forest', in B. Latour, Pandora's Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. — and Woolgar, S. (1979), Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Malinowski, B. (1915), The Natives of Mailu: Preliminary Results of the Robert Mond Research Work in British New Guinea, Adelaide: Royal Society of South Australia. Marcus, G. (1998), Ethnography Through Thick and Thin, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. —— and Cushman, D. (1982), Ethnographies as texts', Annual Review of Anthropology, 11: 25–69. Nadel, S. (1961 [1939]), ‘The interview technique in social anthropology', in F. Bartlett, M. Ginsberg, E. Lindgren and R. Thouless (eds), The Study of Society: Methods and Problems, London: Kegan Paul. Prattis, J. (ed) (1985), Reflections: The Anthropological Muse, Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association. Strathern, M. (1996), Cutting the network', Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 2(3): 517–35. Taussig, M. (1997), The Magic of the State, New York: Routledge. (2004), My Cocaine Museum, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Tedlock, D. (1987), ‘Questions concerning dialogical anthropology', Journal of Anthropological Research, 43(3): 325–44. Weiner, J. (1993), ‘Anthropology contra Heidegger; Part II: The limit of relationship', Critique of Anthropology, 13: 285–301. Whyte, C., Constantopoulos, C. and Bevans, H. (1982), ‘Types of countertransference identified by Q-analysis', British Journal of Medical Psychology, 55: 187–201. Wolf, M. (1992), A Thrice Told Tale: Feminism, Postmodernism and Ethnographic Responsibility, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press. Epilogue