# Design-oriented Human—Computer Interaction

Daniel Fallman

Department of Informatics and Umeå Institute of Design

Umeå University, Sweden

SE-901 87

+46 90 786 6247

dfallman@informatik.umu.se

## ABSTRACT

We argue that HCI has emerged as a design-oriented field of research, directed at large towards innovation, design, and construction of new kinds of information and interaction technology. But the understanding of such an attitude to research in terms of philosophical, theoretical, and methodological underpinnings seems however relatively poor within the field. This paper intends to specifically address what design ‘is’ and how it is related to HCI. First, three candidate accounts from design theory of what design ‘is’ are introduced; the conservative, the romantic, and the pragmatic. By examining the role of sketching in design, it is found that the designer becomes involved in a necessary dialogue, from which the design problem and its solution are worked out simultaneously as a closely coupled pair. In conclusion, it is proposed that we need to acknowledge, first, the role of design in HCI conduct, and second, the difference between the knowledge-generating Design-oriented Research and the artifact-generating conduct of Research-oriented Design.

## Keywords

Design, Theory, Methodology, Sketching, Prototyping, Design-oriented Research, Research-oriented Design

## INTRODUCTION

Human—Computer Interaction (HCI) has emerged as the primary strand within computing-related research that seems to have at its heart the design of novel information, interaction, and communication technology. Two examples may illustrate the focal position of design in HCI. First, researchers in HCI are frequently involved in designing research prototypes based, for instance, on theories from the cognitive and the social sciences; ethnographic fieldwork; users with special needs, or which simply comes out from novel and innovative ideas. Such prototypes often become designed by necessity, as doing so is the only way researchers are able to set up experiments for testing and evaluating their ideas on an appropriate user group. Second, it is becoming increasingly evident that contemporary HCI is not solely an academic discipline but in effect a field which is also reaching out to and involving consultants, researchers and designers from industry. Their projects may result in artifacts whose application scope is that of becoming used by the general public, outside of the comforting walls of research laboratories. These two cases illustrate that HCI tends to involve the academic researcher in design, as well as involving the designer from industry in HCI research. Because of this, we argue that HCI needs to be understood and acknowledged as a design-oriented field of research. If the role of design becomes neglected, HCI research may forgetfully become modeled upon the natural or social sciences. These do not typically embrace a proper or elaborate understanding of what design is, nor do they provide insight into what the role of design in research is. Hence, while design-orientation seems to be at the heart of our discipline, we argue that the understanding of this approach to research in terms of philosophical, theoretical and methodological foundations is poor within the field and that issues of design have not yet received proper attention.

This paper intends to address what design ‘is’ and how it is related to HCI. First, we introduce and analyze three competing accounts from design theory of what design is, and second, we examine in detail the concept of sketching as the archetypal activity of the design approach, and how it helps us grasp design work more properly as a kind of dialogue. Finally, to set out an as-yet-largely-absent discussion on the role and character of design in HCI, we propose to make a distinction between the conduct of Design-oriented Research and Research-oriented Design.

## The Design-oriented Attitude

An initial approach to the question of design and designorientation in HCI research is to emphasize that design is a matter of making; it is an attitude to research that involves the researcher in creating and giving form to something not previously there. This process of making calls for a certain level of ‘involvement’, which metaphorically resembles the way carpenters must be directly involved with the materials of carpentry; its physical tools, techniques, and materials.

To design, again not unlike carpentry, is to consciously aim to create and give form to previously nonexistent artifacts [8, 20, 27, 36]. Thus, at a high level of abstraction, designorientation is about being proactive in one’s research; it is to take an active stance and to bring about intentional change. In doing so, design-orientation by definition implies a commitment to technology and technological development that goes beyond critique [8].

## THREE ACCOUNTS OF WHAT ‘IS’ DESIGN

Adopting the design-oriented attitude has a number of implications on the way HCI research is both perceived and carried out, which go beyond our initial definition. To reveal some of these implications, it is helpful to turn to design theory. Here, we find what appears to be three competing accounts that provide different but equally important attempts to seize and conceptualize what the vibrant discourse of design really ‘is’ and what it is designers really ‘do’ when they design. These accounts are here named the conservative account, the romantic account, and the pragmatic account. These will now be considered (see Figure 1 for a summary).

## The Conservative Account

From what could be called a conservative account, to be design-oriented is consciously to seek to intervene and manipulate [1], aiming to convert an undesired situation into a desirable one [34]. Here, design is thought of as a scientific or engineering endeavor, borrowing methodology and terminology from the natural sciences, mathematics, and systems theory, drawing on a philosophical base in rationalism.

According to this account of design, the design process is supposed to progress gradually from the abstract (requirements specifications) to the concrete (resulting artifacts). Progress is achieved through following a series of well-described, discrete, rational, and structured methodological steps [25]. Hence, the conservative account assumes that there is a ‘problem’ to be solved, and that descriptions of this problem can be comprehensively and accurately produced, if possible in the form of a structured requirements specification [25], which is then fed into the design process. The undertaking of the designer or the group of designers is to find, following the requirements specification, solutions to the described problems that may feasibly be carried out within the boundaries of the design project’s constraints, including issues of cost, time, and performance. Design takes on the character of being a problem-solving activity; something that begins when a problem has occurred. The problem, in this view, is seen as given when design begins. For instance, some hold that “to have a problem implies … that certain information is given to the problem solver: information about what is desired, under what conditions, by means of what tools and operations.” [28, p. 73]

According to Alexander [1], these methodological steps can be abstracted down into two major processes. First, the designer is involved in analysis of the problem, a kind of ‘breaking down’ activity. That is, to seek to break down the initially ill-defined and unstructured area of the design problem into more manageable constituents. Second, the designer is involved in synthesis of a solution. This stage is a ‘building up’ activity, in which the designer builds upwards towards a solution to the overall design problem by solving each and every part of the set of smaller problems found during analysis. The Design Methodology movement—which took off from the work of Alexander [1] and Jones [19, 20]—focuses on the importance of transparency and structure in this process. Cross [11, p. vii] talks about design methodology’s concerns as “the study of how designers work and think; the establishment of appropriate structures for the design process; the development and application of new design methods, techniques, and procedures; and reflection on the nature and extent of design knowledge and its application to design problems.” Design methods in this tradition are generally normative, and often include boxes-and-arrows diagrams [20]—specifying what activities to perform and in what order these activities should be performed—as well as generic design principles such as guidelines. This suggests that according to the conservative account, it is possible to externalize the rationality of design work into guidelines and by doing so transfer the skills of experienced designers to the inexperienced [35].

Hence, design methods typically assert design as a stringent process of systematic and controlled collection of information from which a problem is identified and objectives of the design process established. From this, the design solution—following the principles of logical deduction and mathematical optimization techniques—is thought to be more or less computed [14].

Under the process-oriented conservative account, methodology and structure are at the heart of understanding and practicing design, and the view of the designer is that of an engineer or a natural scientist. A good designer in this tradition is someone who is able to follow prescribed action. This tends to deemphasize the role of the designer, striving towards a disembodied design process built on structured methods and externalized guidelines rather than on the skills and judgment of individual designers [25, 35]. As such, the conservative account of design is highly impersonal, the designer is seen as ‘glass box’ [20], and every step in the process is suggested as rational and possible to describe.

## The Romantic Account

Contrary to the conservative account, the romantic account of design gives prominence to the role of the designer. Here, they are seen as imaginative masterminds equipped with almost magical abilities of creation. This account nourishes the idea of ‘creative geniuses’, a legacy of the Enlightenment, as a reaction against whose intrinsic rationalism romanticism paradoxically took off as a movement. In addition to changing poetry, the novel, drama, painting, sculpture, and music, romanticism also reawakened people’s interest in mythology, nationalism, folklore, the medieval, the exotic, and of course, also in nature, especially its mystical elements.

As romanticism came to develop however, the reaction became more of an alternative strand aside the rationalism promoted by the Enlightenment than a proper substitute for it. For the purposes of this paper, it is important to notice that individualism—that is, concerns of the individual and of individual identity—sprang from romanticism. In its emphasis on the individual, romanticism understands the key human abilities to be imagination over abstract reasoning and creativity over rational problem solving. Designers are seen as creative individuals with unusual talents, who often have to fight opposition in order to defend their unique creativity and artistic freedom [8]. This suggests art to be a better role model for design than science [9]; that designers should be compared with painters, composers, and poets, rather than with scientists or engineers. Creativity and imagination are hence seen to be the human abilities that impel design, whereas the issue of methodology is treated cautiously.

Following romanticism, this account suggests that the process of design involves a certain mystical element; it is by no means the fully rational and explicable process suggested by the conservative account. It is on the contrary somewhat mystical in its character, and it is not necessary to try to uncover this proposed mystical element, for the reason that, like golfers, designers might come to lose their swing if they think too much about what it is they actually do when they design. This account of design can be thought of as ‘black boxed’ [20]—the designer is someone who is able to generate creative designs but not able to, or at least not interested in, explaining how they came about.

Rather than by process, the design process is guided by the designer’s values and taste, where the product becomes judged according to issues of quality and aesthetics [32, 35]. Hence, the romantic account of a design-oriented approach to HCI research trades in creativity and individuality over methodology and control, aesthetics and individual judgment over transparency and logical reasoning. The content of design (the product) and the human creator (the designer) are accentuated, whereas the process of producing the product is opaque. Louridas [24, p. 520] provides a statement of the relationship between art and design that follows the romantic account, including the suggested mystical elements of the relationship: “Design is related to art. This relation is what makes design what it is: design is not just about the creation of useful artifacts: it is equally about the creation of beautiful artifacts. Utility and aesthetics intertwine in the design process; but it is not clear how.”

## The Pragmatic Account

According to the pragmatic account, design is about being engaged directly in a specific design situation. It holds that design is always carried out somewhere in particular. This ‘situatedness’ locates the design process in a world which is already crammed with people, artifacts, and practices, each with their own histories, identities, goals, and plans.

Rather than science or art, under the pragmatic account design takes the form of a hermeneutic process of interpretation and creation of meaning, where designers iteratively interpret the effects of their designs on the situation at hand [10]. It is a reflective conversation with the materials of the design situation [31, 32, 33]. This view is related to Lévi-Strauss’s concept of a ‘bricoleur’ [23];

someone who makes do with what is available or encountered in a specific situation: “[The Bricoleur’s] universe of instruments is closed and the rules of his game are always to make do with ‘whatever is at hand’, that is to say with a set of tools and materials which is always finite and is also heterogeneous […] The set of a ‘bricoleur’s’ means … is to be defined only by its potential use.” [23, p. 17—18] Like Schön’s notion of reflective conversation, the bricoleur operates from the available means (the concrete tools and materials offered by a specific design situation) but treats them abstractly, by seeking to determine and redefine the roles they can play in the given situation by entering into a dialogue with them [23]. Ihde discusses bricolage as the skill to take on multiple views; possessing a compound eye [18].

Drawing on a philosophical base in pragmatism, the pragmatic account understands tacit and pre-reflective knowledge of everyday life and work—the spontaneous, intuitive performance of the actions of everyday life, termed knowing-in-action [31]—as the main elements of knowledge and as such providing the key for understanding design. Rather than leaning on theories and methodology for guidance, Schön suggests that “reflection-in-action … is central to the ‘art’ by which practitioners sometimes deal well with situations of uncertainty, instability, uniqueness, and value conflict” [31, p. 50]. The pragmatic account focuses on the situatedness of the designer in the life-world and brings to light the interweaving of roles, practices, and technologies involved in design. The designer in the pragmatic account can be thought of as a ‘self-organizing system’ with constructive as well as reflective skills [20].

<table><tr><td>Account</td><td>Conservative</td><td>Pragmatic Account</td><td>Romantic Account</td></tr><tr><td>Designer</td><td>An information processor; a &#x27;glass box&#x27;</td><td>A reflective, know- how bricoleur; a &#x27;self-organizing system</td><td>A creative, imaginative genius; an artist; a &#x27;black box&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td>Problem</td><td>Ill defined and unstructured; to be defined</td><td>Unique to the situation; to be set by the designer</td><td>Subordinate to the final product</td></tr><tr><td>Product</td><td>A result of the process</td><td>An outcome of the dialogue; integrated in the world</td><td>A functional piece of art</td></tr><tr><td>Process</td><td>A rational search process; fully transparent</td><td>A reflective conversation; a dialogue</td><td>Largely opaque; mystical</td></tr><tr><td>Knowledge</td><td>Guidelines; design methods; scientific laws</td><td>How each problem should be tackled; compound seeing; experience</td><td>Creativity; imagination; craft; drawing</td></tr><tr><td>Role model</td><td>Natural sciences; engineering; optimization theory</td><td>Bricolage; human sciences; sociology</td><td>Art; music; poetry; drama</td></tr></table>

Figure 1: Summarizing Table (in part based on [11])

## RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN RESEARCH AND DESIGN

Design seems to have a role to play in almost every part of research, also in efforts which are not explicitly designoriented. In the natural and behavioral sciences, scientists must design experiments before they may be carried out and analyzed. This involves the researcher in designing a population of subjects, designing independent and dependent variables, and sometimes also designing the environment in which the experiment takes place. Any surveys and questionnaires appearing in the study must too be designed. In addition, natural scientists sometimes need to design their own instruments [17, 21], similarly to how HCI researchers need to design research prototypes in order to be able to perform tests and evaluations. Design is also at the heart of such disciplines as engineering, computing science, architecture, and medicine, which are often argued to be related to science. Be it combustion engines, compilers, bridges, or dental implants, they must all be designed. While design seems to be involved in many scientific practices, does that mean that design is a science?

## Limits of Design as Science

In design, the struggle to mimic science is both most prominently advocated and critically examined by Simon, for whom the goal is explicitly to strive towards a “science of design” [34, p. 55]. Such a design science should be an “analytic, partly formalizable, partly empirical, teachable doctrine about the design process.” [34, p. 58] In this highly influential work, Simon rests on the natural sciences to vindicate the new science of design, for instance by affirming the primacy of empirical testing [9], while at the same time somewhat paradoxically arguing that the design disciplines of the time had become too oriented towards the natural sciences. Or rather, according to Simon, they had become oriented towards the natural sciences, but in a way which was only to their detriment: “Engineering schools have become schools of physics and mathematics; medical schools have become schools of biological science; business schools have become schools of finite mathematics.” [34, p. 56] To gain academic respectability by acquiring a scientific subject, the design disciplines had drifted away from their subject matter—the design of the artificial. The solution, according to Simon, must be for design to engage in a science of its own: a science of the artificial. But is design then best understood in terms of the natural sciences? Is design a science? From the perspective of interactive systems design, mimicking the natural sciences appears to be a valid approach. After all, computer science is generally considered a natural science, as computer algorithms can be studied and tested in the same way as for instance mathematical formulas, laws of nature, or chemical substances. Coyne observes the similarity with scientific inquiry: “the concept of finding a fit between a form and its context I suggested with the same assurance as the suggestion that a scientist compares two items of data, or compares the prediction of a theory with the results of an experiment. Design variables … are presented as if they are variables in some scientific equation.” [8, p. 220]

While advocating a science of design, Simon however disliked the tendency of the engineering disciplines at the time to have espoused the scientific goals and the methodologies for achieving them of the natural sciences. By doing so, according to Simon, they had started to overlook and drift away from their focal activities, designing the artificial [34].

Ehn, on the other hand, rejects the whole idea of design as having much in common with the natural sciences [13]. Taking off from Simon’s suggestion that “everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones” [34, p. 54], he suggests that in order to learn what Simon has in mind with ‘preferred situation’, one has to consider and integrate into any science of design typical subject matters of the human sciences, including issues of authority, power, control, labor, and in what social and historical settings a particular design effort takes place. Whereas computer algorithms can be studied by the natural sciences, the behavior of neither the individual designer nor the organization that constructs them are well captured by such an approach [8, 13].

## Limits of Design as a Transparent Process

The traditional conception of the design process, strongly rooted in the conservative account, is to envision design work as divided into three distinct stages. The designer, according to this view, should first be involved in analyzing a problem, then in synthesizing a solution, and finally in evaluating the outcome [1]. Jones [20, p. 63] holds that “one of the simplest and most common observations about designing…is that it includes the three essential stages of analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. These can be described in simple words as ‘breaking the problem into pieces’, ‘putting the pieces together in a new way’ and ‘testing to discover the consequences of putting the new arrangement into practice.’” In this, Jones expresses a characteristic conservative conceptualization, advising a sequential and linear order among the activities involved in design. This layout of the design process has been and still is highly influential, especially for approaching design in the engineering disciplines. But also in fields such as architecture, industrial design, information systems development, and software engineering, elaborated versions of the three-stage process have had a tendency to dominate the methodological understanding of design.

Nonetheless, even within the design methodology movement itself the failures of these structured design methods have been well documented [5, 6, 13, 22, 30]. There is also a widespread practical discontent with the process-oriented understanding of design suggested by the design methodology movement [14], where numerous case studies of actual design projects suggest that neither do designers work in the way suggested by the design methodology movement, nor would it be possible for them to work in the prescribed manner [2, 5, 13, 14, 22]. The most important problem seems to be the focus on process over people, product, and content. As design decisions