# The Printed Image in Transition: Popular Pictorial Experience

1790-1832

AmonG the contemporary scenes illustrated in an 18o8 survey of London life and monuments was the annual Royal Academy exhibition of oil paintings. Beneath the high ceilings and large windows of the exhibition room, historical and mythological subjects, animal and genre paintings, landscape and portraiture congested the walls. The stylish crowd of viewers posed, preened, strolled, and conversed. Few gave more than passing attention to the art. They had little need to do so, for such imagery was a commonplace in their lives.

The same London survey also illustrated a different kind of contemporary visual experience. Just a few streets away from the exhibition, in a room of less generous proportion and lighting, another group was assembled. Variously absorbed in needlework, slopwork, winding candlewicks, and picking horsehair, the room's occupants, like the crowd at the exhibition, took scant notice of their surroundings. And they too had little need to do so. In the workhouse of the parish of St James the walls were completely bare.

Between these extremes of aesthetic abundance and visual deprivation lay the experience of the majority of English working people. Those who managed to subsist outside the confines of the prison, asylum, and workhouse were not entirely without the stimulus of imagery. Nature, architecture, public monuments, and commercial signs were all sources of colour, line, and form.² So too were the ornamented stages of travelling puppet shows, the painted posters of fairs and circuses, and the scenes of murder and execution that drew crowds to itinerant peep-shows.

But the imagery that was part of the environment, or an aspect of entertainment, was not specifically intended to provide working people with either instruction or aesthetic experience. Fairs and shows, moreover, were only occasional, often fortuitous events; and the more constant sights of daily surroundings must, with familiarity, have lost much of their power to stimulate the eye and arouse the intellect. Thus, if most workers of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries managed to escape the bleakness of the institution, theirs was still by no means the consistently rich and varied experience of imagery that was taken for granted by patrons of the Academy and others equally privileged. At that time it was the rare worker, if any at all, who had seen an original work of fine art in a gallery or museum.

Between 1790 and 1832, then, it was not the establishments of high culture, nor the physical environment, nor even popular entertainment that provided English workers with their most sustained source of aesthetic experience, visual information, and pictorial amusement. Rather, such stimulus came mainly from the imagery dispensed through the medium of print. In the late eighteenth century Thomas Bewick's popularization of the process of wood-engraving, together with early nineteenth-century advances in mechanized printing, made illustration increasingly available to a widening public.4 And without doubt that public included working people.

Until 1832, though, it was, the middle strata of society that primarily benefited from the burgeoning of pictorial publishing. Economic limitations excluded the majority of workers from all but participation on the fringes of the growing trade in illustration. In a time when a working man's weekly income might be as low as 6 shillings, to own a picture-book or single print was an uncommon luxury that no worker so advantaged took for granted.6 As the Lancashire weaver and Peterloo activist Samuel Bamford remembered, more prosperous workers might after assiduous hoarding take every farthing [they] could scrape together' and purchase the occasional broadside or chapbook—which for i or 2 pennies might include a single small woodcut at its head.7

Those whose income or frugality were insufficient for such purchases gained access to the printed image from a variety of alternative sources. Coffee-houses contained printed matter, some of it pictorial; many charity and Sunday schools supplied picture books and other illustrated material for use in the classroom, or to be awarded as prizes for diligence; and it was not unknown for sympathetic booksellers to grant borrowing privileges to the trustworthy.8 From time to time workers in the larger towns and cities must have paused to gaze at the many fine engravings and other pictorial material arrayed in print and bookshop windows. Certainly they had greater opportunity to do so than their rural counterparts. Thus, although the generality of workers had extremely limited experience of original works of painting and sculpture, at least the urban dwellers among them could on occasion study the art reproductions and other striking prints on display in many a shop-window. No matter where a worker lived, however, at an average cost of 2s. 6d. each, the quality printseller's wares were beyond the means of even the relatively well-off artisan.9

## I

The comparatively restricted access to pictorial material in rural areas and, regardless of locale, its often prohibitive cost could not repress people's widespread interest in the printed image. Rather, workers of all types and from diverse environments sought to incorporate it into their daily lives. The imagery that most typically came their way-through saving and purchase, charity, or chance—was thus closely bound in with other aspects of their cultural experience. One historian has convincingly described this experience as three cultures. There was first of all a predominant popular culture of entertainment characterized by a'live-and-let-live hedonism'. In opposition to this culture were two others: a religious culture centred around Methodism, but taking in Anglican Evangelicalism; and a culture of secular radicalism which combined the politics of protest with the creed of self-improvement.10

With certain qualifications to be discussed later, the printed imagery most common in the everyday life of the people conforms to this descriptive model. But one reservation must be expressed immediately: the model does not distinguish between the experience of urban and rural workers; and, as we have just seen, in the case of the printed image and opportunities for viewing it, the distinction needs to be made.1 Even so, the idea of the geographical uniformity of people's overall cultural experience still has application here. We have already noted, for instance, that most workers-on farms, in villages, towns, or in cities—could not afford the price required to own any illustrative material other than the odd penny print or picture-book. It will also become apparent as we progress with our survey that, whether they occurred often or rarely, many of the circumstances in which working people might potentially encounter or acquire imagery were not geographically differentiated. So it seems that while we must acknowledge the local divergency of some kinds of pictorial experience, we must equally remember that this did not negate a more general cultural coherence manifested through the printed image.

In both country and city, then, but with varying frequency, working people saw printed imagery, usually woodcuts, providing diverse kinds and levels of entertainment. The walls and windows of inns, shops, and other premises were a source of information and at least occasional pictorial diversion. As print replaced the bellmen, advertising bills and cards became an.increasingly common sight in village, town, and city. Before the mid- to late 183os the majority of printed wall advertisements were not illustrated, or included only the odd asterisk or pointing finger for emphasis. None the less the pictorial bill was not entirely unknown, and many working people would have been familiar with such stock images as the horses and riders commonly used to illustrate race bills. One typical example, an 1829 advertisement for the Yarmouth races, presented viewers with a tiny cut of two jockeys and their mounts in a neck-and-neck race; the well-detailed composition also incorporated a flagman and two cheering spectators. Another fairly common sight must have been the stock-cuts of acrobats and tightrope walkers, frequently reproduced on announcements of coming circuses, fairs, and theatrical events like Monsieur Longuemare ... on the TIGHT ROPE' at Davis's Amphitheatre near Westminster Bridge, 28 April 1823.12 Trade cards, usually displayed in shop-windows, were illustrated more often than posted bills and encompassed a range of subject-matter. Among the many images that passers-by might view were Chinese merchants drinking tea, Turks imbibing coffee, and Englishmen enjoying pipe tobacco; elsewhere, meanwhile, cupids, goddesses, flowers, scrolls, and acanthus helped to promote such products as Fashionable Linen Drapery and Cheap Hats; or such enterprises as Richard Warren, Perfumer; Graham, Printer at Alnwick; and J. Garnett, Chemist, Druggist, etc.13

The interior walls of many public houses were also a source of printed imagery. To some patrons, perhaps, these woodcuts and engravings were bland entertainment when compared to the pleasures of the main attraction of such establishments. But at least one working man, a London ribbon-weaver, was sufficiently impressed to recall the ‘framed engravings of naval battles hung round the walls'of a 'respectable' Clerkenwell public house in 1824. More than their subject-matter, however, it was the general character of these prints that struck him. For they, like the rest of the interior, were neat and sober' and thus harmonized with the clientele whose number included ‘carpenters, bricklayers and labourers'.14

But these and other offerings of walls and windows provided imagery of secondary importance in the lives of most workers. More central to their experience of printed pictorial entertainment were the woodcut illustrations of the broadside and chapbook.1⁵ Sold by printers, booksellers, chapmen at fairs, and street vendors, both kinds of publication had wide distribution. A broadside—that is, a single sheet with a poem, song, story, and perhaps one woodcut—cost a penny or halfpenny, while a chapbook—a miniature, usually softcover story-book of a dozen or so pages—sold for slightly more at 1d. to 3d. Those unable to afford such prices might patronize one of the coffee-houses or pubs where the latest broadsides were pasted on the walls or passed from hand to hand. It was also not uncommon for workers to pool resources and share a penny ballad or book between two families.1⁶ And, at no cost whatever, the shop-window of town and city was a constant means of viewing at least some of this material and taking in the pictorial entertainment it afforded. Bamford recalled a Manchester bookshop kept by one Swindells, a printer' and described what must have been a fairly typical display of illustrated wares: In the spacious windows of this shop ... were exhibited numerous songs, ballads, tales and other publications with horrid and awful-looking woodcuts at the head; which publications, with their cuts, had a strong command on my attention.'7

The subject matter of the displays that so attracted Bamford and others revolved around a few constant main themes: real or fictitious scandals, often humorously treated; love, sex, and marriage; illness, misfortune, and death; crime and punishment. The broadsides in particular repeated endless variations on these themes in both ballad and prose forms. A nineteenth-century collector and compiler of street literature, Charles Hindley, pointed out that the stock-in-trade of such publishers of popular entertainment as James Catnach and John Pitts was‘doubtful scandals,'cooked'’assassinations, sudden deaths of eminent individuals, apocryphal elopements, real or catchpenny accounts of murders, impossible robberies, delusive suicides, dark deeds and public executions.’18

These subjects and themes were commonly, though not invariably, illustrated and, as much as the publishers' stock of cuts allowed, the imagery corresponded to the texts. Where they existed, such correspondences tended to be rather loose and generalized, while the use of fairly standardized stock imagery meant that the chosen illustrations were often only pallid reflections of the textual accounts. This was most true in the case of broadsides dealing with sex and love. Extravagant and often highly suggestive passages on illicit passion, heart-rending longings, and cold-blooded betrayal frequently had as their visual accompaniment such innocuous images as prim-looking, not overly attractive young women or, alternatively, sedate and heavily garbed couples strolling chastely through the countryside.19 Sometimes the choices were not so much bland as surprising. In one such instance a ballad entitledThe Constant Lovers' was illustrated with the image of a well-nourished duck, captured in print at some point before the ballad's conclusion determined his and the happier fate of the protagonists: ‘So the constant lovers got married, and had an excellent fat duck for dinner.'2o

In contrast, illustrations of crime and punishment were both to the point and not without emotive force. In the starkness of their style and the finality of their content, stock images of the gallows (figure 1) must have aroused at least a small frisson of pleasurable dread in many viewers.²¹ Similarly, broadside depictions of violent crime were surely graphic enough to satisfy all but the most blood thirsty of pictorial tastes. A case in point is the image of a manic-looking young man relentlessly tightening a rope around the neck of his prone and weakly struggling female victim (figure 2). Probably the majority of viewers cared little that the text described a knifing while the picture showed murder by strangulation—the level of violence portrayed was after all true to the spirit of its description.

The working people who wrote about their lives and tastes remained remarkably silent on the subject of broadsides, feeling perhaps that reminiscences of such entertainment would not have been in keeping with the self-consciously literary and hortatory tone that characterized many of their autobiographies. However, the