# The Printed Image and the Mass: The Illustrated Magazines and their Readership

1832-1860

By the mid-185os, Saturday afternoons were predictably busy in the shops and at the stands of those who sold popular magazines. For to mark the end of a week's work ‘there now rushed in the schoolboy, the apprentice, the milliner, the factory girl, the clerk, and the small shopkeeper'—all intent on paying their pennies for the latest issues of the London Journal, Reynolds's Miscellany, and Cassell's Paper.

The commentator who had noted this weekend 'rush'was Charles Knight. As we would expect from one who was no merely casual observer of publishing trends, his was a fairly accurate and complete assessment of ,the range of people who read and looked at the new pictorial miscellanies.¹Other contemporary observers also remarked upon the readership of these magazines and, like Knight, were of the opinion that the Journal and its two main competitors attracted a wide following among the lower middle and working classes'.² But it is not from such contemporary commentary that we gain our clearest sense of these readers. For that we need to turn to the magazines themselves and the pages containing their editorial correspondence.3

Before pursuing this source, though, a cautionary word or two is necessary, for the magazines' correspondents are by no means as accessible as we would wish. None of their letters survive in the original, nor were they reproduced in the magazines. All that we now have are the often cryptic printed replies addressed to individuals identified only by their place of residence, first names, sets of initials, or pseudonyms. As we will see, a few of these pseudonyms are telling, but others—A Constant Reader', ‘A Subscriber',‘A Sincere Admirer', and the like-reveal nothing about the correspondents' social class, sex, or age. To add to our difficulties, there are a host of terse and enigmatic replies that allow for no inference about the interest or query that they answered: 'Of course', ‘He may', 'We cannot inform you', and so on.

The question of the authenticity of the correspondence is also of some concern. That is, it may well be that those who answered readers'letters occasionally filled space with made-up replies to nonexistent queries—or, worse, perhaps there were no correspondents at all, only fabricated answers. But to adopt this view is to be overly sceptical, for all three magazines offer evidence that they did indeed attract a good deal of genuine correspondence. For example, at the end of most if not all issues, care was taken to provide potential correspondents with correct addresses and detailed instructions on directing specialized questions about chess or gardening to the proper respondents. In addition, it is possible to find frequent, sincerely fraught-sounding notices to the effect that letter-writers should stop sending their efforts to the 'private residence' of 'Mr. Reynolds'or Mr. Cassell' and address them instead to the appropriate office. Still other such notices begged correspondents to cease demanding immediate responses when the volume of their letters made two or three weeks the inevitable wait for a printed reply. Then there was also the noteworthy occasion when the Miscellany was forced to admit to the loss of all of the mail for 15 December 1849, and to request that any who may have written around that time re-submit their letters.⁵ Taken together, all of this seems to represent disproportionate effort merely to authenticate spurious correspondence-after all, the magazine's editors and staff had every right to compose such letters if they wished. It thus seems probable that the notices to correspondents were genuine replies to real letters. But if they were not, or if legitimate answers were occasionally spiced with an interspersed fabrication or two, we still have a useful source here—for even faked replies could at least give us a sense of the kinds of readers that the magazines' producers expected to attract. And that in itself would be valuable, for as the magazines' success argues, Stiff, Reynolds, and Cassell were all well aware of where their market lay. In other words, those that they expected to reach and those that they did reach were not vastly different.

##

Bearing in mind, then, their limitations and drawbacks, we can now see what remains to be inferred from the magazines' correspondence pages.⁶ First of all, many of the pseudonyms are not as ambiguous as those noted above. One group of correspondents, for example, chose to identify themselves by the types of work that they did. From this we can gather that those who wrote to and, by extension, all of those who read the magazines came from several social, occupational, and economic levels—with perhaps a majority comprising clerks, shopkeepers, and the more prosperous strata of the working class.7 The readership in general does not seem to have taken in more than a scant number, if any, of those in high-status professions—such as law or the Church-nor does it appear to have included many whose incomes were much beyond moderate.

Thus at the most genteel end of the scale of significant groups of readers were schoolmasters—none of whom gave details as to where or what they taught. Their number was exceeded by the many others who were law clerks, civil servants in clerical positions, or simply undifferentiated clerks or junior clerks. Then there were all of those who aspired to such positions. Among these hopefuls was one Frank Mildmay, but, sadly for his ambition, the Miscellany's respondent informed him dampeningly that his ‘handwriting should be clearer for a clerk's situation'. The unnamed keepers of unspecified shops constituted another conspicuous group of correspondents, to whose number we might also add the several who identified themselves as drapers or publicans, and the occasional milliner and confectioner who also had concerns to express. Still others indicated that they were in one of two kinds of service: a few soldiers wrote jn, although none gave his rank or regiment; and from time to time those in domestic service sent in their queries; there was, for instance, the manservant seeking a change of scene and a new situation as valet to some ship's captain, and the dairymaid who, for reasons unexplained, wanted to know how to make Bologna sausages.

Apart from servants, the magazines' correspondents took in various other members of the working class. Letters signed ‘An Apprentice' were particularly abundant, and most were queries about the terms of their authors' indentures or complaints about their treatment at the hands of their masters. One writer 'suffered'from a want of proper instruction and supervision in the workplace, while another justifiably felt‘discarded' because without his consent he had been assigned by one master to another. Others had managed to survive the trials of apprenticeship, and the magazines' correspondents also included a journeyman tailor or two, several mechanics, a few hand-loom weavers, the occasional carpenter, and a brassfounder. Finally, there were the many who signed themselves simply ‘A Working Man' or ‘A Labourer'.

Women also contributed their share to the magazines' correspondence pages. A few we know by pseudonyms that suggest their occupations—A Housekeeper', ‘A Milk Maid', ‘A Mother'—but most went by first name. Among those who sent in their queries were several Annies, Janes, Kates, and Fannies, a few Claras, Rosas, Louisas, and Sophias, as well as Catherine, Laura, Matilda, Adeline, and Angela. This range of names from the humble Annies to the elegant Angela suggests that these women correspondents came from more than one social class—although it must be remembered that some names might have been fictitious (expressions perhaps of wishful thinking).

Amongst readers of both sexes-in cases, that is, where we can establish gender-there was widespread anxiety over complexion problems, notably blushing, and questions relating to courtship and appropriate behaviour with the opposite sex. From all of this we might gather that many of those who read and wrote into the magazines were adolescents or young adults—an impression which is confirmed by numerous pseudonyms such as‘A Juvenile Subscriber', 'A Young Grammarian', 'A Youth of Fifteen', and 'A Young Girl'. In addition there were all of those apprentices mentioned above and a number of women who candidly admitted to ages in the range of 18 to 23.

About other correspondents whose age and sex are not obvious (although sometimes inferable) we can gather different kinds of information. A few, for example, used pseudonyms that signalled the direction of their political leanings: A True Republican', ‘A Tory', 'A Democratic Socialist', 'A Chartist'; regrettably, though, none of these writers were forthcoming about their income or occupation. One or two others, such as 'A Protestant', indicated their religious tendencies, but on the whole the letters do not reflect any generalized interest in doctrinal issues. Still other correspondents, by the nature of their queries, indicated that theirs was a comparatively prosperous lifestyle. For, presumably, in order to want hints on removing scratches from varnished tables and dressers, or cleaning stains from carpets, correspondents must have owned such items-although it remains possible that some of these enquiries were made by servants for the benefit of their employers'furnishings. But if a few at least of the writers enjoyed an adequate level of material comfort, others apparently did not. The numerous queries about how to emigrate and pseudonyms such as Poor but Industrious', A Destitute Orphan', ‘A Poor Carpenter', 'A Poor Weaver', 'A Poor Man', and ‘A Starving Workman'together suggest that many who troubled to submit their questions were anything but well-off. Finally, from yet a different set of correspondents, we gain a sense of the geographical diffuseness of the magazines'readership. For, to help differentiate their replies to those designated only by initials, the magazines' editors helpfully added a bracketed reference to the writers' place of residence. Thus we find reflected in their correspondence the whole sphere of the magazines' distribution, as readers wrote in from all over London, from Manchester, Birmingham, Newcastle upon Tyne, Liverpool Salford, Nottingham, and Preston, from Oxford, from Dublin, from Paisley, Dundee, Glasgow, and Edinburgh, and from countless small towns and villages all around Great Britain.

Regardless of where they came from, whatever their sex, age, occupation, or income, a significant number of the magazines' correspondents were overridingly concerned with self-improvement. Some wished to better themselves vocationally and wrote to find out how to obtain a certain job or what form of education would enhance their qualifications. Many more, though, sought intellectual improvement for its own sake, and the magazines' correspondence pages are replete with replies to all manner of questions. What is the climate of Egypt? Or the value of a Queen Anne farthing? How do they manufacture gunpowder? And matches? And electroplate? Where can you acquire an inexpensive home library? Learn English composition? Or French grammar? How do you pronounce ‘sauerkraut'? When was Socrates born? And so on.

Where they identified themselves according to their work, the authors of these and other such questions ranged along the occupational spectrum from clerks to labourers. Only one group appeared to participate with less than the generalized enthusiasm in this spirit of enquiry: schoolmasters, not too surprisingly, were more interested in imparting information of their own or correcting the errors of others. In the sampling used here, the youngest writer in pursuit of information was a 12-year old boy who wanted to know about silkworms and Charlemagne. Others, judging by their occupations, were adults, but there is nothing to suggest their exact ages. It seems safe to assume, though, that those who sought intellectual improvement were of various ages. Many, it is clear, were male, but many others failed to leave clues about gender. Some of these, presumably, were women who shared all the widespread interest in acquiring general knowledge. For, as a member of the Journal's staff told a certain Helen B., who wished to further her schooling,‘Young ladies are apt scholars.'

Other correspondents were not of course so avowedly intent on intellectual self-improvement, and wrote in instead for advice on health problems and patent medicines, legal difficulties, and romantic or domestic relationships. But whatever were their specific interests or questions, those who troubled to send letters to the three magazines were clearly a varied lot. Thus the correspondence pages sampled here both support and elaborate Knight's and others' impression that the Journal, Miscellany, and Paper attracted readers from a large cross-section of society.

This was not, however, a brand-new achievement. For such a socially diverse cultural grouping—the mass—had initially formed itself around the Penny Magazine.8 Although it had never included correspondence pages, the magazine did attract at least a few letters, usually addressed to some representative of its nominal sponsor, the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. From this correspondence we begin to gain a sense of the different kinds of people and interests that this then pioneering publication served. J. B. Tenniel, illustrator of Carroll's Alice books, enjoyed it as a young man; an aspiring drawing master also ‘gave unfeigned thanks that such a publication should have been circulated'; one Adam Pele, a baker, also perused it with close, although not always uncritical attention; an amateur horticulturist apparently liked it, but wanted more articles on gardening; a Welshman was impressed with its positive effect on this uncultivated and illiterate part of the kingdom'; and a young father valued the magazine so highly that he

laid it by for the use, and instruction of, my infant son (if it please God to spare him) when he arrives at Riper Years . . . [This] I conceive of more real value than a paltry annuity for life that might be squandered away; but the contents of the Penny Magazine when once read and treasured up in the mind can never be lost.9

From the general contents of their letters, most of the above correspondents would seem to have been fairly comfortably-off, and we can probably situate them somewhere within the middle class. As their names indicate, all were men, although we will subsequently see that the magazine may have had at least a small female following. The weight of the evidence from SDUK correspondence and autobiographies indicates that a majority or, at the least, a significant minority of the Penny Magazine's readers were working people. The next section of this chapter will consider this group in some detail. For the time being we need only acknowledge that the readers of the magazine were not exclusively of one sex, locale, or class, but together comprised a large and varied, or mass, market. In the words of one contemporary commentator, the Penny Magazine offered amusement ‘to every man, woman, and child who takes it up. Its reception is consequently universal.'10

The magazine's wide-ranging popularity also came to the notice of another sort of cultural observer, the now anonymous artist who designed two satirical broadsides, published in 1833 by G. Purkess of Soho." Both arranged like a modern page of comic strips, these broadsides regaled their purchasers with an array of humorous images of the Penny Magazine's ‘readers': a man who tramples a flower-bed while absorbed in an article on botany an ancient lady who peers at an essay on antiquities; a large gentleman who consults an item entitled 'The Measurement of Solid Bodies', all the while being fitted for a suit by his tailor; a drunkard, who reads the magazine in a bottle-strewn gutter; the man in the moon, who studies a treatise on astronomy; and several more such vignettes. In fact, in the view of the satirist who created these images, so universal was the magazine's appeal that even animals, such as monkeys and owls, liked it. Of this group, perhaps the most interested reader of all was a large pig whom we see about to dip into a weighty essay illustrated with the minuscule image of yet another pig. And the essay's title?'Bi-hog-raphy, for the Swinish Multitudes'.

## II

In taking satirical note of the Penny Magazine's varied following, our broadside artist had not failed to include humorous depictions of a street hawker, a sweep, a farm-labourer, and other working-class readers. As an earlier chapter's discussion indicated, many historians have routinely insisted that the magazine had few, if any, such readers.¹² There is, however, no substantial evidence on which to base such insistence. Rather, almost without exception, what remains of correspondence and autobiographical commentary supports the opposite view that a great number of workers bought, read, looked at, and liked Knight's pioneering attempt to bring culture to the people.

These readers, most of whom we now can no longer identify, obtained the magazine in various ways: some were subscribers; others saved their pennies and purchased issues whenever they could; and a great many others had access to copies distributed in working-class coffee-houses, factories, workshops, and mechanics' institutes.13 Among the identifiable working-class readers who managed to secure the magazine one way or another we find the radical tailor Francis Place; the factory operative turned poet John Plummer; the Colchester tailor Thomas Carter, who also became a contributor; the warehouse worker and Chartist sympathizer Adam Rushton; and one Richard Sheldon of Hull, ‘a labouring man'who had had his 'share of misfortunes' and was ‘shortly to be out of employ', but who none the less continued determinedly to read the Penny Magazine.¹

Some who were devotees of the magazine found ways to incorporate its reading into a day's work. For example, a London footman, William Tayler, gave this account of his activities on New Year's Day, 1837:

I got up at half past seven, cleaned the boys' clothes and knives [and] lamps, got the parlour breakfast, lit my pantry fire, cleared breakfast and washed it away, dressed myself, went to church, came back, got parlour lunch, had my own dinner, sit by the fire and red the Penny Magazine and opned the door when any visitors came.

And another working man, T. B. Clark, wrote this letter to SDUK secretary, Thomas Coates:

## Honoured Sir

I hope you will excuse the liberty I am taking in addressing a gentleman of you rank. but Sir I have been a subscriber to the Penny magazine from the first copy to the last and on which I set the greatest value upon it as it comprises the principal portion of my Library and over which I pass away many a midnight hour in my Avocation as a Brickburner.¹⁵

For most readers, though, the magazine appears to have been part of the self-improvement programme with which they filled what little leisure time they had. This was the case with the Yorkshire stencil painter Christopher Thomson, who was particularly eloquent about the place the magazine held in his life, and the lengths to which he went to keep himself supplied with copies. He began with a description of the difficulties and expense associated with the acquisition of knowledge before that day when Charles Knight

unfurled his paper banners of free trade in letters. The Penny Magazine' was published-I borrowed the first volume, and determined to make an effort to possess myself with the second; accordingly, with January, 1833, I determined to discontinue the use of sugar in my tea, hoping that my family would not then feel the sacrifice necessary to buy the book. Since that period, I have expended large sums in books, some of them very costly ones, but I never had one so valuable, as was the second volume of the ‘Penny Magazine'; and I looked as anxiously for the issue of the monthly part, as I did for the means of getting a living. I continued to be a subscriber up to the publication of the last number; and albeit, but an unit, out of the ten's of thousand's that have benefited by that work, I feel bound to tender my mite of gratitude to its spirited and enterprising publisher. The Penny Magazine' was the first intellectual mile-post put down upon the way-side, wherefrom coming ages may measure their progress towards a commonwealth of books.¹6

It is possible that upon the magazine's demise Thomson and many others of its readers might have become part of the mass who now read the Journal, Miscellany, and Paper. If so, then he did not acknowledge the fact—and nor did anyone else, with the exception of just two of the autobiographers out of the sampling used here. One of these was the East London vellum-binder Frederick Rogers, who remembered that in his‘boyhood's days' he had been fond of the London Journal.¹7 The other autobiographer was Thomas Burt, a Northumbrian pitman, later Labour MP, and he too recalled the Journal from his boyhood:

When about fourteen years old a comrade lent me a few stray numbers of the London Journal, a highly-spiced periodical, which I read with great gusto. It was full of adventures of wild, romantic stories depicting duels and battles, deeds of daring, hairbreadth escapes by land and sea, the heroes being banditti, pirates, robbers and outlaws. This stirred the blood and excited the youthful imagination. When my father caught me reading it he gently chided me for wasting time on such rubbishy stuff. Wretched garbage no doubt it was, yet, after all, perhaps the time given to it was not wholly wasted. No useful information, indeed, was gained, but I was acquiring facility in reading, and laying hold of the golden key which would open to me the rich treasures of a great literature.18

In this passage we have a possible clue as to why we find so little autobiographical mention of the Journal, Miscellany, and Paper. Burt, his father, and, indeed, the vast majority of autobiographers belonged to that self-taught, self-improving faction of the working class, most of whom, like Burt's Methodist father, would have considered entertaining miscellanies to be‘time-wasting’and ‘rubbishy stuff'. It thus seems quite likely that if any autobiographers had ever read and enjoyed the Journal and its like, it would have been a surreptitious affair. For to have admitted to such taste would have been to spoil the generally serious and industrious image in which most of these writers cast themselves. On the other hand, it may simply be that those who wrote their autobiographies genuinely did not care for and therefore did not read the second generation of pictorial miscellanies. But which of the two possibilities was more commonly the case, we will likely never know.

We can, though, recall the three magazines' correspondence pages and all those ‘Apprentices', ‘Mechanics', and 'Labourers' who wrote in and represented a wider readership of others much like themselves. There thus seems no reason to doubt the contemporary view that these miscellanies had a substantial working-class following. Here and there we get a further glimpse of some of these readers: for example, amongst Mayhew's labouring poor of London, there were the costermongers who were‘eager for . . . Reynolds' periodicals' and who would‘after their day's work or their rounds' read, or assemble to hear being read, the latest number of these or other such ‘penny publications'. There were too all of those nameless others, in all the working-class districts of all England's urban centres, who regularly visited the shops and stalls and became part of that ‘crowd of applicants' for their weekly issues of the London Journal, Reynolds's Miscellany, and Cassell's Family Paper.19 But for a sense of what these magazines must have meant in many otherwise dreary and hopeless lives there is perhaps no more speaking image than one which comes down to us through Mayhew—a brief description of‘a rheumatic London crossing-sweeper crawling back to his cold, squalid room to pore over a copy of Reynolds's Miscellany'.2o

## III

On the basis of much of the evidence cited above, the working-class experience of the Penny Magazine and its successors might appear to have been a male prerogative. In fact this was not the case. As we already know from editorial correspondence, the three later miscellanies had an especially visible female readership; and this without doubt included working-class women. Indeed, when Thomas Wright, the 'Journeyman Engineer' and observer of working-class life, commented on ‘working men's Saturdays', he was moved to remark that if any man 'has been unfortunate enough to get for a wife a woman who is . . . one of those lazy, lackadaisical London-Journalreading ladies with whom working men are more and more curst, he will have to devote his Saturday afternoons to assisting in the woman's work of his own house'.²¹ This observation aside, there is no reason to suspect that the Journal and similar publications actually contributed to any serious disruption of the routine or necessitated the reallocation of weekend chores in most households-rather, as previous discussion has pointed out, the Journal and its like did their best to insist on domesticity as a specifically female obligation and virtue. But if Wright exaggerated a bit for effect, he was accurate in his main point that many women found the new pictorial miscellanies to be of absorbing interest. Charles Knight was another one who observed the many women readers of these 'penny journals'; and another contemporary publisher, Henry Vizetelly, noted that factory-girls were the ‘great patrons' of the stories of J. F. Smith, which had first appeared in the Journal and later in the Paper.²²

It was not necessarily only working-class women who read the new pictorial magazines. As the correspondence pages of the Journal, Miscellany, and Paper show, some women had preoccupations that signalled a style of life that might have been available to some daughters, wives, and sisters of the most prosperous artisans, but was perhaps more likely to have been the experience of those who were born or married into at least the lower levels of the middle class. For example, occasional comments or queries about the finer points of the etiquette of paying calls or taking leave at parties, as well as the occasional writer's claim to having had a boarding-school education, are suggestive (or at least mildly so) of a middle-class way of life.²³ In the majority of the letters from women, though, there are no clear or conclusive signals of social class.

What does come through strongly is a tendency that we have observed amongst the generality of correspondents: the desire to improve. Sometimes it was intellectual improvement that was the object and we can find a few replies to women who had enquired about some facet of history, science, or literature. More commonly, though, the women correspondents defined self-improvement in a restrictive sense that accorded well with the three magazines'female image. Thus, what most correspondents evidently sought was improvement (or, if not that, confirmation of adequacy) in the areas of personal morality, domestic skills, and physical appearance. How far, they wanted to know, could flirtation go before virtue was compromised? Could one, without impropriety, give a gift to a young man? Or walk home alone from church with him? Then, with these sorts of problems resolved, there came others to take their place. How do you dye wool? Or mend muslin? What is the best method to prepare mutton ham? Rich rice pudding? Vermicelli? Good butter cakes? Ratafia pudding? And tomato ketchup? But, most of all, the correspondents wanted information that would help them improve their appearance. Almost invariably their greatest concern was the state of their complexions and hair. They wanted to know about lotions to prevent wrinkles and remove freckles. They requested receipts'for facial cosmetics like elder-flower water and compound of milk and sulphur-flower. They worried that the hair on their heads was too dull, too thin, too short. Conversely, they were even more exercised that the hair on their arms and faces was too dark, too thick, too long. Those who wrote the replies tried their best to help all the unhappily hirsute like‘Poor Polly' and‘Superfluous'. Always, variously expressed, they made the same recommendation: ‘we know nothing better than a razor'-a piece of aesthetically disastrous advice that could only have come from a man.

The correspondents' involvement with the magazines' female image of good looks, good behaviour, and good housekeeping found its single most complete expression in one kind of letter that many of them wrote. By the early 185os the Journal and Miscellany had begun to print queries from men in search of wives. To take just one example, a young man named Roderick had written to the Miscellany with the information that he wished to marry and to that end would like to hear from suitable young ladies. To Roderick and the other men who had made similar requests, there was usually no shortage of replies. Without exception, the young women who answered attempted to demonstrate their suitability by aligning themselves with the magazines' female image. They thus tried to describe to advantage their wifely qualities, domestic capabilities, and, without stretching the truth too far, their physical attractiveness. The reply of one young woman of 23 to Roderick is typical:

EMmA begs to introduce herself to the notice of Roderick.' She is not pretty, but good-looking, with nice black hair, good eyes, good figure, and altogether interesting. She can play on the piano a little, dance, is very domesticated, and has been told would make any kind man an affectionate and dutiful wife.²4

Emma's and the other women correspondents'engrossment with their physical appearance and the tendency of this preoccupation to override or intermingle with other interests suggests that they and many other women readers studied closely, and compared themselves unfavourably to, the magazines' images of fashionable ladies, beautiful fictional heroines, and attractive actresses and singers. If so, then we have here an instance of the interaction of readers and imagery. But this is surmise for which there is no direct evidence. Janet Bathgate, the only female autobiographer in the sampling used for this study, did not mention the Journal, Miscellany, or Paper at all—let alone how she felt about or what she did with their illustrations.

We know even less about women's reaction to the Penny Magazine. Nor, indeed, can we determine much about the size or character of its female readership. There is no surviving editorial correspondence from women and our lone female autobiographer was as reticent about the earlier magazine as she was about its successors. We do know that the magazine attracted female contributors—the art historian Anna Jameson and Emily Shore, the teenage essayist on natural history.²⁵ We also know that the latter was a reader before she became a contributor, and possibly the same was true of Anna Jameson. Finally, we can point to items like an essay on corsets and, from such examples, speculate that Knight and those who produced the magazine had a rudimentary sense of directing material towards a female readership.26 But such gender-specific content is rare in the magazine and we are left wondering whether or not it, or the other more general-interest subjects, attracted a female readership of any significant size.

## IV

What remains to be glimpsed of the readers of the Penny Magazine and its three successors comes from exclusively male sources. These tell us something about reader interaction with the magazines' illustration and give an inkling of what the printed image meant in the lives of the mass. Unfortunately a great deal must also be left to surmise. This is particularly so when we consider the second generation of pictorial miscellanies. For, although there is no doubt whatsoever that these magazines enjoyed immense popularity, and that some of this popularity was due to the attraction of illustration, there is very little direct evidence from readers to this effect. Those who corresponded with the editors were apparently preoccupied with matters other than pictures when they sat down to compose their letters. And the two autobiographers who mention the Journal did not record what they thought of its illustrations. Thus, on people's responses to the three later magazines' imagery, we have only two sources of information-one famous, the other nameless.

The first is Robert Louis Stevenson, whose childhood's Saturdays were much taken up with the pursuit of the imagery in Cassell's Paper. His parents considered much of this imagery to be unsuitable for youthful consumption, so the young Stevenson was compelled to

study the windows of the stationers and try to fish out of subsequent woodcuts and their legends the further adventures of my favourites... . The experience at least had a great effect on my childhood. This inexpensive pleasure mastered me. Each new Saturday I would go from one newsvendor's window to another's, till I was master of the weekly gallery and had thoroughly digested ‘The Baronet Unmasked', ‘So and So Approaching the Mysterious House', The Discovery of the Dead Body in the Blue Marl Pit', Dr. Vargas Removing the Senseless Body of Fair Lilias', and whatever other snatch of unknown story and glimpse of unknown characters that gallery afforded.²7

But as replete as it is with detail and literary licence, Stevenson's description of his boyish fascination with the illustration in the Paper somewhat pales against the energetic enthusiasm with which Mayhew's costermongers approached the imagery in similar penny publications—in this instance, the Miscellany:

'The costermongers,’ said my informant, ‘are fond of illustrations. I have known a man what couldn't read, buy a periodical what had an illustration, a little out of the common way perhaps, just that he might learn from someone, who could read, what it was all about . . . Look you here, sir,' he continued, turning over a periodical, for he had the number with him, 'here's a portrait of Catherine of Russia. "Tell us about her," said one man to me last night: “read it, what was she?’ Now here,'proceeded my friend, you see an engraving of a man hung up, burning over a fire, and some costers would go mad if they couldn't learn what he'd been doing, who he was, and all about him."But about the picture?"they would say, and this is a very common question put by them whenever they see an engraving.'28

The costermongers' enthusiasm for the imagery of the second generation of pictorial miscellanies was no greater, though, than the similar feelings that the Penny Magazine's illustrations had aroused in others a few vears earlier. For working men such as John Plummer and Adam Rushton the magazine's pictures were a gateway to greater knowledge and literacy. The latter remembered ‘a rather fine view of the Castle of Chillon, accompanied with ... lines from Byron' and how he had been inspired to learn more about the prisoner, and to read more of the writings of the poet'. Plummer recalled the first time that he had happened upon some stray copies of the Penny Magazine ‘and other illustrated periodicals of a similar nature': ‘No miser ever hugged his gold with a more jealous care, than I did those few old torn and soiled numbers which came into my possession. For hours I would gaze on the woodcuts, and strive to decipher the letterpress descriptions, in which I at last succeeded.'9 But it was not just those from deprived backgrounds who had been stimulated by the magazine and its illustrations. Austin Dobson, author of studies of Bewick and Hogarth, offered this fond recollection:

It is difficult to understand nowadays what a revelation these . . . representations of far countries and foreign animals, of masterpieces of painting and sculpture, were to middle-class households fifty years ago. The present writer, though he can scarcely go back so far, still remembers with gratitude, that to Mr. Fairholt's careful copies of Hogarth's prints in the old ‘Penny Magazine', he is indebted for an enthusiasm which has never since deserted him.30

The most detailed account of a reader's response to the magazine's imagery comes from W. B. Rands, who became a successful journalist, poet, and author of children's stories. But at the time of which he wrote Rands was a boy living in the home of his father, an impoverished tradesman with radical political leanings. The senior Rands's politics did not, however, stop him from subscribing to the Penny Magazine and thus, as his son put it, bringing ‘an image of the mighty world' into a home that had previously been nearly barren of