6

# The Transformation of Popular Culture: Working People in an Expanding Pictorial World 1832-1860

IN 184o a commentator on thepopular literature of the day' offered readers of the British and Foreign Review‘a collection of statistical notes' on the magazines and journals that then circulated amongst working people ‘to an extent undreamed of' only a decade earlier:

Seventy-eight weekly periodicals are enumerated, of which nearly twothirds are issued at the price of one penny, none exceeding twopence: twenty-eight of these are devoted to miscellaneous matter; seven to more political subjects; fifteen to the publication of novels, romances and tales; sixteen to biography of celebrated individuals; four to scientific intelligence; three to drama; two to medicine; two are collections of songs, and one registers the progress of the Temperance cause.. More than two-thirds of thęse have the attraction of illustrations.

By 1859 such material had so greatly proliferated that our muchquoted contributor to the British Quarterly Review was moved to remark upon what had become a veritable ‘flood' of ‘cheap literature'and'tempting'illustrations.²

This rapid and unprecedented growth in the number of inexpensive and, by 184o, usually pictorial publications was fundamental in expanding the common cultural experience of working people. And, because the expansion was dramatic, continuing, and wide-reaching in effect, we can with good reason think of it as the transformation of popular culture. The first phase of this transformation had begun in the early 183os with the mass circulation of the Penny Magazine and one or two other publications such as the Saturday Magazine and the unillustrated Chambers' Journal. By 186o, with even higher circulations and wider appeal, the London Journal, Reynolds's Miscellany, and Cassell's Paper had brought this initial phase to its fullest development.³ Illustrated miscellanies thus formed the nucleus of working peoples' experience of the printed image between 1832 and 186o. But other artefacts and their associated imagery also gained in number and importance during this period; and together with magazine illustration such imagery made up almost the whole of the English worker's expanding pictorial world.⁴

The transformation and expansion of popular culture was not just a matter of an increase in the quantity and kind of information, entertainment, and illustration available to working people. It was also a social shift whereby workers joined a wider cultural formation that was not restricted to a single age-group, gender, or class. As the previous discussion of magazine readership indicated, working people had by mid-century chosen to become part of a larger and more diverse group: the mass. In making this choice they indicated their consent to the conventional social values represented in many mass-circulation books and magazines. Such consent served their own purposes and did not negate developing class differences or the economic, social, and cultural inequalities from which these differences arose. As we will see, by the 185os the printed imagery both of generalized social and political protest and of an emergent, although not fully formed, working-class consciousness existed side by side within the English worker's expanding pictorial world. Meanwhile that world held increasingly less of the imagery of power, privilege, and high culture: art and its printed reproduction was in rapid retreat from common experience.

## I

In trying to understand the place of the printed image in working people's lives after 1832 we find that our initial model of three kinds of popular experience—entertainment, religion, and radicalism—no longer adequately serves us. Certainly these cultural categories continued to have some bearing on people's lived experience at midcentury. However, in its pictorial forms at least, a transformed popular culture was more complex and multifarious than it had ever been before. Any one of the three main categories might now be divisible into multiple cultural levels, each of which might require separate attention and differing analytical approaches. For example, the kind of illustrated entertainment that from the 183os proliferated in inexpensive magazines and books had become highly diversified in subject-matter and style, and covered a spectrum ranging from the respectabte and moderate to the lurid and sensational. Moreover, the boundaries distinguishing entertainment, religion, and radicalism increasingly blurred as these different cultura categories found expression and intermingled in unpredictable ways in illustrated books and magazìnes and other forms of printed imagery.

The years after 1832 also saw the increase of types of illustration that tend to defy any effort to assign them conclusively to one of the three categories considered so far. Advertising is a case in point. As we have seen, before 1832 pictorial advertisements were rare enough to divert many an eye and amuse by virtue of novelty. We could thus with some justification situate the imagery of advertising within the popular culture of entertainment. From 1832, though, and especially after 184o, pictorial advertisements became so abundant and varied in content that we cannot with any accuracy label them simply entertainment or, indeed, assign them in entirety to any of the other two categories. It is of course possible that an illustrated playbill advertising a melodrama was in itself a minor form of entertainment; and presumably an advertisement for a book of sermons or a Sunday magazine had something to do with popular religious experience. But what about the increasingly greater number of advertisements for such household goods and personal products as furniture, clocks, and electroplate; and perfume, hair dye, and patent medicines? Certainly these had nothing to do with popular religion, nor likely with radicalism, and compared to an illustrated serial by Reynolds, they could hardly have ranked as entertainment. Rather, it seems that by 186o ,advertising and its images were well on the way to becoming a distinct cultural category. The same also appears to have been true of certain other types of imagery: for instance, the illustration of current events, and the inexpensive prints which became widely available from about 184o, and which working people purchased and used to relieve some of the dreariness of their often otherwise comfortless homes.

Taken together, the complexities and confusions noted above indicate that when we consider popular pictorial experience after 1832, the use of a model is likely to be too restrictive and therefore inadequate for meaningful description and analysis. It seems to be more productive simply to acknowledge that the printed imagery which had become a common feature of most working lives was myriad in number, varied in form and content, and representative of several cultural levels, any of which might be present within a single artefact such as a magazine, or even within an individual illustration. Here, then, we can only sample a limited selection of the more commonplace kinds of popular printed image and in passing gather something about the diverse ways that such images reflected and combined with other forms of cultural expression and lived experience.

It seems clear that the bulk of the illustrated printed matter that became affordable and readily available for working-class consumption between r832 and 186o was either entertaining in a primarily escapist way, or factually informative but still in some measure diverting. For example, serial fiction belonged to the first group; fashion news, popular biography, and so on to the second. As we have seen, the offerings of the Journal, Miscellany, and Paper covered all, or nearly all, of the possible range of inexpensive pictorial entertainment. But, while these three publications achieved the highest circulations among weekly penny magazines, they by no means had that market all to themselves. Other similar miscellanies—all providing illustrated serial fiction, short stories, sundry anecdotes, poems, and informational items—proliferated from the mid-184os especially. One such publication, the Welcome Guest, an illustrated journal of recreative literature', had an 1858 circulation of 120,ooo; meanwhile other comparable magazines like Lloyd's Weekly Miscellany and the Home Magazine did well enough to enjoy runs of several years. Their recipe for commercial success was the same as their three largest competitors: a sprinkling of mildly instructive nonfiction, and a generous measure of highly spiced stories and pictures of wronged serving-girls, beautiful and beset heiresses, evil poisoners, corpses, spectres, and chambers of death.⁵ Apart from this sort of miscellany, there were also a number of other roughly contemporary weekly magazines that confined themselves to a more restricted range of subject-matter. There were, for example, illustrated magazines of fiction such as the Weekly Novelist, as well as several, often shortlived journals and gazettes of humour, horror, or crime with titles like the Penny Satirist, Annals of Crime, and Calendar of Horrors.

Inexpensive novels, many of which had at least one illustration, became widely available from the 184os. Because they were commonly sold in penny parts, such works were now within the means of a large number of working people. One of the most popular of these was Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin, published in England in the early 185os by two dozen or so different publishers. Three working-class autobiographers fondly recalled the story, and one of this group, the son of a Northumberland coal-miner, recorded that in 1852 Uncle Tom's Cabinwas read aloud in our little family circle'. During the 184os and 185os the works of Reynolds, Egan, and Smith (published in book form and penny parts as well as in magazines) also found a large readership. Reynolds, it seems, was the most popular of all, with tales such as his sensational Mysteries of London (1845) and its sequel, The Mysteries of the Court of London (1848–56), which was sold in penny parts and illustrated by Henry Anelay.7 Charles Dickens was another successful author of this period and many of his works, such as The Pickwick Papers and Nicholas Nickleby, appeared in illustrated editions. It is uncertain, though, whether or not many working people read these or other stories by Dickens: he is not mentioned in any of the working-class autobiographies in our sampling; in addition, one-time editor for the house of Cassell, Thomas Frost, believed that Dickens did not become popular among working people until the 187os. Before then more than a few might well have purchased the cheaply produced and crudely engraved imitations that were about in the 183os and 184os: The Penny Pickwick, The Sketchbook by 'Bos', Oliver Twiss, and Nickelas Nickelbery.8

If pirated versions of Dickens and the romantic outpourings of Reynolds lacked the uplifting tone and moral purpose of Mrs Stowe's tale of slavery, they none the less demonstrated a modicum of restraint in style and content when compared to another form of saleable fiction: the so-calledpenny dreadful'. The stories contained in examples of this type of small, inexpensive, paper-bound book invariably tended to dwell lovingly on crime, horror, and the seamier side of relations between the sexes. So, naturally, they attracted a substantial following of people in search of pleasurable terror, revulsion, titillation, and general escapism. After all, who but the most dedicatedly serious-minded reader could fail to respond to the lure of titles such as Ada, the Betrayed, or, The Murder at the Old Smithy, The Apparition, Crimes of the Aristocracy, The Secret of the Grey Turret, The Death Ship, or, The Pirate's Bride, and Varney, the Vampyre, also published as The Feast of Blood?º

An illustration from an 1847 edition of this last work (figure 40) provides as good an example as any of the kind of imagery that attracted readęrs with a penny to spend and a taste for the dreadful. Prominent in the centre of the composition is a horrifically bony and toothy vampire (Varney without doubt) whose lips are fastened on to the neck of a young female victim who flails her arms in agony. As she tormentedly arches her back, she thrusts her breasts upwards, thus providing Varney with a convenient place to rest a loving hand while he takes his nourishment. Here indeed was what our expert on cheap literature' called a pièce de résistance for the strong stomach of the million.'¹o Astute publishers of such illustrated fiction were well aware of the popular appetite for graphic images of violence and horror. Edward Lloyd, one of the most prominent and successful of the penny dreadful publishers, was purported to have directed his