## Preface This book embodies around 40 years of our combined experience working with sustainability issues in the fashion sector. In that time we have worked in the fashion industry, as consultants, in design research, in various teaching posts at universities and with non-profit organizations. We have interacted with many groups, from farmers to politicians, artisans to academics, chemists to fashion business people. Working across these groups has exposed us to many perspectives on sustainability, fashion and commerce, all of which have helped form our own philosophies. Fashion and Sustainability attempts to bring together some of these perspectives and learning with the aim of igniting action and change. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, one definition of fashion is that activity that forms, moulds or shapes either material or immaterial objects. Yet this doesn’t explain all that fashion is. Fashion brings together creative authorship, technological production and cultural dissemination associated with dress,<sup>1</sup> drawing together designers, producers, retailers and all of us who wear garments. At its creative best, fashion helps us to reflect who we are as individuals, while connecting us to wider social groups, providing a sense both of individuality and of belonging. Fashion is a connector, linking people across demographics, socio-economic groups and nationalities; and an attractor, drawing people into a movement for change. Yet fashion also has a complex relationship with larger systems; with economics, ecology and society. The repercussions of the sector’s activities are becoming better understood; and in this book we explore the potential of leveraging the fashion sector’s relationship with these larger systems for sustainability advantage. Our approach to fashion and sustainability throughout this book is opportunistic. We started writing with David Orr’s question at the forefront of our minds: ‘What would sustainability have us do?’<sup>2</sup> and set out to explore how fashion might be practised in a world of natural integrity and human flourishing; and what roles for designers might emerge to help the sector make that shift. Arguably, sustainability offers the biggest critique the fashion sector has ever had. It challenges fashion at the level of detail (fibre and process) and also at the level of the whole (economic models, goals, rules, values and belief systems). As such, it has the potential to transform the fashion sector at root, influencing everyone working within it and everyone who touches fashion and textiles on a daily basis, though too often the system-transforming nature of sustainability for fashion is ignored in favour of making more straightforward adjustments to operational details. This book aims to offer a coherent view of fashion and sustainability thinking, and as such references some ideas and working examples that have been presented before. This is deliberate, for it helps show the trajectory of development in this nascent field, or in some cases the lack of development or change. The book is divided into three parts, each of which focuses on modifying and renewing the ‘fashion industry system’ sector at different points or places. Each progressively explores and expands the ideas and innovation opportunities more deeply and broadly than those that are seen in the industry today. We see each section as part of a continuum of change offering many opportunities for designer-led intervention. We favour a multifarious approach to sustainability in fashion, working both inside and outside the sector and across all parts of the economy, for there are many points where change can be fostered, and through collective effort, each change will affect the whole. Part One begins in a familiar place, exploring the favourable conditions for transforming fashion products via fibre selection, processing routes, use behaviours and reuse strategies; and setting out ways in which the impact of garments can be reduced and their resourcefulness increased. It often places these actions in context with natural systems, to give a sense of the complexities at play even as designers make seemingly simple decisions. Part Two widens this focus further to take in the design of the structures and the economic and business models that shape the fashion industry as a whole and starts to define broader opportunities to transform fashion systems through, for example, adaptability, localism, speed, biomimicry and co-design. Here the ideas are less familiar, more challenging and daring, for they often fall outside the current commercial fashion perspective. Part Three shifts the focus again, to transforming fashion design practice, this time exploring a new set of roles in which designers can be cast in a fashion sector allied with sustainability ideas. Understanding the different skills necessary for designers to contribute actively to ‘The Great Transition’<sup>3</sup> makes the process of improving the whole an outcome of individual practice. This part is shorter than the first two, and deliberately so, for new roles for designers are emerging all the time and we wanted to hint at their beginnings while allowing space for additional roles to surface. In the coming years, we imagine all sectors of the economy becoming rapidly populated by informed and empowered designers, bringing forth innovations not yet possible even to conceive. Lynda Grose and Kate Fletcher San Francisco and London