# BIBLIOGRAPHY ## 1924 The fashion department is constituted as an independent entity, the Modehaus der Wiener Werkstätte Primavesi & Co. The New York branch folds. ## 1925 Zimpel dies. Häusler quits. Wimmer returns from America and resumes his post at the Kunstgewerbeschule but not at the Wiener Werkstätte. The Werkstätte is attacked because of its poor showing at the Paris Art Deco exhibition. ## 1926 Primavesi dies and his bank collapses. The Wiener Werkstätte becomes a publicly held corporation (Aktiengesellschaft). ## 1927 The fashion department is reabsorbed into the company as a whole. Grohmann takes over as manager of the Werkstätte. ## 1928 The Wiener Werkstätte celebrates its twenty-fifth anniversary. ## 1929 A Berlin branch opens and is an immediate failure; an attempt to revive the New York branch likewise fails. Salubra brings out the Flögl wallpaper collection. ## 1930 The silver workshop is closed. Grohmann resigns. Hofmann and Öeri acquire the stock of the Werkstätte. ## 1931 The fashion department closes its showroom in the Palais Esterhazy and moves in with the textile division. The workshop operation is terminated and liquidation of the inventory begins. ## 1932 The Wiener Werkstätte's remaining inventory is liquidated in September, and the fashion department's in November. ## 1939 The name Wiener Werkstätte is removed from the trade registry and its archives donated to the Österreichisches Museum für Kunst und Industrie. The following books have been used as principal sources and will not be cited unless there is a factual discrepancy or specific passages are quoted: Baroni, Daniele, and Antonio D'Auria. Josef Hoffmann und die Wiener Werkstätte. Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 1984. Behal, Vera J. Möbel des Jugendstils. Munich: Prestel Verlag. 1981. Fenz, Werner. Koloman Moser, Graphik, Kunstgewerbe, Malerei. Salzburg: Residenz Verlag, 1984. Gebogenes Holz, Konstruktive Entwürfe Wien 1840–1910. Vienna: Julius Hummel and Stefan Asenbaum, 1979. Koloman Moser, 1868–1918. Vienna: Hochschule für angewandte Kunst, 1979. Neuwirth, Waltraud. Josef Hoffmann, Bestecke für die Wiener Werkstätte. Vienna: Selbstverlag Dr. Waltraud Neuwirth, 1982. Die Keramik der Wiener Werkstätte I. Vienna: Selbstverlag Dr. Waltraud Neuwirth, 1981. Österreichische Keramik des Jugendstils. Munich: Prestel Verlag, 1974. Wiener Werkstätte, Avantgarde, Art Déco, Industrial Design. Vienna: Selbstverlag Dr. Waltiaud Neuwirth, 1984. Schweiger, Werner J. Wiener Werkstätte, Design in Vienna 1903– 1932. New York: Abbeville Press, 1984 Sekler, Eduard F. Josef Hoffmann, The Architectural Work. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985. Völker, Angela. Wiener Mode und Modefotografie, Die Modeabteilung der Wiener Werkstätte 1911-1932. Munich/Paris: Verlag Schneider-Henn, 1984. ## INTRODUCTION 1. Waltraud Neuwirth, Österreichische Keramik des Jugendstils (Munich: Prestel Verlag, 1974), p. 78. ## I. BACKGROUND 1. Koloman Moser, "Vom Schreibtisch und aus dem Atelier: Mein-Werdegang," in Koloman Moser 1868–1918 (Vienna: Hochschule für angewandte Kunst, 1979), p. 9. 2. Hugo Haberfeld, "The Architectural Revival in Austria," in The Studio, 1906, p. (C) ii. 3. Adolf Loos, “Potemkin's Town" (1898), in Vienna Moderne: 1898– 1918 (Houston: Sarah Campbell Blaffer Gallery, 1979), p. 86. 4. Otto Wagner, “Moderne Architektur" (1896), in Vienna: Turn of the Century Art and Design (London: Fischer Fine Art, Ltd., 1979), p. 4. 5. Eduard F. Sekler, Josef Hoffmann: The Architectural Work (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), p. 13. 6. For a detailed discussion of the events leading up to the founding of the Secession, see James Schedel, Art and Society: The New Art Movement in Vienna, 1897–1914 (Palo Alto: The Society for the Promotion of Science, 1981). 7. In view of its eventual role and the general stylistic thrust of its membership, the Secession may be considered the avant-garde of its time and place, with the proviso that it was interested far more in a general ideal of creative freedom than in promoting any one style. Its earliest members included Hoffmann, Klimt, Olbrich, Moll, and Moser. Rudolf von Alt, then almost ninety and one of the most esteemed artists of the Biedermeier period, was appointed honorary president; Wagner joined up relatively late, in 1899. 8. Peter Vergo, Art in Vienna, 1898–1918 (London: Phaidon Press, Ltd., 1975), p. 23. 9. Ver Sacrum, Vol. I, No. 1 (January 1898), p. 9. 10. A certain portion of the Secession's proceeds (like the Künstlerhaus, it took a 10 percent commission on all sales) was to be used for the acquisition of modern art. Otto Wagner designed a museum to house these works, but it was never built. Instead the collection was eventually given provisional quarters in the Belvedere Palace, where, with some adjustments and administrative changes, the bulk of it remains to this day. 11. Ver Sacrum, Vol. I, No. 1 (January 1898), p. 6. 12. Today the Österreichisches Museum für angewandte Kunst. 13. In 1909 the South Kensington Museum split into the Science Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum. 14. Today the Hochschule für angewandte Kunst. 15. Scala's initial winter exhibition, in 1897/98, was the first to display “modern" interiors by designers such as Josef Urban and Heinrich Lefler. However, Scala's anglophilia went too far for the Secessionists' tastes, and when he began to actively encourage native industry to copy British models (as was, after all, in keeping with the museum's long-standing policy) he was roundly attacked by the avant-garde. 16. Most of the teachers were employed on a provisional basis before being named professors; Hoffmann's official appointment came in 1899, Moser's in 1900. 17. The influence of the Secession and the Wiener Werkstätte on the Kunstgewerbeschule is so far-reaching that it is difficult to pinpoint an exact termination date. Eduard Josef Wimmer-Wisgrill taught there until 1953, Hilda Jesser until 1967. 18. Alessandra Comini, Egon Schiele's Portraits (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1974), p. 19. 19. For a detailed discussion of Mackintosh's influence on Hoffmann, see Sekler, pp. 39-40. 20. Roger Billcliffe, Mackintosh Furniture (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1984), p. 69. Billcliffe cites the Westdel house in Glasgow as the first use of the square motif. Interestingly, this project was first published in 1902 in the German journal Dekorative Kunst. 21. Billcliffe (p. 69) states that only two pieces by Mackintosh were sold at the Secession exhibition: an armchair, to Moser, and a cabinet, to Hugo Henneberg (around which Hoffmann would design a room in Henneberg's Hohe Warte villa). 22. Gottfried Semper was probably most instrumental in transmitting the British lesson to the German-speaking world. His essay “Wissenschaft, Industrie und Kunst," published in 1852 in direct response to the Great Exhibition in London the year before, was one of the earliest attempts to deal with the aesthetic implications of industrialization. 23. Carl E. Schorske, Fin-de-Siècle Vienna, Politics and Culture (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1980), p. 304. 24. Jane Kallir, Arnold Schoenberg's Vienna (New York: Rizzoli International Publications, 1984), p. 73. All of these men felt that the aristocrat's imperative and the artist's imperative were allied. 25. Walter Gropius, "Programme of the Staatliche Bauhaus in Weimar" (1919), in Vienna Moderne, p. 91. 26. Isabelle Anscombe and Charlotte Gere, Arts & Crafts in Britain and America (New York: Rizzoli International Publications, 1978), p. 110. 27. Otto Wagner, Jr., “Josef M. Olbrich, ein Nachruf," in Deutsche Bauzeitung, Vol. XLII, August 15, 1908, p. 456. 28. Die Kunst und die Revolution (1849), Das Kunstwerk der Zukunft (1849), and Oper und Drama (1851). 29. Gropius in Vienna Moderne, p. 91. 30. For a detailed discussion of the Austrian Gesamtkunstwerk, see Werner Hofmann, "Gesamtkunstwerk Wien," in Der Hang zum Gesamtkunstwerk (Zürich: Kunsthaus Zürich, 1983), pp. 84-92. 31. Sekler, p. 33. 32. Vergo, p. 164. 33. This story has long been part of the Wiener Werkstätte legend though its accuracy has recently been challenged by Werner Schweiger (Wiener Werkstätte, Design in Vienna 1903-1932 [New York: Abbeville Press, 1984], p. 91), who contends that Wimmer made his first visit to the Stoclets only in 1912, a year after the fashion department formally opened. In any case, the spirit of the anecdote remains accurate enough. ## II. HISTORY 1. In 1892 the Munich Secession was founded, and within the next three years similar splits had divided the artistic populations of Düsseldorf, Weimar, Dresden and Karlsruhe. Vienna, in 1897, and Berlin, in 1898, were the two last major cities to form Secession movements. Berlin, however, differed from Vienna in that it had a well-developed network of commercial galleries, and almost from the start its Secession established close ties with these dealers. 2. Prior to 1904 the Galerie Miethke (founded in 1861 by Hugo Othmar Miethke) represented conservative nineteenth-century art in the Ringstrasse mode. After Klimt's friend Paul Bacher bought the gallery in 1904, Moll took over as artistic director and the exhibition program became far more progressive. 3. The money to reclaim Klimt's university paintings was provided by the wealthy industrialist August Lederer and by Kolomon Moser, who divided the works between them. 4. According to Nora Wärndorfer Hodges (the daughter of August Wärndorfer; interview, January 23, 1986), the family name was spelled with an umlaut over the a. However, upon joining the Wiener Werkstätte, Fritz Wärndorfer adopted the alternative spelling “Waerndorfer." This spelling was consistent with the style popular with many Werkstätte artists (the word Werkstätte was, in fact, spelled with an ae in the organization's original logo). This preference may have a typographical explanation, in that the umlaut, rising above the other letters, disrupts the unity of a line of type. For the sake of consistency, the umlauted a is used throughout this book. 5. Both Leopold Wolfgang Rochowanski (Josef Hoffmann, Eine Studie geschrieben zu seinem 80. Geburtstag, [Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Staatsdruckerei, 1950]) and Hoffmann himself ("Selbstbiographie" in Ver Sacrum—Neue Folge 4 [Vienna/ Munich: Verlag für Jugend und Volk, 1972]) contend that the idea of the Wiener Werkstätte was first mooted at the Café Heinrichshof in late 1902 or early 1903. Moser and Hoffmann were sitting with Wagner, Wärndorfer and some friends griping about the artistic situation in Vienna, when Wärndorfer asked what it would cost to finance such a venture. Moser and Hoffmann took him up on his offer, and so, supposedly, the Wiener Werkstätte was born. 6. Werner J. Schweiger, Wiener Werkstätte, Design in Vienna 1903- 1932 (New York: Abbeville Press, 1984), p. 16. 7. The original members of Wiener Kunst im Hause—Gisela von Falke, Emil Holzinger, Franz Messner, Marietta Peyfuss, William Schmidt, Jutta Sika, Karl Sumetsberger, Therese Trethan, Else Unger and Hans Vollmer—were later joined by Yvonne Brick, Agnes Hossner and Alexandra von Sauer-Csaky. 8. According to Nora Hodges (interview, January 3, 1986), Fritz Wärndorfer's father had been a cofounder of the firm of Wärndorfer, Benedict, Mautner, which had several factories in Bohemia and one in Lower Austria. The second generation consisted of two Wärndorfer sons, Fritz and August, and two Mautner sons, Stefan and Konrad, who collectively bought out the Benedict family's interest and changed the company's name to Österreichisches Textilwerk. The oft-repeated assertion that Wärndorfer was involved in banking is incorrect. 9. According to Nora Hodges (see above), both Fritz and August Wärndorfer were sent to England to study the British textile industry before entering the family business; the family also had British relatives. 10. It is Nora Hodges's contention that almost none of the secondgeneration proprietors of the family firm was particularly interested in it, and that Fritz Wärndorfer was able to devote almost all his time to the Wiener Werkstätte. 11. Schweiger, pp. 42-43. 12. Many sources imply that the cabinetry shop was part of the Wiener Werkstätte from the beginning, but in fact it was only officially authorized in 1904. Woodworking, with its noise and machinery, was somewhat different in scale from the other crafts workshops; the neighbors complained, and the cabinetry shop was forced to suspend operations in 1907 or 1908. 13. Other than a cabinet in the entry hall and some metal desk accessories, no contributions by Moser to the Palais Stoclet have thus far been documented. 14. Josef Hoffmann, “Unser Weg zum Menschentum, 25 Jahre Wiener Werkstätte," in Deutsche Kunst und Dekoration, Vol. LXII, August 1928. According to this statement, woven and printed fabrics, carpets and wallpaper were produced by outside licensees; all other items were manufactured on the premises of the Wiener Werkstätte. 15. Robert Cole, one of the biographers of Josef Urban, has so far been unable to confirm the date when Urban opened the Wiener Werkstätte's New York branch. The first articles on the branch, published in The New York Times in June 1922, suggest that the shop was opened only that year. The 1921 date derives from an article on Urban published in Architecture Magazine in May 1934. 16. The Österreichischer Werkbund, which held its first official meeting in the spring of 1913, from the start placed far less emphasis on industrial production than did its German counterpart. After the war, Hoffmann criticized the Österreichischer Werkbund for promoting sloppy workmanship and was consequently attacked for conflict of interest. As a result, the Werkbund split in 1920, and Hoffmann founded his own "Werkbund Wien." Sporadic attempts to reconcile the two groups were made throughout the 1920s. 17. Waltraud Neuwirth (Österreichische Keramik des Jugendstils [Munich: Prestel Verlag, 1974], p. 209) gives 1905 as the date of the founding of the Wiener Keramik; Schweiger (p. 263) gives the date as 1906. 18. Otto Wagner constructed the building on the Döblergasse in 1912 and leased a portion of it to the Artists' Workshops that year; the workshops probably began to operate in 1913. 19. Schweiger, pp. 42-43. 20. Peter Vergo, Art in Vienna, 1898-1918 (London: Phaidon Press, Ltd., 1975), p. 132. 21.J. A. Lux, “Wiener Werkstätte, Josef Hoffmann, Koloman Moser," in Deutsche Kunst und Dekoration, Vol. XV, 1904/05, p. 7. 22. Schweiger, p. 113. 23. Ibid., p. 42. 24. Ibid., p. 43. 25. Hermann Bahr, “Contrefaçon, Epilog zur Winterausstellung des Österreichischen Museums," in Sezession, 1900, p. 188. In his essay, Bahr also wondered “out loud" whether such copying was actually permissible: “Is that allowed? Is there no legal protection against it?" In fact an attempt was made subsequently to apply some sort of legal constraints to the copying then rampant in the Viennese furniture industry, but such practices were so widespread, and had for so long been condoned by the museum itself, that it was very difficult to know where to draw the line. 26. Interview with Mäda Primavesi, December 30, 1985. 27. James Shedel, Art and Society: The New Art Movement in Vienna, 1897-1914 (Palo Alto: The Society for the Promotion of Science, 1981), p. 56. Shedel seems to have established that Wittgenstein's grant came to 60,000 gulden, which according to Shedel's table of values (p. 209) would equal 120,000 kronen or roughly \$25,200. 28. The portrait of Magda Mautner-Markhof was never actually executed. 29. Alessandra Comini, Egon Schiele's Portraits (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1974), page 127. 30. Ibid., pp. 127-131. Comini gives the cost of the Klimt portrait as “the equivalent of \$7,000” (page 234, note 52), which would have then been 33,600 kronen. 31. Peter Vergo, “Dream and Reality: The Wiener Werkstätte 1903- 1913," in Vienna 1900 (Paris: Centres Georges Pompidou, 1986). Vergo notes that artists were allowed to buy many products at close to cost, further reducing the Werkstätte's income. Hereafter cited as Vergo II. 32. Eduard F. Sekler, Josef Hoffmann, The Architectural Work (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), p. 63. 33. Schweiger, p. 42. 34. Like many aspects of the Werkstätte's program, the Artists' Workshops were in reality less than ideal. The royalty setup meant that artists might receive little or no compensation if their work failed to sell, something that became a sore point during the economic distress of the 1920s. 35. Interview with Mäda Primavesi, December 12, 1985. 36. Vergo II. 37. Ludwig Goldscheider, Kokoschka (London: Phaidon Press, Ltd., 1963), p. 13. 38. Sekler, p. 76. 39. Koloman Moser, letter to Josef Hoffmann, February 20, 1907, in Werner Fenz, Koloman Moser (Salzburg: Residenz Verlag, 1984), p. 249, note 109. 40. Interview with Nora Wärndorfer Hodges, December 20, 1985. 41. Vergo II. 42. Ibid. Vergo also states that “at one point Wärndorfer suddenly, and inexplicably, turns up in London, trying to float the WW as a going concern on the London stock market, but to no avail." Schweiger (p. 96) contends that the Wiener Werkstätte was in fact registered as “Vienna Works Ltd." in England in 1912. As Schweiger notes, it remains to be determined whether this was purely a legal formality or had any larger significance for the parent company in Austria. 43. Schweiger, p. 96. Nora Hodges (interview, January 3, 1986) recalls that the amount was 1,250,000 kronen. 44. Interview with Nora Hodges, December 20, 1985. The family of Fritz Wärndorfer's wife (who remained behind in Austria with the children) also put up some of the money to pay off the Wiener Werkstätte debt. At around this time, and possibly also in connection with the Werkstätte fiasco, the Wärndorfer family sold out the balance of its interest in the Österreichisches Textilwerk. 45. Interview with Mäda Primavesi, December 30, 1985. 46. Josef Urban also organized an American “Artists' Fund" that sent money to needy Austrian artists. 47. Interview with Gretl Urban (Josef Urban's daughter), January 3, 1986. Urban, it is interesting to note, had many extremely wealthy society clients, such as William Randolph Hearst and Marjorie Post, but they did not buy in sufficient quantity to keep the enterprise alive. The kind of comprehensive patronáge that was so common in Austria simply did not exist in the vast, democratic United States. 48. Angela Völker (Wiener Mode und Modefotografie [Munich/Paris: Verlag Schneider-Henn, 1984], p. 252) states that the Zürich branch closed in 1920, while Schweiger (p. 121) notes that the Wiener Werkstätte A.G. remained in the business registry in Zürich until February 1926. 49. Interview with Mäda Primavesi, December 20, 1985. 50. Interview with Mäda Primavesi, December 30, 1985. Further difficulties were created by the extreme complexity both of Primavesi's other business interests and of the Wiener Werkstätte. He felt that no one man could ever fully administer all the Werkstätte's myriad fields of endeavor, let alone do all that and run the various Primavesi enterprises as well. His wife, on the other hand, considered the preservation of the Wiener Werkstätte not only an artistic, but a patriotic duty; to the end of her days, she never gave up hope of reviving it. 51. Grohmann was not, as reported by Schweiger (p. 122), a relative of Eugenie Primavesi, but of her husband; he had married a distant cousin. Mäda Primavesi (interview, January 3, 1986) suggests that it was her mother who encouraged Grohmann to try his hand at salvaging the Wiener Werkstätte but questions the extent to which he actually contributed either money or expertise to the enterprise. 52. Interview with Mäda Primvaesi, December 30, 1985. 53. “Alfred Kubin's Autobiography," in The Other Side, Denver Lindley, trans. (New York: Crown Publishers, 1967), p. lxi. 54. Buıkhardt Rukschcio and Roland Schachel, Adolf Loos (Salzburg: Residenz Verlag, 1982), p. 199. In November 1914 Karl Kraus wrote a friend sadly that “Loos's conversation reveals a Teutonic fervor. Therefore communication is even more difficult than usual." Kraus's own famous essay, “In these Great Times," however, reveals no particularly clairvoyant knowledge of the actual outcome of the war, but only a grim dismay about its immediate cultural manifestations. Loos, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Kokoschka, and Schoenberg are among those who willingly accepted military service as their duty. 55. Schweiger, p. 106. 56. Egon Schiele, letter to Anton Peschka, March 2, 1917, in Christian M. Nebehay, Egon Schiele, Leben, Briefe, Gedichte (Salzburg: Residenz Verlag, 1979), p. 418. 57. Schweiger, p. 68. ## III. ARCHITECTURE 1. Peter Vergo, Art in Vienna 1898-1918 (London: Phaidon Press, Ltd., 1975), p. 118. 2. Otto Wagner, "Olbrich," in Die Zeit, August 9, 1908, pp. 4-5. 3. Eduard F. Sekler, Josef Hoffmann, The Architectural Work (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), p. 18. 4. Ibid., p. 20. 5. Ibid., p. 41. Olbrich declared in 1898, "We must build a city, an entire city! Everything else means nothing! The government should give us a field, ... and there we want to show what we are capàble of; in the entire settlement and to the last detail, everything dominated by the same spirit." 6. Werner Fenz, Koloman Moser (Salzburg: Residenz Verlag, 1984), p. 29. 7. Deutsche Kunst und Dekoration, Vol. XIX, October 1906-March 1907, p. 55. 8. Roger Billcliffe, Mackintosh Furniture (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1984), p. 9. 9. Fenz, pp. 33-34. The so-called Purkersdorf chair had been used in the Moser-designed Klimt installation in 1903 and was manufactured by Prag-Rudniker (a firm with which Moser worked) in several variations. These facts would tend to confirm a Moser attribution. 10. Mackintosh's Haus eines Kunstfreundes (never built) was designed in response to a competition sponsored by Alexander Koch's Zeitschrift für Innendekoration in 1901. Mackintosh received the purchase prize for his entry. 11. Carl E. Schorske (Fin-de-Siècle Vienna, Politics and Culture [New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1980], p. 237) notes that the Secession's attempts to foster an international style were initially encouraged by the Habsburg regime because it was felt that native (i.e., “folk") styles would fuel the nationalistic divisiveness that threatened to tear the empire apart. The return to folk forms at the very moment when the empire was at the brink of destruction suggests a final attempt to forestall the inevitable by uniting behind the illusion that such forms constituted a national identity after all. 12. As used within the context of this book, the term “folkish" will be given a strictly stylistic interpretation, tacitly ignoring the political implications that Hitler would soon impart to the concept. However, one must not altogether forget that this concept of the “Volk," even as it applied to so seemingly innocuous an area as art, did in fact already invoke dangerous nationalistic tendencies. 13. Sekler, p. 129. Mäda Primavesi, the client's daughter, gives most of the credit for the idea of the house to Hoffmann, who she says thought it would be fun to employ regional vernacular motifs throughout the house. 14. Interview with Mäda Primavesi, December 20, 1985. 15. Alfred Kubin, The Other Side, Denver Lindley, trans. (New York: Crown Publishers, 1967), p. 13. 16. Burkhardt Rukschcio and Roland Schachel, Adolf Loos (Salzburg: Residenz Verlag, 1982), pp. 62-64. 17. Sekler, p. 29. 18. Adolf Loos, “Kulturentartung," (1908) in Trotzdem (Vienna: Georg Prachner Verlag, 1982), p. 77. 19. Karl Kraus, Die Fackel, No. 389-390, December 1913. 20. Schweiger, p. 10. 21. Ibid., p. 10. 22. XIV. Ausstellung der Vereinigung Bildender Künstler Österreichs (Vienna: Secession, 1902), pp. 9-10. 23. Armin Friedmann, "Sezessionistische Tafelfreuden, Das Tischleindeckdich der 'W.W.", in Neues Wiener Tageblatt, October 16, 1906. 24. Vergo, p. 158. 25. Koloman Moser, “Bühnenbilder und Kostümentwürfe zu 'Der Musikant," in Deutsche Kunst und Dekoration, Vol. XXVII, 1910/11, p. 388. 26. In 1908 the Cabaret Fledermaus's first artistic director, Marc Henry, resigned, and there was a second change in management the following year. Each change brought a decline in quality, and in 1913 the space was taken over by the "Singspielhalle Feminina." 27. Sekler, p. 112. 28. Advertisement for J. & J. Kohn in The Studio, 1906, p. AD. II. 29. Like most Austrian industries, the bentwood firms were hard hit by World War I. Thonet's factories ended up outside the borders of the redefined nation. Kohn was absorbed by the firm Mundus, which in turn merged with Thonet in the mid-1920s. 30. Sekler, p. 484. 31. F. Servaes, "Kunst im Handwerk," in Neue Freie Presse, November 10, 1900. 32. Hermann Bahr, Tagebücher 2 (Innsbruck/Vienna/Munich: Verlagsanstalt Tyrolia, 1919), pp. 262-263. 33. Ludwig Hevesi, Altkunst-Neukunst, Wien 1894-1908 (Vienna: Verlagsbuchhandlung Carl Konegen, 1919), p. 227. 34. Deutsche Kunst und Dekoration, Vol. XXIV, April 1909-September 1909, pp. 85-88. 35. Schweiger, p. 207. ## IV. FASHION 1. Attempts to definitely attribute particular garments to Hoffmann have been largely unsuccessful; however, he did publish an essay on “Das individuelle Kleid" (The Distinctive Dress) as early as 1908. 2. Austrian law does not permit the operation of a business such as a tailoring establishment without a formally licensed “"master." Wimmer, trained as an architect, did not qualify, and it is perhaps for this reason that his name does not appear on the official fashion department documents. Marianne Zels, a "master" tailor, served as the titular head of the shop in the beginning; after the fashion division achieved "factory" status in 1914, the presence of such a master was no longer legally required. 3. Eduard Josef Wimmer-Wisgrill, letter to Josef Hoffmann, July 23, 1910, in Angela Völker, Wiener Mode und Modefotografie (Munich/Paris: Verlag Schneider-Henn, 1984), p. 16. 4. Werner J. Schweiger, Wiener Werkstätte, Design in Vienna 1903- 1932 (New York: Abbeville Press, 1984), p. 224. 5. Bertha Zuckerkandl, "Durch Kunst zur künstlerischen Mode," in Wiener Allgemeine Zeitung, March 15, 1913. 6. Völker, p. 47. 7. Schweiger, p. 42. 8. Schweiger, p. 220. 9. Völker, p. 8. 10. Schweiger, p. 187. 11. Ibid., p. 187. 12. According to James May, who has made an exhaustive study of the Wiener Werkstätte's American years, wallpaper installation was particularly problematical in the United States, where the level of craftsmanship was inferior to that in Austria. 13. Max Eisler, Dagobert Peche (Vienna/Leipzig, 1925). 14. Elisabeth Rücker, Wiener Charme (Nuremberg: Germanisches Nationalmuseum, 1984), p. 29. 15. Hermann Bahr, “Der englische Stil," in Secession, November 1900, p. 184. 16. Schweiger (p. 202) gives 1913 as the date of the merger between the Wiener Keramik and the Gmundner Keramik; Waltraud Neuwirth (Österreichische Keramik des Jugendstils, [Munich: Prestel Verlag, 1974], p. 209) gives the date as 1912. 17. Schweiger, p. 118. 18. Baudisch ran ceramics workshops in Germany and Austria; Wieselthier pursued her career in the United States; Flögl also had her own workshop and was active as a teacher, as were Jesser, Likarz and Rix. 19. This is confirmed by The Studio (1906, p. D-ix), and also by an early article on the coed group Wiener Kunst im Hause (Das Interieur, 1902, Vol. 3, pp. 97-98), that noted: "While the male members mainly look after and supervise the design of the rooms and the construction of the furniture, the women have taken over the production of the accessories.' 20. Joseph Roth, The Emperor's Tomb, John Hoare, trans. (London: Chatto & Windus/The Hogarth Press, 1984), pp. 97-99. 21. Rücker, p. 5. Gretl Urban (interview, January 3, 1986) commented on the contrast between the living conditions of the Austrians after the war and the illusions their artists tried to create, noting that Peche occupied a house that was on the verge of collapse at the same time that he was producing his silver fantasies. 22. According to a statute recorded in 1895, the Kunstgewerbeschule consisted of four basic divisions: (1) the General Division, (2) master classes in architecture, painting and sculpture, (3) special crafts studios (for woodcarving, enamel, lacemaking, etc.), and (4) the Chemical Laboratory. Attendance was limited to a maximum of four (!) years in any one division, but within this rather lenient program, it appears that the students were more or less allowed to shape their own exact course of study. The length of time in the General Division seems to have varied from student to student, as did the length of time spent in a master class. 23. Rita Boley-Bolaffio, who studied under Hoffmann at the Kunstgewerbeschule during the war years (interview, November 5, 1985) claims that he showed up in the classroom no more than once a week. It is interesting to note that Hoffmann himself, in his first years at the Academy, had suffered under the tutelage of a teacher, Hasenauer, who was too busy to attend to his classes himself and instead delegated much of the day-to-day responsibility to an assistant. 24. Students had to pass a fairly rigorous exam (five days in duration, according to Rita Boley-Bolaffio) to get into the Kunstgewerbeschule, and Hoffmann's class of a half-dozen or so handpicked students was even more selective. During its heyday, the Kunstgewerbeschule also attracted foreign students, and competition was keen to get into the more desirable classes. 25. Koloman Moser, "Vom Schreibtisch und aus dem Atelier, Mein Werdegang," in Koloman Moser (Vienna: Hochschule für angewandte Kunst, 1979), p. 12. ## IV. GRAPHIC ARTS 1. Werner J. Schweiger, “Koloman Moser, Eine biographische Skizze," in Koloman Moser (Vienna: Hochschule für angewandte Kunst, 1979), p. 21. Hereafter cited as Moser. 2. The system of identifying monograms can become exceedingly complex, as for instance when one must sort out the designer of the object, the craftsman/creator of the object, the designer of the decoration, and the craftsman/creator of the decoration. 3. For an exhaustive study of Wiener Werkstätte monograms and their meaning, see Waltraud Neuwirth, Wiener Werkstätte Schutzmarken I (Vienna: Selbstverlag Dr. Waltraud Neuwirth, 1985). 4. Werner J. Schweiger, Wiener Werkstätte, Design in Vienna 1903- 1932 (New York: Abbeville Press, 1984), p. 43. 5. Eduard F. Sekler, Josef Hoffmann, The Architectural Work (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), p. 167. 6. Daniele Baroni and Antonio D'Auria, Josef Hoffmann und die Wiener Werkstätte (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 1984), p. 46. 7. Many former Cizek students comment on the creative freedom that he encouraged, and yet the stylistic uniformity and almost selfconscious cuteness of much of the work somehow contradict this. What is certain is that Cizek brought out the "child" in children, and very few of his former students amounted to much as artists in later life. For further information on Cizek, see Franz Cizek, Pionier der Kunsterziehung (Vienna: Historisches Museum der Stadt Wien, 1985). 8. Schweiger (p. 177) gives 1907 as the year when the Wiener Werkstätte commenced its postcard series; Traude Hansen (Die Postkarten der Wiener Werkstätte, [Munich/Paris: Verlag Schneider-Henn, 1982], p. 11) gives the date of 1908. While it is true that the first numbered cards were published in connection with the 1908 Kunstschau, there were several unnumbered cards before this. Czeschka actually designed the first single Werkstätte card, a New Year's greeting, in 1905. 9. Schweiger, p. 178. 10. All biographical information on Richard Gerstl is based on Otto Kallir, "Richard Gerstl (1883-1908), Beiträge zur Dokumentation seines Lebens und Werkes," in Mitteilungen der Österreichischen Galerie, Vol. XVIII, No. 64 (1974) 11. Gerstl's painting The Sisters, one of the few to bear a confirmed date, was painted in 1905 and already shows strong Expressionist tendencies. 12. Werner Fenz, Koloman Moser (Salzburg: Residenz Verlag, 1984) p. 204. 13. Ibid., p. 205. 14. Gerstl's parents, unlike the families of Kokoschka and Schiele, were relatively well-to-do, and seem to willingly have paid for his art lessons and also a separate apartment/studio. Gerstl's early death leaves open the question of what might have happened had he lived to an age at which he might have been expected to support himself. 15. Werner J. Schweiger, Der Junge Kokoschka (Pöchlarn: Oskar Kokoschka Dokumentation Pöchlarn, 1983), p. 5. Hereafter cited as Pöchlarn. 16. Ludwig Goldscheider, Kokoschka (London: Phaidon Press, Ltd., 1963), p. 10. 17. Stephan Steinlein, "Ludwig Heinrich Jungnickel—München," in Deutsche Kunst und Dekoration, XVII, November 1905, p. 118. 18. Kokoschka himself always claimed that Die träumenden Knaben was done in 1906, or two years before its publication (thereby making it seem al the more revolutionary), and this assertion is repeated by Schweiger, p. 88. However, in Schweiger's earlier essay (Pöchlarn, pp. 31-32) he cites fairly conclusive evidence supporting a later date of 1907 or even 1908. 19. Unpublished letter, exhibited “Der junge Kokoschka," Oskar Kokoschka—Dokumentation Pöchlarn, June 24-September 25, 1983. 20. Pöchlarn, p. 7. 21. Fritz Wärndorfer, letter to C. O. Czeschka, February 4, 1908, in Pöchlarn, p. 42. 22. Jane Kallir, Arnold Schoenberg's Vienna (New York: Rizzoli International Publications, 1984), pp. 31-32. 23. As anticipated, Die träumenden Knaben was an economic disaster; the unsold copies were remaindered to the publisher Kurt Wolff, who reissued them in 1917 with a new title page. 24. Adolf Loos, “Bekenntnis zu Kokoschka," in Oskar Kokoschka, Das gesammelte Werk (Mannheim: Städtische Kunsthalle, 1931), pp. 2-3. 25. Goldscheider, p. 10. 26. Koloman Moser, undated letter to Gustav Klimt, in Fenz, p. 227. Of the four artists whom Moser mentions in his letter, three-Faistauer, Schiele and Wiegele-were members of the Neukunstgruppe—the group of artişts who, together with Schiele, left the Academy in 1909 and exhibited together later that year. The third, Anton Kolig, actually received à travel stipend from Klimt and Moll in 1912, making it possible to date Moser's letter to around that time. 27. It is said that Klimt introduced Schiele to his favorite model, Valerie Neuzil; Klimt also introduced Schiele to one of his most important patrons, the industrialist August Lederer. LE17740 Jane Kallir's comprehensive work not only charts the rise and flowering of the Wiener Werkstätte, but assesses its extraordinary artistic achievements in every branch of design. In so doing, the author analyzes for the first time the dense web of connections - institutional and educational, intellectual and social - that enabled the imaginative leaders of the Werkstätte to impress upon the Austrian élite and the world beyond their visual ideals and stylistic idiom.' - Carl E. Schorske At the turn of the century, Vienna emerged as a great cultural centre that stood at the forefront of developments in music, psychology and the natural sciences. Equally influential, and still tremendously popular today, are the designs of the Wiener Werkstätte, or Vienna Workshops, a group that was at the heart of the city's cultural efflorescence and whose collaborators included such luminaries as the architect Josef Hoffmann, the designer Koloman Moser, and the painters Gustav Klimt, Oskar Kokoschka and Egon Schiele. Here is an excellent introduction to their work in all media - architecture, furniture, ceramics and glass, silver, fashion and textiles, bookbinding, toys, and painting and the graphic arts - which also serves as a survey of the cultural development of this pivotal period. Jane Kallir is co-director of the Galerie St. Etienne, the leading New York gallery for Viennese and early Expressionist art from Austria and Germany. She is an art historian and writer, and is currently working on the definitive catalogue raisonné of Egon Schiele's paintings, drawings and watercolours. Carl E. Schorske is Professor Emeritus of History at Princeton University and the author of Fin-de-siècle Vienna. With 250 illustrations, 55 in colour ## THAMES AND HUDSON Cover design adapted from a poster by Josef Hoffmann, 1905. Printed in Japan. ISBN 0-500-27445-2