Architecture and the Higher Learning Schon, Donald A. # The Design Studio An Exploration of its Traditions and Potentials © 1985 Donald Schon/MIT and RIBA Buiiding Industry Trust 66 Portland Place London W1A 4AD England ISBN 0 947877 45 2 ## Preface This study was commissioned by the RIBA Industry Trust as a contribution to the ‘great education debate' of the 1980's, a debate concerned both with general education and that of architects in particular. Architecture and design teaching methods are being seen increasingly as models for avoiding the polarisation of the arts and the sciences in traditional secondary education; an education to somé purpose' involving both intellectual and practical ability. Such an education produces young people with a much greater all round capability, of great value to them and society. Such people are also just the kind that a diverse industry such as building needs in all its many facets. It is hoped that Dr. Schon's work will also aid 'The Education for Capability' campaign of the Royal Society of Arts. Keith Ingham Chairman RIBA Building Industry Trust. ## Foreword Professor David Gosling Professor Schon has recognised the renewed interest in architectural education internationally. Perhaps because architecture has become a fashionable vocation, similar in appeal to law and medicine, the current view may be that there are too many people crowding the profession. This is certainly a view held at the time by the Government of the United Kingdom and members of the Royal Institute of British Architects, both bodies wishing to see a drastic reduction in numbers. Inevitably, such a view encourages a reappraisal of architectural education with the intention not only of encouraging fewer students to enter schools of architecture but acting as a challenge concerning the very validity of architectural education in its present form. It is certainly true that, before politically imposed pressures on architectural education occurred, the status of architectural schools within the higher educational system was uneasy in not satisfying the more obvious criteria which may be applied to science and engineering; for example, the level of research funding, presentation of papers at international conferences or the quality of published work for learned societies. Quality of design achievement either on the part of teacher or student is considered largely irrelevant in the harsh reality of academic competition in universities. To suggest, therefore, that other professions taught in institutions of higher learning have much to learn from architectural education is a radical, if not unique, point of view. Donald Schon rightly points to the architectural studio as a quite special form of education in the creative arts, drawing upon precedent in the craft system of the medieval guilds as well as the 19th century École des Beaux Arts. The greatest of the European architects in the early part of this century used the atelier system and this influenced strongly the organisation of schools of architecture both in Europe and North America. It is also true that studio work in schools of architecture sometimes bears little resemblance to conventional architectural practice of today, particularly with regard to what Donald Schon describes as “the laborious rendering of technical detail”. The advocates of computer-aided design in architecture would argue that it is precisely by the extensive utilisation of computers that the need for laborious technical details could be obviated and that the creative aspects of the architectural studio would then be more closely reflected in practice. This book interestingly draws comparisoñs between the architectural profession and its use of design “language” and parallels in other professions such as law and medicine. It has been argued elsewhere, however, that “learning-by-doing” in architecture draws upon the experience of medical teaching rather than vice versa. Attempts have been made in the United Kingdom to introduce the idea of the teaching practice in architectural education in the same way that upper year medical students are assigned to hospital wards under the guidance of medical professors, using techniques of problem solving in their route towards medical qualification. Without the impressive resources of the National Health Service, however, it is unlikely that such experiments in architecture would succeed at present and though building pathology has latterly become a new specialism in architectural education, the comprehensive study of building failures as the essence and core of teaching might be questionable. There is an argument for a process of reflection rather than precipitate action in the studio system of teaching in an attempt to demistify the intuitive approaches to criticism. Professor Schon's detailed account and case study of studio presentation by an individual student makes fascinating reading; with each design review described graphically. Such an analysis is of great interest to any architectural teacher in assessing comparative processes in other schools of architecture. There is a persistent emphasis on spatial relationships in which the particular student in the case-study and her teacher seem to reject some functional requirements of cost and program which normally occur in architectural practice. Donald Schon acknowledges this in accepting that designers might differ with respect to the priorities they assign to “design domains”. There is a further problem which the book emphasises. Contrary to the doctrine of architectural education a decade or more ago, architectural design now comprises an extremely complex pluralist approach with the danger of the architect becoming merely a designer of façades and styles, as in the 19th century, and contribute little to real design development by the end of the present century. It is suggested that the analysis of design evaluation described provides an independence from stylistic considerations. That is to say, such an evaluation, based upon a form of objectivity, allows the architect to fulfill new and more demanding roles such as architect-developer. New roles require an even wider base of knowledge and it is difficult to see how these new fields of knowledge can be taught within the conventional system of architectural education. It is also suggested here that there could be a possibility of architectural education incorporating units of research-based theory and technique while retaining the traditions of the studio as the heat of the curriculum. Professor Schon cites two examples in this book — at the University of Southern California concerning solar research and at Harvard Graduate School of Design concerning the interaction of urban design. Yet generally, the situation of the medical students in the clinic, the engineers in the laboratory or the social workers in the field, does not yet apply in architecture. The proposal for a “reflective practicum” suggests a way forward in integrating new found theories and techniques within the advantages of the studio system. This study is a scholarly, searching piece of work which advances a new view of architectural education as a prototypical design activity with implications for higher education in general. Department of Architecture, University of Sheffield United Kingdom March 1985