# Introduction In the United Kingdom, as in the United States and many other nations throughout the world, there has been in recent years a surge of interest in architectural education. Within the schools of architecture, in the professional associations of educators and practitioners, in new journals devoted to the topic, and even in newly appointed national commissions, there has been a ferment of discussion and debate. Much of the debate has been framed in the familiar terms of a perceived imbalance of supply and demand. In the United States, for example, there are signs of a rapidly increasing population of practising architects. In the state of Florida, to take one dramatic instance, the number of resident architects has grown over the past twenty years from about 500 to 3,000, or from a ratio of 10 per 100,000 population to a ration of 27 per 100,000¹. Over the same time period, not only in Florida but in the United States as a whole, there has been a decline in the percentage of buildings designed by architects. Nevertheless, the number of students enrolled in architectural programs has held steady or increased. Some 37,000 students are now enrolled, of which, however, only one in eight graduates with a degree in architecture; and of these, only thirty percent go on to pass their registration board examinations.² Given the signs of an oversupply of practising professionals, and the narrowing funnel through which students move from school to professional practice, it is striking that, at least in many places, enrolment in schools of architecture has tended to hold up so strongly. supply, in this case, seems to be relatively insensitive to fluctuations in demand. In professional, educational and governmental circles, these contradictory trends have been the subject of vigorous debate. How should the schools, and those who fund the schools, be responding? Some observers advocate a reduction in supply. In the United Kingdom, for exampie, one well-known school of architecture has been recently closed. Others argue that in the United States and United Kingdom — as has long been the case in other countries, such as Italy - architectural education has come to function as an alternative form of general liberal arts education. Students choose architecture, as they also choose history or classics, when they have no intention of becoming practising architects. Architecture should be seen, in this view, both as a form of professional training and as an alternative form of general higher education. But such a policy has important implications for the structure and content of architectural education. In what directions should the schpols of architecture develop if they are to play this dual role? A second reason for the surge of interest in architectural education is the growing recognition of changes in the nature and context of architectural practice. In the established circles of industrial nations, practitioners have become aware of the extent to which the design and construction of buildings has become a complex sociotechnical process. At least in the large firms that tend to dominate the profession, the practitioner is coming to be seen less as an individual designer in one-to-one relation with his client than as the manager of a technical team. New domains of applied science and technology — energy management, ecology, building diagnostics, along with the more familiar fields of structural engineering, lighting, acoustics, soil mechanics, site planning and landscape architecture — are seen to have central roles in the building process. Computers, still in their infancy as far as designing and building are concerned, are moving toward a leading, though still ill-defined, role. A recent National Academy of Sciences conference on computers in building design, intended for several hundred participants, attracted several thousand. Architects have begun to find themselves in competition with other professions, such as engineers and quantity surveyors, for the roles of design team management. There are changes in the institutional structure of architectural practice, as real estate development, construction, design and building management firms come into new relationships with one another. Some architects have begun to play entrepreneurial roles in the development process. In the non-industrialized nations, and in the lower income segments of industrialized nations, some architects have learned to function, not as designers of buildings but as enablers of self-help design and construction carried out by indigenous populations. There is an emerging field of “community architecture” in which architects seek to function as advocates and providers of technical assistance to community clients. Leading practitioners and educators have long since begun to wonder whether traditional architectural education — especially the sort that as one former student put it, “tends to make us all into little LeCorbusiers" — can equip students for effective participation in these emergent roles. The task of answering this question has been made more difficult by two very robust features of contemporary architectural education. In the twentieth century, architectural education, like architectural practice, has been resolutely pluralistic. Architecture tends to have been dominated by the work of "great men", such as Wright, LeCorbusier, Mies, Aalto, Kahn, and by the schools of thought, or better yet, the movements, built up around them. The pronouncements of these great men and their followers, and the debates among them, have tended to adopt a distinctly ideological tone. Moreover, the several voices claiming to present Architecture have tended to stand not only for different images of desirable buildings, appreciative systems and priorities of attention, but for different views of the design process and ways of framing the architect's role. Caught in the cross-fire of architectural movement and competing images and paradigms of practice, the architectural schools have tended to take one of two positions – either to ally themselves with one of the competing voices, adopting its images, style, and views of relevant knowlege or to present a “supermarket” of alternatives, leaving the student (however poorly suited to the task he or she may be) the burden of choice or synthesis. Underlying these divisions of schools of thought and paradigms of practice, there is a more fundamental division. Historically, architecture has been a hybrid, or bimodal, profession, seen on the one hand as an art, with roots in the monuments of the ancient, medieval, and Renaissance worlds and, on the other hand, as a social function, providing structures and spaces within which the life and work of society are conducted. As “artist”, the architect is seen as a giver of forms, constrained – perhaps unhappily - by the demands and the limited resources of his client or patron. As a functional specialist, the architect is seen as bringing his design competence and special knowledge to the fulfilment of individual and social needs. In the world of contemporary architectural practice and education, the two views of the profession tend to polarize, each view suggesting a very different answer to the questions posed by the shifts in architectural practice. If the architect is, indeed, an artist, what business has he with the technical management of design teams? and if he is primarily a functional specialist, what business has he with the traditions of the great architectural artists around whom the prevailing movements have developed? In a world characterized by this division, and by a babble of contending voices claiming to represent Arçhitecture, it is exceedingly difficult for the profession to speak with ones voice in its efforts-to respond to the changing context of practice. It is exceedingly difficult for the schools to decide how the traditional patterns of education should be extended or modified to include the domains of knowledge and competence thought to be essential to emergent architectural roles. Finally, it is important to note that, in their efforts to grapple with the issues whose complexity has been sketched above, the architectural educators speak from a platform lacking stability and status. In the universities — where in the United States, most, and in the United Kingdom, many schools of architecture are located — architecture's place is at the margins. For reasons I will elaborate shortly, architecture tends to fall outside the prevailing norms of the modern, research-based universities. Compared to departments of economics, physics, engineering, or mathematics, its status tends to be low and its standards of accomplishment tend not to be understood. In some universities, for example, professors of architecture gain tenure on the basis of the quality, not of their design portfolios but of their published papers. In times of retrenchment in higher education, departments of architecture are vulnerable. All of these reasons for the resurgent interest in architectural education have a prudential or premonitory ring. They stem from awareness of threats to the profession or from a recognition that architectural education must chánge in order to keep up with changes in the world around it. In this essay, however, I shall propose an additional interest in architectural education – an interest affecting not only the practitioners, teachers, and students of architecture but the schools of other professions, including those professions whose status in the universities is highest, I shall argue that the schools of other professions have a great deal to learn from the unique institution of architectural education, the studio. In the context of the modern research university, the architectural studio is deviant. It is a throwback to an earlier mode of education and an earlier epistemology of practice, which helps to account for its current marginal status in the university. It is the repository of long-standing traditions for education in the artistry of designing. It is a setting for the acquisition of a competence to perform, and it has something important to say to other professional schools increasingly aware of the dilemmas inherent in their more recent traditions of education as the transfer of professional knowledge.³ What Nathan Glazer has called the “major" professions of medicine, law, and business, along with such “minor" professions as social work, education, and town planning, are based on an epistemology of practice embedded in the modern research university where these professions have established their schools. On this view, professional competence consists in the application of systematic professional knowledge – at best, scientific knowledge — to the instrumental problems of practice. The professional schools have, in greater or lesser degree, accepted a normative professional curriculum⁵ made up of the relevant basic science, the relevant applied science, and a “practicum" in office, clinic, field-work or laboratory, where students are supposed to apply to everyday practice the scientific knowledge they have acquired in the classroom. But, increasingly, leading practitioners and educators in these professions have become aware of the crucial importance of indeterminate zones of practice which do not lend themselves to the theories and techniques derived from the normative professional curriculum. Their attention has turned to the dilemmas of practice under conditions of complexity, uncertainty, and uniqueness. In the face of increasingly strident criticisms from the lay public, and from within their own professions, they have become attentive to issues of valueconflict and morality. They have begun to shift their attention from technical expertise to artistry and from problem-solving to problem-setting. And, with this shift of attention, they have begun to question the adequacy of the normative professional curriculum as a preparation for a life in the professions. At its best, the architectural studio is an examplar of education for artistry and problem-setting. With distant origins in the apprenticeships of the medieval guilds and more recent origins in the École des Beaux Arts of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, architectural studios are prototypes of individual and collective learning-by-doing under the guidance and criticism of master practitioners. There are many different types of architectural studios with different pedagogies, emphases on architectural form, technologies, allegiances to competing schools of architectural thought. But there are also certain central, more or less constant features of the studio from which other professions can learn. What students and studio masters do in the studio is in some ways unlike the reality of architectural practice. It tends, for example, to minimize the laborious rendering of technical detail on which many young practitioners spend a great deal of their time. It tends to leave out such important processes as dealing with building code inspectors and with the conflicting preferences of clients and interest groups. Few studios pay attention to breakdowns of equipment or work-stoppages on the site. Nevertheless, the kinds of inquiry undertaken in the studio are at the heart of architectural practice. Given an architectural program (or brief) and the description of a site, the student must first set a design problem and then go on to solve it. Setting the problem means framing the problematic situation presented by site and program in such a way as to create a springboard for design inquiry. The student must impose his preferences onto the situation in the form of choices whose consequences and implications he must subsequently work out — all within an emerging field of constraints. The architectural studio has developed traditions of learningby-doing — the tradition of project-based education, which often seems innovative when it is introduced to other professional schools; the more particular traditions of work, review, and criticism; and the less easily nameable traditions that inform the ways in which groups of students learn from and with one another. These have evolved gradually over many years, and contribute to a rich context for learniņg-by-doing. In the context of the studio, some instructors have learned to become not only master practitioners but master coaches. They have learned to respond to the imperative, present in the studio as it is often not in practice, to make design assumptions, strategies and values explicit. They have learned to deal with paradoxes and predicaments that arise whenever students try to acquire competences they perceive as radically new. They have become familiar with the various uses of types of projects, strategies of description, and styles of demonstration and criticism. Among observers of the professions, it has become commonplace that all competent practice involves a kind of design. Indeed, the language of design has entered into the ordinary languages of many professions other than those usually called “design professions". In medicine, practitioners speak of the design of a process of diagnosis and intervention; in law, cases and arguments are “designed". One eminent student of the professions has argued for a science of design as the fundamental knowlege-base underlying all professional education.6 Architecture is the very prototype of design activity, It is certainly worth considering that other professions, more recently come to awareness of the need for education in the artistry of practice, can learn from the traditions of the architectural studio and from the experience of the studiomasters. In order for the lessons of the studio to be made accessible to other professions, however, studio masters must be willing to examine what they already know how to do. They must try to make systematic descriptions of their practice and coaching, and the knowledge and appreciations embedded in them, in spite of the factors that work against systematic self-reflection. Like other practitioners, architects tend to value action over reflection. They tend to take for granted what is most exceptional about their own familiar practice. Perhaps more than other practitioners, they tend to mystify their artistry, treating it defensively as an indescribable something that “either one has or has not". In the universities, where architects see themselves accurately as occupants of the lower rungs on the ladder of status, they may be reluctant to image that they have something important to give other fields. And finally, they mav find it extraordinarily difficult to give explicit, accurate, and useful accounts of the understandings implicit in gradually learned competences that have become intuitive. In view of these impediments, I shall try in this essay to illustrate what such a process of reflection might be like. I do not propose to make an exhaustive, or even a representative, description of the architectural studio.7 I shall concentrate on a few examples of studio practice, hoping to encourage studio