masters to undertake their own more systematic reflections and to interest a wider audience of educators in the unique potential of the architectural studio. I do not believe, however, that the benefits of such an inquiry will flow only from architects to non-architects. As the schools of architecture revise their own curricula in order to take account of the changing nature of architectural practice, and as they try to work out productive marriages of artistry, applied science and technology, they will profit from a more reflective grasp of the understandings and know-how embedded in their own traditions. And, if they pursue the more deliberate use of architecture as a form of general higher education, they wil need to articulate more fully the premises of their bid for educational leadership. The argument of this essay will be divided into six parts: (1) the dilemmas of contemporary professional education, (2) artistry conceived as reflection-in-action, (3) the architectural studio as a vehicle for education in artistry, (4) the paradox and predicament of learning to design, (5) the artistry of the studio master, and (6) what can be learned from the experience of studio. # Part I: Dilemmas of Contemporary Professional Education Although our society has become thoroughly dependent on professionals, so much so that the conduct of business, industry, government, education, and everyday life would be unthinkable without them, there are signs of a growing crisis of confidence in the professions. In many well-publicized scandals, professionals have been found willing to use their special positions for private gain. Professionally designed solutions to public problems have had unanticipated consequences, sometimes worse than the problem they were intended to solve. The public has shown an increasing readiness to call for external regulation of professional practice. Laymen have been increasingly disposed to turn to the courts for defense against professional incompetence or venality. The professional's traditional claims to privileged social position and autonomy of practice have come into question as the public has begun to have doubts about professional ethics and expertise.¹ And in recent years, professionals themselves have shown signs of a loss of confidence in professional knowledge. Not very long ago, in 1963, the editors of Daedalus could introduce a special volume on the professions with the sentence, “Everywhere in American life the professions are triumphant."² They noted the apparently limitless demand for professional services, the “shortages" of teachers and physicians, the difficulty of coordinating the proliferating technical specializations, the problem of managing the burgeoning mass of technical data. In the further essays which made up the volume, doctors, lawyers, scientists, educators, military men, and politicians articulated variations on the themes of professional triumph, overload, and growth. There were only two discordant voices. The representative of the clergy complained of declining influence and the “problem of relevance"3, and the city planner commented ruefully on his profession's lagging understanding of the changing ills of urban areas.ª Yet in less than a decade the discordant notes had become the dominant ones and the themes of professional triumph had virtually disappeared. In 1972, a colloquium on professional education was held at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Participants included distinguished representatives of the field of medicine, engineering, architecture, planning, psychiatry, law, divinity, education, and management. These individuals disagreed about many things, but they held one sentiment in common — a profound uneasiness about their own professions. They questioned whether professionals would effectively police themselves. They wondered whether professionals were instruments of individual well-being and social reform or were mainly interested in the preservation of their own status and privilege, caught up in the very problems they might have been expected to solve. They allowed themselves to express doubts about the relevance and remedial power of professional expertise. It is perhaps not very difficult to account for this dramatic shift, over a single decade, in the tone of professional selfreflection. Between 1963 and 1972 there had been a disturbing sequence of events, painful for professionals and lay public alike. A professionally instrumented war had been disastrous. Social movements for peace and civil rights had begun to see the professions as elitist servants of established interests. The much-proclaimed shortages of scientists, teachers, and physicians seemed to have evaporated. Professionals seemed powerless to relieve the rapidly shifting “crises" of the cities, poverty, environmental pollution, and energy. There were scandals of Medicare and, at the end of the decade, Watergate. Cumulatively, these events created doubts about professionally conceived strategies of diagnosis and cure. They pointed to the overwhelming complexity of the phenomena with which professionals were trying to cope. They led to scepticism about the adequacy of professional knowledge, with its theories and techniques, to cure the deeper causes of societal distress. Sharing, in greater or lesser degree, these sentiments of doubt and unease, the participants in the MIT colloquium tried to analyse their predicament. Some of them believed that social change had created problems ill-suited to the traditional division of labor. A noted engineer observed that “education no longer fits the niche, or the niche no longer fits education”. The dean of a medical school spoke of the complexity of a huge health care system only marginally susceptible to the interventions of the medical profession. The dean of a school of management referred to the puzzle of educating managers for judgment and action under conditions of uncertainty. Some were troubled by the existence of an irreducible residue of art in professional practice. The art deemed indispensable even to scientific research and engineering design seemed resistant to codification. As one participant observed, “if it's invariant and known, it can be taught; but it isn't invariant." Professional education emphasized problem-solving, but the most urgent and intractable issues of professional practice were those of problem-finding. “Our interest", as one participant put it, “is not only how to pour the concrete for the highway, but what highway to build? When it comes to designing a ship, the question we have to ask is, which ship makes sense in terms of the problems of transportation?" And representatives of architecture, planning, social work, and psychiatry spoke of the pluralism of their schools. Different schools held different and conflicting views of the competences to be acquired, the problem to be solved, even of the nature of the professions themselves. A leading professor of psychiatry described his field as a “babble of voices”. Finally, there was a call for the liberation of the professions from the tyranny of the university-based professional schools. Everett Hughes, one of the founders of the sociology of the professions, declared that “American universities are products of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The question is, how do you break them up in some way, at least get some group of young people who are free of them? How do you make them free to do something new and different?" The years that have passed since the 1972 colloquium have tended to reinforce its conclusions. In the early 1980's, no profession could celebrate itself in triumphant tones. In spite of the continuing eagerness of the young to embark on apparently secure and remunerative professional careers, professionals are still criticized, and criticize themselves, for failing both to adapt to a changing social reality and to live up to their own standards of practice. There is widespread recognition of the absence or loss of a stable institutional framework of purpose and knowledge within which professions can live out their roles and confidently exercise their skills. In retrospect, then, it is not difficult to see why participants in the 1972 colloquium should have puzzled over the troubles of their professions. They were beginning to become aware of the indeterminate zones of practice — the situations of complexity and uncertainty, the unique cases that require artistry, the elusive task of problem-setting, the multiplicity of professional identities — that have since become increasingly visible and problematic. Nevertheless, there is something strange about their disquiet. For professionals in many different fields do sometimes find ways of coping effectively, even wisely, with situations of complexity and uncertainty. If the element of art in professional practice is not invariant, known, and teachable, it does appear occasionally to be learnable. Problem-setting is an activity in which some professionals engage with recognizeable skill. And students and practitioners do occasionally make thoughtful choices from among the multiple views of professional identity. Why, then, should a group of eminent professionals have been so troubled by the evidence of indeterminacy in professional practice? It was not, I think, that they were unaware of the ways in which some practitioners cope well with situations of indeterminacy. Indeed, they might easily have counted themselves among that number. Rather, I suspect, they were troubled because they could not readily account for the coping process. Complexity and uncertainty are sometimes dissolved, but not by means of applying specialized knowledge to welldefined tasks. Artistry is not reducible to the exercise of describable routines. Problem-finding has no place in a body of knowledge concerned exclusively with problem-solving. In order to choose among competing paradigms of professional practice, one cannot rely on professional expertise. The eminent professionals were disturbed, I think, to discover that the competences they were beginning to see as central to professional practice had no place in their underlying model of professional knowledge. The epistemology of professional practice which dominates most thinking and writing about the professions, and is built into the very structure of professional schools and research institutions, has been clearly set forth in two recent essays on professional education. Both of these treat rigorous professional practice as an exercise of technical rationality, that is, as an application of research-based knowledge to the solution of problems of instrumental choice. Edgar Schein, in his Professional Education, proposes a threefold division of professional knowledge: (1) An underlying discipline or basic science component upon which the practice rests or from which it is developed. (2) An applied science or “engineering” component from which many of the day-to-day diagnostic procedures and problem-solutions are derived. (3) A skills and attitudinal component that concerns the actual performance of services to the client, using the underlying basic and applied knowledge.⁵ In Schein's view, these components constitute a hierarchy which may be read in terms of application, justification and status. The application of basic science yields engineering, which in turn provides models, rules and techniques applicable to the instrumental choices of everyday practice. The actual performance of services “rests on” applied science, which rests, in turn, on the foundation of basic science. In the epistemological pecking order, basic science is highest in methodological rigor and purity, its practitioners superior in status to those who practice applied science, problem-solving, or service delivery. Nathan Glazer, in a much-quoted article, argues that the schools of such professions as social work, education, divinity and town planning are caught in a hopeless predicament.º These “minor" professions, beguiled by the success of the “major” professions of law, medicine and business, have tried to substitute a basis in scientific knowledge for their traditional reliance on experienced practice. In this spirit, they have placec their schools within universities. Glazer believes, however, that their aspirations are doomed to failure. The “minor” professions lack the essential conditions of the “major" ones. They lack stable institutional contexts of practice, fixed and unambiguous ends with “settle men's minds",7 and a basis in systematic scientific knowledge. They cannot apply scientific knowledge to the solving of instrumental problems, and they are, therefore, unable to produce a rigorous curriculum of professional education. Can these fields (education, city planning, social work and divinity) settle on a fixed form of training, a fixed content of professional knowledge, and follow the models of medicine, law and business? I suspect not because the discipline of a fixed and unambiguous end in a fixed institutional setting is not given to them. And thus (my emphasis) the base of knowledge which is umambiguously indicated as relevant for professional education is also not given.8 Glazer and Schein share an epistemology of professional practice rooted historically in the positivist philosophy which so powerfully shaped both the modern university and the modern conception of the proper relationship of theory and practice.º Rigorous professional practice is conceived as essentially technical. Its rigor depends on the use of describable, testable, replicable techniques derived from scientific research, based on knowledge that is objective, consensual, cumulative and convergent. On this view, for example, engineering is an application of engineering science; rigorous management depends on the use of management science; and policy-making can become rigorous when it is based on policy-science. Practice can be construed as technical, in this sense, only when certain things are kept clearly separate from one another. Deciding must be kept separate from doing. The rigorous practitioner uses his professional knowledge to decide on the means best suited to his ends, his action serving to “implement" technically sound decisions. Means must be clearly separated from ends. Technical means are variable, appropriate or inappropriate according to the situation. But the ends of practice must be “fixed and unambiguous”, like Glazer's examples of profit, health and success in litigation; how is it possible, otherwise, to evolve a base of applicable professional knowledge? And finally, research must be kept separate from practice. For research can yield new knowledge only in the protected setting of the scholar's study or in the carefully controlled environment of a scientific laboratory, whereas the world of practice is notoriously unprotected and uncontrollable. These tenets of the positivist epistemology of practice are stil built into our institutions, even when their inhabitants no longer espouse them. Just as Thorsten Veblen propounded some seventy years ago,1º the university and the research institute are sheltered from the troublesome world of practice. Research and practice are presumed to be linked by an exchange in which researchers offer theories and techniques applicable to practice problems and practitioners, in return, give researchers new problems to work on and practical tests of the utility of research results. The normative curriculum of professional education, as Schein describes it, still follows the hierarchy of professional knowledge. First, students are exposed to the relevant basic science, then to the relevant applied science, and finally to a practicum in which they are presumed to learn to apply classroom knowledge to the problems of practice. Medical education offers the prototype for such a curriculum, and its language of “diagnosis”, “cure”", “laboratory", and “clinic” have long since diffused to other professions. From the perspective of this model of professional knowledge, it is not difficult to understand why practitioners should be puzzled by their own performance in the indeterminate zones of practice. Their performance does not fit the criteria of technical rationality; it cuts across the dichotomies built into the positivist epistemology of practice. Artistry, for example, is not only in the deciding but also in the doing. When planners or managers convert an uncertain situation into a solvable problem, they construct – as John Dewey pointed out long ago – not only the means to be deployed but the ends-in-view to be achieved. In such problem-setting, ends and means are reciprocally determined. And often, in the unstable world of practice, where methods and theories developed in one context are unsuited to another, practitioners function as researchers, inventing the techniques and models appropriate to the situation at hand. For practitioners, educators and students of the professions, the positivist epistemology of practice contributes to an urgent dilemma of rigor or relevance. Given the dominant view of professional rigor, the view which prevails in the intellectual climate of the universities and is embedded in the institutional arrangements of professional education and research, rigorous practice depends on wellformed problems of instrumental choice to whose solution research-based theory and technique are applicable.11But realworld problems do not come well-formed. They tend to present themselves, on the contrary, as messy, indeterminate, problematic situations. When a civil engineer worries about what road to build, for example, he does not have a problem he can solve by an application of locational techniques or decision-theory. He confronts a complex and ill-defined situation in which geographic, financial, economic and political factors are usually mixed up together. If he is to arrive at a well-formed problem, he must construct it from the materials of the problematic situation. And the problem of problemsetting is not a well-formed problem.12 When a practitioner sets a problem, he chooses what he will treat as the “things" of the situation. He decides what he will attend to and what he will ignore. He names the objects of his attention and frames them in an appreciative context which sets a direction for action. A vague worry about hunger or malnourishment may be framed, for example, as a problem of selecting an optimal diet. But situations of malnourishment may be framed in many different ways.13 Economists, environmental scientists, nutrition scientists, agronomists, 'planners, engineers and political scientists debate over the nature of the malnourishment problem, and their discussions have given rise to a multiplicity of problem-setting worthy of Rashomon. Indeed, the practice of malnourishment planning is largely taken up with the task of constructing the problem to be solved. When practitioners succeed in converting a problematic situation to a well-formed problem, or in resolving a conflict over the proper framing of a practitioner's role in a situation, they engage in a kind of inquiry which cannot be subsumed under a model of technical problem-solving. Rather, it is through the work of naming and framing that the exercise of technical rationality becomes possible. Similarly, the artistic processes by which practitioners sometimes make sense of unique cases, and the art they sometimes bring to everyday practice, do not meet the prevailing criteria of rigorous practice. Often, when a competent practitioner recognizes in a maze of symptoms the pattern of a disease, constructs a basis for coherent design in the peculiarities of a building site, or discerns an understandable structure in a jumble of materials, he does something for which he cannot give a complete or even a reasonably accurate description. Practitioners make judgments of quality for which they cannot state adequate criteria, display skills for which they cannot describe procedures or rules. By defining rigor only in terms of technical rationality, we exclude as non-rigorous much of what competent practitioners actually do, including the skilful performance of problemsetting and judgment on which technical problem-solving depends. Indeed, we exclude the most important components of competent practice. In the varied topography of professional practice, there is a high, hard ground which overlooks a swamp. On the high ground, manageable problems lend themselves to solution through the use of research-based theory and technique. In the swampy lowlands, problems are messy and confusing and incapable of technical solution. The irony of this situation is that the problems of the high ground tend to be relatively unimportant to individuals or to society at large, however great their technical interest may be, while in the swamp lie the problems of greatest human concern. The practitioner is confronted with a choice. Shall he remain on the high ground where he can solve relatively unimportant problems according to his standards of rigor, or shall he descend to the swamp of important problems and non-rigorous inquiry? Consider medicine, engineering and agronomy, three of Glazer's major or near-major professions. In these fields, there are areas in which problems are clearly defined, goals are relatively fixed, and phenomena lend themselves to the categories of available theory and technique. Here, practitioners can function effectively as technical experts. But when one or more of these conditions is lacking, competent performance is no longer a matter of exclusively technical expertise. Medical technologies like kidney dialysis or tomography have created demands which stretch the nation's willingness to invest in medical care. How should physicians behave? How should they try to influence or accommodate to health policy? Engineering solutions which seem powerful and elegant when judged from a relatively narrow perspective may have a wider range of consequences which degrade the environment, generate unacceptable risk, or put excessive demands on scarce resources. How should engineers take these factors into account in their actual designing? When agronomists recommend efficient methods of soil cultivation that favor the use of large land-holdings, they may undermine the viability of the small family farms on which peasant economies depend. How should the practice of agronomy take such considerations into account? These are not problems, properly speaking, but problematic situations from which problems must be constructed. If practitioners choose not to ignore them, they must approach them through kinds of inquiry which are, according to the dominant model of technical rationality, not rigorous. The doctrine of technical rationality, promulgated and maintained in the universities and especially in the professional schools, infects the young professional-in-training with a hunger for technique. Many students of urban planning, for example, are impatient with anything other than “hard skills". In schools of management, students often chafe under the discipline of endless case-analysis; they want to learn the techniques and algorithms which are, as they see it, the key to high starting salaries. Yet a professional who really tried to confine his practice to the rigorous application of researchbased technique would find not only that he could not work on the most important problems but that he could not practice in the real world at all. Nearly all professional practitioners experience some version of the dilemma of rigor or relevance, and they may respond to it in several ways. They may choose the swampy lowland, deliberately immersing themselves in confusing but crucially important situations. When asked to describe their methods of inquiry, they speak of experience, trial and error, intuition and muddling through. When teachers, social workers or planners operate in this vein, they tend to be afflicted with a nagging sense of inferiority to those who present themselves as models of technical rigor. When physicians or engineers do so, they may be troubled by the discrepancy between the technical rigor of the “hard” zones of their practice and the apparent sloppiness of the “soft” ones. Practitioners who opt for the high ground confine themselves to a narrowly technical practice and pay a price for doing so. Operations research, systems analysis, policy analysis, and management science are examples of practices built around the use of formal, analytic models. In the early years of the development of these professions, following World War 2, there was a climate of optimism about the power of formal modelling for the solution of real world problems. In subsequent decades, however, there has been a growing recognition of the limits of these techniques, especially in situations of high complexity and uncertainty.4 Some practitioners have responded by confining themselves to the limited class of problems — for cxample, to inventory controł. Others have continued to develop formal models for use in problems of high complexity and uncertainty, quite undeterred by the troubles incurred whenever a serious attempt is made to put their models into practice. They may become researchers, pursuing an agenda driven by evolving questions of modelling theory and technique, increasingly divergent from the context of actual practice. They may try, on the other hand, to cut the situations of practice to fit their models, employing for this purpose one of several procrusean strategies. They may, for example, become selectively inattentive to data that do not fit their theories,15 as educators preserve their confidence in “competency-testing" by ignoring the kinds of competence that competency-testing fails to detect. Physicians or therapists may use junk categories like “patience resistance” to explain away the cases in which an indicated treatment fails to lead to cure.16 And social workers may try to make their technical expertise effective by exerting unilateral control over the practice situation, for example, by removing “unworthy” clients from the case rolls. Those who confine themselves to the limited range of technical problems, or cut the situations of practice to fit available models and techniques, seek a world in which technical rationality works. Even those who choose the swamp tend to pay homage to prevailing models of rigor; and what they know how to do, they have no way of describing as rigorous. Writers about the professions tend to follow similar paths. Both Glazer and Schein, for example, recognize the indeterminate zones of professional practice. But Glazer relegates them to the “minor" professions, of which he despairs. And Schein locates what he calls “divergent" phenomena of uncertainty, complexity, and uniqueness in concrete practice situations, while at the same time regarding professional knowledge as increasingly “convergent". He thinks convergent knowledge may be applied to divergent practice through the exercise of “divergent skills"17 — about which, however, he is able to say very little. For if divergent skills were treated in terms of theory or technique, they would belong to convergent professional knowledge; and if they are neither theory nor technique, they cannot be described as “knowledge" at all. Rather, they function as a kind of junk category which serves to protect an underlying model of technical rationality. Yet the epistemology of practice embedded in our universities and research institutions, ingrained in our habits of thought about professional knowledge, and at the root of the dilemma of rigor or relevance, has lost its hold on the field that nurtured it. Among philosophers of science, no-one wants any longer to be called a positivist.18 There is a rebirth of interest in the ancient topics of craft, artistry and myth, topics whose fate positivism seemed once to have finally sealed. Positivism and the positivist epistemology of practice now seem to rest on a particular view of science, one now largely discredited. It is timely, then, to reconsider the question of professional knowledge. Perhaps there is an epistemology of practice which takes full account of the competence practitioners sometimes display in situations of uncertainty, complexity and uniqueness. Perhaps there is a way of looking at problem-setting and intuitive artistry which presents these activities as describable and susceptible to a kind of rigor that falls outside the boundaries of technical rationality. ## Part II: Reflection-in-Action When we go about the spontaneous, intuitive performance of the actions of everyday life, we show ourselves to be knowledgeable in a special way. Often, we cannot say what it is that we know. When we try to describe it, we find ourselves at a loss, or we produce descriptions that are obviously inappropriate. Our knowing is ordinarily tacit, implicit in our patterns of action and in our feel for the stuff with which we are dealing. It seems right to say that our knowing is in our action. And similarly, the workday life of the professional practitioner reveals, in its recognitions, judgments and skills, a pattern of tacit knowing-in-action. Once we put aside the mode of technical rationality, which leads us to think of intelligent practice as an application of knowledge to instrumental decisions, there is nothing strange about the idea that a kind of knowing is inherent in intelligent action. Commonsense admits the category of know-how, and it does not stretch common sense very much to say that the know-how is in the action — that a tightrope walker's knowhow, for example, lies in, and is revealed by, the way that he takes his trip across the wire, or that a big-league pitcher's know-how is in his way of pitching to a batter's weakness, changing his pace, or distributing his energies over the course of a game. There is nothing in commonsense to make us say that know-how consists in rules or plans which we entertain in the mind prior to action. Although we sometimes think before acting, it is also true that in much of the spontaneous behaviour of skilful practice we reveal a kind of knowing which does not stem from a prior intellectual operation. ## As Gilbert Ryle put it: What distinguishes sensible from silly operations is not their percentage but their procedure, and this holds no less for intellectual than for practical performances. “Intelligent” cannot be defined in terms of “knowing that"; “thinking what I am doing does not connote “both thinking what to do and doing it." When I do something intelligently . . . I am doing one thing and not two. My performance has a special procedure or manner, not special antecedents.19 And Andrew Harrison has recently put the same thought in this pithy phrase: when someone acts intelligently, he “acts his mind".20 Examples of these spontaneous, tacit processes of intelligence in action include acts of recognition and judgment, and the exercise of ordinary physical skills. Michael Polanvi has written about our ability to recognize a face in a crowd.²1 The experience of recognition can be immediate and wholistic. We simply see, all of a sudden, the face of this familiar person. We are aware øf no processes of reasoning or calculation — no listing of the particular features peculiar to this person — and we are often unable to describe what we have recognized, that is, what signs distinguish this face from the hundreds of others also present in the crowd. When the thing we recognize is “something wrong" or "something right", then recognition takes the form of judgment or appreciation. Chris Alexander has called attention to the innumerable judgments of “mismatch” — deviations from a tacit norm — that are involved in the making of a design.22 And Geoffrey Vickers has gone on to note that not only in artistic judgment but in all of our ordinary judgments of quality, we “can recognize and describe deviations from a norm very much more clearly than we can describe the norm itself.23 A young friend of mine who teaches tennis observes that his students have to be able to feel when they're hitting the ball right, and they have to like that feeling, as compared to the feeling of hitting it wrong; but they need not, and usually cannot, describe either the feeling of hitting it right or what they do to get that feeling. A skilled physician can sometimes recognize “a case of . . ." the moment a person walks into his office. The act of recognition comes immediately and as a whole; the physician may or may not be able to say, subsequently, just what led to his initial judgment. Polanyi has described our ordinary tactile appreciation of the surface of materials. If you ask a person what he feels when he explores the surface of a table with his hand, he is apt to say that the table feels rough or smooth, sticky or slippery, but he is unlikely to say that he feels a certain compression and abrasion of his fingertips – though it must be from this kind of feeling that he gets to his appreciation of the table's surface. Polanyi speaks of perceiving from these fingertip sensations to the qualities of the surface. Similarly, when we use a stick to probe a hidden place, we focus not on the impressions of the stick on our hand but on the qualities of the place which we apprehend through these tacit impressions. To become skilful in the use of a tool is to learn to appreciate, as it were, directly, the qualities of materials that we apprehend through the tacit sensations of the tool in our hand. Chester Barnard has written of “non-logical processes" that we cannot express in words, as a process of reasoning, but only by a judgment, decision, or action.24 A child who has learned to throw a ball makes immediate judgments of distance which he coordinates, tacitly, with the feeling of bodily movement involved in the act of throwing. A high-school boy, solving quadratic equations, has learned to carry out a sequence of operations spontaneously, though he may not be able to describe the program he follows. A practiced accountant of Barnard's acquaintance could “take a balance sheet of considerable complexity and within minutes or even seconds get a significant set of facts from it”, though he could not describe in words the recognitions and calculations that entered into his performance. Similarly, we are able to execute, spontaneously, each complex performance as crawling, walking, riding a bicycle, juggling, without having to think, in any conscious way, what we are doing, without having to describe in words the actions we are carrying out, and often without being able to give a verbal description even approximately faithful to our performance. Our spontaneous responses to the phenomena of everyday life do not always work. Sometimes our spontaneous knowingin-action yields unexpected outcomes and we react to the surprise by a kind of thinking what we are doing while we are doing it, a process I call reflection-in-action. Sometimes this sort of process takes the form of ordinary, on-line problem-solving. It may not be associated with a high degree of skill but with the efforts of an amateur to acquire a skill. Recently, for example, I built a wooden gate. The gate was made of wooden pickets and strapping. I had made a drawing of it, and figured out the dimensions I wanted, but I had not reckoned with the problem of keeping the structure square. I noticed, as I began to nail the strapping to the pickets, that the structure wobbled. I knew that when I nailed in a diagonal piece, the structure would become rigid. But how could I be sure that, at the moment I nailed in the diagonal, the structure was square? I stopped to think. There came to mind a vague memory about diagonals – that in a square, the diagonals were equal. I took a yard stick, intending to measure the diagonals; but I found it difficult to make these measurements without moving, and altering the structure. It occurred to me to use a piece of string. Then it became apparent that I need precise locations from which to measure the diagonal from corner to corner. After several frustrating trials, I decided to locate the center point at each of the corners (by crossing diagonals at each corner), hammered in a nail at each of the four center points, and used the nails as anchors for the measurement string. It took several moments to figure out how to adjust the structure so as to correct the errors I found by measuring, and when I had the diagonals equal, I nailed in the piece of strapping that made the structure rigid. Here — in an example that must have its analogues in the experience of amateur carpenters the world over – my intuitive way of going about the task led me to a surprise (the discovery of the wobble) which I interpreted as a problem. Stopping to think, I invented procedures to solve the problem, discovered further unpleasant surprises, made further corrective inventions, including the several minor inventions necessary to make the idea of string-measurement and diagonals work. Ordinarily, we might call such a process “trial and error”, which it certainly is. But we might give a more articulated description of it in terms of the following schema: To begin with, the starting condition of reflection-in-action is the repertoire of routinized responses that skilful practitioners bring to their practice. This is what I call the practitioner's knowing-in-action. It can be seen as consisting of strategies of action, understanding of phenomena, ways of framing the problematic situations encountered in day-to-day experience. It is acquired through training, or through on-the-job experience. It is usually tacit, and it is delivered spontaneously, without conscious deliberation. It works, in the sense of yielding intended consequences, so long as practice situations fall within the boundaries of the normal and routine. It is à dynamic knowing process, rather than a static body of knowledge, in the sense that it takes the form of continuing detection and correction of error, on-line fine-tuning, all within the framework of a relatively unchanging system of understanding A process of continual adjustment in the service of maintaining a sense of constancy. As Gregory Bateson put it, “The more things are the same, the more change (to keep them the same)". Sometimes, however, there are surprises. These take the form of unanticipated events which do not fit existing understandings, fall outside the categories of knowing-inaction. They are anomalous, and if they are noticed, they yield uncertainty – meaning not merely that one cannot predict for sure what will happen but that, at least for a time, one cannot make sense of the situation. Often, such surprises appear as unique events – things one has never seen before and may never see again. Often, they are associated with conflicting values, conflicting ways of framing the problematic situation, even conflicting paradigms of practice. These are tensions or contradictions in what Geoffrey Vickers called the appreciative system of the practitioner. Together, uncertainty, uniqueness, value-conflict, make up what I call the indeterminate zones of practice. In these zones, competence takes on a new meaning. There is a demand for reflection, though turning to the surprising phenomena and, at the same time, back on itself to the spontaneous knowing-in-action that triggered surprise. It is as though the practitioner asked himself, “What is this?" and at the same time, “How have I been thinking about this?" Such reflection must be at least in some degree conscious. It converts tacit knowing-in-action to explicit knowledge for action. It must take place in the action-present — the period of time in which thinking can still make a difference to the outcomes of action. It has a critical function, questioning and challenging the assumptional basis of action, and a restructuring function, reshaping strategies, understanding of phenomena, and ways of framing problems. Thinking gives rise to experimenting – but to a particular kind of experimenting, unique to practice, like and unlike the experience of laboratory science. It occurs on-the-spot, in the practice situation. It consists in actions that function in three ways, to test new understandings (“What is going on here?"), to explore new phenomena (“What else looks odd here?"), and to affirm or negate the moves by which the practitioner tries to change things for the better (“How can we get this under control?"). On-the-spot experiment may “work”, in the sense that you get what you intend and/or like what you get. Or it may yield further surprises, pleasant or unpleasant. In these instances, we can think of the inquirer moving in the situation and the situation “talking back" to the inquirer, triggering a reframing of the problem, a re-understanding of what is going on. The entire process then has the quality of a reflective “conversation with the situation". These are examples of reflection-in-action drawn from other domains of professional practice: — A banker's judgment of credit risks: Sometimes all the customer's numbers look right but to an experienced banker something stil “feels wrong”. The banker then experiments onthe-spot to test his intuitive feeling about the situation. (Note that, in such a case, reflection begins with attention to the feeling, which is treated as information. The banker asks, "What am I picking up that causes me to feel this?".) – A physician who, recognizing that 85% of the cases that comes into his office are not in the book, responds to unique, anomalous configurations of symptoms by inventing and testing a new diagnosis. A market researcher who is attentive to the market's response to a new product introduction. She listens to what the market is telling her, by its behaviour, about the meaning of the product, sometimes recasting it away from initial production definition toward the unanticipated uses the market has discovered. (As in the case of Scotch Tape.) — Similarly, planners who detect the unanticipated meanings planned interventions have for those affected by them. They may construe these deviations from intentions not as “failure but as a sign that they have misunderstood the problem they were tryipg to solve. (As in the case of housing allowances.) – Managers who engage a failure to perform, lıke a plant that fails to deliver products on time. As the manager explores the situation with his colleagues, he may unearth a normal Rashomon of conflicting views of the problem. And he may seek to mobilize his staff in a continuing inquiry which is at once exploratory, aimed at testing understandings of the situation, and aimed at fixing it. Note that, in such a case, the manager's reflection-in-action entails organizational inquiry which may result in a critically important kind of organizational learning. Many such examples of reflection-in-action occur in the indeterminate zones of practice — uncertain, unique or valueconflicted. Depending on the context and the practitioner, such reflection-in-action may take the form of on-the-spot problem-solving, theory-building, or re-appreciation of the situation. When the problem at hand proves resistant to readily accessible solutions, the practitioner may rethink the approach he has been taking and invent new strategies of action. When a practitioner encounters a situation that falls outside his usual range of descriptive categories, he may surface and criticize his initial understanding and proceed to construct a new, situationspecific theory of the phenomenon. (The best theories, Kevin Lynch observed, are those we make in the situation.) When he finds himself stuck, he may decide that he has been working on the wrong problem; he may then evolve a new way of setting the problem, a new frame that he tries to impose on the situation. The objects of his reflection may lie anywhere in the system of understanding and know-how that he brings spontaneously to his practice. Depending on the centrality of the elements he chooses to surface and rethink, more or less of that system may become vulnerable to change. But, systems of intuitive knowing are dynamically conservative, actively defended, highly resistant to change. They tend not to go quietly to their demise, and reflection-in-action – more especially, reflection on reflection-in-action — often takes on a quality of struggle. In all such cases, the notion of reflection-in-action goes a long way towards describing what we mean when we speak of a practitioner's artistry. It is a capacity to combine reflection and action, on-the-spot, often under stress – to examine understandings and appreciations while the train is running, in the midst of performance. It is artistry, in this sense, that enables some individuals to be competent in situations that do not fit the preconceived categories of technique, theory or rule of thumb, that make up the corpus of “professional knowledge”. In the indeterminate zones of practice, some practitioners are sometimes able to make sense of uncertain, confusing situations and to test the sense they make. Their reflection-in-action is not at war with the instrumental problem-solving that we are used to associating with professional competence. Rather, reflection-in-action on the problematic situation at hand may convert “messes” into the well-formed problems to which research-based techniques can be applied. Competent practice, as we are increasingly coming to see, demands a marriage of problem-setting and problemsolving. Professional artistry, in the form of reflection-in-action, is not a rare event. It is true that many practitioners, locked into a view of themselves as technical experts, find little in the world of practice to occasion reflection. For them, uncertainty is a threat; its admission, a sign of weakness. They have become proficient at techniques of selective inattention, the use of junk categories to dismiss anomalous data, procrustean treatment of troublesome situations, all aimed at preserving the constancy of their knowing-in-action. For others — teachers, managers, engineers or artists — reflection-in-action is the “prose” they speak as they display and develop the ordinary artistry of their professional lives. They are more inclined toward, and adept at, reflection on their intuitive inquiry. Nevertheless, in a world where professionalism is still mainly identified with technical expertise, they may feel profoundly uneasy because they cannot describe what they know how to do, cannot justify it as a legitimate form of professional knowledge, cannot increase its scope or depth or quality, cannot with confidence help others to learn it. For all of these reasons, the study of professional artistry and its acquisition is of critical importance. We should be turning the puzzle of professional knowledge on its head, not seeking only to build up a science applicable to practice but also to reflect on the reflection-in-action already embedded in competent practice. We should be asking such questions as these: . : How is it that some people learn the kinds and levels of reflection-in-action that are associated with artistry? . What kinds of competences must they have in order to learn? What must they “know already?" If reflection-in-action is sometimes, for some people, learnable, is it also teachable? Can one person help another to learn it? and if the answer is “yes”, What is it that a good coach knows how todo when he helps a student learn to reflect-in-action? In what does his artistry consist? • And how should our answers to all of these questions be modified to take account of the special conditions that arise when we consider how professional artistry is, and may be, acquired, in a profession whose curriculum is strongly organized around the teaching of systematic, research-based professional knowledge. In exploring such questions, we will also be pursuing a new epistemology of practice. Perhaps we will be heeding Everett Hughes's call for ways of breaking up the late 19th century traditions of university and the professional school, at least getting some group of young people who are free of them, making them free to do something new and different.