# Part IV: The Paradox and Predicament of Learning to Design So far, we have considered the dialogue of Quist and Petra for what it reveals about the design process. Suppose we were to look at it as an example of design education? What, then, would we notice? First of all, perhaps, that Petra has been involved in doing something on her own, and that she has gotten stuck. She seems to be unclear, in certain respects, just what it is she should be doing, or has some ideas about it incongruent with Quist's. Quist listens to her “big problems" and then takes over, providing a master demonstration of a process similar to the one Petra is supposed to be carrying out. From time to time, he punctuates his demonstration with reflections on the work he is doing, but even when he is not reflecting on designing, he uses the drawing/talking language of designing to make his process accessible to Petra. If we pay attention to the things Quist chooses to emphasize, we may notice that he seems to have arrived at a diagnosis of Petra's difficulties, even though he leaves it for the most part tacit. He selectively demonstrates aspects of the process that seem to be aimed at her specific problems. For example, she is disposed to deal with individual elements (to work “closely”, as she says) rather than with the overall organization. So he focuses on establishing the basic geometry of the buildings on the site. She is hesitant to make the apparently arbitrary choices that can give meaning and value to her design by investing it with features she likes, features from which the basic idea can flow. Quist demonstrates for her a continuing oscillation between making such choices, on the one hand, and on the other, being rigorously obedient to their implications. She is not adept at stringing out long and complex sequences of conditional moves and consequences. Quist (in his language of “you might . . ." and "this might happen here . . .") constructs for her a web of possible moves and consequences. But he also continually judges both what must now be done, given the implications of earlier moves, and what would be good" or “nice” in the resulting effects. Through his dialectic of positing, spinning out consequences, and evaluating, he enables the “whole idea” to take shape. She is limited in her repertoire of norms and disciplines. Quist shows how she should allow herself to be influenced by many different domain-specific norms — the formal implications of chosen geometries, the use-related idea of "being one with the trees”, the effects of orientation on the site, anthropometric standards, the feelingful meanings that may be attached to building elements, the uses compatible with various slopes, to name only a few. In the cases of the cafeteria and the auditorium, where Petra seems interested only in the purety of her hard-edged forms, Quist shows how it is possible to allow geometric forms to be “softened” and “broken open” by accommodation to norms derived from other domains. She does not grasp certain relationships between features of orientation and form, matches of formal elements across vertical levels and the like. Quist gives her direct instructions about these matters and shows how she can apply them to the problem at hand. What does Petra make of all this? Quist does not ask her, and she does not offer to tell him. If she remains confused about the meaning of “designing” in spite of Quist's demonstrations and reflections, neither we nor Quist can know it from the data available. But there is considerable evidence from other interviews and dialogues that many students at Petra's stage of development are thoroughly confused; indeed, they sometimes find the whole experience of the studio mysterious. In Petra's studio, for example, in spite of the students’ general admiration for Quist as practitioner and teacher, fully half of the group find it hard to grasp what he means by "thinking architecturally". Judith, a colleague of Petra's, has a jury in which the critic finally tells her, Unless you can begin to think of the problem architecturally . . . you aren't going to find any way to proceed. And Judith herself says, in a later interview, I began to realize that my approach wasn't architectural at all. In another studio,¹ the studio master says of a student, Lauda is the hardest guy to deal with. Intelligent, articulate, comes up with something that works, but architecturally it's horrible. Now, what do I do? In a way, it's the kind of case which precipitates the weakest responses, because he has not internalized some of the covert things . . . I think he should do something else. He is bright but totally unvisual. Within the frame of reference of a designing architect, he is totally misplaced . . . I wouldn't know what to do with him. totallv misnlaced . . . I wouldn't know what to do with him. The teacher argues that because Lauda has not picked up the “covert things", the teacher does not (and cannot) know what to do with him. As for Lauda, he accepts but is rather bewildered by the demand that he perform according to standards that he finds alien and mysterious. I think at times (the teacher) assumed a greater awareness on mv part than I had .. . I wasn't doing it around my own standards. My standards were far surpassed . . . That's probably the key thing. ## So, he says, . . . (I want) to go out and learn first. I want to know what it is we are arguing about. In vet another studio, a student who has not been singled out by his teachers as a problem, makes this poignant observation. What we have is a very Kafkaesque situation where you really don't know where you are, and you have no basis for evaluation. You hang on the inflection of the tone of voice in your crit to discover if something is really wrong.² So we must add the student's sense of confusion and mystery, at least in the early stages of the studio, to the features of design education I have already mentioned — the student trying to do something on her own; being unclear just what it is she is supposed to do; getting stuck; the studio master offering in demonstration, instruction, and reflection on the basis of his implicit diagnoses of her difficulties. These phenomena are not unique to Quist's dialogue with Petra, or even to Quist's studio as a whole, but are characteristic of most studio education. In order to make sense of them, we must identify the paradox with which design education necessarily begins. Then, as we set the learning/teaching predicament to which that paradox leads we will recognise the implicit pedagogy of the studio. Whether we agree with it or not, we will find it intelligible. Initially, the student does not and cannot understand what designing means. He finds the artistry of “thinking (and doing) like an architect" to be elusive, obscure, alien and mysterious. Conversely, the studio master realizes that the students do not initially understand the essential things and cannot be told those things at the outset, because the fundamental concepts of designing can be grasped only in the context of the doing — only through the experience of designing. Further, at least some studio masters, like Lauda's, believe that, even in the experience of designing, some of the essential things must remain covert; one cannot explain them, the student must somehow internalize them. Hence the “Kafkaesque" situation in which the student must “hang on the inflection of the tone of voice in (his/her) crit to discover if something is really wrong". In this sense, the design studio shares in a general paradox attendant on the teaching and learning of any really new competence or understanding. For the student seeks to learn things whose meaning and importance he cannot grasp ahead of time. He is caught in the paradox Plato describes so poignantly in his dialogue, The Meno. Here, just as Socrates induces him to admit that he hasn't got the least idea what virtue is, Meno bursts out with the question: But how will you look for something when you don't in the least know what it is? How on earth are you going to set up something you don't know as the object of your search? To put in another way, even if you come right up against it, how will you know what you have found is the thing you didn't know?³ The student does not yet know what he needs to know, yet knows that he needs to look for it. His instructor cannot tell him what he needs to know, even if he has words for it, because the student would not understand him. The student is expected to find out for himself, to learn by doing. The studio seems to rest on the assumption that it is only in this way that he can learn. Though others may be able to help him, they can only do so as he begins to understand for himself the process he does not yet understand. And although they may help him, he is ultimately responsible. In a fundamental sense, he is expected to educate himself in designing. Or as my friend, Tom Cowan put it, I like old Carl Gustave Jung best on education. You know that unlike Freud for whom psychoanalysis is a branch of the healing arts, Jung always insisted that it is a propadeutic, a branch of education. For him, education is what one does to and for one's self. Hence the universal irrelevance of all systems of education . . . This view forced me to distinguish education from training: Education - the self-learning process. Training - what others make you do — What are educational systems (so-called) really doing? For example, law school, I discovered, primarily trains students to listen . . . Law school trains people to think and talk the way the rest of the profession does. What is its educational function then? To drive you mad with its incessant drill to educate yourself. The process appears terribly wasteful, yet some do get educated. If the teacher had a big stick and hit you over the head every time you tried to get him to educate you, the thing would be done in less than a semester. It seems to me that this is the Zen method of education, so of course, I can't claim to have invented it.⁴ In the context of the studio, there is a double paradox: on the one hand, the student cannot initially understand what he needs to learn; on the other hand, he can only learn it by educating himself, and he can only educate himself by beginning to do it. This places the student in a predicament. He is expected to plunge into the studio, trying from the very outset to do what he does not yet know how to do, in order to get the sort of experience that will help him learn what “designing” means. In this predicament, it is as though the teacher said: I can tell you there is something you need to know, and I can tell you that with my help you can probably learn it. Bu I cannot tell you what it is in a way that you can now understand. You must be willing, therefore, to undergo certain experiences as I direct you to undergo them so that you can learn what it is you need to know and what I mean by the words I use. Then and only then can you make an informed choice about whether you wish to learn this new competence. If you are unwilling to step into this new experience without knowing ahead of time what it will be like, then I cannot help you. You must trust me. As Quist puts it in an interview about his own studio, the studio master asks the students to make a “willing suspension of disbelief": It has to be a kind of contract between the two — the teacher must be open to challenge and must be able to defend his position – the student, in turn, must be willing to suspend his disbelief, to give the teacher's suggestion a chance — to try the suggestion out. The student must be willing to trust that the faculty member has a programmatic intention which will be pre-empted or ruined by his requiring full justification and explanation before anything is done . . . a good student is capable of the willing suspension of disbelief. Quist's phrase, "the willing suspension of belief", comes from Samuel Taylor Coleridge, who used it to describe the stance essential to our understanding of poetry. The poet tries to convey an esoteric experience, Coleridge thought. In order to read a poem in such a way as to grasp what the poet seeks to communicate, the reader must enter into a collaboration with him, willingly suspending his disbelief in utterances that seem to him mistaken, or even absurd. Only in this way can he allow the poem to do its work. Like the reader, the student is asked to will the suspension of disbelief in what the studio master has to tell him. He is not asked to will "belief”, because he will not be able to believe until he understands, and ħe cannot understand until he has had the right sort of experience. The phrase also suggests that belief, when it comes, should be a matter of informed choice. Disbelief should be suspended until the student has access to the information on which to make a good decision. The student is asked to will something, however - to make an act of commitment to the enterprise on which he and the studio master will embark. What makes this situation into a predicament for the student is that he, or she, is likely to feel that this commitment entails costs that cannot, in the nature of the case, be justified before the fact by their counterbalancing benefits. Perhaps the least of these is the fact that the student must forego, at least for a while, other opportunities for learning. More important is the fact that, as he enters into the new experience, he perceives himself to be at risk. He feels that he risks a loss of his sense of competence and control and, with these, a loss of confidence. For a time, at least, he will be swimming in unknown waters, without competence, without control, and indeed, without understanding. He must temporarily abandon much that he already knows and values. If he comes to the studio with knowledge he considers useful for the task, he may well be asked to unlearn it, so as to open himself to new skills. If he comes with a perspective on what is valuable and important in design, he may be asked to put it aside in order to grasp a new perspective. Later in his studio education, or after it, he may be able to assess for himself the relative merits of his earlier and later perspectives, perhaps even to reconcile them. But in the early stages, he is unable to do this. And he may fear that, by a kind of insidious coercion or seduction, he may permanently lose what he already knows and values. With his entry into a new experience in which he is relatively without competence and relatively without understanding of what he needs to learn, he will become significantly dependent upon his instructors. It is to them that he must look for understanding, direction, and help in the acquisition of competence. His willing suspension of belief is also a willing suspension of autocracy and distrust of dependency — all very much like becoming a child again. In such a predicament, he is likely to be vulnerable to anxiety. The magnitude of the loss the student feels he is experiencing, the scope of the risk he feels he is taking, and the depth of his anxiety, have much to do with what he brings to the experience. If he has a relatively weak sense of his own competence and confidence, so that he is easily threatened by their temporary surrender, then his sense of loss, risk, and anxiety is likely to be high. Not so, if he is confident of his own competence and independence. Then a temporary surrender of control can seem innocuous. If he finds it easy to distrust those in authority, and see them as manipulating him — and if, more especially, he is unaware of these dispositions — then the willing suspension of disbelief will present him with grave and perhaps insuperable problems. Not so, if he needs reasons for distrusting others, rather than the reverse. And if he has learned to think about the process by which he restructures familiar meanings, then he will have a way of reflecting on the new experience of the studio; not so, if he has no concepts to describe what is happening to him. In some respects, the studio master shares the student's predicament. Although he is likely to have greater understanding of the design process, and competence matched to his understanding, he knows that, in the first instance, he cannot convey these to his student. He knows that the student, like a postulant asked to make a leap of faith in order to attain belief, can get good reasons for taking action only by beginning to act. However much the studio master may dislike asking the student to make an initially unjustified surrender of autonomy and doubt — however much he may dislike having to abandon a view of the learning process as one in which he and the student participate as equal partners — his initial contract with the student, on which the effectiveness of design education depends, requires that the student make a willing suspension of disbelief, in spite of its perceived risks, and that the studio master invite him to do so. To be sure, the learning contract is seldom explicit. Quist is rather an exception among studio masters in the degree to which he makes it into an object of reflection. Usually student and studio master simply find themselves in the situation described by the contract. And if they should happen to think about it later on, their reflections are likely to be embedded in the complex, multi-levelled process of communication in which, after the initial contract, the main work of the studio consists. We can think of this process as one in which the participants send messages to one another and receive messages from one another. However, the transmission of theit messages is not like a kind of telegraphy, in which signals (assumed to be inherently meaningful) are directly transferred from one participant to another. Rather the process is one of reciprocal construction. Each participant must construct for himself the meanings of the messages sent by the other, design messages whose meanings the other is likely to be able to construct, and test both that he has correctly constructed the other's meaning and that the other has correctly constructed his own. When this process works well, the result is a reliable convergence of meaning. So much of the studio shares with alì human communication. But the communication between student and studio master is, in several ways, exceptionally problematic. First of all, messages usually refer, at once, to at least two kinds of things: the process of designing, and the process of learning to design. At the outset, the student is likely to be confused about both. A particular event, like Petra's desk crit, pertains to both processes and holds a potential for two interacting levels of confusion. Second, messages about designing and learning to design are not primarily conveyed in the mode of talk but in the mode of action — through the studio master's demonstrations of designing and the student's efforts to design. Or, as in Quist's dialogue with Petra, the two kinds of actions provide a ground for talk about design. The fact that student and studio master communicate primarily by doing is essential to the effectiveness of their process. The student's success is measured, after all, not only by his ability to recognize and talk about good design, but by his ability to do it. On the other hand, this fact makes things, in some ways, more difficult. The student must be able to construct the meanings of the studio master's actions and must try to do this even though the studio master's meanings are likely to conflict, in ways he cannot anticipate, with his own. (The likelihood of their conflict underlies the need for an initial suspension of disbelief.) And the student cannot send messages through his own actions without making himself vulnerable to the perceived risks of confusion and failure. Finally, the studio master's messages are often troubled by vagueness, ambiguity or obscurity. The most essential things are often those most likely to be initially unclear to the student, or even inexpressible in words. For example, in the design review we have examined, Quist devotes a great deal of effort to demonstrating the variety of design domains that must be taken into account in spinning out and evaluating the designer's choices. Nowhere, however, does he describe the system of design domains on which he draws; and even if he were to try to do so, some students would find this a point of extreme confusion – Lauda, for example, who can think only in terms of structure and technology. When Quist tells Petra that she must “draw and draw”, he means drawing in the sense of drawn experiment. For some students, however, “drawing” can mean only the visual delineation of an already formed idea. When told to “draw and draw", they infer that their presentation lacks the polish of a professional presentation. Some students interpret Quist's use of “metaphor", which he intends to denote the image generative of a design, to mean a decorative attachment to an already established design. One student, having completed her basic drawing, suggests that in order to please her instructor she will “put in some metaphors". The very notion of “thinking architecturally" can remain stubbornly ambiguous. A student has not really grasped the meaning of component design skills (analysing a program, making a partí, making a scale model) until he has experienced these processes in their interaction with one another in a whole process of design. Although the design master may break “thinking architecturally" into a set of independently learnable components, the student cannot understand and acquire each component skill, in the sense in which “thinking architecturally” requires it, until he has experienced that component in the context of the whole. Similarly, vagueness and confusion may hover around such questions as the sources of evaluation judgments (the meanings underlying terms like “screwy”, “nice”, “horrible”), and the degree of objective validity or relativity imputed to such judgments. On these matters, the instructor is often silent. As one student says, One of the things that really bugs me about architectural education is that a lot of things are really implicit, remain under the surface and are not talked about. And such silences may themselves become sources of ambiguity, leaving the student free to believe, for example, that these things are obvious to everyone except him, or he is being challenged to find them out for himself, or this instructor cannot express them, or they are inexpressible or he, the student, has not learned to ask the right questions. The issue becomes crucial to a student when he is unable to grasp the underlying view of designing from which an instructor has criticized his work. Although, in any particular interaction between student and studio master, the various types of ambiguity, vagueness or obscurity may not arise, the potential for them is inherent in the studio situation. The premise of the studio is that the student must begin to design before he knows what he is doing so that, in the light of this experience, the studio master's demonstrations and descriptions may begin to have meaning for him, and thereby help him to teach himself to design. But this virtuous circle depends on the capacity of student and instructor to search effectively for convergence of meaning about the “essential things”. They must do this in spite of the potential for ambiguity, vagueness, or inexpressibility inherent in much of what they wish to communicate about. And they must do it in the context of a learning predicament which leads most students, at one time or another, to feel vulnerable and defensive. Their search, and the strategies both parties may bring to it, will be the subject of the following section. ## Part V: Coaching Artistry As the student begins to design, even though he is not sure how to do it and does not know what he needs to know in order to learn to do it, the studio master may help him in two ways. He may demonstrate some part of the process he believes the student needs to learn, in which case he gives the student something to imitate. Or he may tell the student something about designing, general descriptions, specific instructions or criticisms, asking questions, suggesting that the student try various things – in all of which cases the student is expected to listen. Studio masters vary in their preferences for “showing" or "telling". Some refuse to draw for their students, fearing, perhaps, that the student's imitation will be blind and mechanical. Others will only draw, distrusting mere words as a vehicle of communication about something as inherently visual as designing. Some, like Quist, combine the two strategies. Whatever the studio master's preference may be, two conditions must be met if the search for convergence of meaning is to be effective. The first is that the context must be one in which the student is actively engaged in trying to do something. The second is that demonstrating and imitating, telling and listening, must take the form of reciprocal reflection-in-action. The studio master, when he works well, tries to figure out what the student understands, what his problems are about, what he needs to know, all of this from the main evidence of observation of the student's designing. The studio master's interventions, then, are experiments which test both the studio master's grasp of the student's understanding and the effectiveness of his intervention. In this way, the studio master reflects-in-action. The student tries to grasp the meaning of the master's showing and telling and seeks to translate what he grasps into his own performance. Each such performance is an experiment which expresses the sense the student has made of what he has observed or heard and tests the means by which he translates that sense into the task of designing. In this sense, the student reflects-in-action. Studio master and student construct a dialogue in the media of words and performance. The student performs and presents the results of his performance; the master “reads” what he observes and tries to make interventions matched to the student's understanding and problems. The student tries to grasp the meaning of what the master has said and done, and to test his new understandings by translating them into a new performance. This process goes on continuously, within and across the design problems that make up the tasks of the studio. It is successful when it results in convergence of meaning, expressed in the student's ability to perform (in the particular context then appropriate) in a way that student and master can recognize as thinking and doing “like-an-architect". As the two persons approach convergence of meaning, their speech becomes more eliptical, they use shorthand in word and gesture to convey ideas that might seem complex to an outsider; they communicate with greater confidence; they finish one another's sentences, or leave sentences unfinished, confident that the other has grasped their meaning. In the process of reciprocal reflection-in-action, several levels of learning are involved. As I have mentioned earlier, the student learns both about designing and about learning to design. For example, Petra learns about designing whatever she learns from Quist's demonstration (we do not know just what it is, although she does mention for example, she sees why a shape had seemed “intuitively wrong") and she also learns what to expect from a desk crit, what it expected of her in such an event, how she should present her inquiries and problems in order to get useful responses from Quist, what kinds of questions Quist is likely to ask that she might also come to ask herself, and the like. Further, the student learns about design in the same process by which she learns about designing. As we have seen, every experiment in designing involves judgments about what is “nice”, “good”, “interesting”, “like what Aalto has done on occasion”, or what is “horrible”, “spoils the whole idea”, “screwy". If the process works well, the student becomes aware that she must have likes and dislikes, values and preferences of her own, by which she judges the results of her design experiments. She learns how the studio master makes his judgments of design quality, and something of what enters into those judgments, and she learns (with greater or lesser independence) to make her own judgments. She also learns to be attentive to certain norms of designing – for example, the norm of fidelity to the implications set up by one's prior moves — and to see the connections of those norms to the qualities she has learned to like in her own and other's work. As student and studio master oscillate between descriptions of the qualities of designs and descriptions of designing, they also oscillate from one language to another. There is a language of appreciation (some elements of which I have cited above) and there is a language of performance which both Quist and Petra illustrate profusely in their dialogue. For example, Quist's "this (the dining room) might come down here to get summer sun here", “you must impose a discipline, you can always break it open later”. Often Quist combines the two languages in the same sentence, as in “Then you might carry the gallery level through, and look down into here . . . which would be nice". In addition, there is (as I have already mentioned) language about designing, which we might think of as fragments of a theory about the design process, such as Quist's comments about working back and forth between unit and total, the need for subjection to a common geometry, “you will see that will be a common problem that will come up with everyone, either too much constraint or not enough". In the passáges back and forth among the languages of appreciation, performance and theory of designing, student and studio master pass, in their reciprocal reflection-in-action, from one domain of attention to another, and from one level of description to another. With this overview of the search for convergence of meaing, let us now examine more carefully the two main strategies of telling and listening, demonstrating and imitating. I shall first consider each of these separately, though, as we shall see further on, they are usually closely coupled and combined in actual practice. And I shall examine how they can work, even in the context of the learning paradox and predicament and the obstacles to communication I have previously described. Telling and listening. The studio master's “telling” may take several forms, — specific instructions about particular design tasks or situations, for example, the preparation of a site plan, how to assign uses appropriate to slopes of various grades, when to use cross-sectional drawings, elevations or plans, — criticisms of the student's performance, — suggestions of things the student needs to do next in a particular design task, like Quist's suggestion that Petra now work on the size of the “middle area”, or calibrate the dimensions of her grid, — proposals for new experiments the students ought to try, — analysis of problems the student has encountered, — general comments about good design, or about the process of designing, — questions aimed at getting the student to pay attention to design domains previously ignored or to rethink the problem, or to become aware of important norms (drawing to scale, establishing orientation, considering the implications of a choice of geometry). Most of these sorts of utterances are made in the context of the student's doing. They are made as the student is in the midst of a task (and perhaps stuck in it), or as the student is about to begin a task, or thinking back on a task just completed, or rehearsing in imagination a task she may perform in the future. Clearly, the things the studio master says in contexts like these have a potential for communication to the student that they would not have in other contexts. Once the student has begun to design, the studio master can begin to communicate what designing is about. But there is no magical dividing line between the studio and the world outside it. The student does not suddenly understand, when she steps into the studio, what she had found obscure while she remained outside it. Nevertheless, master and student can begin their reflective dialogue about design, designing and learning to design, once the student has begun to design. What happens to make this possible? In the context of action, both the studio master's telling and the student's listening, take on new potentials for effectiveness. These have to do with the way in which the student can pay attention to what she hears, with the way in which the student's designing provides a source of feedback about the sense she has made of what she has heard, and with the special demands both parties place on verbal descriptions when they must be translated into action. When Quist tells Petra, for example, about placing administration, kindergarten, and gym on the site, she listens to him in a special way because she is engaged in trying to place them on the site. She listens rather as we listen to directions telling us how to get somewhere when we are the ones who will have to drive. It is one thing to listen to a description of a process as though it were mere information divorced from action; another, to listen to it with the understanding that it is an instruction for the performance of a task; and still another, to listen to it as an instruction we must presently try to follow. In the last case, which might be called “operational attention", we listen with a readiness to translate what we hear into action which means that we must construct its meaning in our own performance. In this case, unless the instruction is one we already know how to follow, it is always incomplete. There are always gaps between the description of action contained in the instruction and the kind of description from which we can act. We become aware of them only when we try to act from the instruction or imagine what it would be like to put it into action. We then put a different kind of demand both on the instruction and on our understanding of it, namely that the discovered gaps are ones we can figure out how to fill. The gaps between instruction and performance are of several kinds. The instruction may not have appropriate specificity. It may not be specific enough, or may not have the right sort of specificity, for the student to be able to apply it to the situation at hand. In order to follow Quist's advice to "draw and draw, in order to calibrate the grid", Petra must know how to carry out the drawing experiments involved in such a calibration. She must know, for example, how to test a particular choice of dimension for its impacts on access to buildings, circulation, and fit to the contours of the slope. Quist may give her examples of what it might mean to test a grid's dimensions in these ways, but his examples may not be matched to the particular problem Petra feels she is having or to what she already knows how to do. He may discover this through her questions, or through observation of her attempts to follow his instructions. In order to get to the level of appropriate specificity, for her in this instance, he must say enough of the right sort of thing (right for her sense of problem and for her existing know-how) without trying to say everything. He must become aware that some of the things he takes for granted are just the things that give her the greatest difficulty. The instruction may be ambiguous. It may have the peculiar sorts of ambiguity characteristic of the language of designing (some of which I have described in the previous section), or it may have the general kind of ambiguity common to all instructions. With respect to the latter, one need only try to follow someone's directions for getting to a place; “take the first left after the lights”may turn out, for example, to mean "take the first paved left” — the dirt road immediately after the lights was not meant to count! In such a case, as in the case of Quist's instructions to Petra, the active listener, trying to translate the instruction into a competent performance, discovers ambiguities of which the giver of the instructions is unaware. For the instructor, the instruction is not ambiguous; he has already done all the necessary gap-filling and takes for granted the tacit know-how that went into it. For the active listener, the discovered ambiguity is a problem to be solved – alone, or with the instructor's help. The instruction may be novel, in the sense that it refers to things, procedures, or qualities that are not yet in the listener's repertoire. Petra may not be able to follow Quist's advice about “being one with the trees" because this idea is strange to her, not yet among her “things to think with". The instruction may contain intended meanings that conflict with the meanings the listener constructs for it. The student may not perceive an instruction as ambiguous, for example — may think that he “gets it" — and may, nevertheless, perform it in a way that reveals to the instructor a meaning incongruent with his own. This is what happens, for example, when a student decides to “put in some metaphors”. In all four kinds of cases — inappropriate specificity, ambiguity, novelty, conflict of meaning — the student discovers, or reveals, gaps between instruction and performance which become visible only when there is an attempt to translate instruction into action. For both student and studio master, the instruction then becomes subject to the demand that it be translatable into action — and, indeed, into an action of the sort the instructor had in mind. Moreover, such gaps are revealed in a context in which they can be filled, either through the student's private experimenting, or through his dialogue (drawing and explaining) with the instructor. And here it is important to notice a further sense in which the context of doing makes it possible for student and studio master to begin to understand one another. When the student is engaged in designing, his performance can serve, for the instructor and for himself, as evidence of the meanings he has constructed for the instructor's descriptions. His performance is a text in which it is possible to read his understandings. Seeing what the student has drawn, the studio master can realize that the student thinks “drawing to scale" means using a ruler. The student can realize that he does not really know what it means to “calibrate the grid”. The student's attempts to translate descriptions into performance can reveal unanticipated gaps in description, indicate incongruities of meaning not previously suspected, show that the student has a problem different from the one the instructor had in mind. And on the basis of such feedback, the instructor can invent what he ought to say next. The student's attempted performance is just as much an utterance as the instructor's attempted description. Both are experimental moves in a process of reflection-in-action. For the student, every attempt at translating instruction into action is an experiment that tests his construction of the instructor's meaning. He asks himself, in effect, have I got it right? Do I understand what he is talking about? Does it make sense to me? Can I do it? For the studio master, every utterance is the output of an attempt to read the test of the student's performance for its content of understanding and problems. What he chooses to say to the student tests his reading. But it also tests his answers to other questions, any or all of which may be alive for him in the dialogue. He may ask himself, for example, what kind of language will best match this student's problem or understanding? What Tolstoy says of the teacher of reading holds also for the teacher of designing: Every individual must, in order to acquire the art of reading in the shortest possible time, be taught quite apart from any other, and therefore there must be a separate method for each. That which forms an insuperable difficulty to one does not in the least keep back another, and vice versa. One pupil has a good memory, and it is easier for him to memorize the syllables than to comprehend the vowellessness of the consonants; another reflects calmly and will comprehend a most rational sound method; another has a fine instinct, and he grasps the law of word combination by reading whole words at a time. The best teacher will be he who has at his tongue's end the explanation of what it is that is bothering the pupil. These explanations give the teacher the knowledge of the greatest possible number of methods, the ability of inventing new methods and, above all, not a blind adherence to one method but the conviction that all methods are one-sided, and that the best method would be the one which would answer best to all the possible difficulties incurred by a pupil, that is, not a method but an art and talent. . . . Every teacher must . . . by regarding every imperfection in the pupil's comprehension, not as a defect of the pupil, but as a defect of his own instruction, endeavour to develop in himself the ability of discovering new methods . . . Like Tolstoy's teacher, the studio master may call in different ways on the elements of his repertoire in order to match his descriptions to the particular student's way of understanding, or he may invent new interventions on the spot. Similarly, he may choose to say different things depending on his reading of the student's particular design situation. For example, – He may ask a question aimed at direcțing the student's attention to a new aspect of the situation: "Why does the administration belong here? What if you opened up the space here?" — He may ask a question that contains within it an idea the student may not yet have entertained: “How will you mark these level differences?” (where the student has not yet noticed that there are differences to be marked). — He mav give the student a very concrete instruction that contains implicitly, a deeper meaning. He might say, for example, “Why don't you see what it looks like in crosssection?", hoping that the student will notice, then, that the gallery (to return to Petra's drawing) is more than a vehicle for circulation. The hope is that the student will translate from the concrete instruction to an unstated, essential meaning. In effect, the studio master then tries to get the student to put herself in a position to see something that she might not see if it were stated in general terms. In a similar spirit, a piano teacher might say, “You should change the fingering here", meaning, "There is really a new phrase which you must begin here". — He may pick up the exact words with which a student has described her intention, developing them, however, in a direction different from the one the student had in mind, as when Quist says, “It is a general pass-through that anyone has the liberty to pass through, but it is not a corridor . . ." – He may try to find a concrete image, accessible to this student, which carries a complex network of associations. Thus Quist speaks of a “garden, a soft back area to these (hardedged forms)." In an analagous vein, a skiing instructor might say, “You should plant the pole here!” Just as the instructor may vary his strategies of description, according to his reading of the particular student or design problem, so he may vary the timing of what he says, or the manner in which he says it. He makes judgments about a student's need to know something just now, or about her readiness to hear it. He may treat one student with great gentleness and indirection, barely hinting at issues which would cal for new directions of work. With another, he may be direct, aggressive, challenging. In Quist's studio, some of the variations in student response to him may reflect the different sides of himself that he chooses to present to different students. As he selects strategies of description from his repertoire, or invents them, the studio master engages in reflection-in-action. He reflects on the student's performance, makes an on-the-spot experiment responsive to his reading, and judges his experiment by its impact on the student's further performance - which derives, in turn, from the student's on-the-spot construction of the instructor's meaning. The process is one of reciprocal reflection-in-action. And in this process, the student's performance is pivotal. It tests and reveals, at once, the instructor's reading of the student's situation, the appropriateness of the invervention selected, and the sense the student has made of it. To be sure, the process need not be self-conscious. Studio master and student need not reflect on their reflection-in-action but may pass spontaneously from one reading and response to another, without a “stop and think". But if they do stop and think — perhaps when they feel their dialogue is not working – then they may become aware of the on-line experimentation and reflection in which they have been engaging and the tacit assumptions and strategies they have been employing. Demonstration and imitation. A great deal of what Quist does in his dialogue with Petra consists not in “telling" but in showing. Starting with the givens of her design situation, and the big problems she has described, he gives her a demonstration of a version of the sort of design process she has already tried (stutteringly, as Quist says) to carry out. How shall we describe the intention with which Quist makes this demonstration? Clearly, he intends to show her something so that she will understand it. But, equally clearly, he intends her to go on and do something like it. “You should go on”, he says, “you are going to make it!" Quist has demonstrated how one might go about building this diagramatic process of designing the layout of the buildings on the site so that Petra can proceed to imitate it — to imitate, that is, not the details or the mechanics of the process but its essential features. And Petra seems to accept the demonstration in the spirit Quist intends. She seems to feel that he has made clear to her why she was stuck, why certain things had seemed to her to be “intuitively wrong"” and she seems to attribute to herself, as Quist attributes to her, a capacity to go on and do as he has done. In a more general sense, the studio master uses his capacity to demonstrate aspects of designing as a way of helping the student to grasp what designing means, what she needs to learn that she may not, at the outset, realize she needs to learn. And when he does, he attributes to her – as part of what she already knows how to do — the capacity for a certain kind of imitation. At first glance, there is nothing strange in this. Imitation is practiced, virtually universally, as a way in which one individual learns to do what another individual already knows how to do. Children learn to play by imitating other children. They learn to enter the adult world by imitating the adults around them. Adults learn sports, games, working skills, the business of everyday life, by imitating those who are already proficient. It is true that for adults the idea of imitation has negative connotations (we shall have more to say about these later on); still, most adults continually engage in imitation and generally take the process for granted. They may not like the idea of imitating someone else, but this does not prevent them from doing it and considering it an obvious thing to do. The sense of obviousness dissolves, however, the moment we consider imitation more closely. For imitation is not simply the reproduction of an observed behaviour. It is a complex process of construction, in which the student must form an idea of what is essential in the demonstration — those aspects of it that are to be imitated. And, in complementary fashion, the student reveals by her performance what she perceives as essential in the demonstration. Imitation need not, and usually does not, proceed through an intermediate verbal description of the action to be imitated. The constructive performance usually comes first; verbal description usually comes, if at all, when the imitator reflects on what she has done. And often, a verbal description, when it is given, seems an inadequate account of what the performer has actually done. Imitation involves a process of seeing one thing as another and doing as another person has done, without necessarily being able to say in what respects the two performances are alike. Further, the imitator may transfer what she has made of an observed performance to a new situation, one both similar and different from the first, and transform her performance to fit the new situation. Petra may imitate Quist's demonstration of the laying out of school buildings on the site, producing a new layout of her own which is, nevertheless, similar in certain essential respects to Quist's. Then, when she goes on to the next design problem, she may proceed in the diagrammatic phase essentially as Quist showed her in the case of the school — this time, however, entirely different conditions of site and program. It is important to note here, first, that Petra may transfer the essentials of Quist's way of handling the diagrammatic phase of design without replicating the details of his first demonstration (indeed, as the famous tale of Epaminondas reminds us, to be unable to do this is to embody a classic type of stupidity); and second, Petra may succeed in translating and transferring what she observes of Quist's demonstration without being able to give a good verbal description of the essential thing that she has picked up and carried over into the new problem. To imitate, at this higher level of apprehension and performance, is to take the demonstration as an exemplar or precedent for further action. It involves seeing the later problem as the earlier one and doing in the later as Quist has done in the earlier. It is, in effect, a version of the process of generative metaphor. Carrying what she has made of Quist's demonstration over into a new problem, Petra would construct in her new performance an embodiment of her grasp of the essentials of his. One might say that she tries to understand him by performing essentially like him. And she may reveal in her performance more or less of what he regards as essential to his. Her performance is, in this sense, a source of feedback about her grasp of his meanings and a continuation, in action, of their dialogue. The things Quist and Petra say to one another take on a special significance when they are uttered in the context of imitative construction. Quist's language of designing – his combination of drawing and talking, as in “If this is the gully and this, the hill, then there might be a bridge here .. ."— makes manifest and understandable, for purposes of understanding and imitation, what would be opaque if it consisted in drawing alone. His language about designing – as in his advice to “impose a discipline” or “work back and forth between unit and total" — take on special significance because they are intended to “coach" Petra in her efforts at imitation. Although Petra need not reflect on the process in which she engages when she imitates Quist, her ability to do so may enhance her powers of imitation, in the sense of enabling her to grasp and correct what she, or Quist, sees as a failure to translate the essentials into action. And her ability to reflect, in the course of imitation, gives her, as well, a greater freedom to choose — to criticize and to retain, or reject, elements of her imitation of Quist. Such a process of reflective imitation may be divided into several “moments". These are usefully distinguished from one another, even though they may not be cleanly separated from one another in the actual doing: (1) She perceives what he does. Šhe recognizes it, in the sense of grasping the essential features that she will shortly embody in her own designıng. (2) She does as she has seen him do. This is a multi-levelled process of translation and construction. She must first of all transpose the pattern she sees as an outsider of observer into the pattern she feels as a producer of the action. She must transform the theme of the action she perceives in this context into a new variation to be produced in a new context. She may “get it" more or less. One way in which she may fail to get it, at first, is that she may replicate superficial details mannerisms – of Quist's performance; her imitation may be merely mechanical. (3) She reflects on her performance. Šhe reflects on his doing and hers by looking to see in what ways she has produced in her situation what is essential in the relation of his performance to his situation. This is one of the points in the process where she may fall into confusion — discovering, for example, that she has failed to construct what is essential in his performance. Note, too, that she may be unable at this point to say what it is that she has failed to get. She may then seek, with Quist's help, perhaps, to reflect in a further sense, trying to put into words what is like and unlike in the two performances. And her reflections on her efforts at imitation may be joined to reflection on the tacit knowing-inaction that she finds already embedded in her own performance. What she already knows and does spontaneously, without conscious intention, may stand as an obstacle to her imitative construction of his performance. Through her reflections, then, she may analyse and correct her performance, bringing it closer to what she perceives as essential in his; or she may succeed in drawing her earlier knowing-in-action into a new integration with his. In this process, Quist may help her by his explicit reflections on his own performance. At the same time, Petra's may serve as a kind or mirror for Quist, helping him to gain a better understanding of what he is really doing. Petra may reflect, in the still further sense of critical evaluation of what she “gets” when she gets it. How does she like what she does when she does as he does? (This is the point at which, she can “always break it open"). What does she choose to keep, to give up, or to change? (4) She internalizes the performance, in its essentials, making it her own. She “goes over it” until she can perform in this way intuitively, spontaneously, no longer in the mode of imitative construction of his actions but by having brought this way of performance into her own repertoire. The entire process of reflective imitation is an important part of what students already know how to do when they enter the studio, or an important part of what they learn to do when they increase their ability to learn to design. Študents who are not gifted with this antecedent competence must learn it in the very same process by which they try to learn the new process of designing – learning to engage in reflective imitation as they learn designing through reflective imitation. Moreover, they may need to unlearn other ways of learning which interfere with this one. Their success in building a capacity for reflective imitation greatly influences, as we shalì see, the learning outcomes of their studio experience. The ladder of reflection. In the actual exchange of student and studio master, the process of telling and listening, demonstrating and imitating, are variously combined and interwoven. — the studio master, while demonstrating, reflects on his own performance, — the student, presenting her drawing, reflects on the steps she has taken and the problems she has experienced, — the master describes and criticizes the student's performance (as in Quist's, “sort of what you have here", or "what you have done stutteringly . . ."), — the master instructs the student to carry out a particular task (as in Quist's comment that Petra should draw the gallery in section), — the master proposes experiments for the student to try, the student tries them, and the master joins the student in reflecting on the results of the trials, — the student reflects aloud on the difficulties she experiences as she tries such an experiment, questions the master about a gap she has found in his instructions, — the master demonstrates the new procedure he has advised her to try, or demonstrates both correct and incorrect ways of executing the procedure. Telling, demonstrating, questioning, translating into performance, reflective imitation, criticism, all may be “chained" in various combinations, in such a way that the later events of doing, telling, translating and reflecting build on earlier ones. The context of such a dialogue is set by the fact that the student is engaged in a design task, or has just finished one, or is just about to engage in one. Moves in the dialogue are executed in a variety of media and languages. The master may draw, talk, combine drawing and talking, point to features of the student's drawing or to features of his own or some other drawing or slide meant to function as precedent. He may employ, in various combinations, the language of appreciation, performance, or theory. Each party engages in designing, or in helping the other to design, and each engages in communication with the other about the designing in which they are engaged. Each party engages, in several senses, in on-the-spot experimentation and reflects, in several senses, on his own and the other's experimentation. Some experimenting has the function of testing what the other means by what he says or does, or what the other makes of what one says or does. Reflection, in one's own interventions or on the other's punctuates the process of experimentation and contributes to the search for reliable convergence of meaning. Designing is itself, as we have seen, a process of reflective conversation with the materials of the design situation. Draped over this process, as it were, is the reciprocal reflection-inaction of student and studio master. In this process, each party makes utterances, in words or actions, which are experiments in communication; he reflects on what the other makes of them, tries to test his perceptions of the other's messages, constructs meaning for them, and tries to test the reliability of his construction. We can think of this process in terms of the metaphor of a ladder of reflection. There are levels, or “rungs”, of reflection, which refer to the level below and serve as objects of reflection at the level above. The base, or “ground” level consists of the substantive phenomena of the design process (in our example, the contours of the slope, the grid, the problem of circulation and access, the level differences, the meaning of the gallery). One level up, there is reflection on the action of designing. This may take the form of advice about, or enunciation of principles for, designing (as in Quist's comment that “at this point I wouldn't worry about the roof"). But reflection at this level may also take the form of reflection on the knowing-inaction embedded in one's designing – not “what I believe to be true about designing" but the know-how implicit in my actual designing. Here, the designer may address questions such as these: What made me decide to put the turning circle here? What domains am I treating as relevant here? What implications flow from the moves I have made so far? How am I framing the problems of my design at this point? At the next level, student or studio master may reflect on the meaning of the other's words or actions. The student may ask, for example, What is the essential meaning in the demonstration Quist has just given? What does he really mean by describing the gallery as “in a minor way the major thing?" And he may then seek to test his understanding by eliciting the master's further reflection on what he has said or done, or by trying to translate it into his own performance. The testing process may be private, in which case the student explores whether he can do as the master has done, compares his performance with the master's instructions, sees whether he likes what he gets when he does this, or considers whether he gets something essentially similar to the master's product. The testing process may be interactive. The student may try to restate what the master has said, or describe what the master has done, or ask for criticisms of his own performance. The master may ask, for example, What does he really want to know when he asks this question? What are the understandings he reveals, the problems he shows, by what he does? What kinds of instructions or demonstrations would really help him now? What way of telling him, or showing him, is most likely to reach him? At what point is he likely to plug in? Reflections of this sort lead the master to try descriptions in the form of instructions, suggestions, or theory about the process in which the student is engaged. The master may then try to test, in the privacy of his own mind, the effects of his interventions on the student, observing what the student says at that point, his non-verbal; cues, or his performance following the master's intervention. Or, like Quist with Petra, the master may not try to test what the student makes of his intervention. Or he may ask the student to join him in the testing process by asking him what he has made of what the master said or did, or by eliciting the student's reflections on his further designing. These levels and kinds of reflection may be conceived as a ladder, in the sense that the higher rungs are about, and in response to, what happens at the lower ones. When something is perceived, by either part, as “not working” at a lower level, it is possible to “climb up” to reflect (and action) at the next level. When something seems not to be working in the designing, student or studio master may climb up to reflect about designing. When something is not working in the communication about designing, as either party sees it, he may climb up a “rung” of reflection on that communication — as in the example of the master's reflection of his own demonstration. The two examples that follow are illustrations of the operation of such a ladder of reflection. The first is drawn from a third-year design studio; the second, from a master class in violin — not an example of studio teaching, but one that shows an important similarity between the coaching processes that may be found in studio and conservatory settings. In both examples, the coach displays, in his reflection-in-action, an awareness both of the problem of helping the student to acquire new strategies of performance and, at the same time, the problem of constructing an interaction with the student that reduces the likelihood that the student will become defensive. In the first example, the studio master, Danny, has assigned the problem of designing a field school — a training school located in a rural setting. One student, Elena, came in with what she subsequently described as a “school solution" (nobody had asked her to do this; it was what she had tacitly assumed the situation called for). Danny described it as an arrangement of banana-shaped buildings in a field, a kind of motel. He asked her whether she liked what she had done. She said, no, she didn't, but she thought it was what would be called for in the studio. He asked her what she would like such a school to be. The question took her by surprise. It has not occurred to her that what she liked would matter. After some thought, she said she would like the field school to be “hidden”, she would like it to be “one with nature”, and she would like it to stimulate social activity. With a few quick sketches, Danny showed her several different ways in which she might consider producing the qualities she liked. She went home, and over a two-week period of intense immersion, she came up with a series of lively, evocative drawings in which, indeed, she had found ways of “hiding" the school in its natural setting and constructing arrangements conducive to social interaction. In the workshop I conducted, where Danny gave this example, the student was present. Although the event had occurred eight years earlier, she had kept all her drawings and remembered every detail of the interaction. The second example I’ve drawn from is a master class in violin. Dorothy DeLay of the Julliard School (famous now as Yitzhak Perlman's coach) sat listening to a series of performances by gifted young performers. Each student had prepared a piece and each performed it in turn, uninterruptedly, sometimes for as long as twenty minutes, while Miss DeLay sat impassively, listening. After each student played, she would say somnething like, “That was wonderful, sugar", and then would do something quite particular to that performer. Sometimes, her comments would have to do with intonation (she kept an electronic tuning fork for cases such as this), sometimes with the technical details of fingering or bowing, sometimes (in the case of a German student who listened precariously to one side) with posture. The only time she talked about specifically musial issues was to a young Chilean woman who had played with outstanding musicality - not a virtuoso stint but the first movement of a Brahms sonata. Dorothy asked that student to play what she felt to be the main themes of the movement. The student obliged by playing first one, then another. The third one played, Dorothy observed, seemed to be not a new theme but a variation of the first. She asked then whether there wasn't something “transitional". The student found it, played it, and agreed that it was, indeed, a third theme. Dorothy asked her, then, how she would describe the qualities of these themes? The student thought for a moment, then offered the view that the first was “lively", the second “stormy", the third “reflective". Dorothy said, “Suppose we wanted to accentuate the liveliness of the first, how would we do it?" She put her head in her hands, thinking about the problem. Then she said, “There's an up-beat that goes to a resting place, ta-dum. Perhaps you could really spring off of it, and land on the next — ta-dum. The student tried it, produced the effect, liked it. Then, “How about the third, how woud you make it really ‘reflective'?" the student seemed puzzled, then proposed a fingering and bowing that gave a very gently performance of the figure. Dorothy said, “Yes, you could do that. Or you could also restrict the bowing," and she mimed what she meant. The student tried it. Yes, that would work, too. "Which do you think you'll use?" Dorothy asked. The student seemed puzzled again. “I'm not sure, I'll have to think about it." Dorothy sat back, obviously pleased. I'm struck by several features common to both of these examples. First, both coaches asked their students to reflect on their feelings about what they are doing. In both cases, they made it legitimate for the student to like or dislike something; and in both, they invited the student to reflect on and describe the qualities of what was liked. Then, these descriptions were taken as the materials of a problem: how to produce what was liked? This was taken as a problem for the student and instructor. Both parties stood, as it were, in front of the same problem. Suggestions were made as to ways in which the described qualities might be produced. The coach seemed to be inviting the student to join her in the process of experimentation — indeed, if anything was being taught by demonstration, not by description, it was the idea of practice as experimentation. And the relationship that had been constructed was not that of performer and critic but that of partnership in the setting and experimental solving of a problem. The image of the ladder suggests that one can climb it at will, and that each rung presents a degree of difficulty more or less the same as the others. However, particular “rungs" may present difficulties peculiar to themselves. Either student or studio master, for example, may find it difficult to reflect on what he takes for granted; it is not easy to reflect on what one may not be aware of knowing already. Some things — the “covert things" — may present themselves to either party as inexpressible, therefore not susceptible to clarification by reflection. On the other hand, the experience of inexpressibility may have to do with the student, or studio master's willingness to try to put things in words, or in words and drawing combined. Whether a thought about designing is expressible may depend, to some extent, on the individual's skill in expressing it, in turn a function of practice in such expression. Belief in the centrality of “covert things” may help to keep them covert, contributing to a mystification of design. But it may also be true that, for a given student at a particular time, nothing the studio master does or says can succeed in communicating a certain essential idea. The question of inexpressibility, then, is perhaps best treated as an open question, to be explored through experiment in each interaction. The ladder of reflection would then function as a structure within which such explanations might proceed. The image of a ladder of reflection suggests an explicit ordering of reciprocal reflection whereas interactions between student and studio master usually unfold in the studio in a more or less spontaneous, intuitive way. Yet, as protocol of student/studio master interactions suggest, both parties do sometimes reflect, individually (or with peers) and with one another, on their efforts at communication. Studio masters and students differ from one another in how much of this sort of thing they do, how they do it, and how well they do it. And both parties, students and instructors, who are frequently troubled by failures in the search for convergence of meaning or intrigued by unexplained successes, often express interest in shared reflection on the process in which they are engaged and enter rather readily, at least in my experience, into collective efforts to improve it. The ladder of reflection may serve both as an explicit model of a process that is usually casual and spontaneous, and as a basis for the more deliberate and systematic reflections that some participants in the studio wish to undertake. Conclusion. The process I have described is one in which both parties engage in certain kinds of work – the work of designing, and the work of communication about (and through) designing. We may call these sorts of work “cognitive", not in the sense that they consist only of thinking but in the sense that