# Introduction: The Delft Protocols Workshop Nigel Cross, Henri Christiaans and Kees Dorst Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands Design activity encompasses some of the highest cognitive abilities of human beings, including creativity, synthesis and problem solving. Every normal person is capable of exercising such abilities, but it is in design activity that they are most frequently stretched to their limits, and the most able designers clearly exercise some exceptional levels of ability. The study and analysis of design activity therefore offers significant intellectual challenges. Nonetheless, this is a growing research field, stimulated perhaps both by the challenge and by the increasingly wide recognition of the value of design ability. A substantial and varied range of research methods has been developed and adopted for the analysis of design activity. The range extends from philosophical reflection to empirical investigation, and includes study of both the natural and the artificial intelligence of design. This variety was well reviewed in the first Delft Workshop on 'Research in Design Thinking' in 1991¹. This book contains the proceedings of the second Delft Workshop, 'Research in Design Thinking II - Analysing Design Activity', in 1994, which focused on one particular research method, that of protocol analysis. Of all the empirical, observational research methods for the analysis of design activity, protocol analysis is the one that has received the most use and attention in recent years. It has become regarded as the most likely method (perhaps the only method) to bring out into the open the somewhat mysterious cogńitive abilities of designers. In essence, protocol analysis relies on the verbal accounts given by subjects of their own cognitive activities. It is difficult to imagine how else we might examine what is going on inside people's heads, other than by asking them to tell us what they are thinking. Of course, this is fraught with difficulties. People do not necessarily know what is going on inside their own heads, let alone have the ability to verbalize it. Nevertheless, people do normally find it relatively straightforward to give a verbal account of what they believe they are thinking, or what they were thinking recently. Retrospective verbal accounts (i.e. recalling what one was thinking recently) offer one means of getting at cognitive activity which is frequently used not only in research but also in everyday interchanges: 'What were you thinking when you were doing that?'. Concurrent verbal accounts (i.e. 'thinking aloud') offer the researcher the hope that they really do externalize - or allow insight into – at least some of the subjects' cognitive activities. As Ericsson and Simon claim, in their standard work on protocol analysis, 'There is a dramatic increase in the amount of behaviour that can be observed when a subject is performing a task while thinking aloud compared to the same subject working under silent conditions. A brief instruction to think aloud usually suffices to bring about this major change in observable behaviour'.² However, there are some significant disadvantages of thinkaloud protocols, including the following. Firstly, there may well be side-effects of the verbalization, such that it actually changes the subject's behaviour and their cognitive performance. Secondly, what the subject reports may well be incomplete accounts of what their cognitive activity actually is. Thirdly, the subject may, quite unintentionally, give irrelevant accounts, reporting parallel but independent thoughts to those that are actually being employed in the task. All of these disadvantages weigh particularly heavily on the validity of protocol analysis in design, where 'non-verbal thinking' is believed to be a significant feature of the relevant cognitive activities, and where the use of sketches and similar externalization of thought processes seems to be fundamental. (See particularly the paper by Lloyd, Lawson and Scott, Chapter 20, in this volume.) The analysis of think-aloud protocols emerged as a method of psychological research in the 1920s. From the beginning it was a method of seeking insight into problem solving. The early studies were limited, however, by the researcher's ability to take accurate notes of the subject's verbalizations. It was not until after 1945, when tape recorders became available, that more accurate methods of verbal data collection allowed more precise, and less selective, studies to be undertaken. However, it was not until the 1960s that the first major protocol studies were made. Notably, thinking-aloud protocol analyses were used by de Groot³ in his studies of chess playing, and by Newell and Simon⁴ in their studies of cryptarithmetic and logical problem solving. In the 1970s, the availability of video-recording added a new dimension, in which the non-verbal behaviour of subjects could be studied alongside their verbal reports. The number and variety of protocol studies of design activity have grown significantly in recent years. The first report of such a study was that by Eastman⁵, who studied architects. Architectural design has continued to be a rich subject area for such studies6-11. As well as the conventional, single-subject, think-aloud protocol studies, the use of dialogue exchanges between two or more collaborating subjects has also been employed¹² It was not until the late 1980s that protocol studies of engineering design began to appear13-15, but the studies in that domain have increased rapidly since then16-19. A significant feature of several of these engineering design studies has been their further extension of the method of analysis to team design activity20-22. The classical protocol study relies on an individual subject thinking aloud; this is not possible in teamwork, of course, but the verbal exchanges of members of a team engaged in a joint task do seem to provide data indicative of the cognitive activities that are being undertaken by the team members. The engineering design studies have been undertaken mainly in the mechanical engineering domain, although some work in electronic engineering has also been undertaken²³. A rapidlygrowing field of study which has also begun to use protocol analysis is that of software design24-26, where teamwork has also begun to figure significantly, particularly related to the design of computer-based support systems (both software and hardware design) for cooperative or collaborative work². Most researchers using protocol analysis have studied design activity within one domain, but there are a few who have attempted to make comparisons across several domains28,29. The industrial (product) design domain has been studied relatively little through protocol analysis until very recently30,31. Industrial design is the domain in which we, the originators of the Delft Workshop, are situated, and which we therefore particularly wished to focus upon. The last decade has seen a major growth in the use of protocol studies as a method of analysing design activity. However, it has not been easy to draw general comparisons, nor even to agree general procedures or standards for such studies, because of their scattered and independent nature. It was therefore most appropriate that the 1994 Delft Protocols Workshop was designed precisely to force a concentration on the research methodology itself, and to encourage more coordinated progress in analysing design activity in the near future. The idea for this Workshop originated with Kees Dorst, in conversation at the ASME92 Conference with David Radcliffe, who brought the XeroxPARC and Stanford collaborators into the project. The aim of the Workshop was to bring together a distinguished group of design researchers (all well versed in protocol analysis) to compare analyses of the same data and to discuss the state of the art in protocol research. Although the number of protocol studies in design has been growing steadily, this has not resulted in intensifying and broadening the discussion around protocol analysis. Most of the studies have been relatively isolated projects of research groups trying out the method for themselves, and exploring the design universe. The buildup of a 'community of knowledge' out of protocol research has been limited; discussions vital for the dialectic of the scientific inquiry have been few and far between. One of the factors that keeps the dialectic low in the field of protocol analysis is the large number of variables that have to be set before the actual protocol study can get under way. The experimental layout, the choice and number of subjects, the domain and the assignment given to the subjects all influence the outcome of the protocol studies in hitherto unexplored ways. The different settings of all these variables in the studies make it very hard to compare and learn from each other's work. And protocol analysis happens to be so labour-intensive that single research projects just cannot yield statistically significant stand-alone data. To foster discussion of protocol analysis we eliminated many of the above variables from the research equation. This was done by providing the Workshop participants with a set of 'standard' data, to be analysed by all of them. They were asked to perform the analysis in any form they saw fit. The common set of data should make it easier to compare and criticize each other's work. The aims of this whole Workshop undertaking were, therefore: • to get an overview of the accumulated knowledge on design of these researchers • to seek a common language in discussing protocol analysis and detailed design processes to 'validate' in this forum protocol analysis as a research technique • to get a discussion going on the properties and limitations of protocol analysis research in design to discuss possible ways of using protocol analysis in the future, alone or in combination with other research techniques to form the basis of an international research network, a platform for discussion on these matters. The data prepared for analysis at this Workshop were recordings of an individual designer and a three-person team of designers working for two hours designing a typical industrial design product, a 'fastening device' that should allow a given backpack to be fastened onto a mountain bike. The video tapes and transcribed protocols were sent to the participants some six months before the Workshop. The 20 participants in the Workshop were selected from the many applications received in response to a call for participation, with the aim of putting together a group of experienced researchers with a great diversity in goals and approaches to the analysis of design activities. The recordings were made in January 1994 at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (XeroxPARC), California, USA, and in collaboration with the Design Research Center of Stanford University. The experiment subjects were invited by either Xerox or Stanford to participate in a research project into design thinking. They were told that the research would involve them doing a short (two-hour) design exercise, within their familiar design domain. All subjects volunteered, and were not paid. The experiments were conducted in a design room equipped with video and audio recording facilities, and supplied with table and chairs, drawing pad, pens and pencils and whiteboard. Also in the room were a mountain bicycle and the backpack to be used for the design assignment. An experimenter was present in the room, who had a file of information and data for supply to the designers if they were to ask for it. Two microphones and four video cameras recorded the activity in the design room. The four cameras were installed to capture different views: • a general overview of the room • a closer view of the subjects' faces when sitting at the table the whiteboard • overhead view of the drawing pad/tabletop. All four camera views were recorded separately on Hi-8 (NTSC) videocassettes. At the same time the images were mixed into one 4-PIP (four pictures in picture) combined view, recorded on SVHS (NTSC) videocassette. Time codes were added later to all tapes. The experiment used the same setting as in earlier experiments in Delft by Christiaans and Dorst³1,32. One experimenter (EXP1) is in the design room; a second experimenter (EXP2) is in a separate room, connected to EXP1 with a telephone headset and able to view and hear the activity in the design room. A third experimenter (EXP3) controls the video recording, logs the sequence of information cards which are asked for by the subjects, and keeps a summary of the procedures. During the experiment the actions of the experimenter EXP1 are limited to: giving information, either by supplying the information on cards or by answering questions directly (sometimes drawing on advice from EXP2) • reminding the individuals to think aloud, or speak louder, if necessary • in some cases asking the designers to work in positions where they can be adequately recorded by the video cameras • reminding the subjects of the time when they have half an hour and a quarter of an hour to go, and to stop them when time is up. At the start, the experimenter in the room (EXP1) read aloud the general experiment instructions. There were slightly different instructions for individual designers and teams of designers - an individual subject was asked to 'think aloud' continuously throughout the experiment, whereas a team was given no such instruction, and an individual subject was asked to perform a short, initial 'think aloud' training exercise in order to become accustomed to thinking aloud. After reading the instructions, the experimenter asked the subjects if there were any questions about the procedure. The subjects were then given the design assignment, which they read for themselves, and the session began. The instructions read to the subjects at the commencement of each session were as follows: Thank you for agreeing to participate in this research project. We are interested in the ways that designers work on conceptual design projects. This session is being videotaped for later analysis by a number of researchers. I am going to ask you to undertake a short design project. Let me assure you that no commercial advantage will be taken of any design work or ideas that you produce. (To an individual subject: Because we want to understand what you are thinking during the task, we want you to think aloud continually during the session. This would be as if you are talking to yourself but loud enough for me to hear. In order for you to get used to thinking aloud, I will give you a small problem which has nothing to do with the design task. Try to solve this problem while thinking aloud. This is only a training exercise, which lasts 10 minutes: so please do not worry if you do not solve the problem. Here is the problem I want you to work on. ## Written instructions: Three missionaries and three cannibals are together on one side of a river. They have one rowing-boat, which can hold up to two people. They all know how to row. How can they all reach the other side of the river, given that – for obvious reasons – there must never be more cannibals than missionaries on either riverbank?) [10 minutes allowed for this exercise, in which the experimenter reminds the subject to keep thinking aloud if there are silences of more than 30 seconds.] I am now going to ask you to undertake the design project. The time available is limited to two hours. In a moment I will give you a short written design brief for the project. Additional information which you may require during the project is available in an information file which I keep and have access to. So, if you think that you need additional information during the project, please ask me for what you need to know. Please be specific about what you ask for. The information available in the file includes both technical and client information. Although access to the file is only available through me, please do not feel constrained about asking for any information that you feel you need during the project. I also have an outside helper who can give me additional information if it is not available in the file. Apart from providing you with information when you ask for it I will not interact with you in any other way. You should try to ignore my presence in the room. Drawing materials - paper, pens and markers - are available for your use. There is also a whiteboard which you may use if you wish. The particular design project which we are asking you to undertake is concerned with a new product related to mountain bikes and backpacking. Therefore we also have in the room a mountain bike and a backpack, which you may use or refer to as you wish. Please work as you normally would on such a design assignment as this. (To an individual subject: But remember to keep thinking aloud.) Before I give you the design brief, are there any questions about the procedure? If there are no further questions we will start the session now. I remind you that the maximum time available to you is two hours. I will remind you of the time at 30 minutes and 15 minutes before the end of the session, if you are still working. (After the subjects have read the assignment the experimenter says: The bicycle here in the room is not the Batavus Buster, but the backpack provided is the HiStar backpack.) At the end of the allotted two-hour period for the experiment session, the subjects were debriefed in a short interview. The debriefing questions were: 1. What did you think of this assignment? 2. Are you satisfied with the result you managed to achieve? 3. What were the key decisions which influenced your final design? 4. Which particular items of information were especially helpful? 5. What did you find particularly difficult in the project? The design assignment given to the subjects for the experiment was as follows: HiAdventure Inc. is a fairly large US firm (some 2000 employees) making backpacks and other hiking gear. They have been very successful over the last ten years, and are well known nationwide for making some of the best external-frame backpacks around. Their best selling backpack, the midrange HiStar, is also sold in Europe. In the last one and a half years, this European activity has suffered some setbacks in the market; in Europe internal-frame backpacks are gaining a larger and larger market share. As a response, HiAdventure has hired a marketing firm to look for new trends and opportunities 'for the European market. On the basis of this marketing report, HiAdventure has decided to develop an accessory for the HiStar: a special carrying/fastening device that would enable you to fasten and carry the backpack on mountain bikes. The device would have to fit on most touring and mountain bikes, and should fold down, or at any rate be stacked away easily. A quick survey has shown that there is nothing like this on the European market. This idea is particularly interesting for HiAdventure, because the director, Mr Christiansen, has a long-standing private association with one of the chief product managers at the Batavus bicycle company (one of the larger bicycle manufacturers in northern Europe, based in Holland). Mr Christiansen sees this as a good opportunity to strike up a cooperation and to profit from the European marketing capabilities of Batavus. The Batavus product manager, Mr Lemmens, is very enthusiastic about putting a combination product on the market, a mountain bike and a backpack that can be fastened to it. The idea is to base the combination product on the Batavus Buster (a midrange mountain bike), and to sell it under the name Batavus HikeStar. The design department at Batavus has made a preliminary design for the carrying/fastening device, but both Mr Christiansen and Mr Lemmens are not very content with it. The user's test performed on a prototype also showed some serious shortcomings. That is why they have hired you as a consultant to make a different proposal. Tomorrow there is going to be a meeting between Mr Christiansen and Mr Lemmens, scheduled as the last one before presenting the idea to the board of Batavus. Before then, they need to have a clearer idea of the kind of product it is going to be, its feasibility and price. You are hired by HiAdventure to make a concept design for the device, determining the layout of the product, concentrating on • ease of use • a sporty, appealing form • demonstrating the technical feasibility of the design • ensuring that the product stays within a reasonable price range. You are asked to produce annotated sketches explaining your concept design. Good luck! See the first paper in this volume, 'The design problem and its structure' by Dorst, for an analysis of this problem and the solution possibilities open to the designers. Most of the information that designers could be expected to need to complete this assignment was available on information cards kept by EXP1. The designer or designers could ask the experimenter for anything they wanted. Information regularly asked for included: ## 1. Marketing research \- this included a profile (age, habits) and some estimations of the size of the target group. 2. Use of the backpack \- some details about the use of the backpack (such as the position of the bedroll). 3. Users' trials/evaluation \- vital information on the evaluation of the Batavus design. Stability is an issue, freedom of leg movements, and the dangling straps. 4. Batavus design (three cards) – an exploded view and some side-views of the preliminary design. It is a simple tube-frame product, fastened to the bike at the rear axle and under the saddle. The backpack is in an upright position, and the frame can fold down for storage. 5. Underlay drawing of a bike (22 inch frame) 6. Technical drawings of the 'Buster' (two cards) 7. 'HiStar' product information – giving the weight and dimensions of the backpack 8. Technical drawing of the 'HiStar' 9. Comparable products – Blackburn (three cards) – some copies from the Blackburn catalogue, featuring all the basic forms of bike racks and panniers. On the whole, the designers asked for only a small portion of the information that was available to them. Things not asked for (but prepared by us) included in-depth interviews with the director of the backpacking firm and the bicycle manufacturer. Occasionally, a designer would ask for some information included in these interviews, without asking for the complete interview. In that case the information (if available) was given verbally by the experimenter in the room. The designers also had access to the backpack featuring in the assignment, and to a mountain bike. These were used very intensively all through the project. (See the paper by Harrison and Minneman, Chapter 19, in this volume.) Two technical reference books which were available were not used at all, except to fill up and increase the weight of the backpack. ## 5 Data Analysis In all, three teams of three designers and two individuals were recorded at XeroxPARC: Trial experiment: team (Stanford students) (code: DPW 94.1.12.1) Second experiment: individual (code: DPW 94.1.13.2) Third experiment: individual (code: DPW 94.1.13.3) ● Fourth experiment: team (code: DPW 94.1.14.4) ● Fifth experiment: team (code: DPW 94.1.14.5) Of these five experiments two were selected for analysis (DPW 94.1.13.2 and DPW 94.1.14.5). The main criteria for the selection of the tapes were as follows: 1. We wanted to include both individual and group work, because some of the Workshop participants had been working with either groups or individuals; they should at least have one tape that they can process in their own way, though they might or might not be particularly interested in the other one. 2. In a discussion including the Delft Workshop organizers and the Xerox team (six people of very different backgrounds in design and design research), the two selected tapes were identified unanimously as being very interesting for their content. We deemed this informal agreement adequate for the purpose of preselecting the tapes. If the agreement had been less strong, we would have had to resort to throwing dice. 3. Recording quality (not a major factor, but the audio recording of the team in DPW 94.1.14.4 was slightly inferior to that of DPW 94.1.14.5). The main reason for not sending tapes of all five experiments to the participants of the Workshop was that we wanted the participants to focus on the same data, to ensure that conclusions could be compared. It simply would be no use sending people more data than they could possibly process. A copy of the 4-PIP video recording, a transcript and copies of the designers' drawings, whiteboard notes, etc. were sent to all the Workshop participants, for each of the two selected experiments. (For cost reasons, only the 4-PIP recordings were sent, but any of the separate recorded views was also available on request.) In the transcribed protocols, the subjects were identified by fictional names – 'Dan' (DPW 94.1.13.2) and 'Ivan', 'Kerry' and 'John' (DPW 94.1.14.5). 'Dan' is an engineering designer with more than 20 years of design experience in mechanical and electro-mechanical engineering. 'Ivan', 'Kerry' and 'John' all work for the same leading product design consultancy firm, and all have approximately 5-8 years design experience in engineering product design. Participants were asked to use the data to make their own analyses, and write research papers for the Workshop. We did not specify how the analyses should be made, which features from the experimental sessions should be emphasized, what encoding systems should be used, or whether to concentrate on either one or both of the recordings. The given goal was to perform research aimed at understanding the design process; different participants were expected to have different interests and to use different methods to achieve that goal. ## 6 Results The Workshop meeting was held in Delft in September 1994. Draft papers were presented and discussed, and final papers were then prepared by the participants. It is these papers that form the contents of this book. Together the participants produced an outstanding set of papers. Even a book like this cannot be more than a shadow of what happened at the Workshop itself. The variety of papers and the arguments brought up in the discussions were such that it is very hard to summarize them and draw a finite number of conclusions. Protocol analysis is clearly not a universal cure for design research problems. Nevertheless, we feel that we can say that protocol analysis as a research technique for design has been 'validated' with some qualifications, as follows. 1. Protocol analysis has severe limitations in capturing the nonverbal thought processes going on in design work. 'Completeness' of protocol data is an illusion. Protocol analysis is a very specific research technique, capturing a few aspects of design activity in great detail. 2. Even within these restrictions we have to be very careful. The experimental setup heavily influences the protocol data, and the amount of interpretation needed to wrench conclusions from protocol data is also comparatively large. It is impossible to claim to have all of these factors under control. In the end, conclusions and generalizations drawn on the basis of protocol research will only be valid if and when we have a coherent picture of the influence of the experimental technique and situation. In the meantime, we can do little more than identify the sources of bias in protocol research, and be very explicit on the way the experiment was set up, the background of the researchers, the aim of the research project, etc. 3. The adoption of protocol analysis as a research technique for design is an effort on the part of design methodologists to find a rigorous form for their empirical research. Protocol analysis is somewhere in the middle ground between the 'hard' experimental methods of the natural sciences and the 'weaker', purely observational methods of the social sciences. The whole of empirical design research can be seen balancing between these, perhaps trying to lean both ways. The general feeling in the discussions at the Workshop was that the balance has tipped too much to the side of rigour and 'safe' research techniques, at the expense of the 'relevance' of results for design practice and education. The emerging picture for empirical design research in the near future is that of larger research projects, in which multidisciplinary teams of researchers work together on analysing more complex and realistic design tasks. Techniques like participant observation and interviews can be used for analysing the long-term processes. Protocol analysis can take its place among the more detailed techniques for studying short-term processes or some especially significant turns in the design saga. The great potential of protocol analysis can then be used to the fullest extent. The Workshop format has proved to be very valuable in tying together the many specialisms and disciplines within design research. We hope this event in Delft will spark off other initiatives. Cooperation in research projects and regular discussion platforms like these are a good way to make progress in tackling the baffling complexities of design activity. ## Acknowledgments We wish to thank the Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering of the Delft University of Technology for its generous (financial and moral) support of the Workshop. Thanks are also due to Steve Harrison and Scott Minneman of XeroxPARC for setting up and working with us on the taping of the experiments, and to Stanford University's Design Research Center for helping to find the subjects; and of course we are especially indebted to the anonymous subjects themselves. We are grateful to Anita Clayburn Cross for transcribing the recordings and to the Workshop participants for preparing their papers. ## References 1 Cross, N., C. Dorst, and N. Roozenburg (Eds), Research in Design Thinking, Delft University Press, Delft (1992) 2 Ericsson, K.A. and H.A. Simon, Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports as Data, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, (1993) (Rev. Edn) 3 de Groot, A.D., Thought and Choice in Chess, Mouton, The Hague (1965) 4 Newell, A. and H.A. Simon, Human Problem Solving, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1972) 5 Eastman, C.M., On the analysis of intuitive design processes, in G.T. Moore (Ed.), Emerging Methods in Environmental Design and Planning, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, (1970) 6 Foz, A., Observations on designer behaviour in the Parti, DMG-DRS Journal: Design Research and Methods, 7(4) (1973) 320–323 7 Akin, Ö., How do architects design?, in J.-C. Latombe (Ed.), Artificial Intelligence and Pattern Recognition in Computer Aided Design, IFIP/ North-Holland, New York (1978) 8 Chan, C.-S., Cognitive processes in architectural design problem solving, Design Studies, 11(2) (1990) 60–80 9 Schön, D.A., Designing: rules, types and worlds, Design Studies, 9(3) (1988) 181–190 10 Klein, M. and S.C.-Y. Lu, Conflict resolution in cooperative design, Artificial Intelligence in Engineering, 4(4) (1989) 168–180 11 Goldschmidt, G., Linkography: assessing design productivity, Proc. Tenth European Meeting on Cybernetics and Systems Research, Vienna (1990) 12 Schön, D.A., Problems, frames and perspectives on designing, Design Studies, 5(3) (1984) 132–136 13 Ullman, D.G., T.G. Dietterich, and L.A. Stauffer, A model of the mechanical design process based on empirical data, Artificial Intelligence in Engineering Design and Manufacturing, 2(1) (1988) 33– 52 14 Adelson, B., Cognitive research: uncovering how designers design, Research in Engineering Design, 1(1) (1989) 35–42 15 Whitefield, A. and C. Warren, A blackboard framework for modelling designers' behaviour, Design Studies, 10(3) (1989) 179– 187 16 Ennis, C.W. and S.W. Gyeszly, Protocol analysis of the engineering design process, Research in Engineering Design, 3(1) (1991) 15–22 17 Kuffner, T.A. and D. Ullman, The information requests of mechanical design engineers, Design Studies, 12(1) (1991) 42–50 18 Ehrlenspiel, K. and N. Dylla, Experimental investigation of designers' thinking methods and design procedures, Journal of Engineering Design, 4(3) (1993) 201–212 19 Lloyd, P. and P. Scott, Discovering the design problem, Design Studies, 15(2) (1994) 125–140 20 Tang, J.C., Findings from observational studies of collaborative work, International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 34 (1991) 143– 160 21 Minneman, S. and L. Leifer, Group engineering design practice: the social construction of a technical reality, Proc. Int. Conf. on Engineering Design ICED93 (Ed. N. Roozenburg), The Hague: Heurista, Zürich (1993) 22 Visser, W., Collective design: a cognitive analysis of cooperation in practice, Proc. Int. Conf. on Engineering Design ICED93 (Ed. N. Roozenburg), The Hague: Heurista, Zürich (1993) 23 Colgan, L. and R. Spence, Cognitive modelling of electronic design, in J. Gero (Ed.), AI in Design 91, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford (1991) 24 Jeffries, R., et al., The processes involved in designing software, in J.R. Anderson (Ed.), Cognitive Skills and their Acquisition, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ (1981) 25 Guindon, R., Knowledge exploited by experts during software system design, International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 33 (1990) 279–304 26 Davies, S. and A. Castell, Contextualizing design: narratives and rationalization in empirical studies of software design, Design Studies, 13(4) (1992) 379–392 27 Olson, G.M., et al., Small group design meetings: an analysis of collaboration, Human-Computer Interaction, 7 (1992) 347–374 28 Thomas, J.C. and J.M. Carroll, The psychological study of design, Design Studies, 1(1) (1979) 5–11 29 Goel, V. and P. Pirolli, The structure of design problem spaces, Cognitive Science, 16 (1992) 395–429 30 Ballay, J., An experimental view of the design process, in W.B. Rouse and K.B. Roff (Eds), System Design: Behavioral Perspectives on Designers, Tools and Organisations, North-Holland, New York (1987) 31 Christiaans, H. and C. Dorst, Cognitive models in industrial design engineering: a protocol study, in D.L. Taylor and D.A. Stauffer (Eds), Design Theory and Methodology – DTM92, ASME, New York (1992) 32 Christiaans, H., Creativity in Design: The Role of Domain Knowledge in Designing, Lemma, Utrecht (1992)