# Constructing Russian Culture in the Age of Revolution: 1881-1940 Edited by Catriona Kelly and David Shepherd Oxford University Press, Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP Oxford New York Athens Auckland Bangkok Bogota Bombay Buenos Aires Calcutta Cape Town Dar es Salaam Delhi Florence Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kuala Lumpur Madras Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi Paris Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto Warsaw and associated companies in Berlin Ibadan Oxford is a trade mark of Oxford University Press Published in the United States by Oxford University Press Inc., New York © i998 Catriona Kelly and David Shepherd The Moral Rights of the Authors have been asserted All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press. Within the UK, exceptions are allowed in respect of any fair dealing for the purpose of research or private study, or criticism or review, as permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, or in the case of reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms of the licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside these terms and in other countries should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data Data available Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data Constructing Russian culture in the age of revolution, 1881–1940/ edited by Catriona Kelly and David Shepherd. Includes bibliographical references and indexes. 1. Russia—Civilization——18ol-1917. 2. Soviet Union— Civilization. 3. Literature and society—Russia. 4. Literature and society—Soviet Union. I. Kelly, Catriona. II. Shepherd, David (David G.) DK189.2.C66 1998 947.08—dc21 97-255ol ISBNo-19-874236-3—ISBNo-19-874235-5 (pbk.) 1357 9 10 8 6 4 2