# Acknowledgements The editors wish to record their especial gratitude to Andrew Lockett of OUP for entrusting them with this project, and for his patience during its gestation. Similarity between the proposal for a book and the end product is often, if not coincidental, at least distant. This is the first of two books arising from a single volume first mooted in 1992. In part this development results from changes in the understanding of Russian culture which have taken place since then, and which we have tried to reflect, and in part from the helpful suggestions of anonymous readers. But it is also in large measure the fruit of a workshop on the theme of ‘Russian Cultural Studies' held at the School of Slavonic and East European Studies, University of London, in July 1995, with the generous support of the British Academy and the Leverhulme Trust. Discussions at the workshop opened new avenues and provided fresh impetus; especially important were the frequent contributions made by Robin Aizlewood, Martin Dewhirst, Sheila Fitzpatrick, Maria Gough, Julian Graffy, Barbara Heldt, Geoffrey Hosking, Lindsey Hughes, Robert Service, and Tony Swift. The workshop could not have succeeded in this way without Radojka Miljevic's organizational skills. The slightly unorthodox genesis of this book has its counterpart in matters of presentation. This is not a traditional volume of essays, each by an individual author. Rather, in the interests of narrative and thematic coherence, material submitted by contributors has in most cases been combined, often with greater than usual editorial intervention, to form lengthy chapters which are credited both to the principal authors and, in some cases, to providers of additional material'. The willingness of contributors to accept this unconventional procedure is greatly appreciated. Thanks are also due to Laurence Waters for his assistance in preparing the illustrations. Finally, the editors owe heartfelt thanks to Ian Thompson and Jeff Denton for practical and, above all, moral support. ## Contents List ofIllustrations ix List of Contributors xi Translation and Transliteration xiii Introduction: Literature, History, Culture 1 PART I Prologue: Key Concepts Before 1881 11 Lichnost': Notions of Individual Identity 13 Obshchestvennost', Sobornost': Collective Identities 26 Narodnost': Notions of National Identity 28 Literaturnost': Literature and the Market-place 37 Suggested Further Reading 50 PART II Cultural Transformation in Late Imperial Russia 55 1 The Objective Eye and the Common Good 57 Suggested Further Reading 99 2 Commercial Culture and Consumerism 106 Suggested Further Reading 156 3 Collapse and Creation: Issues of Identity and the Russian Fin de Siècle 165 Suggested Further Reading 217 PART III Epiloque: Constructing a New Russia: Change and Continuity in the Aftermath of Revolution 225 Introduction: Iconoclasm and Commemorating the Past 227 New Boundaries for the Common Good: Science, Philanthropy, and Objectivity in Soviet Russia 238 Programmes for Identity: The New Man' and the 'New Woman' 256 Directed Desires: Kul 'turnost'and Consumption 291 Conclusion: From Russian Empire'to Soviet Union' 314 Suggested Further Reading 318 Index 331 Analytical Index of Names and Places 348 ## List of Illustrations Nevskii Prospekt, St Petersburg, c.1908 63 2 The famous wrestler Sergei Lurikh 76 3 Dmitrii Mendeleev, creator of the Periodic Table of the Elements 4 The street frontage of Muir and Merrilies, Russia’s first department store 109 5 Street-trader in St Petersburg, c.1910 110 6 Fanny Tarnovskaia, Russian Song and Dance Operetta Artiste’, the 1910s 114 7 Niko Pirosmani, sign for a Tiflis beer bar 148 8 Montage of small ads from the popular illustrated weekly Niva, 1899 150 9 View of the private theatre at Talashkino 183 10 The ballerina Matilda Kshesinskaia in her boudoir 186 II The Cowboy Dance’, early twentieth-century music-hall act 212 12 Still from The Keys to Happiness, block-busting film of Verbitskaia's best-selling novel 214 13 25o-rouble note produced by the White Cossack regime in Rostov-on-Don,1918 228 I4 Design for a constructivist commercial building by the Vesnin brothers,1924 229 15 Cartoon of Old Moscow by the Kukryniksy' group, 1934 234 16 Parade of fizkul'turniki, Moscow, 1935 268 17 Still from Pudovkin's film of Gor'kii's The Mother, 1926 270 18 Design for a Stalinist department store, 1936 293 19 Advertisement for ice cream, Ogonek, 1949 294 20 Maiakovskii's birthplace, Bagdadi, near Kutaisi 316 ## Sources for illustrations 1, 5, 8, 9, 14–iņ courtesy the Curators, Taylor Institution, University of Oxford. 2, 4, 6, 10, 11, 12 courtesy Louise McReynolds. 3 courtesy Tret'iakov Gallery, Moscow. 7 courtesy Georgian National Art Gallery, Tbilisi, Georgian Republic. 13 courtesy Catriona Kelly. 2o courtesy Robin Milner-Gulland.