# LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS Lynne Attwood is Lecturer in Russian Studies at the University of Manchester. She is the author of The New Soviet Man and Woman: Sex-Role Socialisation in the USSR (1990), and editor of Red Women on the Silver Screen (1993). She is currently working on the construction of gender identity in the USSR, focusing on the changing representations of women in the press and in films. Rosamund Bartlett is the author of Wagner and Russia (1995) and co-author, with Anna Benn, of Literary Russia: A Guide (1997). The focus of her current research is Russian modernism and the musical structure of Russian prose, and she is editing a collection of articles about Shostakovich. Neil Cornwell is Professor of Russian and Comparative Literature at the University of Bristol. He is the author of The Life, Times and Milieu of V. F. Odoyevsky (1986) and Vladimir Odoevsky and Romantic Poetics (1997), and of other Russian and comparative literary studies. He is also the general editor of the Reference Guide to Russian Literature (1997), and is currently engaged on projects concerning Henry James and Vladimir Nabokov. Linda Edmondson is ESRC Research Fellow at the Centre for Russian and East European Studies, University of Birmingham. Her research has focused on issues of gender equality and civil rights in the history of late imperial Russia. She is the author of Feminism in Russia, 1900–1917 (1984) and editor of Women and Society in Russia and the Soviet Union (1992). She is currently completing a monograph entitled Gender, Citizenship and Authority in Russia, 186o-1920. Catriona Kelly is Reader in Russian and Tutorial Fellow at New College, University of Oxford. She is the author of Petrushka: The Russian Carnival Puppet Theatre (1990) and A History of Russian Women's Writing, 1820–1992 (1994), editor of An Anthology of Russian Women's Writing, 1777–1992 (1994), and co-editor, with David Shepherd, of Russian Cultural Studies: An Introduction (also to be published by OUP). She is currently working on a monograph entitled Refining Russia: Gender, Manners and Morals from Catherine to Yeltsin. Louise McReynolds is an Associate Professor of History at the University of Hawaii. The author of The News under Russia's Old Regime: The Development of a Mass-Circulation Press (1991), she has also written numerous articles on the press and other aspects of popular culture in late imperial Russia. Most recently she has translated Evdokiia Nagrodskaia's The Wrath of Dionysus (1997). She is currently writing a history of Russia's commercial culture at the turn of the twentieth century. Derek Offord is Professor of Russian at the University of Bristol. His books include Portraits of Early Russian Liberals (1985), The Russian Revolutionary Movement in the 188os (1986), and Using Russian: A Guide to Contemporary Usage (1996), and he is co-author, with William Leatherbarrow, of A Documentary History of Russian Thought: From the Enlightenment to Marxism (1987). His current research is in the field of eighteenth-century intellectual history. Maureen Perrie is Reader in Russian History at the Centre for Russian and East European Studies, University of Birmingham. Her most recent book, Pretenders and Popular Monarchism in Early Modern Russia, was published by Cambridge University Press in 1995; her other publications have included studies of neopopulism, popular culture, and peasant unrest in pre-Revolutionary Russia. She is currently working on representations of Tsarist Russian history in the Stalin era, with particular reference to the image of Ivan the Terrible. Cathy Popkin is Professor of Russian at Columbia University. She is the author of The Pragmatics of Insignificance: Chekhov, Zoshchenko, Gogol (1993), and is currently completing a book on epistemology and physicality in the works of Anton Chekhov entitled Bodies of Knowledge: Chekhov's Corpus. David Shepherd is Professor of Russian and Director of the Bakhtin Centre at the University of Sheffield. He is the author of Beyond Metafiction: Self-Consciousness in Soviet Literature (1992), editor of Bakhtin, Carnival, and Other Subjects (1993), and co-editor, with Catriona Kelly, of Discontinuous Discourses in Modern Russian Literature (1989). His current research is focused on the intellectual contexts of the Bakhtin Circle. Steve Smith is Professor of History at the University of Essex. He is the author of Red Petrograd: Revolution in the Factories, 1917-1918 (1983), and of books and articles on aspects oflate imperial Russian social and cultural history. He also works on the social history of China in the republican period and is completing a book of comparative essays on labour in the Russian and Chinese revolutions. Vadim V. Volkov is Lecturer in and Dean of the Faculty of Political Sciences and Sociology of the European University at St Petersburg. In 1995 he received his Ph.D. from Cambridge University for a thesis entitled The Forms of Public Life: The Public Sphere and the Concept of Society in Imperial Russia’, and is currently writing a book on this subject. His research interests are in social theory, historical sociology, Russian social history, and issues of civil society. Faith Wigzell is Reader in Russian at the School of Slavonic and East European Studies, University of London. She is the author (under the name Faith Kitch) of The Literary Style of Epifanij Premudryj: pletenije sloves’(1976), and editor of Russian Writers on Russian Writers (1995). She has recently completed Reading Russian Fortunes: Print Culture, Gender and Divination in Russia from 1765, and is currently continuing research on folk belief, Leskov, and popular culture. ## Translation and Transliteration Unless otherwise stated, translations are by the contributors or editors. With the exception of some commonly occurring names, Russian words are transliterated according to the Library of Congress system (without diacritics).