# Narodnost': Notions of National Identity Maureen Perrie ## Origins TíE term narodnost'is one of the most elusive in the Russian language. Its meanings and possible translations range from nationalism, nationality, nationhood, and national identity, through folkways, folksiness, and folklorism, to populism, popularity, accessibility, and comprehensibility. It has been dignified by inclusion in two notorious trinities' of Russian cultural history: alongside Orthodoxy and autocracy in the tripartite formula ofOfficial Nationality' in the reign of Nicholas I; and, together with ideological correctness (ideinost) and Party-mindedness (partiinost), in the dogma of Soviet socialist realism. The word narodnost'appears to have been first used in 1819 by the poet P. A. Viazemskii in a letter to A. Turgenev. Viazemskii described his poem ‘First snow' as having a Russian colouring', and he referred to the narodnost'of some of its stylistic features. Recognizing that the term was a neologism, Viazemskii added: 'Why not translate nationalité as narodnost'? After all, the Poles have said narodowość!'49 It is clear from this that Viazemskii intended narodnost'to be the Russian equivalent of the French nationalité or English nationality' (or rather, in the context, 'national character'). But why, in that case, did he feel the need to coin the new term narodnost', when the Russian language already possessed the word natsional'nost'? His decision may partly have reflected a distaste for words of foreign origin, typical of some proponents of Russian national consciousness in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries; but it also reflected Viazemskii's awareness that the adjective narodnyi, from which the noun narodnost'was derived, was the Russian equivalent not only of the French national but also of populaire:we say narodnye pesni and dukh narodnyi where the French would say chanson populaire [popular song] and esprit national [national spirit]', he wrote in 1824.50 In its turn, the Russian word narod can mean both nation' and people’, in the sense of thecommon' orsimple' people(prostoinarod). The term narodnost', when applied to literature, came to refer not only to its ‘national character' in the sense of a Russian colouring or setting, but also to elements of folklorism in its style or content. Conversely, folklore and its bearers and transmitters, the prostoi narod, came to be seen as the truest exemplars of the Russian national character. The basis for this identification of the prostoi narod as the source of the national character was laid in the late eighteenth century. Russian national consciousness developed among the educated elite of the eighteenth century partly as a form of protest against Western cultural influence. This led to an identification of rural Russia as more truly national' than the urban centres, such as St Petersburg and Moscow, where foreign influence was greatest.51 A number of satires depicted dissolute and Westernized aristocrats, divorced from their native soil, and indulging their taste for foreign luxuries at the expense of their peasants. These parasites were counterposed to true Russian noblemen of the old school who lived not in the capitals, but on their ancestral estates, where harmonious patriarchal relations supposedly prevailed between lord and peasant. Eighteenthcentury writers such as N. I. Novikov and D. I. Fonvizin played an important part in the definition of what came to be regarded as Russian national characteristics. According to Hans Rogger, these were values that came to be regarded as national because they were the opposite of the vices which imitation was thought to have produced. They were the simple virtues on which every nation thrown into contact with a more complex civilization tends to pride itself: possession of a generous heart and simple soul . . .; the preservation of a certain roughness of manner . . .; the avoidance of luxury and a proper regard for probity, sincerity, friendship, and honest service.⁵2 Once the pattiarchal village, where lord and peasant lived together in harmony, had been identified as the true fount of national life and strength, it was only a short step to the depiction of the peasants themselves as embodiments of traditional national virtues. The influence of Rousseau encouraged the notion that rural people lived closer to nature, and hence to God, than did civilized man; the peasants were therefore more truly human, and more profound in their capacity for feeling, than the urbanized and Westernized nobility. And the true expression of national feeling was folklore, the artistic expression of the simple peasantry. The interest of the educated class in folklore went back to the second half of the eighteenth century; in Russia, as elsewhere in Europe, it was influenced by the growth of nationalism and romanticism. In contrast to the cosmopolitan and universalist neo-classicism of the mid-century, sentimentalism and early romanticism were concerned with indigenous literary and artistic forms. Just as the peasantry came to be seen as the true bearers of the national character, so did their artistic creations appear as the truest expression of the national culture. (Comparative studies have shown that much folklore comprises universal motifs; but this discovery was made later, and did not seriously undermine belief in the national peculiarity of folklore.) The notion of the peasantry as the authentic embodiment of the nation was not, of course, unique to Russia; like so many other intellectual trends, it was borrowed from the West. But in Russia the reception of this idea was influenced by two specific features. First, Peter the Great's reforms had introduced a greater distinction between the Westernized upper classes, on the one hand, and thesimple people', on the other, than existed in other European states. And second, the fact that the majority of the narod comprised serfs, and that serfdom not only assumed a harsher form, but also lasted longer in Russia than in any other major European country, made the Russian ‘peasant question' more acute than it was elsewhere. The idealization of the peasantry by so many nineteenth-century intellectuals may have reflected the guilt of educated nobles whose privileges were derived from serf-ownership. The concept of narodnost' enjoyed a considerable vogue in the 182os, particularly in discussions of the national character of Russian literature."3 The incorporation of folk motifs in the poetry of the Romantic era, in Russia as elsewhere, served to give literature anational' flavour. But Pushkin, who utilized folk themes in poems such as Ruslan and Liudmila (Ruslan i Liudmila, 182ı), nevertheless insisted that narodnost in literature represented a more profound expression of national character than simply the adoption of local settings and vocabulary.⁵⁴ Pushkin's concept oftrue'narodnost'was somewhat mystical and elusive; a more superficial variety of narodnost, however, in the guise of folklorism, came to characterize much nineteenth-century literature. Folk art also influenced Russian music: folk melodies and motifs were incorporated into the works of such composers as Glinka, Musorgskii, Borodin, and Rimskii-Korsakov. But Russian romanticism did not identify narodnost'exclusively with the ethnically Russian peasantry. Literary figures close to the Decembrists associated the concept with the peoples of the Empire as a whole. Orest Somov, in his 1823 article‘On Romantic Poetry', insisted that Russian poets should write about the non-Russian nations of the Empire, and utilize the mythology and beliefs of these peoples in their verse. Pushkin, in his Byronic Captive of the Caucasus (Kavkazskii plennik, 182z), provided an early example of this new imperial literature.55 Intellectuals throughout the nineteenth century continued to associate narodnost'as the expression of a truly national and popular form of culture— with the rural peasantry. The growth of towns and cities, with their expanding lower-class populations, was to be accompanied by the development of various forms of urban popular culture: funfairs, circuses, and music-halls, as well as publications addressed to the mass market. Some of this popular literature, such as lubki (chapbooks), circulated widely in the countryside as well as the towns. These various manifestations of popular culture, however, were never accepted by educated society as genuine expressions of narodnost': rather, they were seen as reflecting the corrupt, commercialized, and Westernized values of the cities.5⁶ ## The Rise of Official Narodnost' From the early 183os, the term narodnost'was adopted by the government of Nicholas I for its own purposes. In a circular of 2 April 1833 addressed to the officials in charge of the educational districts of the Empire, the newly appointed Minister of Education, S. Uvarov, proclaimed: 'Our common obligation consists in this, that the education of the people be conducted, according to the Supreme intention of our August Monarch, in the joint spirit of Orthodoxy, autocracy and nationality [narodnost'].'57 This three-part formula, subsequently to become known as the ideology of'Official Nationality', influenced government policy throughout the reign of Nicholas I. Of the three elements, nationality was the least precise and most problematic. Some have claimed that the term was merely a euphemism for serfdom, which it would have been more accurate to list as the third key institution of Nicolaevan Russia. And the historian S. M. Solov'ev noted the irony that the concept of narodnost'was advocated as a central educational principle by Uvarov, a man who had not read a single Russian book in his life and wrote constantly in,French or in German'.58 In view of the generally conservative tenor of Nicholas's government, it is tempting to equate Uvarov's narodnost'with ‘nationalism'.59 Hans Rogger has identified an early form of official nationalism in the eighteenth century, in the reign of Catherine the Great. This stressed not only the German-born Empress's commitment to Russian principles, in contrast to the allegedly Prussian sympathies of Peter III, the husband she had deposed and murdered, but also her continuation of the achievements of Peter the Great.60 Military glory and territorial expansion naturally played an important part in this tradition; and in the early nineteenth century Russia's victories in the Napoleonic Wars strengthened national pride. The publication from 1816 of the multi-volume History of the Russian State by N. M. Karamzin, the official historiographer, also played its part in strengthening this brand of official nationalism. Nicholas Riasanovsky has drawn attention to the existence of two distinct concepts of nationality within the government: the dynastic' and the 'nationalistic'.6¹ The former in effect recognized the reality of the Russian state as a multinational empire, and stressed the importance of the Romanov dynasty as its unifying force. This position was taken to an extreme by Count E. Kankrin, the Minister of Finance, when he said: If we consider the matter thoroughly, then, in justice, we must be called not Russians, but Petrovians . . . Everything: glory, power, prosperity, and enlightenment, we owe to the Romanov family; and, out of gratitude, we should change our general tribal name of Slavs to the name of the creator of the empire and ofits well-being. Russia should be called Petrovia, and we Petrovians; or the empire should be named Romanovia, and we——Romanovites.62 The ‘nationalistic' view, by contrast, was influenced by romantic concepts of nationalism and national identity, and placed more stress on specific notions of Russia and the Russian people and their historical mission. This distinction reflects the two different concepts of nationhood that co-existed in nineteenth-century Russia: the ‘imperial' concept of the nation as coterminous with the population of the Empire; and the ‘ethnic' concept of the Russian people. The adjective rossiiskii referred to an inhabitant of the Russian Empire, whereas russkii indicated an ethnic Russian. Ethnic Russianness' itself was, however, a problematic concept. Official statistics, as late as the 1897 census, used the category ‘Russians'(russkie) to comprise not only Great Russians (velikorusskie), but also Ukrainians (malorusskie, literally Little Russians') and Belorussians (White Russians'). Both groups of'official nationalists'shared a concept of the ordinary Russian people as especially devoted to both autocracy and Orthodoxy, and to that extent it is not coincidental that Uvarov should have chosen to use the word narodnost', rather than natsional'nost', for the third element of his trinity'. Andrzei Walicki has noted that narodnost'was not only intended to convey a certain nationalistic trend, but also reflected the efforts of the autocratic regime to expand its social base, to rely directly on the “people” in the broad sense of the word'; in the aftermath of the Decembrist uprising of 1825, in which scions of the most aristocratic families in the land had attempted to overthrow the autocracy, Nicholas I liked to contrast the loyalty to the throne of the peasantry with the oppositional mood of many of the educated nobility.63 This official notion of a union of Tsar and people had its counterpart in peasant concepts of the Tsar as the protector of the ordinary people against exploitation and oppression by bureaucrats and nobles. These popular monarchist' ideas found their expression in folklore, especially in positive popular images of rulers such as Ivan the Terrible and Peter the Great, who were notorious for their harsh treatment of the nobility. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, popular rebellions had often centred around pretenders who claimed to be 'true Tsars' leading the peasants against serfdom; in the nineteenth century, peasant rebels in the name of the Tsar' claimed to believe that the Tsar had decreed an end to serfdom, but the nobles opposed the implementation of his wishes. The government itself was not, however, particularly successful in harnessing such sentiments. Occasionally the Tsar tried to take advantage of the symbolism of the myth, as when Nicholas I bowed low to the people of Moscow on a visit to the Kremlin, but in general autocracy as a system was too dependent on the institutions of the nobility and the bureaucracy to risk complementing popular monarchism' with its own ‘monarchist populism'.64 In this notion of the unity of Tsar and people, the people'were not necessarily perceived as ethnically Russian. On occasion, the Tsarist government sought to bid for the support of the non-Russian lower classes against the nationalism of the local nobility. The most striking case of this occurred in Russian Poland after the nationalist uprising of 1863. The agrarian reform of 1864 gave the Polish peasants more favourable treatment than their Russian counterparts had received in the Emancipation Act of 1861, as a reward for their loyalty to the throne during the insurgency. The dynastic and ‘nationalist'schools of Official Nationality also differed over their attitudes towards the non-Russian nobility of the Empire. According to the dynastic view, where non-Russian nobles proved themselves to be loyal servants of the state, not only should they not be discriminated against, but they should be allowed special privileges. The most obvious example of this was the case of the Baltic German nobility, whose service was much prized by Nicholas I. The nationalist advocates of Official Nationality, however, were suspicious of the Baltic Germans, and advocated the removal of their privileges and the Russification of the Latvian and Estonian majorities in the Baltic provinces, as a counterweight to the German nobility.65 ## Narodnost' in the Slavophile-Westernizer Debate Differing concepts of narodnost' played their part in the famous controversies between Slavophiles and Westernizers in the 184os. The ideas that came to be known as Slavophilism were formulated primarily in response to Peter Chaadaev's privately circulated Philosophical Letters, which depicted Russia as a backward and benighted country without a history or a national culture. Writers such as Ivan Kireevskii, Aleksei Khomiakov, and Konstantin Aksakov, seeking to defend the Russian national character, found its origins in the traditions and institutions of the common people. For Kireevskii, true Christian principles as embodied in the Orthodox religion, had survived among the ordinary Russian people, who were unaffected by the Westernizing influences introduced by Peter the Great. Peasant institutions such as the patriarchal family and the commune (obshchina, mir) embodied these Christian precepts. (Ironically, the first detailed study of the Russian peasant commune was made in the 184os by a German scholar, August von Haxthausen.) For Kireevskii, the narod embodied the old traditions and the principle of community (Gemeinschaft), while educated society (obshchestvo) represented modern European civilization, corrupted by rationalism, Roman law, and the principles of private property (Gesellschaft) Aksakov was the most fanatical of the Slavophiles in his espousal of the cause of the narod: he wore peasant dress and cultivated a beard in order to draw closer to the people' who, however, according to Chaadaev, mistook him for a Persian. Aksakov was an uncritical admirer of the peasant commune as an ideal model of Gemeinschaft, with its principle of unanimity rather than majority voting. But even for Aksakov, these principles were not peculiarly Russian: they were of universal value, but happened to have been preserved most fully among the peasantry because of accidents of Russia's historical development. Slavophilism is sometimes characterized as a reactionary form of nationalism that idealized Russian backwardness. But in reality its founders proceeded from a religious standpoint of universalist significance that saw the Russian peasantry as the sole surviving bearers of original Christian principles which would ultimately triumph not only amongst the Russian educated classes, but also in Western Europe. The Slavophiles differed from the proponents of Official Nationality in their rejection of the Petrine state and in their criticism of the Westernized educated society (obshchestvo) that had been brought into being by Peter's reforms. Hostility to the autocratic state and to the statist principle (gosudarstvennost') in general was a major part of Slavophile teaching: they set up the narod as a counterweight to the state as a focus for national attachment and identity. A similar distinction to that drawn by the Slavophiles between the narod and obshchestvo was made by their Westernizer opponents. For the Westernizers, however, narod was the inferior category. The literary critic Vissarion Belinskii differentiated between the narod and narodnost', on the one hand, and the natsiia and natsional'nost', c. the other. Pre-Petrine Russia, according to Belinskii, had been a naroda primitive form of society, patriarchal, non-differentiated, and homogeneous. Peter's reforms had begun the process of transforming the narod into a natsiia by the raising of its consciousness through education. A truly national literature and culture, Belinskii argued, would be characterized not by pseudo-folklorism, but by the development of a more truly national spirit, on the lines of the development of national consciousness in the West.66 After the emancipation of the serfs in 186r, the development of the concepts of the 'nation' and the people'diverged. The ideas of Official Nationalism evolved in the direction of pan-Slavism. M. P. Pogodin asserted the common heritage of the Slav peoples, both inside and outside the Russian Empire. It was Russia's mission to liberate her Slav brothers currently oppressed within alien empires, and perhaps to bring them together into a single Slav state under the Russian Tsar. But pan-Slavism was full of contradictions. The Russian Empire was not a purely Slav state, and the Tsars denied to both their Slav and non-Slav subjects the rights that the pan-Slavs claimed for the Slav peoples of the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian Empires. And whereas the Official Nationalist precursors of pan-Slavism had stressed the Orthodox religion, Slavdom was not identical with Orthodoxy: the Poles, the Czechs, and the Croats were predominantly Roman Catholic, while other Slavs were Protestant, and in the Balkans sometimes even Muslim. The Tsars were wary of pan-Slavism when it encouraged or supported Slav nationalist movements abroad, undermining the principles of legitimism on which the domestic stability of the Russian Empire depended. Where it suited Russia's great-power interests, however, the Tsarist government was willing to support Slav nationalisms. This was particularly the case in the Balkans, where Russian expansionism led to war with Turkey in 1877-8; and where Russia's support of Serbia against Austria-Hungary in 1914 led directly to the outbreak of the First World War. Within the Russian Empire, the rise of non-Russian nationalisms, both Slav and non-Slav, intensified the tendency towards a state policy of Russification that had already been evident in the first half of the nineteenth century. After the Polish rising of 1863, measures to promote Orthodoxy and the use of the Russian language were instituted not only in the Kingdom of Poland but also in the western and south-western provinces of the Empire, where much of the population was Belorussian or Ukrainian. Similar measures were subsequently introduced in the Baltic provinces. Discrimination against the Jews was another element in the Russification policies of Alexander III: quotas for Jewish admissions to secondary and higher education were introduced in 1887; and further restrictions were decreed to Jewish rights of residence, both inside and outside the Pale of settlement. These policies might have been defended as an attempt to create a civic nation' of rossiiane with a common language and religion that would serve as unifying cultural bonds within the Empire; but the clumsy way in which they were introduced tended to make them counter-productive and to encourage the anti-Russian nationalisms they were intended to forestall. But it must be noted that the Russification policies of the Tsarist government were designed as measures of assimilation and inclusion rather than of racial exclusion: unlike in Nazi Germany, for example, a Russian Jew who converted to Christianity ceased to be regarded as a Jew, and was even accorded special privileges.67 If Russian nationalism moved in the directions of pan-Slavism and Russification in the second half of the nineteenth century, conservative thought did retain some elements of Official Nationality right through to the early twentieth century. Some of the right-wing political groupings that formed during the 1905 Revolution, such as the Union of Russian Men and the Union of the Russian People, embraced neo-Slavophile notions of the union of Tsar and people. They advocated some kind of resurrection of the pre-Petrine Assembly of the Land (zemskii sobor) as an alternative to the elected Western-style State Duma. These groups also revived the slogans of Official Nationality: Orthodoxy, autocracy, and narodnost'. The Union of the Russian People, in particular, enjoyed some success in recruiting peasant support in 1905–7.68 Ifpopular monarchism' survived into the early twentieth century, so too did ‘monarchist populism'. The last, ironic echo of the rulers' belief that they enjoyed the love of the narod came with Nicholas II's patronage of Rasputin, an earthy ‘man of the people' who symbolized for the Emperor—and even more so for the Empress Alexandra— the closeness of the bond between Tsar and muzhik (peasant). ## Narodnost' in Revolutionary Thought In the second half of the nineteenth century narodnost'also developed in a very different direction: towards revolutionary populism (narodnichestvo). The populists inherited from the Slavophiles a view of the peasant commune as an institution that embodied the principles of social equality and justice; they added the notion that these principles made the commune the embryo of a socialist system (in most of European Russia the commune periodically redistributed the land under its control to its component households on the basis of family size, thereby seemingly implementing the socialist principle ofto each according to their need’). The populists developed a view of a peculiarly Russian type of socialism that could be created on the basis of existing popular institutions such as the peasant commune and the artisan co-operative workshop (artel). In Western Europe, Marxists envisaged the creation of a socialist society as a result of the development of capitalism, the proletarianization of the small producers, and the revolutionary expropriation of the capitalist class by the proletariat. The Russian populists, by contrast, believed that Russia could achieve socialism without going through the stage of capitalist development. Socialist propaganda among the peasants and artisans would raise them to a level of revolutionary consciousness, and the overthrow of the autocratic state would lead to the creation of a socialist society. The first stage in the revolutionary transformation would be black partition': the transfer of all of the land of the large estates into the hands of the peasantry, for them to cultivate on the basis of communal principles. In Russia, therefore, the social group that the populists identified as the bearers of socialism was not the proletariat but the communal peasantry—the narod. Since the recently emancipated peasants were not conscious socialists, however, the question arose of the relationship of the revolutionary socialist intelligentsia to the narod. In the early 187os the movement to the people' of several thousand idealistic young people represented an attempt by the revolutionaries to teach the peasants about socialism. Many of the students were to be bitterly disillusioned as a result of their experiences in the villages in the ‘mad summer' of 1874. They failed to provoke any kind of popular revolt, and were generally met with incomprehension by the peasants. Hundreds were arrested, some of them denounced to the authorities by the peasants themselves. The failure of the movement to the people' led some revolutionaries to develop the idea that, instead of trying to teach the people about socialism, the intelligentsia should serve the interests of the narod and subordinate themselves to them. The term narodnichestvo, in fact, originally referred to this theory of the hegemony of the masses over the educated elite, which influenced the Land and Liberty (Zemlia i volia) organization of 1876–8. When Land and Liberty split in 1879, both its terrorist wing, People's Will (Narodnaia volia), and their opponents, Black Partition (Chernyi peredel), claimed the term narodnichestvo as their own: subsequently, it was to be used by the Russian Marxists as a pejorative label for the older agrarian socialism which had held that Russia could bypass capitalism and proceed directly to socialism through the commune and artel'.69 Economic developments in the last two decades of the nineteenth century seemed to show that, contrary to populist expectations, capitalism was emerging in Russia in both the industrial and agrarian sectors. Marxist socialist ideas now seemed more attractive and more applicable to Russia than they had two decades earlier. The Russian Marxists identified processes of social differentiation in both town and countryside: the emergence of an urban industrial proletariat, and the separation of the previously homogeneous communal peasantry into a class of petty rural capitalists (kulakis), on the one hand, and a rural proletariat or semi-proletariat, on the other. But while the Marxists rejected the very concept of the narod, the populists fought a rearguard action. The 'neo-populist Socialist Revolutionary Party identified a broad revolutionary coalition for socialism that comprised all exploited groups, including not only the industrial proletariat but also thetoiling peasantry' (trudovoe krest'ianstvo) in a single broad working class. This was in essence the narod of the earlier populists; and the term trudovoi narod (toiling people) often appeared in neo-populist discourse. And indeed, even the Bolsheviks in 1917 implicitly identified the same broad coalition as the mass base of the October Revolution, when Lenin talked of the alliance of the industrial proletariat with the poorest sections of the peasantry: the nizy, or lower classes, who opposed the verkhi, or upper classes.