# Literaturnost': Literature and the Market-place Neil Cornwell and Faith Wigzell UNLIKE the other terms considered in these introductory essays, the term literaturnost, literariness, may be translated into Western languages without difficulty. The decision to explain the term here is based less on the intrinsic unfamiliarity of the notions that it conveys to an anglophone audience than on our concern that Western readers should not take it for granted that literature is as well-established a concept in Russian as it is in many Western cultures. One of the most persistent clichés of Western interpretations of Russian culture, at any rate in the twentieth century, has been the idea that Russians accord literature a greater value and reverence than do other Europeans. They are said to read more weighty literature, to know their classical authors better, and to take literature more seriously. The dreadful fates that have befallen many Russian writers, from Pushkin to Mandel'shtam, Pasternak, Akhmatova, and Solzhenitsyn, has been seen as evidence that the Russian and Soviet state, even at its most repressive periods, also understood the importance and value of literature—no democratic culture, it is argued, would think that a poet is worth shooting. All these notions, each of them questionable in itself, have been welded together to underpin one governing idea: that literature is an eternal and unchanging given of Russian culture, and that culture's quintessential expression. Yet, in fact, the concept of literariness' arrived in Russia relatively recently, took some time to become established, and proved as mutable and as contentious as any of the other terms whose genealogy is traced here. For long periods of Russian history, the term literatura was not in use at all. Rather than a defence of what is uniquely Russian, then, the debates about literariness can partly be seen as an anxious struggle to domesticate a concept that was unfamiliar and problematic and to make an idea borrowed from other human minds seem (to use the adjective applied to icons) 'not made by human hands', that is, a divinely given form for the expression of national spiritual values (the word was in fact used by Pushkin in his poetic testament of 1836: 'I have raised myself a monument not made by human hands'('Ia pamiatnik sebe vozdvig nerukotvornyi')). What follows sets out some of the historical processes by which this came about.7º ## 'Literature' in pre-Petrine Russia The term 'literature', when applied to Russian writing before the end of the seventeenth century, presents considerable problems, a fact which has not prevented it being conventionally applied to selected Russian texts: histories of Russian literature begin with texts that accompanied or followed the conversion to Christianity in 988. Those normally included in the category of literature are, unsurprisingly, not legal and other documents, but works that are held to possess clear artistic qualities. Thus, Metropolitan Ilarion’s Sermon on Law and Grace (Slovo o zakone i blagodati), written in the mid-eleventh century, is widely admired for its patriotic tone, its mastery of rhetoric, and the superb logical development of its theme. The late seventeenth-century autobiography of the indomitable leader ofthe Old Believers Avvakum is distinguished by graphic narrative and vigorous language and portraiture. Yet both were written with a clear functional purpose in mind; the first is a sermon, and the second a combination of polemical religious tract and exemplum, composed in prison to encourage other supporters of the Old Belief to stand firm against the hostility of the official Orthodox Church. In terms of the emphasis on function, there is little to distinguish them from wills, official documents, or polemic tracts. The conventional division of old Russian texts into literary and non-literary (usually termed in Russian delovaia literatura) stems from the application of modern criteria to a different cultural system with its own rules. The absence of a concept ofliterature, or belles-lettres, and hence also of literaturnost’, is a consequence of the source and nature of writing in Russia. Kievan Russia acquired writing and written texts in conjunction with the official adoption of Christianity in 988 from Byzantium. Inevitably, the choice of works for translation or copying lay predominantly with monks and other clerics, whose primary aim as cultural intermediaries was the acquisition of devotional materials, though they also copied or translated some secular literature, often of a popular historical character. Overall, the type and range of texts acquired by the East Slavs in the eleventh and twelfth centuries may be compared to the library holdings of a decent provincial monastery in Byzantium. The literature prized by the classically educated Byzantine elite therefore remained largely unknown, as of course did the secular literature of Catholic Europe that developed through the Middle Ages. Writing in Kievan Rus' (from the eleventh to the thirteenth century) was associated primarily with Orthodoxy, and this state of affairs continued into the Muscovite period (fourteenth to seventeenth century). Local knizhniki (bookmen), predominantly monks, produced devotional texts based on Byzantine models, while the small corpus of secular or semi-secular texts provided the impetus for local works of a mainly historical or political character (chronicles, treaties, military tales, wills, etc.). This system remained largely intact until the second half of the seventeenth century, although change and evolution occurred within it as a consequence of changing historical and social circumstances and demands. All written texts performed a specific function which excluded entertainment as a primary aim. Whether ritual, instructional, polemical, or documentary in intention, early Russian writing or pis'mennost'saw itself as recording the truth for a specific purpose. Though obviously fanciful or fantastic material often appeared in, say, exaggerated chronicle accounts ofbattles or popular lives of saints, it was not regarded as anything other than historically accurate. In this system the concept of fiction could not exist, since for it to do so would require an intereșt in entertainment for its own sake. The same attitudes led to a disregard of the personal impulse in creativity, and thus to a diminished interest in personal authorship. Many texts are anonymous, since the aim was not to produce an individualized work, but something that could perform its function, and merge without difficulty into the corpus of great works of that genre. It would be wrong to assume that early Russian pis 'mennost showed no interest in ‘authors', but the differences illustrate the absence of a concept of literature as belles-lettres. Although there are instances of an author placing his name to his work, far more important was the tendency for works of a given type to agglomerate . . . around authoritative names'.7¹ These might be those of the Greek Fathers of the Church, or, with time, known knizhniki from an earlier period in Russian history. Attribution of authorship, usually by later copyists, thereby became a way of enhancing the weight and value of a work, and not of designating individuality. Nineteenth- and twentieth-century scholars have devoted reams of paper to attributing texts to real' authors when the work in question appears or clearly is of East Slavonic or Russian origin. Both the obsession with authorship and the preference for native works are largely alien to the literary system of the period. While it would appear that certain works enjoyed considerable popularity as a consequence of relating events that occurred on Russian soil, or describing the lives of local figures, this was not a necessary guarantee of authority. The Russian Church fostered the cult of local saints, but retained the greatest veneration for those worshipped by the whole Christian community. The most popular lives of saints were of general Christian saints like St Nicholas. The distinction between East Slav, or Slav, original works and translated works was hardly relevant, and if anything, the balance of authority lay with translated works. Attitudes to language and education were also factors militating against the appearance of a concept of literature. The medium of expression for ecclesiastical works of all kinds was Church Slavonic, the South Slav language employed in the ninth century by Cyril and Methodius, the first missionaries to the Slavs, for the translation of devotional texts. In the late tenth century the morphological and phonological differences between it and Old Russian were so slight that comprehension presented no real problem, although the complex Graecized syntax and abstract vocabulary of devotional texts instantly set them apart. A system of linguistic diglossia developed: as Russian evolved, Church Slavonic became increasingly distinct in its archaisms, seen more and more as a sacred language, the only true vehicle for the expression of Christian Truth." When it is also borne in mind that schools did not exist and that literacy was taught (predominantly to clerics) through the memorizing of Holy Writ and other ecclesiastical works written in Church Slavonic, it is easy to see how language and textual content came to be seen as inextricably linked. By the seventeenth century any innovation in Church Slavonic grammar would be deemed the work of the devil, and use of Church Slavonic in inappropriate situations blasphemous. Hence, the attempts by newly arrived Ukrainian scholars, educated in the spirit of the Polish-Ukrainian Baroque, to institute formal study of grammar and so detach medium from message were viewed as the work of the devil."3 Such rigid views naturally militated against the development of individualized style. Educational methods as well as attitudes to writing also led to a different concept of style. Since the aim of a knizhnik was to learn by memorizing and write by imitating, he (and it was always he) generally observed the stylistic and structural norms of texts with the same function. In the case of ecclesiastical works, this led to a concentration on the rhetorical properties of language, ultimately part of a classical heritage in Byzantium but in Russia exclusively connected with religious pis'mennost'. No attempt was made to develop the capacity for expression of a notional individual self. Nor could there be any tradition of literary criticism when tradition and the integration of medium and message were dominant. Thus, when in the sixteenth century Prince Kurbskii responded to a lengthy diatribe from Ivan the Terrible by sneering at his convoluted syntax and crude mélange of styles, he was criticizing Ivan's shaky grasp of appropriate norms. The existence of a system of writing that emphasized function and adherence to tradition does not mean that texts necessarily lack artistic qualities. Although ecclesiastical genres such as lives of saints followed structural and stylistic patterns inherited from Byzantium, the author could present episodes with more or less drama or employ a more or less ornate rhetorical style. A writer of a military tale could introduce considerable pathos into his account of a defeat such as in the Tale of the Destruction of Riazan'by Batu (Povest'o razorenii Riazani Batyem)——or stick to a bald account of events, preferring factual information to hyperbole. These look like decisions of an artistic nature, but they may owe as much to the type of sources or to the specific audience for whom the work was intended as to individual choice. Nonetheless, it does seem that the popularity of a work, judged by the imperfect criterion of the number of extant manuscripts, may sometimes reflect not only the work's fitness for purpose, but also its appeal to its audience. For example, of the two main works devoted to the martyrdom of Princes Boris and Gleb in 1o15, it is the version that corresponds less closely to hagiographical tradition, the Narration (Skazanie) rather than Nestor's Lection (Chtenie), that survives in numerous copies, testifying to its appeal. Emotional appeals, lyrical prayers, and a dramatic tale of death and revenge, as well as a message of support for the ruling clan of princes, struck a chord in Muscovy, emphasizing the need for loyalty to the ruler. When modern literary historians go one step further and declare that the Narration is ‘better' than the Lection, they are deriving their judgements from premisses based on modern conceptions of literature and literaturnost', which miss the essential features of the Old Russian system of writing. It should be possible to integrate some form of judgement about a work's artistic merit into an overall understanding of the system under which it was produced. However, until the late 195os, no sustained effort had been made to define the system underpinning Old Russian writing. Rejecting the pre-Revolutionary interest in works solely in terms of their value as historical sources and, implicitly, the Marxist obsession with progressive'elements (so-called reflections of real life, evidence of class conflict, secularization of literature, etc.), literary historians began to recognize the importance of genre, defining this in the first instance in terms of the pragmatic functions of a text.74 The Soviet scholar Dmitrii Likhachev took function as one of the markers of genre as a basis upon which to argue that writers followed the stylistic literary etiquette' appropriate to that particular genre which had developed on Byzantine models and, in the case of Muscovite works, earlier Russian tradition.75 The advantage of this theory was that style·could now be evaluated in the context of tradition, allowing proper evaluation of the distinctive features of a given work. Nonetheless, the emphasis on style as a determinant of genre reflected a basically belletristic approach, and, as others pointed out, implied that the system of genres was as distinct and well developed as in modern literature. In fact, overlap between genres, anomalies, hybrids, variation within genres, and the use of one text for different functions, all imply a highly flexible, not to say chaotic, system.76 In recent years, the unsatisfactory nature of all efforts to classify inclusively according to genre has prompted a swing to a socio-cultural approach, developed by a group of German scholars including W.-H. Schmidt, K.-D. Seemann, and A. Ebbinghaus, which suggests that the presentation of the material to a particular community at a particular time rather than structural and stylistic conventions is central to the shaping of a work.7 Taking the various texts devoted to the cult of the saints Boris and Gleb, Gail Lenhoff has shown that the Sitz im Leben—that is, the specific socio-cultural setting of each—interacting with the characteristics and demands of the cult of saints (that is, the need for ritual celebration and record rather than observation of the literary etiquette of a given genre) determined their shape.78 The advantages of such an approach lie in its emphasis on the community and the literary works produced within that community, although it entirely leaves out questions of artistry or popularity. The world-view that sustained the Old Russian literary system began to crack in the second half of the seventeenth century. Texts such as the Tale of Frol Skobeev (Istoriia o rossiiskom dvorianine Frole Skobeeve), a novella about a rogue on the make, were intended solely to entertain, a sure sign of the weakening grip of Church and State on writing. Irreverent parodies like the Tavern Mass (O sluzhbe kabaku), which travestied the language of the vespers and concluded with a mock saint's life about a drunkard, implied the ability to use linguistic styles to other ends. The position of Church Slavonic as a sacred language indissociable from religious subject-matter was also undermined by scholars educated in the Western tradition of the Polish-Ukrainian Baroque, who believed that both grammar and a system of rhetoric could be taught formally. In this way they were opening the door to the possibility of greater stylistic flexibility and innovation as well as the use of Church Slavonic for non-Orthodox subject-matter. Nonetheless, seventeenth-century writing still generally lacked the features associated with modern literature. The forcible Westernization of the upper classes by Peter the Great at the beginning of the eighteenth century produced over a number of decades the necessary social conditions for the creation of literature in the modern sense. One of the most significant features of the Westernization of the nobility was the radical changes it produced to the ordering of their leisure hours. The calendar rituals and traditional activities which had for so long regulated leisure hours (separately for men and women, since women were largely segregated in Muscovite times) gave way to genteel activities and pastimes both for men or women on their own and for mixed social occasions. The creation of an elite Westernized group, differentiated from the mass of the population, prompted the appearance of a culture to match, in which books were to play an ever-increasing role. Westernization meant that the elite classes lost touch with the folk tradition, which dominated the way of life, mind-set, and beliefs of the overwhelming majority of Russians in the pre-Petrine period (indeed, this situation obtained for the peasantry up until the twentieth century). Folklore and pis'mennost had existed as separate systems in the Kievan and Muscovite periods, although folklore, mainly in the form of legends viewed as source material for historical accounts or lives of saints, often appeared in written works. In the reverse direction, the impact was more gradual but equally slight, and came largely with the (often superficial) Christianization of pagan ritual and belief. As folklore ceased to be a vehicle for cultural attitudes, it became a source of artistic material and, suitably sanitized, genteel entertainment. Of course, once this process began, the elite classes brought to bear their own literary attitudes in its appreciation, and, in applying the termpopular', selected forms that were not necessarily popular in the sense of being known widely among ordinary people. Russian epic songs, the byliny, which were admired in the late eighteenth century as colourful expressions of a heroic past and in the nineteenth century as the pinnacle of Russian folk-poetic creativity, were in fact known to only a tiny percentage of Russian peasants living in a few isolated areas, and certainly did not form part of their culture. Even the name bylina was invented by folklorists. The active development and promotion of a Westernized culture naturally lay in the hands of a small number of people, who, working in the 174os and 1750s within the Academy of Sciences, and subsequently outside as well, sought to establish the basis for a new literary system. In their search for a literary Russian language to replace Church Slavonic, they reflected the new approach to artistic language as a medium with a wide application. The attempts of Trediakovskii, Lomonosov, and Sumarokov to specify appropriate linguistic styles (with a greater or lesser Church Slavonic element) according to subject-matter, and determine the best form of versification for Russian poetry, revealed them as inheritors of a culture that viewed books as instructional as much as subscribers to prevailing Western views of the connection between literature and high moral purpose. Nonetheless, their efforts laid the ground for the establishment of the main Western belletristic genres in Russia (poetry, drama, essays, satire, fiction, etc.). Establishing a literary language and system of genres proved highly contentious, though the polemic between theorists-writers may be regarded as the first stage in the development of literary criticism. In the absence of any terminology, critical concepts were borrowed from the West through the translation of works such as Boileau's Art poétique. However, in the eighteenth century most literary criticism took the guise of vituperative attacks of a highly personal nature. By the end of the century much of what passed for criticism was based on the premiss that the talent of the individual writer, rather than his adherence to set programmes or known groupings, was what mattered.79 There could be no book market before Peter, given the absence of necessary factors such as a sizeable educated clientele, an element of consumer choice, adequate book distribution, and reasonable prices. A prerequisite for many of these was printing, which increased book availability and, ultimately, choice. Printing had existed in Muscovy from the mid-sixteenth century (an official typography, the Pechatnyi dvor, under the control of the Tsar and the Metropolitan, was founded in 1563). However, the non-existence of private printing meant that book production prior to the reign of Peter the Great was, first, dominated by the Church (95 per cent of all printed books in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were devotional), and, second, still occupied a relatively minor role in the production of pis'mennost'.80 Peter's policies made printing an essential tool of government and modernization,81 while the founding of the Academy of Sciences in 1725 created a body devoted to the propagation of enlightenment through word and print. Unfortunately, the paucity of qualified Russians meant that three-quarters of Academicians before 1742 were German, who published overwhelmingly in German or Latin, which was not of much positive value to most literate Russians, who formed a small enough group as it was. In any case, most publications were scientific treatises and textbooks of various kinds. Only 15 per cent of all titles published between 1725 and 1755 were belles-lettres.82 Using printing as an instrument of state control proved so costly that in the 174os and 175os economic pressures forced the Academy to try to increase the publication of works in Russian, and even occasionally to try to respond to popular interests. The gradual extension of the right to run printing presses to institutions such as Moscow University and the Cadet Corps in the 175os and 176os, and then to individuals in the 178os and 179os, slowly resulted in the emergence of a variety of publishers, some of them of merchant origin, interested in producing books for specific tastes and social groups. For example, the entertaining account of the adventures of the famous bandit Van ka Kain by Matvei Komarov was targeted at the unsophisticated reader, while at the end of the century the spread of literacy from male to female members of the upper classes made the production of reading matter for women feasible. The eighteenth century was not merely a period of transformation, but one of national literary apprenticeship; by the end of the century many of the cultural processes that had followed Peter's reforms were nearing maturity. With the advent of romanticism, which put the individual in the foreground of literary perception, literary attitudes in Russia in 18oo would engender a fully fledged literature based on more familiar, but still contended, conceptions of literaturnost'. ## Nineteenth-century Versions of Literaturnost': Functions, Forms, and Factions The period up to 18oo, then, may be considered to have consolidated the movement away from a culture of letters dominated by Church and State towards secularism and progress. This period saw also the development of the Russian literary language, from the three styles of Lomonosov (or slovesnost, literatura, and poeziia, as Tynianov puts it) to, by the end of the century, the Gallicized salon speech of Karamzin and his followers. The key stage, though, of this linguistic controversy was acted out in the early 18oos between the ‘archaists' and innovators'—or the followers of Shishkov and Karamzin, respectively. As this confrontation tailed off, with minor victories and notable literary works by both sides, a new synthesis emerged with what is now widely regarded, to some extent simplistically, as the literary language of Pushkin in the role of new and decisive dominant. This is the brand of literary Russian that was to be followed by Lermontov, Turgenev, and their successors. The same period, and indeed the early nineteenth century, saw an even more fundamental battle between the spoken languages of French and Russian amid the Russian aristocracy, who were now largely, numerically at least, the educated service gentry and who, from the mid-eighteenth century until the rise of the raznochintsy, formed the main reading public for the growing Russian culture. Although, from the late eighteenth century, more and more literary writing was being done in Russian, French very largely remained the spoken language of the court and the salons, and the language of private correspondence. It was also the language of literary endeavour for a number of highly educated aristocratic women, from Ekaterina Dashkova, Catherine II's most powerful woman contemporary, through the salon hostess Zinaida Volkonskaia, to Madame de Ségur, née Rostopchina, creator of the famous French children's book Les Malheurs de Sophie. The split between feminine'Frenchified tradition and ‘masculine language looking back to its Slavonic (or popular) roots was the cause of many anxieties in the 182os, particularly among male writers espousing a Frenchified’ literary language. It is evident, for instance, in Pushkin's insistence, expressed in his diaries and letters of the mid-18zos, on the need to create a properly virile style for prose and poetry. The term literaturnost'at this stage in literary history assumes a concern with a number of issues, both stylistic and social. Apart from the literary language and its development—in the sense of the campaign to create a national' literature and a style in which to write it——a number of other stylistic questions informed debate on literariness' in the early nineteenth century. These included the development of a new, at once flexible and self-conscious, attitude to genre, as the old neoclassical system of odes and elegies broke down in poetry, and prose genres, such as the novel and short story, became increasingly respectable and prominent. With the decay of the old notion that literature should always aspire to elevated subjects and modes of expression came the question of what distinguished literature'from other kinds of writing; this was expressed particularly in a concern with the devices and techniques appropriate to belles-lettres. There was also a high degree ofinterest in questions and concepts of authorship, which could be overt or oblique. For instance, the 182os was a great period for pseudonyms, such as 'Luzhnitskii starets', 'Baron Brambeus', and (though for political as well as literary reasons in this case), 'Marlinskii'. Here, literary-cultural concerns often merged into the social, as 'the author' was seen alternately, or sometimes simultaneously in one text, as the ultimate articulator of romantic individualism, as in Pushkin's Eugene Onegin (Evgenii Onegin, 1823–31), or as the most profound and important expresser of political and social commentary (as in Lermontov's accusation of the Tsarist authorities, ‘The Death of a Poet'(‘Smert' poeta', 1837)). The often performative role of the author produced as a consequence a particular construction of the reader in the text. Much of the writing of this period verged on the elitist in that it was intended for, or could only be fully appreciated by, an in-group of initiates (it had what has been termed circle semantics' kruzhkovaia semantika, or, in the more derogatory phrase of F. R. Leavis, was the product of a ‘coterie culture'). Address to a privileged in-group was facilitated by the fact that many Russian writers of the day, Pushkin and later Lermontov among them, took a dim view of the intelligence of Russian readers, and in particular of their ability to distinguish fact from fiction, and homily from irony: see, most notably, the preface to Lermontov's A Hero of Our Time (Geroi nashego vremeni, 1837–40). Connected with this was the role of the salons and clubs, at which writers read their works to a select audience (including, in the former case, educated women). This facilitated the flourishing of such minor genres as the epigram, the album entry, and the open letter. At the same time, however, the Russian book market was expanding and becoming more professional and commercial. Unlike their later nineteenth-century successors, many early nineteenthcentury writers took a very positive view of the new opportunities to earn money (a famous example is Pushkin's'Conversation between the Bookseller and the Poet'(Razgovor knigoprodavtsa s poetom', 1824), which ends with the poet jettisoning his high-flown anti-commercial arguments to accept the bookseller's largesse). This was partly because of the nature of the readership at which commercial publishers aimed their materials: literacy levels were so low that the tastes of the lower classes could not impinge much on the book market. Moreover, the possibility of publishing for money seemed to the independent, anti-absolutist, and in some cases even republican-minded young men who were the dominant group in literature after 182o a preferable alternative to the aristocratic patronage on which their predecessors had often had to rely, since booksellers were less likely to exercise editorial control.8³ This is not to say that all literature produced after 182o was free of the influence of the court: censorship by the government authorities was often intrusive, especially after the accession of Nicholas I in 1825. The situation was complicated by the collusion of some writers who acted as censors or collaborated with the censorship (Shishkov, Nikitenko, and later Goncharov). It could be a small step from writing literary manifestos or programmatic criticism (activities in which most male writers of the day engaged) to more coercive methods of ensuring political or aesthetic propriety. ## Writers and Journals in the Early Nineteenth Century: Two Case-studies Even the most cursory examination of the case of the towering literary figure of this period, Pushkin, reveals the extensive, not to say exhaustive, range of genres or forms in which he worked, something which is itself emblematic of the dynamically evolving literary period in which he operated. Most famous as a poet, Pushkin of course wrote lyrics, ballads, elegies, and odes, as well as excelling in the epigram, the bawdy, the fairy tale, and the narrative poem, not to mention the novel in verse— this last, arguably, his own generic invention. In the dramatic field he wrote a Shakespearian historical tragedy in blank verse and a complex collection of dramatic miniatures. In the realm of prose fiction he wrote, or attempted, novels, historical novels, short stories, and a cycle of short stories. Most critics would agree that he achieved at least one masterpiece in virtually all the categories mentioned. Apart from prose fiction, he wrote a body of letters (albeit mainly in French), travelogue, history, and critical notes, and was founding editor of one of the century's best-known journals, Sovremennik (The Contemporary). With very few exceptions—perhaps the serious aesthetic essay, literary translation (though some consider that the little tragedy' A Feast during the Plague (Pir vo vremia chumy, 183o) might come into that last category), and the autobiographical memoir—Pushkin made his mark, to say the least, in just about every literary form of the day in an epoch which boasted manifold literary activity. Further evidence of the dynamics of the literary process of the early nineteenth century emerges from scrutiny of an influential literary journal: for convenience's sake, we shall take one which (not untypically) ran to only four issues and was then abandoned in the wake of the failed Decembrist uprising. Mnemozina (1824-5) was edited by Vladimir Odoevskii and Wilhelm Küchelbecker (the latter was arrested for his active involvement in the Decembrist conspiracy, and was possibly fortunate not to share the desperate fate of Ryleev and others). It was, despite its intellectual success, a financial failure. This publication, subtitled ‘a collection of works in verse and prose', was effectively the house journal of the Society of the Lovers of Wisdom (Obshchestvo liubomudrov), and was heavily influenced by German romantic philosophy (particularly that of Schelling and Oken). Nevertheless, its contributors included a wide cross-section of the leading literati of the day, and it stands chronologically at the very centre of the period under discussion, and therefore at a key formative moment in Russian literature: after the Shishkov-Karamzin controversy, but before the hegemony of Pushkin became apparent, and before the establishment of the principal thick' journals. Furthermore, it was the most intellectually ambitious journal that Russia had yet seen. The journal's overall contents are grouped under the following headings: 'Philosophy'; Belles-lettres' (iziashchnaia proza), subdivided into ‘Apologues', 'Military History', 'Travelogues', 'Tales and extracts from novels' (Povesti. Otryvki iz romanov); 'Criticism and Anticriticism'; 'Poetry', subdivided into 'Poetic stories'(Stikhotvornye rasskazy), 'Lyrical Verse'; 'Missives'; and ‘Miscellaneous'. Also represented are songs in notational form and various illustrations, including cartoons and portraits. In the pages of this extraordinarily diverse publication apologues and philosophy by Odoevskii, campaign notes by Davydov, and travel letters by Küchelbecker (who also contributes an influential essay on Russian lyric poetry) are assembled alongside the more settled genres of the lyric, verse drama, and translation. Griboedov, Polevoi, Pushkin (with the poems ‘My demon'(Moi demon') and ‘To the Sea' (‘K moriu')), Raich, Shakhovskoi, Viazemskii, and Iazykov all contributed. On a European level, Mnemozina promoted German romantic philosophy and paid tribute on the death of Byron. The editors between them contributed well over half the total copy, and were unwise enough to get embroiled in undignified polemics with their vastly more down-market competitors, published by Bulgarin and Grech when the almanac folded, in 1825, it had a pathetic subscription list numbering just 157. ## The Development of Literaturnost' in the Later Nineteenth Century: the Rise of 'Mass Literature' Nicholas I was the last Russian Tsar to take a direct personal interest in the censorship of literary (as opposed to political) works. Alexander II not only permitted a relaxation of the censorship regulations in 1862, but increasingly left to bureaucrats the task of arbitrating what material should be banned and permitted. The last third of the nineteenth century, therefore, was marked by three new developments in Russian literature. The first was a gradual and rather timid increase in the dominance of literary aestheticism, 'l’art pour l’art', which did not really take hold until the 189os, but was to make a considerable impact in the twentieth century. The second was that the independence of literary activity from political authority (as distinct from literature's continuing prominence in the ‘public sphere') was now taken for granted. In 1847, Belinskii was still needing to emphasize the idea of secular progress: Russia needs the success of civilization, enlightenment, humanity; dignity and justice; not mysticism, sermons and serfdom, bribery and corruption.' By the second half of the nineteenth century, even those writers who preferred mysticism' toenlightenment'saw themselves as independent professionals who had no need for official endorsements of their work, or of ties with the Russian Court. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the second half of the nineteenth century saw an immense expansion of the publishing industry generally, and in particular of the production of cheap books aimed at the new readers of the lower classes. Established genres such as lubochnye knizhki (pamphlet romances sold by pedlars) were joined by serialized novels in journals and newspapers, detective stories, adventure novels, and romantic fiction (often referred to as women's literature', zhenskaia literatura).84 These upstart rivals placed new pressure on the category of literaturnost', which now took on an evaluative coloration, referring not only to particular linguistic strategies, but to their relative aesthetic merits. Like their counterparts in other European countries, Russian writers and critics developed an obsession with distinguishing between'genuine' literature and trash', and considered that the former was distinguished by originality of expression. By the very end of the nineteenth century these concerns were finding expression in theories of literature which emphasized form' or manner overcontent' or politico-ideological engagement, both in prescriptions for contemporary practice and in descriptions of what had preceded it. ## Russian Theories of Literary Evolution: the Formalist School Though concern with ‘literariness' was, as we have seen, explicit in early nineteenth-century culture, perception of this has, during the last seventy-five vears, been inseparable from the literary-historical categories established by the Russian formalists, in particular Iurii Tynianov. According to Tynianov's theories (developed most extensively in his essay collection Archaists and Innovators, 1929), genre development takes place by interchange between the‘centre' and the periphery'; by a process ofstruggle'and‘replacement'(bor ba ismena); and by a conflict between‘archaism' and innovation', involving major figures and their epigones and renewed exploitation of old devices. Old genres may be either enhanced or debased (the neoclassical ode and epic are studied by Tynianov as exemplary instances of these processes). According to Tynianov, there might be periods when all poets wrotewell', and then the 'bad' poet would write with genius. Nekrasov's verses, criticized originally as ‘rotten', were eventually accepted as good' because they stifled what had become an automatized verse form and did something new. The combination of these two contentions illustrates the less than fully materialist and relativist attitudes that underlay formalist appreciations: on the one hand literary quality is the result of contingent historical sitting and of reception, but on the other hand those writers such as Nekrasov, who fight againstautomation', are most valued. Similarly evaluative attitudes may be appreciated in Eikhenbaum's distinction between 'literature'and 'subliterature' or para-literature'(literaturnyi byt, 'literary life'), following which letters written by Pushkin, say, were able to transform the epistolary genre from para-literature'into literature', while letters (or indeed poems) written by Pushkin's female contemporaries have attained, in the historiologies of the formalists and their successors, at most the status of ‘para-literature'(though this generation included some highly self-conscious women letter-writers, such as the salon hostess Avdot'ia Elagina). The formalist critics, whether, in the first phase of their activity, when they sought to identify the qualities that distinguishedpoetic' from ‘everyday' language, or, later, when they confronted the imperative of taking into account ‘extra-literary history as a factor influencing literary ‘evolution', wrote as twentieth-century modernists, for whom literaturnost'had taken on a different meaning from that which it held in the early nineteenth century, under the pressure to distinguish book from commodity. But at the same time there was an essential continuity between the enterprise of the formalists and that of their predecessors: literaturnost remained indissociable from a functionality which was now laid bare'in literary and critical work alike. The cogency of this position is perhaps masked by the fact that ‘literariness' sometimes comes across in their writings as denoting an essence, something that can be identified in ontological rather than functional terms; features which are products, or functions, of a set of relations between the text and its contexts and those of its readers and its critics, are sometimes treated as inherent properties of the literary text, and indeed of literature' in general. But in general, the virtue of formalism is that, as Jurij Striedter argues, it ‘no more answers the question What is Literature? than it does the question What should literature be?'8⁵ Rather, it asks: on what basis can we ask these questions? In this sense it is especially valuable for a cultural studies' approach, in that it highlights the ways in which, even today, the frequently invoked specialness of Russian literature has tended to depend on a reluctance to analyse the reasons for literature's specificity——a specificity which, as our analysis here has shown, may be traceable both to the recent arrival of literature' in the Western sense, and to the accelerated development of a mass readership in the late nineteenth century.