# Suggested further reading ## Lichnost' OFFORD, D., The Russian Revolutionary Movement in the 188os (Cambridge, 1986), 141-5. RAEFF, M., Origins of the Russian Intelligentsia: The Eighteenth-Century Nobility (New York, 1966). WALICKI, A., The Slavophile Controversy: History of a Conservative Utopia in Nineteenth-Century Russian Thought, tr. H. Andrews-Rusiecka (Oxford, 1975). ## Narodnost' CHERNIAVSKY, M., Tsar and People: Studies in Russian Myths (New Haven, 1961). MILLER, F. J., Folklore for Stalin: Russian Folklore and Pseudofolklore of the Stalin Era (Armonk, 1990). RIASANOVSKY, N. V., Nicholas I and Official Nationality in Russia, 1825–1855 (Berkeley, 1959). ROGGER, H., National Consciousness in Eighteenth-Century Russia (Cambridge, 196o). WALICKI, A., The Slavophile Controversy: History of a Conservative Utopia in Nineteenth-Century Russian Thought, tr. H. Andrews-Rusiecka (Oxford, 1975). ## Literaturnost' BROOKS, J, When Russia Learned to Read: Literacy and Popular Literature, 1861–1917 (Princeton, 1985). CORNWELL, N., The Life, Times and Milieu of V. F. Odoyevsky (London, 1986). GREENLEAF, M., Pushkin and Romantic Fashion (Stanford, 1994). LIKHACHEV, D. S., Poetika drevnerusskoi literatury, 3rd edn. (Moscow, 1979). MARKER, G., Publishing, Printing and the Origins of Intellectual Life in Russia, 1700-1800 (Princeton, 1985). MILLS TODD III, W., Fiction and Society in the Age of Pushkin: Ideology, Institutions, and Narrative (Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1986). MORSON, G.S. (ed.), Literature and History: Theoretical Problems and Russian Case Studies (Stanford, 1986). STRIEDTER, J., Literary Structure, Evolution, and Value: Russian Formalism and Czech Structuralism Reconsidered (Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1989). TYNIANOV, IU. N., Arkhaisty i novatory (Leningrad, 1929; repr. Munich, 1967). ## Notes 1 V. Dal', Tolkovyi slovar'russkogo iazyka, 2nd edn., ii (Moscow, 1881), 259. 2 S. I. Ozhegov, Slovar'russkogo iazyka, 2oth edn. (Moscow, 1988), headword lichnost'. Similarly, the Soviet Academy dictionary gives both the personal individual basis in a person' and the aggregate of signs and qualities inherent in a person as a social being'. 3 See D. S. Likhachev,Kontseptosfera russkogo iazyka’, Ižvestiia Akademii nauk (Seriia literatury i iazyka), 52 (1993), 3–9. 4 R. H. Barrow, The Romans (Harmondsworth, 1949), 13. 5 M. Raeff, Origins of the Russian Intelligentsia: The Eighteenth-Century Nobility (New York, 1966), 146; see also 151. 6 Ibid., 41. 7 N. Kochetkova, Nikolay Karamzin (Boston, 1975), 40. 8 See N. M. Karamzin, Chto nuzhno avtoru?’, in Izbrannye sochineniia, ii (Moscow and Leningrad, 1964), 120–2. 9 A.I. Gertsen, Neskol'ko zamechanii ob istoricheskom razvitii chesti’, in Sobranie sochinenii (30 vols.; Moscow, 1954–65), ii, 158. 10 D.I. Pisarev, ‘Skholastika XIX veka’, in Sochineniia (4 vols.; Moscow, 1955), i, 107. 1 V. G. Belinskii, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii (13 vols.; Moscow, 1953–9), xii, 433. 12 See Gertsen, Pis'ma iz Avenue Marigny’, in Sobranie sochinenii, v, esp. 15–67. 13 Pisarev, ‘Skholastika XIX veka', 101. 14 Quoted in D. E. Rozental', Prakticheskaia stilistika russkogo iazyka, 4th edn. (Moscow, 1977), 143. 15 A. Walicki, The Slavophile Controversy: History of a Conservative Utopia in Nineteenth-Century Russian Thought, tr. H. Andrews-Rusiecka (Oxford, 1975), 411. 16 N. Riasanovsky, Collected Writings: 1947–1994 (Los Angeles, 1993), 240-1. 17 Belinskii, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii, xi, 556. 18 Ibid., iii,341. 19 Ibid., xi, 556. 20 Ibid., 577. 21 Ibid., xii, 22. 22 Ibid., 51-2. 23 Ibid., 66, 69. 24 Gertsen, Neskol'ko zamechanii’, 151–76, esp. 154–5; 157, 159–61, 163, 167–8, 174-5。 25 See A. V. Stankevich, T. N. Granovskii i ego perepiska, 2nd edn. (2 vols.; Moscow, 1897), i, 150–1. 26 T. N. Granovskii, O sovremennom sostoianii i znachenii vseobshchei istorii', Sochineniia, 4th edn. (Moscow, 1900), 25. 27 Granovskii, 'Reforma v Anglii', ibid., 483, and 'Istoricheskaia literatura vo Frantsii i Germanii v 1847 godu', ibid., 439, 445. 49Quoted in M. K. Azadovskii, Istoriia russkoi fol'kloristiki (Moscow, 1958), 191–2. 50 Ibid., 192. 28 K. D. Kavelin, Vzgliad na iuridicheskii byt drevnei Rossii', Sobranie sochinenii (4 vols.; St Petersburg, 1897–1900), i, 5–66. 29 Belinskii, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii, xii, 23, 52, 72. 30 See Granovskii, Chetyre istoricheskie kharakteristiki: Timur', in Sochineniia, 241 ff. 31 Stankevich, T. N. Granovskii, ii, 456. 32 Walicki, The Slavophile Controversy, 406. 33 Kavelin,Vzgliad’, 46–53. 34 J. S. Mill, On Liberty and Considerations on Representative Government, ed. R. B. McCallum (Oxford, 1946), 50, 9. 35 See G. M. Hamburg, Boris Chicherin and Early Russian Liberalism: 1828–1866 (Stanford, 1992), 85 ff., and my review of this book, European History Quarterly, 24(1994), 309-12. 36 See I. Nagy, Gershenzon chitaet Turgeneva', in Zh. Ziol'dkhein-Deak and A. Khollosh (eds.), I. S. Turgenev: Zhizn', tvorchestvo, traditsii (Budapest, 1994), 163-5. 37 N. G. Chernyshevskii, ‘Antropologicheskii printsip v filosofi', in Polnoe sobranie sochineni (16 vols.; Moscow, 1939–53), vii, 222–95, esp. 261 and 264. 38 Chernyshevskii, Bor'ba partii vo Frantsii pri Liudovike XVIII i Karle X’, ibid., v, 217-18. 39 Pisarev, ‘Skholastika XIX veka', 103. 40 Pisarev, Bazarov', in Sochineniia, ii, 10. 41 K.S. Aksakov, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii(3 vols.; Moscow, 1861–80), i, 291–2. 42 See Iu. F. Samarin, Sochineniia (12 vols.; Moscow, 1877–1911), i, 34–5, 42, 56, 63–4; see also Walicki, The Slavophile Controversy, 409. 43 I. V. Kireevskii, O kharaktere prosveshcheniia Evropy i o ego otnoshenii k prosveshcheniiu Rossii’, in Polnoe sobranie sochineni (2 vols.; Moscow, 1911), i, 174–222, esp. 186–8, 210, 191–2, 206–7. 44 See Riasanovsky, Collected Writings, 142. 45 F. M. Dostoevskii, Zimnie zametki o letnikh vpechatleniiakh, in Polnoe sobranie sochinenii (30 vols.; Leningrad, 1972–90), v, 78–80. 46 On Tochisskii and his group, see D. Offord, The Russian Revolutionary Movement in the 188os (Cambridge, 1986), 141–5. 47 N. Riasanovsky, 'Khomyakov and sobornost", in E. J. Simmons (ed.), Continuity and Change in Russian and Soviet Thought (Cambridge, Mass., 1955), 183–94 (185). On the later history of sobornost', see B. G. Rosenthal, Transcending Politics: Vyacheslav Ivanov's Visions of sobornost", California Slavic Studies, 14 (1992), 17–70, and A. I. Mazaev, Ot misterii k sobornosti: Viacheslav Ivanov i A. Skriabin o sinteze iskusstv', in Problema sinteza iskussty γ estetike russkogo simvolizma (Moscow, 1992), 142–234. 48 See Ia. Grot, Filologicheskie razyskaniia (St Petersburg, 1899), 83–4, and note in Uchenye zapiski Riazanskogo pedagogicheskogo instituta, 8 (1949), 147. 51 See H. Rogger, National Consciousness in Eighteenth-Century Russia (Cambridge, 1960), 126. 52 Ibid., 71. 53 See L. G. Leighton, Narodnost'as a Concept of Russian Romanticism', in Russian Romanticism: Two Essays (The Hague, 1975), 41–107. 54 See A. S. Pushkin,‘O narodnosti v literature’, in Polnoe sobranie sochinenii, xi (Moscow, 1949), 40. 55 See Azadovskii, Istoriia russkoi fol'kloristiki, 193–5, and K. Hokanson, Literary Imperialism, Narodnost'and Pushkin's Invention of the Caucasus', Russian Review, 53(1994),336–52. 56 On the educated response' to popular commercial literature, see J. Brooks, When Russia Learned to Read: Literacy and Popular Literature, 186ı-1917 (Princeton, 1985), ch. 10. 57 Quoted in N. V. Riasanovsky, Nicholas I and Offcial Nationality in Russia, 1825–1855(Berkeley, 1959), 73. 58 Ibid., 70-I. 59 M. T. Florinsky states that Uvarov's narodnost'stood for militant nationalism': Russia: A History and an Interpretation, i (New York, 1953), 799. 60 Rogger, National Consciousness, 34. 61 Riasanovsky, Nicholas I, 124. 62 Ibid., 139. 63 Walicki, The Slavophile Controversy, 46, 420. 64 See M. Cherniavsky, Tsar and People: Studies in Russian Myths (New Haven, 1961) 149, and R. S. Wortman, Scenarios of Power: Myth and Ceremony in Russian Monarchy, i. From Peter the Great to the Death of Nicholas I (Princeton, 1995), 291–2. 65 Riasanovsky, Nicholas I, 144–6, 232–3. 66 See Walicki, The Slavophile Controversy, 397–421. See J. D. Klief, The Concept of“Jewish Emancipation" in a Russian Context', in O. Crisp and L. Edmondson (eds.), Civil Rights in Imperial Russia (Oxford, 1989), 125. L. Kristof has described the policy of nation-building on the basis of religion rather than ethnicity as 'Rossification' (as opposed to 'Russification'): see H. Rogger, Jewish Policies and Right-Wing Politics in Imperial Russia (London, 1986), 3-4. 68 See D. C. Rawson, Russian Rightists and the Revolution of i9o5 (Cambridge, 1995). 69See R. Pipes, Narodnichestvo: a Semantic Enquiry’, Slavic Review, 23 (1964), 441-58. 70 For a good overview of Russian conceptualizations ofliterature, see G. S. Morson, Introduction: Literary History and the Russian Experience', in Morson (ed.), Literature and History: Theoretical Problems and Russian Case Studies (Stanford, 1986), 1–30. 71 S. Franklin, Introduction', in Sermons and Rhetoric of Kievan Rus, tr. Franklin (Cambridge, Mass., 1991), pp. lxxii—lxxiv. 72 The question of the interrelationship between Church Slavonic and Old Russian has been much debated: see B. A. Uspenskii, 'K voprosu o semanticheskikh vzaimootnosheniiakh sistemno protivopostavlennykh tserkovnoslavianskikh i russkikh form v istorii russkogo iazyka', Wiener Slavistisches Jahrbuch, 22 (1976), 992—100, and Kratkii ocherk istorii russkogo literaturnogo iazyka (XI-–XIX vν.) (Moscow, 1994); G. Hüttl-Volter, Diglossiia v Drevnei Rusi', Wiener Slavistisches Jahrbuch, 24 (1978), 108–23; D. S. Worth, ‘On Diglossia in Medieval Russia', Die Welt der Slaven, 23 (1978), 371–93; and A. Issatschenko, Die Geschichte der russischen Sprache, i (Heidelberg, 1980), 68 ff. 73 See B. A. Uspenskii, ‘The Language Situation and Linguistic Consciousness in Muscovite Rus': The Perception of Church Slavic and Russian', in Medieval Slavic Culture (California Slavic Studies, 12; Stanford, 1984), 365–86. 74 R. Jagoditsch argues that medieval Russian writing distinguished work-types rather than art-types: see Zum Begriff der“Gattungen" in der altrussischen Literatur', Wiener Slavistisches Jahrbuch, 6 (1957–8), 113–37. 75 The most cogent presentation of his ideas is in D. S. Likhachev, Poetika drevnerusskoi literatury, 3rd edn. (Moscow, 1979), 55–79. 76 See the views of N. Ingham in Genre Characteristics of the Kievan Lives of Princes’, in P. Debreczeny (ed.), American Contributions to the Ninth International Congress of Slavists, Kiev, September 7–13 i983, ii (Columbus, 1983), 223–37, and Genre-Theory and Old Russian Literature’, Slavic and East European Journal, 31 (1987),234-45. See W.-H. Schmidt, Gattungstheoretische Untersuchungen zur altrussischen Kriegserzählung (Zur Soziologie mittelaltlicher Gattungen) (Berlin-Wiesbaden, 1975); W.-H. Schmidt (ed.), Gattungsprobleme der älteren slavischen Literaturen (Berminer Fachtagung) (Berlin–Wiesbaden, 1984); and K.-D. Seeman (ed.), Gattung und Narration in der älteren slavischen Literaturen (Berlin—Wiesbaden, 1987). 78 G. Lenhoff, The Martyred Princes Boris and Gleb: A Socio-Cultural Study of the Cult and the Texts (Columbus, 1989). 79 See W. G. Jones, Familiar Solidarity and Squabbling: Russia's Eighteenth-Century Writers', in F. Wigzell (ed.), Russian Writers on Russian Writers (Oxford and Providence, 1994), 1–14. The essays by I. Serman and M. Altshuller in C. Moser (ed.), The Cambridge History of Russian Literature (Cambridge, 1989), 45–91 and 92–135, offer a good survey of the period 1730–1820. 80 On printing in seventeenth-century Russia, see S. P. Luppov, Kniga v Rossii v XVII veke (Leningrad, 1970). 81 On printing and publishing in eighteenth-century Russia, see G. Marker, Publishing, Printing and the Origins of Intellectual Life in Russia, 17oo—180o (Princeton, 1985); and S. P. Luppov, Kniga ν Rossii ν pervoi chetverti XVIII veka (Leningrad, 1973), and Kniga ν Rossii v poslepetrovskoe vremia (Leningrad, 1976). 82 Marker, Publishing, Printing, 59. Marker assigns odes written to celebrate formal occasions and belles-lettres to different categories. 83 On the development of literary institutions in the first half of the nineteenth century, see W. Mills Todd III, Fiction and Society in the Age of Pushkin: Ideology, Institutions, and Narrative (Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1986). 84 See Brooks, When Russia Learned to Read, and C. Kelly, A History of Russian Women's Writing, 1820–1992(Oxford, 1994), chs. 1–5. 85 J. Striedter, Literary Structure, Evolution, and Value: Russian Formalism and Czech Structuralism Reconsidered (Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1989), 19. PART II Cultural Transformation in Laté Imperial Russia