# Suggested further reading ## Urbanization and Local Government BRADLEY,J., Muzhik and Muscovite: Urbanization in Late Imperial Russia (Berkeley, 1985). BROWER, D. R., The Russian City between Tradition and Modernity, 1850—1900 (Berkeley, 1990). CLOWES, E. W., KASSOW, S. D., and WEST, J. L. (eds.), Between Tsar and People: Educated Society and the Quest for Public Identity in Late Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1991). HAMM, M. (ed.), The City in Late Imperial Russia (Bloomington, 1986). OwEN, T., Capitalism and Politics in Russia: A Social History of the Moscow Merchants, 1855–1905 (New York, 1981). THURSTON, R. W., Liberal City, Conservative State: Moscow and Russia's Urban Crisis, 1906–1914 (Oxford, 1987). ZASOSOV, D. A., and PYZIN, V. I., I zhizni Peterburga 1890-191o-kh godoν (Leningrad, 1991). ## Education, Print Culture, the 'People's Theatre' BROOKS, J., When Russia Learned to Read: Literacy and Popular Literature, 186ı–1917 (Princeton, 1985). EKLOF, B., Russian Peasant Schools: Officialdom, Village Culture, and Popular Pedagogy, 1861–1914 (Berkeley, 1986). McREYNOLDS, L., The News Under Russia's Old Regime: The Development of a Mass-Circulation Press (Princeton, 1991). SWIFT, E. A., Fighting the Germs of Disorder: The Censorship of Russian Popular Theatre, 1888–1917, Russian History, 18 (1991), 1–49. THURSTON, G., The Impact of Russian Popular Theatre, 1886–1915’, Journal of Modern History, 55 (1983), 244–8. ## Philanthropy and Social Welfare; the Temperance Movement CHRISTIAN, D., Living Water: Vodka and Russian Society on the Eve of Emancipation (oxford, 1990). HERLIHY, P. Joy of the Rus': Rites and Rituals of Russian Drinking', Russian Review, 50(1991), 131-47. LINDENMEYR, A., A Russian Experiment in Voluntarism: The Municipal Guardianships of the Poor, 1894–1914’,Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas, 30 (1982), 429–51. Public Life, Private Virtues: Women in Russian Charity, 1762–1914’, Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 18 (1993), 562–91. RIEBER, A. J., Merchants and Entrepreneurs in Imperial Russia (Chapel Hill, 1982). RUCKMAN, J.-A., The Moscow Business Elite: A Social and Cultural Portrait of Two Generations, 1840–1905 (De Kalb, 1984). STEINBERG, M. D., Moral Communities: The Culture of Class Relations in the Russian Printing Industry, 1867–1907 (Berkeley, 1992). ## The Worker Intelligentsia BONNELL, V. E., Roots of Rebellion: Workers' Politics and Organizations in St Petersburg and Moscow, 1900-1914 (Berkeley, 1983). KOENKER, D., Moscow Workers and the 1917 Revolution (Princeton, 1981). SMITH, S. A., Red Petrograd: Revolution in the Factories 1917-1918 (Cambridge, 1983). ZELNIK, R. E. (tr. and ed.), A Radical Worker in Tsarist Russia: The Autobiography of Semën Ivanovich Kanatchikov (Stanford, 1986). ## Science, Knowledge, Intellectual History ENGELSTEIN, L., The Keys to Happiness: Sex and the Search for Modernity in Fin de Siècle Russia (Ithaca, 1992). FRIEDEN, N. M., Russian Physicians in an Era of Reform and Revolution, 1856–1905 (Princeton, 1981). FRIERSON, C. A., Peasant Icons: Representations of Rural People in Late Nineteenth-Century Russia (Oxford, 1993). GUSTAFSON, R. F., Leo Tolstoy, Resident and Stranger (Princeton, 1986). JORAVSKY, D., Russian Psychology: A Critical History (Oxford, 1989). MACLEAN, H.,Realism', in V. Terras (ed.), Handbook of Russian Literature (New Haven, 1984), 363–7. PAPERNO, I., and GROSSMAN, J.D. (eds.), Creating Life: The Aesthetic Utopia of Russian Modernism (Stanford, 1994). POPKIN, C., Chekhov as Ethnographer: Epistemological Crisis on Sakhalin Island', Slavic Review, 51 (1992), 36–51. VUCINICH, A., Science in Russian Culture 186ι–1917 (Stanford, 1970). \- Social Thought in Tsarist Russia: The Quest for a General Science of Society, 1861–1917(Chicag0,1976). ## Notes 1 Adele Lindenmeyr, Poverty is Not a Vice: Charity, Society and the State in Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1996), 34. 2 M. de Certeau, The Writing of History, tr. T. Conley (New York, 1988), 40. 3 M. Hamm (ed.), The City in Late Imperial Russia (Bloomington, 1986), 13, 51, 212. See e.g. D. Zhbankov, Polovaia prestupnost", Sovremennyi mir, 7 (1909), 54–91. An excellent general survey of anxieties about crime is J. Neuberger, Hooliganism: Crime, Culture and Power in St Petersburg, 1900–1914 (Berkeley, 1993). An example of Lombrosian work on criminology is P. Tarnovskaia, Zhenskaia prestupnost", Severnyi vestnik, 5 (1887), sect. 1, 132–49. 5 B. Mironov, Bureaucratic or Self-Government: The Early Nineteenth-Century Russian City’, Slavic Review, 52 (1993), 233–55. 6 D. R. Brower, The Russian City between Tradition and Modernity, 185o–1900 (Berkeley, i990), 118. 7 Mironov, Bureaucratic or Self-Government', passim, and Brower, The Russian City,esp.ch.3. 8 ‘Zadachi arkhitektury XIX veka’, Artist, 46 (1895), 56. 9 ‘Telefony v Rossii', Elektronicheskii vestnik, 13–15 (1895), 58–9. 10 In recent years city officials have been closing Nevskii [on New Year's Eve] for revellers' (‘Staryi Peterburg', Stolitsa i usad'ba, 43 (1915), 1). " See A. Benois's introduction to A. Leifert, Balagany (Petrograd, 1922). 12 On the planning of entertainments, see the Moscow City Archive, fond 179, op. 51. 13 Izvestiia Moskovskoi gorodskoi upravy, 12, sect. I (1891), 24; the raek text is quoted in A. M. Konechnyi, Raek v sisteme Peterburgskoi gorodskoi kul'tury', Russkii fol'klor, 25 (1989), 135. 14 See Brower, The Russian City, esp. ch. 5. All the contributors to Hamm (ed.), The City in Late Imperial Russia point to the relationship between uncontrolled urbanization and revolution; see also Neuberger, Hooliganism. Clearly, rapid urbanization and revolution did interdepend to some extent, but failure in the former by no means results inevitably in the latter, as such modern cases as Cairo, Bangkok, or Calcutta make clear 15 On the development of sociology, see A. Vucinich's survey, Social Thought in Tsarist Russia: The Quest for a General Science of Society, 1861–1917 (Chicago, 1976). 16 A. Lindenmeyr, A Russian Experiment in Voluntarism: The Municipal Guardianships of the Poor, 1894–1914',Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas, 30 (1982), 429–51. 17 A. Lindenmeyr, Public Life, Private Virtues: Women in Russian Charity, 1762–1914’, Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 18 (1993), 562–91. 18 Brower, The Russian City, 155. 19 B. Eklof, Russian Peasant Schools: Officialdom, Village Culture, and Popular Pedagogy, 186ı–1914 (Berkeley, 1986), 289–94, and O. Crisp, 'Labour and Industrialization in Russia’, in P. Mathias and M. M. Postan (eds.), Cambridge Economic History of Europe, vii, pt. 2 (Cambridge, 1978), 131. 20 A. G. Rashin, Gramotnost' i narodnoe obrazovanie v Rossii v XIX v. i v nachale XX v.’, Istoricheskie zapiski, 37 (1951), 37; Naselenie Rossii za 10o let (181-1913 gg.) (Moscow, 1956), 311; and Formirovanie rabochego klassa Rossi (Moscow, 1958), 580-1. 21 B. A. Anderson, Internal Migration during Modernization in Late Nineteenth-Century Russia (Princeton, 1980), 109; J. Brooks, When Russia Learned to Read: Literacy and Popular Literature, 186z–½917 (Princeton, 1985), 12; and G. Guroff and S. F. Starr, A Note on Literacy in Russia, 1890–1914’,Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas, 19 (1971), 525. 22 On Pirogov, see Eklof, Russian Peasant Schools, 51. 23 Ibid., 432. 24 Istoriia rabochikh Leningrada, 1703–fevral'1917, i (Leningrad, 1972), 146–7, and Ia. V. Abramov, Nashi voskresnye shkoly: ikh proshloe i nastoiashchee (St Petersburg, 1900), 318. 25 R. W. Thurston, Liberal City, Conservative State: Moscow and Russia's Urban Crisis, z906–1914 (Oxford, 1987), 164–5, and V. Leikina-Svirskaia, Russkaia intelligentsiia ν 1900–1917 godakh (Moscow, 1981), 76–7. 26 For reproductions of works by Bogdanov-Bel'skii, see E. Kridl Valkenier (ed.), The Wanderers: Masters of i9th-Century Russian Painting. An Exhibition from the Soviet Union (Dallas, 1990), plates 5–6; on his career, see E. Kridl Valkenier, Russian Realist Art (New York, 1989), 163. 27 B. Ivanov, Po stupeniam bor'by: Zapiski starogo bol'shevika (Moscow, 1934), 49. 28 A. Frolov, Probuzhdenie (Kiev, 1923), 531. 29 R. E. Zelnik (tr. and ed.), A Radical Worker in Tsarist Russia: The Autobiography of Semën Ivanovich Kanatchikov (Stanford, 1986), 93. Cf. J. Rancière's remarks about similar workers in France in La Nuit des prolétaires (Paris, 1981), 32. 30 K. M. Takhtarev, Ocherk peterburgskogo rabochego dvizheniia 9o-kh godov (Petrograd, 1921), 10; S. Kanatchikov remembered being irresistibly drawn' to 'books in beautiful, dark bindings' (165). 31 Zelnik (tr. and ed.), A Radical Worker, 106. 32 On Nekrasov, see Zelnik (tr. and ed.), A Radical Worker, 75–6. On Tolstoi, Dostoevskii, and Gor'kii, see E. R. Kabo, Ocherki rabochego byta (Moscow, 1928), 67, and cf. A. I. Shapovalov, Po doroge k marksizmu: Vospominaniia rabochegorevoliutsionera (Moscow, 1924), 44. On Gor'kii, see also Frolov, Probuzhdenie, 167–8. On Andreev, see M. Gor'kii, 'O pisateliakh-samouchkakh', Sovremennyi mir, 2 (1911), 178–209. 33 L. M. Kleinbort, Rukopisnye zhurnaly rabochei Rossii’, Vestnik Evropy, 7–8 (1917),278,282. 34 Tkach,I(1917),17. 35 Quoted in V. E. Bonnell, Roots of Rebellion: Workers' Politics and Organizations in St Petersburg and Moscow, 1900–1914 (Berkeley, 1983), 333. 36 P. Kenez, The Birth of the Propaganda State (Cambridge, 1985), 21, and Leikina-Svirskaia, Russkaia intelligentsiia, 123. See also the appendix to L. McReynolds, The News Under Russia's Old Regime: The Development of a Mass-Circulation Press (Princeton, 1991). 37 See McReynolds, The News, ch. 6. 38 See T. Owen, Capitalism and Politics in Russia: A Social History of the Moscow Merchants, 1855–1905 (New York, 1981), and A. Rieber, Merchants and Entrepreneurs in Imperial Russia (Chapel Hill, 1982). 39Of the State Council in 1894–1914, 30.7 per cent are classified as ‘bourgeois' in D. Lieven, Russia's Rulers under the Old Regime (New Haven, 1989), 63; this did not, however, lead to more effective co-operation between the Tsarist regime and the new elites, mainly because of the disorganization in institutions caused, above all, by remaining elements of monarchical absolutism' (289). 40 J. Bradley, 'Voluntary Associations, Civic Culture, and Obshchestvennost'in Moscow', in E. W. Clowes, S. D. Kassow, and J. L. West (eds.), Between Tsar and People: Educated Society and the Quest for Public Identity in Late Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1991), 136–7. 41 J. MacAloon, This Great Symbol: Pierre de Coubertin and the Origins of the Modern Olympic Games (Chicago, 1981), 141. Unlike its Soviet successor, the Russian government considered the Olympics a waste of money and offered no support to Russian athletes, few of whom could afford to compete. 42 Sport, I (1897), I. 43 A. Blok, Predislovie k Vozmezdiiu', in Stikhotvoreniia (Leningrad, 1955), 524. 44 V. Merkuriev, Ivan Poddubnyi (Krasnodar, 1976). Information on sports also comes from Lebedev's journal, Hercules, and from dozens of other contemporary sports journals. For a general introduction to the period, see also J. Riordan, Sport and Soviet Society: Development of Sport and Physical Education in Russia and the USSR (Cambridge, 1977), ch. 1. 45 So argued a contributor to Sport, 6 (1897), 80. 46 See J.-A. Ruckman, The Moscow Business Elite: A Social and Cultural Portrait of Two Generations, 1840–1905 (De Kalb, 1984). 47 See M. D. Steinberg, Moral Communities: The Culture of Class Relations in the Russian Printing Industry, 1867–1907 (Berkeley, 1992); Buryshkin, Moskva kupecheskaia (New York, 1954; repr. Moscow, 1991) also contains much information on merchant philanthropy. 48 The poor work and living conditions among the Russian working classes are very widely documented: see e.g. S. A. Smith, Red Petrograd: Revolution in the Factories z917-z918 (Cambridge, 1983), and D. Koenker, Moscow Workers and the 1917 Revolution (Princeton, 1981). 49 Steinberg, Moral Communities, esp. 60–8. 50 D. Christian, Living Water: Vodka and Russian Society on the Eve of Emancipation (Oxford, 1990), 380. and V. I. Binshtok and L. S. Kaminskii, Narodnoe pitan'e i narodnoe zdorov'e (Moscow, 1929), 45–6. 51 See Brower, The Russian City, and E. A. Swift, 'Fighting the Germs of Disorder: The Censorship of Russian Popular Theatre, 1888–1917', Russian History, 18 (1991), 1-49. 52 S. Frank, Confronting the Domestic Other', in Frank and M. D. Steinberg, Cultures in Flux: Lower-Class Values, Practices and Resistance in Late Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1994), 96, and P. Herlihy, Joy of the Rus': Rites and Rituals of Russian Drinking', Russian Review, 50 (1991), 143. 53 Brower, The Russian City, 182, and J. Bradley, Muzhik and Muscovite: Urbanization in Late Imperial Russia (Berkeley, 198), 353. 54 N. M. Lisovskii, Rabochie v voennom vedomstve (St Petersburg, 1906), 203. 55 Eklof, Russian Peasant Schools, 423, and Frank, Confronting', 90–I. 56 The minister in question was Avraam Norov: see K. A. Timiriazev, Probuzhdenie estestvoznaniia v tret'ei chetverti veka', Granat-Ist, vii (n.d.), 2, cited in A. Vucinich, Science in Russian Culture: A History to 186o (Stanford, 1963), 380–1. 57 A. Vucinich, Science in Russian Culture 186ı–1917 (Stanford, 1970), 40–2. We are indebted to this volume of Vucinich's study for the discussion here and below of educational reform and scientific institutions in nineteenth-century Russia; the drift of the discussion also owes much to the feminist approaches of, for example, the contributors to L. Alcoff and E. Potter (eds.), Feminist Epistemologies (New York, 1993), 5mS.V. Rozhdestvenskii, Istoricheskii obzor deiatel'nosti Ministerstva Narodnogo Prosveshcheniia (1802–1902) (St Petersburg, 1902), 520. 59 F. A. Vinogradov, Obshchestvo klassicheskoi filologii i pedagogiki v 1908 godu', Zhurnal Ministerstva Narodnogo Prosveshcheniia, 9 (1909), sect. 4, 9–16. 60 Vucinich, Science in Russian Culture 1861–1917, 227. 61 L. Engelstein, The Keys to Happiness: Sex and the Search for Modernity in Fin de Siècle Russia (Ithaca, 1992), ch. 5, and N. M. Frieden, Russian Physicians in an Era of Reform and Revolution, 1856–1905 (Princeton, 1981). 62 Frieden, Russian Physicians, 105–12, 116, 118, 122, 127, 135, 145. 63 Vucinich, Science in Russian Culture 1861–1917, 200–3, 298–301. 64 K. A. Timiriazev, Nasushchnye zadachi sovremennogo estestvoznaniia, 3rd edn. (Moscow, 1908), 6, cited inVucinich, Science in Russian Culture 1861–1917, 201. 65 The inventor of the familiar racial categories such as ‘Caucasian' and ‘Negroid', Joseph Deniker, was a French citizen, but was married to a Russian and educated in Russia, where his theories were well known, Les Races et les peuples de la terre appearing in Russian in 1902, only two years after the French edition. 66 C. Frierson, Peasant Icons: Representations of Rural People in Late Nineteenth-Century Russia (Oxford, 1993), 27–8, 117–18. 67 Vucinich, Science in Russian Culture 1861–1917, 249. 68 R. F. Gustafson, Leo Tolstoy, Resident and Stranger: A Study in Fiction and Theology (Princeton, 1986), 221–2. 69 Vucinich, Science in Russian Culture 1861–1917, 411, 247, 307–8. 70 D. Joravsky, Russian Psychology: A Critical History (Oxford, 1989), 148. 71 J.-M. Charcot, Charcot, the Clinician: The Tuesday Lessons, tr. C. G. Goetz (New York, 1987), 104. One Russian memoirist, Elizaveta D'iakonova, has left an account of being treated by a follower of Charcot: see her Dnevnik russkoi zhenshchiny (Paris, 1900--2; repr. St Petersburg, 1905). Charcot, Charcot, the Clinician, 107. 73 R. H. Allshouse, Introduction', in Allshouse (ed.), Photographs for the Tsar: The Pioneering Color Photography of Sergei Mikhailovich Prokudin-Gorskii, Commissioned by Tsar Nicholas II (London, 1980), pp. ix–xxiii. 74Quotation from Y. V. Barchatova, Introduction to A Portrait of Tsarist Russia: Unknown Photographs from the Soviet Archives, tr. M. Robinson (New York, 1989), 7. The drift of argument here draws on M. Jay, Scopic Regimes', in H. Foster (ed.), Vision and Visuality (Seattle, 1988), 9. 75 On the growth of the picture postcard, see particularly N. S. Tagrin, Mir v otkrytke (moscow,1978). 76 Barchatova, Introduction to A Portrait of Tsarist Russia, 16. 77 Ibid., 7-27. 78 I. Paperno, Introduction', in Paperno and J. D. Grossman (eds.), Creating Life: The Aesthetic Utopia of Russian Modernism (Stanford, 1994), 4. 79 See J. Tulloch, Chekhov: A Structuralist Study (New York, 1980), 86.