# Suggested further reading ## Industrialization, Development of the Commercial City BATER, J. H., St. Petersburg: Industrialization and Change (Montreal, 1976). BRADLEY, J., Muzhik and Muscovite: Urbanization in Late Imperial Russia (Berkeley, 1985). BROWER, D. R., The Russian City between Tradition and Modernity, 185o-190o (Berkeley, 1990). DAVIDOVICH, M., Peterburgskii tekstil'nyi rabochii v ego biudzhetakh (St Petersburg, 1912). DUNE, E., Notes of a Red Guard, tr. and ed. D. P. Koenker and S. A. Smith (Urbana, 1993). JOHNSON, R. E., Peasant and Proletarian: The Working Class of Moscow in the Late Nineteenth Century (Leicester, 1979). RUANE, C., Clothes Shopping in Imperial Russia: The Development of a Consumer Culture’,Journal of Social History, 28 (1995), 765–82. SMITH, S. A., Red Petrograd: Revolution in the Factories 1917–1918 (Cambridge, 1983). vON GELDERN, J., Life in Between: Migration and Popular Culture in Late Imperial Russia’, Russian Review, 55 (1996), 365–83. ZELNIK, R. E. (tr. and ed.), A Radical Worker in Tsarist Russia: The Autobiography of Semën Ivanovich Kanatchikov (Stanford, 1986). ## Consumer Culture in the Countryside ENGEL, B., Between the Fields and the City (Cambridge, 1994). FRANK, S. P., 'Confronting the Domestic Other: Rural Popular Culture and its Enemies in Fin-De-Siècle Russia’, in Frank and M. D. Steinberg (eds.), Cultures in Flux: Lower-Class Values, Practices and Resistance in Late Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1994), 74–107. FRIERSON, C. A. (tr. and ed.), Aleksandr Nikolaevich Engelgardt's Letters from the Country, 1872–1887 (New York, 1993). ## Entertainments, 'Boulevardization' BROOS, J., When Russia Learned to Read: Literacy and Popular Literature, 1861–1917 (Princeton, 1985). CHRISTIAN, D., Living Water: Vodka and Russian Society on the Eve of Emancipation (Oxford, 1990). ENGELSTEIN, L., The Keys to Happiness: Sex and the Search for Modernity in Fin de Siècle Russia (Ithaca, 1992). HERLIHY, P., Joy of the Rus': Rites and Rituals of Russian Drinking', Russian Review, 50(1991), 131-47. KELLY, C., Petrushka: The Russian Carnival Puppet Theatre (Cambridge, 1990). 'Better Halves? Representations of Women in Russian Urban Popular Entertainments, 1870–1910', in L. Edmondson (ed.), Women and Society in Russia and the Soviet Union (Cambridge, 1992), 5–31. KONECHNYI, A., ‘Shows for the People: Public Amusement Parks in Nineteenth-Century St Petersburg', in S. Frank and M. D. Steinberg (eds.), Cultures in Flux: Lower-Class Values, Practices and Resistance in Late Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1994), 121–30. Peterburgskie narodnye gulian'ia na maslenoi i paskhal'noi nedeliakh’, in N. V. Iukhneva (ed.), Peterburg i guberniia: Istoriko-etnograficheskie issledovaniia (Leningrad, 1989), 21–52. - Raek v sisteme peterburgskoi narodnoi kul'tury’, Russki fol'klor, 25 (1989), 123-38. KUZNETSOV, E., Iproshlogo russkoi estrady: Istoricheskie ocherki (Moscow, 1958). NEKRYLOVA, A. F., Russkie narodnye gorodskie prazdniki, uveseleniia, i zrelishcha: Konets XVIII–nachalo XX veka (Leningrad, 1988). SCHULER, C., Women in Russian Theatre: The Actress in the Silver Age (London, 1996). Silent Witnesses (o videocassettes of early Russian films, British Film Institute) (London, 1992). STITES, R., Russian Popular Culture: Entertainment and Society since i9oo (Cambridge, 1992). TAYLOR, R., and CHRISTIE, I. (eds.), The Film Factory: Russian and Soviet Cinema in Documents, 1896–1939 (London, 1988). TSIV'IAN, IU., Early Cinema in Russia and its Cultural Reception, tr. A. Bodger (London and New York, 1994). ZASOSOV, D. A., and PYZIN, V. I., I zhizni Peterburga 1890-191o-kh godoν (Leningrad, 1991). ZORKAIA, N. M., Na rubezhe stoletii (Moscow, 1976). ## Modernism in Literature and the Theatre BARRATT, A., and RUSSELL, R. (eds.), The Russian Theatre in the Age of Modernism (London, 1990). CLAYTON, J. D., Pierrot in Petrograd: The Commedia dell’arte/Balagan in Twentieth-Century Russian Theatre and Drama (Montreal, 1994). MARKOV, V., Russian Futurism (Berkeley, 1968). —— (ed.), Manifesty i programmy russkikh futuristov (Munich, 1967). PYMAN, A., A History of Russian Symbolism (Cambridge, 1994). RUDNITSKY, K., Russian and Soviet Theatre (London, 1988). ## Visual Arts, the Art Market BOWLT, J., The Silver Age: Russian Art of the Early Twentieth Century and the World of Art Group (Newtonville, 1979; repr. 1982). Russian Stage Design: Scenic Innovation i9oo—193o: From the Collection of Mr and Mrs Nikita D. Žobanov-Rostovsky (Jackson, 1982). ‘The Moscow Art Market', in E. Clowes, S. D. Kassow, and J. L. West (eds.), Between Tsar and Peo,le: Educated Society and the Quest for Public Identity in Late Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1991), 101–30. BURRUS, C., Art Collectors of Russia: The Private Treasures (New York, 1994). DUDAKOV, V. A., Il Simbolismo russo: Sergej Djagilev e l’Età d’argento nell'arte (milan, 1992). ELLIOTT, D., and DUDAKOV, V., 1oo Years of Russian Art: From Private Collections in the USSR (London, 1989). The Great Utopia: The Russian and Soviet Avant-Garde, 1915–1932 (Guggenheim Museum, New York, 1992). KEAN, B. W., All the Empty Palaces: The Merchant Patrons of Modern Art in Pre-Revolutionary Russia (London, 1983; repr. 1995). MILNER, J. (ed.), A Dictionary of Russian and Soviet Artists, 1420—197o (Woolbridge, 1993). ## Notes N. McKendrick, J. Brewer, and J. H. Plumb, The Birth of the Consumer Society: The Commercialization of Eighteenth-Century England (London, 1982); S. Schama, The Embarrassment of Riches: An Interpretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden Age (London, 1987); and L. Davidoff and C. Hall, Family Fortunes: Men and Women of the British Middle Class (London, 1987). 2 R. W. Davies, 'Introduction: from Tsarism to NEP’, in Davies (ed.), From Tsarism to the New Economic Policy (London, 1990), 12. 3 L. Tiersten, Redefining Consumer Culture: Recent Literature on Consumption and the Bourgeoisie in Western Europe', Radical History Review, 57 (1993), 116-49. S. G. Wheatcroft and R. W. Davies, Population', in Davies, M. Harrison, and S. G. Wheatcroft (eds.), The Economic Transformation of the Soviet Union, 1913–1945 (Cambridge, 1994), 59, and A. G. Rashin, Naselenie Rossii za 10o let (1811–1913 gg.) (Moscow, 1956), 99. 5 Rashin, Naselenie, 323, and J. Bradley, Muzhik and Muscovite: Urbanization in Late Imperial Russia (Berkeley, 1985), 34. 6 B. Engel, Between the Fields and the City (Cambridge, 1994), passim, and A. J. Coale, B. A. Anderson, and E. Harm, Human Fertility in Russia since the Nineteenth Century (Princeton, 1979), 252–3. See Bradley, Muzhik, 79, and D. R. Brower, Urban Revolution in the Late Russian Empire', in M. Hamm (ed.), The City in Late Imperial Russia (Bloomington, 1986), 324. 8 W. Benjamin, Moskauer Tagebuch (Frankfurt am Main, 1980), 53. For general information on the growth of retail culture, see J. H. Bater, St. Petersburg: Industrialization and Change (Montreal, 1976), 268; Bradley, Muzhik, 64; Istoriia Moskvy, iv (Moscow, 1954), 164; and W. Barnes Steveni, Petrograd (London, 1915). T. Child, The Tsar and His People (New York, 1891), quoted in Bradley, Muzhik, 62, and Benjamin, Moskauer Tagebuch, 53. See also H. Pitcher, Muir and Mirrilies: The Scottish Partnership that Became a Household Name in Russia (Cromer, 1994), passim; Bradley, Muzhik, 83; Bater, St. Petersburg, 264; and Istoriia Moskvy, v (Moscow, 1955), 51. The analysis of consumption patterns here and below owes much to G. McCracken, Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities (Bloomington, 1988), and to P. Glennie, Consumption within Historical Studies’, in D. Miller (ed.), Acknowledging Consumption (London, 1995), 164–203. 10 Pitcher, Muir and Mirrilies, 147, 169. The profit of the company (store and mail order combined) was 6 million roubles p.a. in 1916 (see 174). 1 T. A. Bernshtam, Molodezh'γ obriadnoi zhizni russkoi obshchiny XIX–nachala XX ν. (Leningrad, 1988), 78. 12 Ibid., 77. 13 Quoted in Engel, Between the Fields and the City, 155. 14 Ibid., 155. For a general study of the subject, see C. Ruane, Clothes Shopping in Imperial Russia: The Development of a Consumer Culture', Journal of Social History, 28 (1995), 765–82. 15 A. Frolov, Probuzhdenie (Kiev, 1923), 17. 16 R. E. Zelnik (tr. and ed.), A Radical Worker in Tsarist Russia: The Autobiography of Semën Ivanovich Kanatchikov (Stanford, 1986), 71. 17 Komsomol'skii byt: Sbornik, intr. E. Iaroslavskii (Moscow, 1927), 169. 18 V. Andrle, A Social History of Twentieth-Century Russia (London, 1994), 61–2. 19 Bradley, Muzhik, 27. 20 Quoted in J. Brooks, When Russia Learned to Read: Literacy and Popular Literature, 1861–1917 (Princeton, 1985), 56. 21 Cited in V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, iii. The Development of Capitalism in Russia (London, 1972), 577. 22 S. Frank, 'Confronting the Domestic Other', in Frank and M. D. Steinberg (eds.), Cultures in Flux: Lower-Class Values, Practices and Resistance in Late Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1994), 86. 23 Quoted in B. Eklof, Russian Peasant Schools: Officialdom, Village Culture, and Popular Pedagogy, 1861–1914 (Berkeley, 1986), 423. 24 R. Rothstein, Death of the Folk Song?', in Frank and Steinberg (eds.), Cultures in Flux, 111-12; Frank, Confronting the Domestic Other', 97; Robert E. Johnson, Peasant and Proletarian: The Working Class of Moscow in the Late Nineteenth Century (Leicester, 1979), 74; and C. Kelly, ‘Better Halves? Representations of Women in Russian Urban Popular Entertainments, 1870-1910', in L. Edmondson (ed.), Women and Society in Russia and the Soviet Union (Cambridge, 1992), 5–8. 25 The figures on numbers of entertainments are taken from V. Leikina-Svirskaia, Russkaia intelligentsiia ν 1900–1917 godakh (Moscow, 1981), 186; on pleasure gardens, books, and films, see the sources in the Suggested Further Reading. 26D. A. Zasosov and V.I. Pyzin, I zhizni Peterburga 189o-19io-kh godov (Leningrad, 1991), 118–19. 27 Polnyirusskii pesennik: 1o0o pesen (Moscow, 1893), 11. 28 Polnyi sbornik libretto dlia grammofona, pt. 2 (n.p., [c.1910]), 220. On music-hall songs, see also Kelly, Better Halves?' 29 C. Schuler, Women in Russian Theatre: The Actress in the Silver Age (London, 1996); I. Erenburg, Liudi, gody, zhizn', i (Moscow, 199o), 68. 30 L. Kleinbort, ‘Ocherki rabochei demokratii’, pt. 2, Sovremennyi mir, 5 (1915), 153. 31 Strashnyi razboinik Churkin. Prikliucheniia ego γ ostroge, na katorge, v rudnikakh, ego begstvo iz Sibiri, zhizn'ego v gorodakh i strashnyi konets ego uzhasnoi zhizni (Moscow, 1885), [3]. 32 N. A. Leikin, Gde apel'siny zreiut: Iumoristicheskoe opisanie puteshestviia suprugov Nikolaia Ivanovicha i Glafiry Semenovny Ivanovykh po Riv'ere i Italii (St Petersburg, 1892), 6–7. 33 I. I. Miasnitskii, 'V Ermitazhe', in Prokazniki: Iumoristicheskie ocherki, stsenki, kartinki i fotograficheskie snimki s natury dobrodushnogo iumorista, 4th edn. (Moscow, 1904), 309. When the book was first published, the author of one snide review commented that merchant Moscow already had its bard, Boborykin, and did not need another (Russkoe bogatstvo, 10 (1896), 56–7). 34 The information about the Korsh theatre here and below comes primarily from the archive on its activities maintained in the Bakhrushin Theatre Museum, Moscow, fond 123. 35 Quoted in L. Engelstein, The Keys to Happiness: Sex and the Search for Modernity in Fin de Siècle Russia (Ithaca, 1992), 403. 36 D. R. Brower, The Russian City between Tradition and Modernity, 1850–1900 (Berkeley, 1990), 152. 37 See D. Christian, Living Water: Vodka and Russian Society on the Eve of Emancipation (Oxford, 1990), ch. 3. 38P. Herlihy, Joy of the Rus': Rites and Rituals of Russian Drinking', Russian Review, 50 (1991), 131–47. 39 Zelnik (tr. and ed.), A Radical Worker, 247. 40 Ibid., 406 n. 2, and V. Dal’, Tolkovyi slovar'velikorusskogo iazyka (4 vols.; St Petersburg, 1880–2), ii, 288,ii, 401. 41 S. A. Smith, Red Petrograd: Revolution in the Factories 1917–1918 (Cambridge, 1983), 93, and R. W. Thurston, Liberal City, Conservative State: Moscow and Russia's Urban Crisis (Oxford, 1987), 133. 42 Christian, Living Water, 83; M. Davidovich, Peterburgskii tekstil'nyi rabochi v ego biudzhetakh (St Petersburg, 1912), 20; A. M. Buiko, Put'rabochego: Zapiski starogo bol'shevika (Moscow, 1934), 11; Putilovtsy v 1905 g.: Vospominaniia (Leningrad, 1930), 12; and A. Buzinov, Za Nevskoi zastavoi (Moscow, 1930), 73. 43 Buzinov, Za Nevskoi zastavoi, 25. 44 Smith, Red Petrograd, 93. 45 S. G. Strumilin, Voprosy truda (Moscow, 1923), 20o; on cards, see F. Wigzell, Reading Russian Fortunes: Print Culture, Gender and Divination in Russia from l765 (Cambridge, 1997). 46 S. G. Lazutin, Russkaia chastushka (Voronezh, 196o), 6r; see also Rothstein, Death of the Folk Song?' 47 E. N. Eleonskaia, Sbornik velikorusskikh chastushek (Moscow, 1914), no. 2623. 48Quoted in Rothstein, Death of the Folk Song?’, 117. 49 E. Dune, Notes of a Red Guard, tr. and ed. D. Koenker and S. A. Smith (Urbana, 1993),8–9. 50 Recorded in the 192os; for the Russian text, see Iu. Sokolov, Russkii fol’klor, pt. 4 (Moscow, 1932), 66. 51 On fist-fighting see Buiko, Put'rabochego, 15; Zelnik, A Radical Worker, 6o; and Frolov, Probuzhdenie, 64–5. On bird-catching, see ibid., 9. A rather pleasanter custom was that practised on a Sunday during Lent: purchasing a small caged bird in order to let it go free. 52 Zelnik (tr. and ed.), A Radical Worker, 13. 53 Kleinbort, ‘Ocherki rabochei demokratii', 153. 54 Letter I quoted fron I. P. Bogdanovich, Novyii polnyi pis movnik, ili podrobnoe i iasnoe nastavlenie, kak pisat'kupecheskie, kantseliarskie, prositel'nye, zhalobnye, odobritel'nye, druzheskie, uveshchatel'nye i voobshche vsiakogo roda delovye pis'ma; takzhe ob"iavleniia, raznye dogovory, zapisi, svidetel'stva, veruiushchie, obiazatel'stva, zaveshchaniia i proch. .. . (St Petersburg, 1791), 101; letter 2 quoted from M. Sieff (comp.), Manual of Russian Commercial Correspondence (London, 1916), 149, 151; the third example is from Noveishii pis'movnik, samouchitel' sostavliat' bez pomoshchi postoronnikh pis'ma, dogovory, akty, prosheniia i dr. delovye bumagi, soderzhashchii obraztsy i formy . . . (Moscow, 1882), 88—90. 55 See A. S. Mindel, Russian Commercial Correspondence: Letters, Idioms, Grammar, Notes and Full Vocabulary (Manchester, 1918), and K. Haller (comp.), Phraseologisches Wörterbuch der deutsch-russischen Handelskorrespondenz (Riga, 1912). 56 Pravila svetskoi zhizni i etiketa. Khoroshii ton. Sbornik sovetov i nastavlenii na raznye sluchai domashnei i obshchestvennoi zhizni . . . (St Petersburg, 1889; repr. 1991), 315–16. Another etiquette manual that has been reprinted is Zhizn´γ svete, doma, pri dvore (St Petersburg, 1890; repr. 1990). 57 H. Pitcher, The Smiths ofMoscow (Cromer, 1984), 63; on the elaboration of culinary traditions, see the observations by J. Toomre in her English translation of E. Molokhovets, A Guide for Young Housewives: Classic Russian Cooking (Bloomington, 1993), 63–5, 214. 58 On genteelism amongst lower-class Russians, see the first part of this chapter; Frank, ‘Confronting the Domestic Other', esp. 92–107; and M. D. Steinberg, Moral Communities: The Culture of Class Relations in the Russian Printing Industry, 1867–1907(Berkeley, 1992),84–102. 59 On Russian utopianism, see R. Stites, Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Vision and Experimental Life in the Russian Revolution (Oxford, 1989), and I. Smirnov, Bytie i tvorchestvo (Munich, 1990). 60 I. Annenskii, 'O sovremennom lirizme', in Knigi otrazhenii (Moscow, 1979), 347. 61 The remarks here are taken from the preliminary matter in K. A. Haller, Deutsche und russische Handelsbriefe für den Schulgebrauch und das Selbststudium, 4th edn. (Riga, 1911): cf. Kommercheskaia perepiska', in Russkii pis'movnik: Sbornik obraztsovykh pisem, delovykh bumag i kommercheskoi perepiski . . . ν piati chastiakh (St Petersburg, c.1910); N. Krakovskii and A. G. Komarovskii (comps.), Teoreticheskoe i prakticheskoe rukovodstvo kommercheskoi korrespondentsii . . . (St Petersburg, 1911); and T. von Kawraysky, Russische Handelskorrespondenz (Leipzig, 1907). 62 M. Kuzmin, ‘O prekrasnoi iasnosti', Apollon, 4 (1910), 5–10. Amongst other landmark writings on poetics and poets of the period were A. Blok, O sovremennom sostoianii russkogo simvolizma' (191o); V. Ivanov, Borozdy i mezhi (1916); A. Belyi, Simvolizm (1910) and Arabeski (1911); and V. Briusov, Dalekie i blizkie (1912). See also R. E. Peterson (tr. and ed.), The Russian Symbolists: An Anthology of Critical and Theoretical Writings (Ann Arbor, 1986). On the Russian educational system, see S. V. Rozhdestvenskii, Istoricheskii obzor deiatel'nosti Ministerstva Narodnogo Prosveshcheniia (1802–1902) (St Petersburg, 1902); N. Hans, History of Russian Educational Policy (1701–1917) (London, 1931); and the articles on Gimnaziia, Real'naia gimnaziia, and Kommercheskoe uchilishche in Entsiklopedicheskii slovar' Brokgauza i Efrona (St Petersburg, 1890–1907). 64 A very full study of the merchant stereotype in Russian literature is available in D. Buryshkin, Moskva kupecheskaia (New York, 1954; repr. Moscow, 1991); see also C. Kelly, ‘Teacups and Coffins: the Culture of Russian Merchant Women, 1870—1917’, in R. Marsh (ed.), Women and Society in Russia and the Ukraine (Cambridge, 1996), 55–77. Recent more balanced studies of the merchant ethic include A. J. Rieber, Merchants and Entrepreneurs in Imperial Russia (Chapel Hill, 1982), and Steinberg, Moral Communities. 65 V. Dmitrieva, Po derevniam', Vestnik Evropy, 10 and 11 (1896), 520–53 and 1 31-76; an extract in English is available in C. Kelly (ed.), An Anthology of Russian Women's Writing (Oxford, 1994), 153–65. C. A. Frierson (tr. and ed.), Aleksandr Nikolaevich Engelgardt's Letters from the Country, 1872–1887 (New York, 1993). 66 Frierson (tr. and ed.), Aleksandr Nikolaevich Engelgardt's Letters, 165, 167. Among other writings on the Russian village which are typical both in their careful attention to oral history and local custom, and in their somewhat uncritical attitude to patriarchal tradition, are O. Semenova Tian-Shanskaia, Zhizn'Ivana: I byta chernozemnykh krest'ian (St Petersburg, 1914), and Dmitrieva, Po derevniam'. 67 See B. Nijinska, Early Memories (London, 1982), 44. 68 On the congruence of high culture and 'boulevard culture’, see esp. Engelstein, The Keys to Happiness, and N. Zorkaia, Na rubezhe stoletii: U istokov massovogo iskusstva ν Rossii 1900-191o godov (Moscow, 1976). 69 On the particular features of Russian constructivism, see esp. C. Lodder, Russian Constructivism (New Haven, 1983). On the avant-garde more generally, see J. Bowlt (ed.), Russian Art of the Avant-Garde: Theory and Criticism (London, 1988); J. Bowlt, The Silver Age: Russian Art of the Early Twentieth Century and the World ofArt Group (Newtonville, 1979; repr. 1982); J. Bowlt and B. Hernard, Aus vollem Halse: russische Buchillustration und Typographie aus den Sammlungen der Bayerischen Staatsbibliothek (Munich, 1993); and S. Compton, The World Backwards: Russian Futurist Books 1912–1916(London, 1979) and Russian Avant-Garde Books, 1917–1934 (London, 1992). 70 Russian quoted from Z. Folejewski (ed.), Futurism and its Place in the Development of Modern Poetry: A Comparative Study (Ottawa, 1980), 214; English version our own. 71 A. Belyi, ‘Sinematograf' (1907), in Arabeski: Kniga statei (Moscow, 1911), 350, 351, 353. In fact, as Iu. Tsiv'ian points out in his excellent study of the early Russian cinema, Early Cinema in Russia and its Cultural Reception, tr. A. Bodger (London and New York, 1994), social differentiation was imposed on the audiences of the cinematograph' by seating plans (the most expensive seats being at the back). However, the semi-darkness in which film showings were held made differentials less evident in the cinema than in the contemporary theatre. 72 See A. Blok, 'V kabakakh, v pereulkakh, v izvivakh', in Sobranie sochinenii ν 8 tomakh, ii (Leningrad, 1960), 159–60; O. Mandel'shtam, Kinematograf', in Stikhotvoreniia (Leningrad, 1973), 8o; and A. Chumachenko, V kinematografe', Russkoe bogatstvo, 1 (1911), 54. On literary reactions to the cinema, see also Tsiv'ian, Early Cinema, esp. chs. I and 2. 73 V. I. Gorianskii, Zhivopisets Pchelkin’, in Poety Satirikona'(Moscow, 1966), 167–8. 74 On the Russian literary avant-garde generally, see V. Markov, Russian Futurism (London, 1969). On the Oberiuty, see N. Cornwell (ed.), Daniil Kharms and the Poetics of the Absurd (London, 1991), and B. Müller, Absurde Literatur in Ruβland: Entstehung und Entwicklung (Munich, 1978). 75 See N. Gumilev, Pis'ma o russkoi poezii (Berlin, 1923), 173–5. On Teffi, see I. Odoevtseva's memoir in Na beregakh Seny (Paris, 1983), 79–123, which both summarizes and replicates the slightly patronizing attitudes of the literary beau monde to Teff's work. 76 V. Nabokov, Speak, Memory (London, 1967); M. Dobuzhinskii, Vospominaniia, i (New York, 1976); Iu. Annenkov, Dnevnik moikh vstrech: Tsikl tragedii, i (New York, 1966); and A. Benua [Benois], Moi vospominaniia, i (Moscow, 198o). On the idealization of childhood in Russia, see esp. A. B. Wachtel, The Battle for Childhood: Creation of a Russian Myth (Stanford, 1990). 77 See M. Voloshin, ‘Oslinyi khvost', in Liki tvorchestva (Leningrad, 1988), 287–9. 78 There is now a vast number of album-type publications with good reproductions of work by avant-garde artists: see Suggested Further Reading. 79 On the use of lettering in political slogans, see E. Waters, The Female Form in Soviet Political Iconography', in B. E. Clements, B. A. Engel, and C. D. Worobec (eds.), Russia's Women: Accommodation, Resistance, Transformation (Berkeley, 1991),229. 80 Quoted from C. E. W. Petersson and W. Barnes Steveni, How to Do Business with Russia: Hints and Advice to Businessmen Dealing with Russia (London, 1917), 72. A fair number of Russian advertising agencies were listed in trade directories such as Spravochnaia kniga o litsakh, poluchivshikh na i9ı5 god kupecheskie i promyslovye svidetel'stva po g. Moskve (Moscow, 1915). 1 An excellent selection of posters, soap-packets, and other commercial art is reproduced in the catalogue of a Hayward Gallery exhibition, The Twilight of the Tsars: Russian Art at the Turn of the Century (London, 1991). 82 M. Tsvetaeva, Nataliia Goncharova' (section Pervaia Goncharova’), in Izbrannaia proza ν 2 tomakh, i (New York, 1979), 311. 83 J. Berger, Ways of Seeing (London, 1972), 154. 84On the art collectors of Russia, see B. W. Kean, All the Empty Palaces: The Merchant Patrons of Modern Art in Pre-Revolutionary Russia (London, 1983; repr. 1995); J. Bowlt, The Moscow Art Market', in E. Clowes, S. D. Kassow, and J. L. West (eds.), Between Tsar and People: Educated Society and the Quest for Public Identity in Late Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1991), 101–30; and C. Burrus, Art Collectors of Russia: The Private Treasures (New York, 1994). 85 L. Haimson, The Problem of Social Stability in Urban Russia’, Slavic Review, 23 (1964), 619–42, and 24 (1965), 1–22. 86 R. Stites, Russian Popular Culture: Entertainment and Society since i9oo (Cambridge, 1992), 12. 87 In The Keys to Happiness, Engelstein offers many interesting reflections on the relationship of the emergent public sphere to the liberal middle class, which have a bearing on consumption, but the relationship has not been studied in detail so far. 88 See Frank, Confronting the Domestic Other’, 107, and I. Shcheglov, Narodnyi teatr (St Petersburg, 1898), 109. 89 See A. Moiseenko, Vospominaniia starogo revoliutsionera (Moscow, 1966), 70; Brooks, When Russia Learned to Read, 123–5; and Brower, The Russian City, 180.