# Suggested further reading Philosophy, Religion, and Politics BERDIAEV, N. A., BULGAKOV, S. N., GERSHENZON, M. O., IZGOEV, A. S., KISTIAKOVSKII, B. A., STRUVE, P. B., and FRANK, S. L., Vekhi: Sbornik statei o russkoi intelligentsii (Moscow, 1909); in English Landmarks: A Collection of Articles About the Russian Intelligentsia, ed. B. Shragin and A. Todd, tr. M. Schwarz (New York, 1977). BOHACHEVSKY-CHOMIAK, M., and ROSENTHAL, B. G., Revolution of the Spirit: The Crisis of Values in Russia, 1890–1918 (New York, 1982). BURBANK, J., Intelligentsia and Revolution: Russian Views of Bolshevism (New York, 1986). CLOWES, E., KASSOW, S., and WEST, J. L. (eds.), Between Tsar and People: Educated Society and the Quest for Public Identity in Late Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1991). ENGELSTEIN, L., The Keys to Happiness: Sex and the Search for Modernity in Fin de Siècle Russia (Ithaca, 1992). HAIMSON, L., The Russian Marxists and the Origins of Bolshevism (Cambridge, Mass., 1955). JAHN, H. F., Patriotic Culture in Russia during World War I(Ithaca, 1995). READ, C., Religion, Revolution and the Russian Intelligentsia i9oo—12: The Vekhi Debate and Its Intellectual Background (London, 1980). – Culture and Power in Revolutionary Russia: The Intelligentsia and the Transition from Tsarism to Communism (London, 199o). ROSENTHAL, B. G. (ed.), Nietzsche in Russia (Cambridge, 1986). SABLINSKY, W., The Road to Bloody Sunday: Father Gapon and the St Petersburg Massacre of i905 (Princeton, 1976). ZERNOV, N., The Russian Religious Renaissance of the Twentieth Century (London, 1963). ## The 'Woman Question' CLEMENTS, B. E., Bolshevik Feminist: The Life of Aleksandra Kollontai (Bloomington, 1979). \- ENGEL, B. A., and WOROBEC, C. D. (eds.), Russia's Women: Accommodation, Resistance, Transformation (Berkeley, 1991). EDMONDSON, L., Feminism in Russia 1900-1917 (London, 1984). (ed.), Women and Society in Russia and the Soviet Union (Cambridge, 1992). FARNSWORTH, B., Aleksandra Kollontai: Socialism, Feminism, and the Bolshevik Revolution (Stanford, 1980). MARSH, R. (ed.), Women in Russia and the Ukraine (Cambridge, 1995). STITES, R., The Women's Liberation Movement in Russia: Feminism, Nihilism and Bolshevism, 1860–1930 (Princeton, 1978), chs. 6–9. WAGNER, W. G., Marriage, Property and Law in Late Imperial Russia (Oxford, 1994). ## The ’Jewish Question' BARON, S. W., The Russian Jew under Tsars and Soviets (London, 1964). DREIzIN, F., The Russian Soul and the Jew: Essays in Literary Ethnocentrism (Lanham, 1990). ELIASEVICH, D. A. (ed.), Istoriia evreev ν Rossii: Problemy istochnikovedeniia i istoriografi. Sbornik nauchnykh trudov (St Petersburg, 1993). GESSEN, IU., KEL'NER, V. E., and GESSEN, V., Istoriia evreiskogo naroda ν Rossii (Moscow,1993). GRUZENBERG, O. O., Yesterday: Memoirs ofa Russian-Jewish Lawyer, tr. D. C. Rawson and T. Tipton (Berkeley, 1981). The Jews in Soviet Russia since 1917, 3rd edn. (Oxford, 1978). KLIER, J. D., Imperial Russia's Jewish Question, 1855–188ı (Cambridge, 1995). ORBACH, A., New Voices of Russian Jewry: A Study of the Russian-Jewish Press in the Era of the Great Reforms, 1860–1871 (Leiden, 1980). SLIOZBERG, G. G., Dela minuvshikh dnei: Zapiski russkogo evreia (3 vols.; Paris, 1933-4). ZIPPERSTEIN, S., The Jews of Odessa: A Cultural History, 1794–1881 (Stanford, 1985). ## Visual and Applied Arts BORISOVA, E., and STERNIN, G., Russian Art Nouveau (New York, 1988). BOWLT, J., The Silver Age: Russian Art of the Early 2oth Century and the World of Art Group (Newtonville, 1979). — Russian Art of the Avant-Garde: Theory and Criticism (London, 1988). BRUMFIELD, W., History of Russian Architecture (Cambridge, 1993). GOODMAN, S. T. (ed.), Russian Jewish Artists in a Century of Change (Munich, 1995). KAMENSKII, A., PETROV, V. N., and SHKAROVSKII-RAFFE, A., The World of Art Movement in Early Twentieth-Century Russia (Leningrad, 1991). KEAN, B. W., All the Empty Palaces: The Merchant Patrons of Modern Art in Pre-Revolutionary Russia (London, 1983; repr. 1994). SARABIANOV, D., Russian Art: From Realism to Neo-Classicism (London, 1990). VALKENIER, E., Russian Realist Art (New York, 1977; repr. 1989). ## Music, Music Drama, Ballet BROWN, M., ‘Skryabin and Russian “Mystic” Symbolism,' i9th-Century Music, 3 (1979),42-51. BUCKLE, R., Diaghilev (London, 1979). RIDENOUR, R., Nationalism, Modernism and Personal Rivalry in Nineteenth-Century Russian Music (Ann Arbor, 1981). TARUSKIN, R., Stravinsky and the Russian Traditions (Berkeley, 1995). ## Literature CLYMAN, T., and GREENE, D. (eds.), Women Writers in Russian Literature (Westport, 1994). KELLY, C., A History of Russian Women's Writing, 1820–1992 (Oxford, 1994), chs.6–8. —— (ed.), An Anthology of Russian Women's Writing, 1777-1992(Oxford, 1994). LEDKOVSKY, M., ROSENTHAL, C., and ZIRIN, M. (eds.), A Dictionary of Russian Women Writers (Westport, 1994). MCVAY, G., Esenin (London, 1978). NAKHIMOVSKY, A. S., Russian-Jewish Literature and Identity (Baltimore, 1992). PROFFER, C., and PROFFER, E. (eds.), The Silver Age of Russian Culture: An Anthology (Ann Arbor, 1971). PYMAN, A., A History of Russian Symbolism (Cambridge, 1994). RICHARDSON, W., Zblotoe Runo’and Russian Modernism (Ann Arbor, 1986). SICHER, E., Jews in Russian Literature after the October Revolution: Writers and Artists between Hope and Apostasy (Cambridge, 1995). ## Notes Western publications at this period range from jingoistic tosh such as A Peep at Russia (London, [1878?]), to the more serious J. W. Buel, A Nemesis of Misgovernment (Philadelphia, 1899). For information on Russian anxieties before and after the Russo-Japanese War, see J. T. Rimer (ed.), A Hidden Fire: Russian and Japanese Cultural Encounters, 1868–1926(Stanford, 1995). 2 These details on legal constraints are taken from Entsiklopedicheskii slovar Brokgauza i Efrona, xi (St Petersburg, 1898), 454–66, headword Evrei. A remarkable account of the period from a Jewish perspective is G. Sliozberg, Dela minuvshikh dnei: Zapiski russkogo evreia (3 vols.; Paris, 1933–4). See also Suggested Further Reading. 3 See D. Lieven, Nicholas II: Emperor of All the Russias (London, 1993), 61; on Nicholas I and earlier, see R. Wortman, Scenarios of Power: Myth and Ceremony in Russian Monarchy, i (Princeton, 1995). 4 For a photograph, see Sotheby’s Icons, Russian Pictures and Works of Art Sale Catalogue (15 June 1995), lot 302. 5 A first-hand account is V. Giliarovskii, ‘Tragediia na Khodynke', Russkie vedomosti (20 May 1896). 6 See W. Sablinsky, The Road to Bloody Sunday: Father Gapon and the St Petersburg Massacre of i9o5 (Princeton, 1976). See M. S. Flier's excellent study, The Church of the Savior on the Blood: Projection, Rejection, Resurrection', in R. Hughes and I. Paperno (eds.), Christianity and the Eastern Slavs, ii (California Slavic Studies, 17; Stanford, 1994), 25-48. 8 See W. Brumfield, A History of Russian Architecture (Cambridge, 1993), 437, 412-20. 9 Quoted in J.-A. Ruckman, The Moscow Business Elite: A Social and Cultural Portrait of Two Generations, 1840–1905 (De Kalb, 1984), 96. 10 See S. Moeller-Sally, Parallel Lives: Gogol's Biography and Mass Readership in Late Imperial Russia’, Slavic Review, 54 (1995), 62–79. M. C. Levitt, Russian Literary Politics and the Pushkin Celebration of i88o (New York, 1989), 158. 12 I. Annenskii, Kantata: Rozhdenie i smert' poeta’, in Stikhotvoreniia i tragedii (Leningrad, 1959), 88–90. 13R. E. Zelnik,"To the Unaccustomed Eye": Religion and Irreligion in the Experience of St Petersburg Workers in the 187os’, in Hughes and Paperno (eds.), Christianity and the Eastern Slavs, 53. 14 See the chapters about the church in Tolstoi's last novel Resurrection (Voskresenie, 1900), and his Confession (Ispoved', 1879), as well as articles such as ‘What I Believe' (V chem moia vera', 1883). See A. Pyman, 'The Church and the Intelligentsia with Special Reference to the Religious-Philosophical Meetings in St Petersburg, 1901-1903', in R. Bartlett (ed.), Russian Thought and Society 18oo—19i7: Essays in Honour of Eugene Lampert (Keele, 1984), 181–219. 16 See P. Steeves, Baptists of Russia', in Modern Encyclopedia of Russian and Soviet History, iii (Gulf Breeze, 1977), 76–81. On earlier evangelism, see A. N. Pypin, Religioznye dvizheniia pri Aleksandre I(St Petersburg, 1916), and M. V. Jones, ‘Dostoevsky, Zasetskaya, and Radstockism', Oxford Slavonic Papers, xxvii (1994), 106-20. 17 See A. Pyman, A History of Russian Symbolism (Cambridge, 1994), 183–225. 18 See M. Carlson, No Religion Higher than Truth': A History of the Theosophical Movement in Russia, 1875–1992 (Princeton, 1993). 19 See G. Ivask, Russian Modernist Poets and the Mystic Sectarians', in G. Gibian and H. W. Tjalsma (eds.), Russian Modernism: Culture and the Avant-Garde 1900–1930 (Ithaca, 1976), 85–106, and Iz zapisok Iur'evskogo arkhimandrita Fotiia o skoptsakh, khlystakh i drugikh tainykh sektakh v Peterburge v 1819 godu' Russkii arkhiv, 2 (1873), 1434–53. 20 See Pyman, A History, 279–84. 21 For more information on Nietzsche's influence, see B. G. Rosenthal (ed.), Nietzsche in Russia (Cambridge, 1986), and E. Clowes, The Revolution of Moral Consciousness: Nietzsche in Russian Literature, 1890–1914 (De Kalb, 1988). On Schopenhauer, see S. Maurer, Schopenhauer in Russia: His Influence on Turgenev, Fet and Tolstoy (Berkeley, 1966). On Wagner and Russian modernism, see R. Bartlett, Wagner and Russia (Cambridge, 1995), chs. 3–6. 22 See N. Zernov, The Russian Religious Renaissance of the Twentieth Century (London, 1963), 1–34. 23 See M. Perrie, The Agrarian Policy of the Russian Socialist-Revolutionary Party from its Origins through the Revolution of 1905–7 (Cambridge, 1976). 24 See L. Haimson, The Russian Marxists and the Origins of Bolshevism (Cambridge, Mass., 1955), 1–92. 25 Quoted in Zernov, The Russian Religious Renaissance, 114. 26 Ibid., 116. 27 Ibid., 118. 28See A. Blok, ‘The People and the Intelligentsia' (Narod i intelligentsiia', 1908); see also A. Belyi, The Silver Dove (Serebrianyi golub', 19o9), V. Ivanov's article The Russian Idea' (O russkoi idee’, 1909), and Pyman, A History, 312, 426 n. 20. 29 A good overview of the Vekhi debate is given in the introduction to J. Burbank, Intelligentsia and Revolution: Russian Views of Bolshevism (New York, 1986). 30 See Zernov, The Russian Religious Renaissance, 129. 31 See H. Baran, Religious Holiday Literature and Russian Modernism: A Preliminary Approach', in Hughes and Paperno (eds.), Christianity and the Eastern Slavs, 212–14. 32 A. Blok, Rozhdenny : v goda glukhie' [1914], in Stikhotvoreniia. Poemy. Roza i krest'(Moscow, 1974), 217. 33 On Rozanov, see L. Engelstein, The Keys to Happiness: Sex and the Search for Modernity in Fin de Siècle Russia (Ithaca, 1992); on Zelinskii, see his own I zhizni idei: Stat'i (St Petersburg, 19o5), and 'Drevnii mir i my', in Zhurnal Ministerstva Narodnogo Prosveshcheniia, sect. 3 (August-October 1903), 1-45, 18-47, 65-114. 34 See E. Kridl Valkenier, Il'ia Repin (New York, 1990), 77–8. 35 On Surikov, see V. Kemenev, Vasily Surikov (Leningrad, 1979). 36 See E. Kridl Valkenier, Russian Realist Art (New York, 1977), 6–10, 132. 37 See B. Anrep, Po povodu vystavki s uchastiem russkikh khudozhnikov', Apollon, 2 (1913),39–48. 38 See B. W. Kean, All the Empty Palaces: The Merchant Patrons of Modern Art in Pre-Revolutionary Russia (London, 1983; repr. 1995), and D. Elliott, Ruined Palaces’: Twilight of the Tsars (London, 1991). On the English movement, see G. Naylor, The Arts and Crafts Movement: A Study ofits Sources, Ideals and Influence on Design Theory (London, 1971), and F. Murphy, William Morris (London, 1994). 39 J. Beavington Atkinson, An Art Tour to Russia (London, 1986), 236. 40 P. Florenskii, Obratnaia perspektiva’, in Sobranie sochineni, i (Paris, 1985), 117–92. On Florenskii's theological views, see B. Rosenthal, “The New Religious Consciousness": Pavel Florenskii's Path to a Revitalized Orthodoxy', in Hughes and Paperno (eds.), Christianity and the Eastern Slavs, 150—1. 41 See R. Bartlett, Khovanshchina in Context', in N. John (ed.), Modest Musorgskii: Khovanshchina’. English National Opera Guide (London, 1994), 31–7. 42 For more information see R. Ridenour, Nationalism, Modernism and Personal Rivalry in Nineteenth-Century Russian Music (Ann Arbor, 1981). 43 For further details, see V. P. Rossikhina, Opernyi teatr S. Mamontova (Moscow, 1985). 44Quoted in R. Shead, Ballets Russes (London, 1989), 70. 45 A. Boucourechliev, Stravinsky, tr. M. Cooper (London, 1987), 15. 46 See R. Buckle, Diaghilev (London, 1979). 47 See Elliott, Ruined Palaces’, 13. 48 See P. Gilliard, Trinadtsat' let pri russkom dvore (Paris, 1978), 68, 223. 49 See M. Mommsen, Hilf mir, mein Recht zu finden: Russische Bittschriften von Iwan dem Schrecklichen bis Gorbatschow (Frankfurt, 1987); reference supplied by Sheila Fitzpatrick. On changes in attitude, see e.g. Sablinsky, The Road to Bloody Sunday. 50 Polnyi sbornik libretto dlia grammofona, pt. 3 (n.p., [c.1910?]), 127. 51 Ibid., 79–81. 52 C. A. Frierson (tr. and ed.), Aleksandr Nikolaevich Engelgardt's Letters from the Country, 1872–1887 (New York, 1993), 144, 146, 147. 53 See H. F. Jahn, For Tsar and Fatherland? Russian Popular Culture and the First World War’, in S. Frank and M. D. Steinberg (eds.), Čultures in Flux: Lower-Class Values, Practices, and Resistance in Late Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1994), 131–46. 54 See Zelnik,"To the Unaccustomed Eye"’, 6o. 55 Ibid., 53. 56N. Kliuev, Sochineniia, i (Munich, 1969), 195. 57 Ibid., 193-4. 58 Gazeta-kopeika, 25 March 1914, 6; reference supplied by Steve Smith 59 Ibid., 21 September 1914, 3. 60 See R. Stites, The Women's Liberation Movement in Russia: Feminism, Nihilism and Bolshevism, 1860–1930 (Princeton, 1978), 295–300; see also R. Abraham, Mariia L. Bochkareva and the Russian Amazons of 1917', in L. Edmondson (ed.), Women and Society in Russia and the Soviet Union (Cambridge, 1992), 124–44. 61 Quoted in Stites, The Women's Liberation Movement, 296. On female soldiers, see J. Wheelwright, Amazons and Military Maids: Women Who Dressed as Men in Pursuit of Life, Liberty and Happiness (London, 1989). 62 We have B. A. Uspenskii to thank for the information about monatki. 63 See J. D. Klier, Imperial Russia's Jewish Question, 1855–1881 (Cambridge, 1995). 64 See C. Kelly, A History of Russian Women's Writing, 1820–1992 (Oxford, 1994), ch.1. 65 I. V. V-skii, [Obituary of Mariia Vernadskaia], Ekonomicheskii ukazatel', 44 (1860), 753-5. 66 Quoted in Stites, The Women's Liberation Movement, 36. 67 See K. Offen, Defining Feminism: A Comparative Historical Approach’, in Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 14 (1988), 119–57. 68 On women radicals, see B. A. Engel, Mothers and Daughters: Women of the Intelligentsia in Nineteenth-Century Russia (Cambridge, 1983). 69 See M. Bohachevsky-Chomiak, Feminists Despite Themselves: Women in Ukrainian Community Life, 1884–1939 (Edmondton, 1988). 70 On these early women writers, see T. Clyman and D. Greene (eds.), Women Writers in Russian Literature (Westport, 1994), and C. Kelly, ‘Sybil, Corinna, Niobe: Genres and Personae in Russian Women's Writing, 1760–1820’, in A. Barker and J. Gheith (eds.), A History of Women’s Writing in Russia (Cambridge, forthcoming). 71 See C. Ruane, Gender, Class and the Professionalization of Russian City Teachers, 1869–1914 (Pittsburgh, 1994). 72 See W. G. Wagner, Marriage, Property and Law in Late Imperial Russia (Oxford, 1994). 73 For a good sample of recent social history on women, see B. E. Clements, B. A. Engel, and C. D. Worobec (eds.), Russia's Women: Accommodation, Resistance, Transformation (Berkeley, 1991). 74 Z. Gippius, Peterburgskie dnevniki (New York, 1982), 195. 75 V. I. Ivanov, ‘O dostoinstve zhenshchiny', in Sobranie sochinenii, iii (Brussels, 1979), 136–45, and V. Rozanov, ‘Zhenshchina i predstavitel'stvo', in Kogda nachal'stvo ushlo (St Petersburg, 1910), 87–95. 76 M. Tsvetaeva, Natal'ia Goncharova', in Sobranie sochinenii v 7 tomakh, iv (Moscow, 1994), 122. 77 T. L. Shchepkina-Kupernik, Razroznennye stranitsy (Moscow, 1966), 31–2. 78 Here and below see S. Tumarkin Goodman (ed.), Russian Jewish Artists in a Century of Change (Munich, 1995), esp. the articles by Z. Amishai-Maisels and J. E. Bowlt. 79 See E. Sicher, Jews in Russian Literature after the October Revolution: Writers and Artists between Hope and Apostasy (Cambridge, 1995), esp. chs. I and 2. 80 Among Chagall's contemporaries, Iudovin, Rybak, Tchaikov, Altman, and David Shterenberg also did very interesting work on Jewish subjects: reproductions are available in Goodman, Russian Jewish Artists, and in Sicher, Jews in Russian Literature. 81 O. Mandel'shtam, ‘(Shum vremeni', in Sobranie sochineni,ii (New York, 1971), 47, 45 (references henceforth by page no. in main text).