# New Boundaries for the Common Good: Science, Philanthropy, and Objectivity in Soviet Russia Catriona Kelly ## Introduction: the 'Mission Civilisatrice' under Assault THE collapse of the Tsarist regime in February 1917 was welcomed by many, if not most, members of the Russian intelligentsia. Since 1907 at the latest, it had been clear that Nicholas II's administration was incapable of serious reform, not least because of the Tsar's own misty-eyed idealization of autocratic rule. A change of government at last offered hope that the legal, social, and political reforms long desired by Russia's educated population might take place. By instituting change on such issues as women's rights (women were given the vote in March 1917) and the rights of ethnic minorities (the Jewish Pale was abolished immediately after the February Revolution), and by setting up plans for an elected parliamentary body (the Constituent Assembly), the Menshevik administration made clear its commitment to a reform programme that was widely supported by intellectuals, whether Social Democrats or not. The rise to power of the Bolsheviks in October 1917 was traceable at least in part to the power vacuum opened by the Mensheviks'ineptitude on another level—their failure to placate grassroots opinion, as represented by the soviets and factory committees of the major cities.' The coup left the intelligentsia fragmented; many disapproved of the use of undemocratic means in order to seize power, and were hardly reassured when the dirigiste authoritarianism of the new regime made itself felt in a series of decrees establishing one-party control and suppressing political opposition (the Constituent Assembly was suspended in January 1918, non-Bolshevik political organizations outlawed, and a press censorship stricter than anything existing in Russia after 1905 imposed). The new regime's proclamation of the dictatorship of the proletariat also seemed to threaten the old notion of a common good guided above all by the values of the educated classes. It promised that the intelligentsia's mission civilisatrice might now be as obsolete as private ownership, or the State Council (advisory body to the Tsar). Some aspects of the social contract were indeed altered irrevocably. The reorganization of local government, subordinating city and district organs to Party authority, ended the hegemony of merchant industrialists and gentry activists which had formerly held sway in Russian cities. The nationalization of cultural institutions made those who espoused the free professions'—doctors, lawyers, writers, teachers, academics—servants of the state, which was now in a position to exact obedience through institutional disciplinary structures, and through the regulation of pay and benefit. Intellectuals could now be reminded of their duties of loyalty through coercion, reprimand, or indeed in more sinister ways. When Alexander III observed to his Minister of the Interior in 1887, We must put an end to the disgrace of Lev Tolstoi’, the writer emerged more or less unscathed, barring the censorship of some of his works in the Russian Empire (and these he published abroad without hindrance or punishment). Had Lenin or Stalin made such an observation, it would probably have been followed by Tolstoi's arrest and imprisonment, or even execution. Purges against Russian intellectuals began soon after the Bolshevik ascendancy. In the appalling conditions of the Civil War, characterized by atrocities on all sides, the Cheka (emergency committee dealing with counter-revolutionary activity) had no monopoly of barbarity, but the execution in August 192ı of the Petrograd poet Nikolai Gumilev for purported involvement in a monarchist plot marked a watershed in the state's relations with dissent. A year later, a group of scholars and intellectuals (including the religious philosopher Nikolai Berdiaev) were summarily deported from Soviet Russia, and the early 192os saw large numbers of intellectuals leave Russia voluntarily, because of wholly understandable anxieties for their safety. The cultural revolution, beginning in 1928, was accompanied by fresh rounds of purges, in which, for example, hundreds of researchers at the Academy of Sciences, and several full academicians, were arrested; some later perished in the prison camps of the far North. In 193o, about a quarter of the country's engineers were arrested, in another blow against perceived subversion. But the largest assault came in the Great Purges of 1937–8, as thousands of writers, doctors, academics, teachers, artists, actors, and scientists were rounded up, brutally interrogated, and either shot, or imprisoned in conditions that in many cases equated to slow execution.1 Even those who survived state violence were often left significantly worse off by revolution. In the grim years after the Revolution, many intellectuals led a hand-to-mouth existence on handouts in cash and kind from the new authorities, and were subject to arbitrary incursions by local administrators who could brand them as exes' (byvshie) and have them expelled from their homes, or forcibly billet upon them strangers from favoured class groups who needed a home in the city. These assaults left the Russian intelligentsia vastly reduced in strength as a force for political opposition or even criticism. In the late 192os, some had still bravely spoken out against the regime's attempts to impose control on intellectual life. The veteran physiologist I. P. Pavlov, for example, had vehemently opposed the enforced candidature, in 1928, ofpolitically correct' scientists for membership of the Academy of Sciences. Interpreting the government's actions only too accurately, he protested: If we admit such scientists to our Academy, it will not be a scientific institution, but God knows what it will be.'" By 1948, on the other hand, the only voice publicly raised against the triumph of the charlatan biologist Trofim Lysenko was that of Iurii Zhdanov, who happened to be the son of the Leningrad Party chief.18 Among intellectuals who had dealings with state institutions (that is, anyone who needed to work in a laboratory, publish a book, make a film, teach a class, or exhibit a picture), careerism and self-interest had taken root as never before since the intelligentsia's emergence around 184o. Denunciation of colleagues (not unknown, but relatively rare, in the past) had become a standard technique among those wishing to climb to the top (though it was a technique that could rebound, since arrest for failing to denounce an ‘enemy of the people' early enough was always a possibility).'º Top-down rule meant the investiture of enormous authority in departmental and institutional heads, so nepotism and other forms of patronage became rife. Especially disabled were lawyers, who had played a crucial role in the evolution of concepts of a civic society, but now found themselves hobbled by a system that allowed defendants no right to proper legal representation, and according to which the law was understood as a mechanism for the imposition of Party policy, rather than as an expression of consensual social control. What was more, the different waves of physical repression were preceded and accompanied by vitriolic campaigns of vilification directed at individuals, at institutions, and at character types ('burzhui', ‘exes', 'Trotskyites'). Since the Revolution, in fact, some left-wing radicals had been voicing the view that 'bourgeois specialists' had no place in the new order. In 1918, the Communist Academy, a higher institute devoted to the social sciences, was set up as a revolutionary alternative to the old Academy of Sciences, with its bias towards natural sciences and the humanities. Attacks on the old scientific and scholarly establishment were frequent: indicative was an article by V. Pletnev, chairman of the Central Committee of Proletkul't, published in Pravda in 1922, which denounced 'bourgeois science' as characterized by self-serving individualism.20 Attacks on individualism had their effects on education too, as collaborative and anti-elitist forms of learning practice were urged on Soviet institutions; schools, for example, were directed by the Commissariat of Enlightenment (Narkompros) to incorporate 'labour training' and thematic learning in their curricula in order to suppress academicism and break down the opposition between manual and intellectual work that was held to bedevil Soviet life. They were also supposed to set up ‘school councils', allowing children a chance to debate educational and disciplinary policy. Some of the same techniques made their way into adult education too, as the poet Vladislav Khodasevich, teacher of a course on Pushkin for the literary studio of Moscow Proletkul't, biliously recorded: Sensing that the studio participants were increasingly susceptible to influence from the 'specialists', the heads of Proletkul't decided to take things in hand. If they'd got rid of us completely, that would have meant admitting their powerlessness, showing their hand and provoking the lecture audiences against the Proletkul't soviet. Therefore, they decided to obstruct us. The first thing they thought up was this: I was told that formal lecturing made the studio participants too passive; I had to get them involved in active work on Pushkin, that is, to switch to the seminar system. . . . What happened was exactly what one would have expected. Even by the second seminar, some of the participants from the first had dropped out, while some new people had turned up, and I had to explain everything to them all over again. The students felt intimidated by me and each other; any active participation' had pretty well to be extracted from them with forceps, and even then in microscopic doses. I ended up by‘acting out' not only the seminar leader, but the participants as well.21 For his part, Daniil Kharms was later (in a dialogue from Happenings (Sluchai), written in the mid-193os) to caricature the levelling-down' process in which intellectuals lost their former authority: WRITER: I'm a writer. READER: I think you're sh——t. [The writer stands for a few minutes shattered by this new idea, then falls down dead on the ground. He is carted out.] ARTIST: I'm an artist. wORKER: I think you're sh—t. [The artist goes white as a sheet, shakes like a leaf, and falls down stock dead. He is suddenly carted out.] COMPOsER: I'm a composer VANIA RUBLEV: I think you're a ....! [Composer, breathing heavily, collapses in a heap——he is suddenly carted out.]22 For some ofhis contemporaries, such material would have seemed less ‘absurdism' than an accurate reflection of a world of inverted hierarchies and anti-intellectual barbarity. ## Empowerment by the Back Door: the Soviet Regime's Absorption of Intellectual Values What Kharms's sketch also illustrates is the theatricality of much 192os and 193os egalitarianism, apparent also in the work experience experiments of the late 192os, when schoolchildren, dispatched to Soviet factories in order to observe work practices, made themselves thorough nuisances by ringing the fire-alarm to summon workers to agitprop presentations on the dangers of heavy drinking, or placing black pennants on the lathes of persistent absentees.² Such disruptions of the status quo had a quite different character from the actions of the adolescent Red Guards during the cultural revolution in the People's Republic of China, who subjected their victims to beatings and executions. In Russia, class war in action signified temporary misrule on the part of a proletariat and peasantry themselves kept well in control by Party regulation, rather than political purges achieved through manipulation of grassroots violence. Conversely, the social contract between the intelligentsia and the regime was a good deal more complicated than the ritual abuse of helpless Chekhovian intellectuals would have suggested The first reason for this was a high degree of overlap between the class interests ofintellectuals as a group, and those of the regime. A representative number of the Old Bolsheviks—Lenin, Bukharin, Krupskaia, Zinov'ev, Lunacharskii -were themselves members of the intelligentsia by birth and education. Those who were not (for example Kalinin, Trotskii) had often come through a system of education and political training in which intellectual values were enormously influential. Party schools of the 192os to some extent perpetuated the traditions of the pre-Revolutionary Sunday schools, so even when the Old Bolsheviks were decimated by the Great Purges, beliefin the importance of progress, the value of education, the necessity of hygiene and efficiency, and the significance of service to society, persisted, if only as symbolic entities, components in a bright future' of efficiency and egalitarianism. Conversely, while educated and sophisticated observers might find it difficult to accept the paranoiac fantasies about Trotskyite-Masonic conspiracies'that filled the Soviet press in the 193os and 194os, many shared the state's secularist distaste for religious ritual and clericalism, its conviction that hooliganism should be stamped out, its detestation of disruptive work practices, and its commitment——at the ideological level——to social equality. The fact that egalitarianism as such, if not aggressive social inversion, was an ideal common to most of the intelligentsia was reflected, for instance, in the fact that few regretted the demise of the old selective secondary school system, with its division into gimnazii, elite schools teaching classical languages and humanities to a microscopic fraction of the country's population, real'nye gimnazii, with a curriculum of science and practical subjects, and commercial schools (kommercheskie uchilishcha). Inflammatory though the precise content of the integrated curriculum might be (some observers, notably the Communist Youth League (Komsomol), favoured a practical and work-based education, while Narkompros itself preferred a more academic approach), the fact of an integrated curriculum was generally accepted (and remained so until the early 196os).²4 And central control was not generally opposed as anti-democratic in itself. The majority of medical professionals welcomed the creation of a People's Commissariat of Health Care (Narkomzdrav), since some of them had been campaigning for a central health ministry since well before the Revolution, in order that emergency relief could be organized in major catastrophes (such as famines or epidemics), and health policy properly co-ordinated.2⁵ For its part, the Academy of Sciences, which had always enjoyed cordial relations with the Tsarist state, was not opposed to the principle of state control. Moreover, while the academicians' concept of ‘scientific neutrality' might lead them to reject what they saw as undue intrusion on the part of the authorities, the neutral'standpoint also hindered direct confrontation with these authorities. A further contributory factor to quiescence was the fact that many scientists remained convinced (however naïvely) that even vociferous critics could be contained within the margins of civilized debate; hence the biologist Vavilov's disastrous attempt to outflank Lysenko by supporting his candidature for the Academy of Sciences in 1935.2⁶ Conversely, from the government side, pragmatic considerations could often be as important as ideology. Though Soviet officials were perfectly well aware thatbourgeois specialists' were not necessarily natural political allies, they were forced to rely on them faute de mieux. Faced with a choice between competent scientists with stiff collars and bourgeois views, and boiler-suited radicals who lacked scientific expertise, whatever their grasp of Marxism, the government favoured the former. Though not one member of the Academy of Sciences was a member of the Communist Party at the time of the Revolution, the Bolshevik regime quickly negotiated a rapprochement: in 1918, its President, A. Karpinskii, agreed, in response to an approach from Lunacharskii, that the Academy was willing to aid in ‘developing productive forces for material needs'.27 In response, on 12 April 1918, the Soviet of People's Deputies passed a decree agreeing that the Academy should be guaranteed financial support.28 By the early 193os, the government was supporting the Academy of Sciences to the tune of many millions of roubles per year. Several million were devoted to one key project alone, the construction of a scientific village’ at Koltushi, near Leningrad, as a site for the experimental work of I. P. Pavlov, complete with a substantial cottage for the grand old man himself.29 And in 1936, the Communist Academy was itself closed down, and some of its personnel absorbed into the old Academy of Sciences, which became the central organizing body for academic research, expanding all over the Soviet Union.30 In education, too, a rapprochement with the intelligentsia was dictated by practicalities, here above all the age structure of the teaching profession. As late as 1930, 33 per cent of primary and 45 per cent of secondary teachers had received their training before the Revolution. The older teachers also represented a relatively stable core in a profession plagued by a high drop-out rate.3' Narkompros did not produce a coherent new syllabus until 1925, and even then many teachers failed to grasp what was meant by komplektirovanie (thematically integrated teaching), or the ‘Dalton system' of project work. So, apparently did their pupils, as suggested by N. Ognev's lively and plausible memoir of a fictional Soviet schoolboy, The Diary of Kostia Riabtsev: They're introducing the Dalton Plan in our school. It's a system that means the beaks do nothing and the students have to find it out all for themselves. . . . The Dalton Plan is turning out a real mess. No-one understands what's going on—not us, nor the beaks. The beaks discuss it all every evening. So far as we can see, the only new thing is that they've given us benches instead of fixed desks, so you've got nowhere to hide the books you want to read in boring classes.32 In such circumstances it is not surprising that, as one expert has commented, in primary and secondary schools throughout the Republic, teachers continued to teach, and students continued to learn, by means of the familiar cycle of dictation, memorization, and drill'.3 Things did not go much better with pupil selfgovernment-—introduced in only two out of twenty-one reporting regions by 1923—or with marks and homework, supposedly abolished but in fact retained by many Russian schools.34 The reintroduction of more 'old-fashioned' educational criteria in 1931, at which point the Central Committee began dictating policy to Narkompros, can therefore be seen as a recognition of the inevitable, rather than as a Great Retreat. In any case, though pointless experiments were now frowned on, a certain flexibility in educational method was still allowed to the more go-ahead schools. 'Pedology', the innovative and exciting school of Soviet educational psychology that had developed during the 192os (its most famous exponent was Vygotskii), retained some influence until the late 193os.35 And informality persisted in at least some classrooms, as recorded by a British schoolteacher, Deana Levin, who spent time teaching in Moscow in the mid-1930s: I found the children very intelligent, rather noisy and uncontrolled, but very easily interested. The first lesson I had with them was arithmetic, and as I kept them very busy, they worked fairly quietly. But when it came to geography, I found it more difficult to control them. They were seemingly very much interested in this subject, but all began to ask questions at once, without any idea of order. I stopped the lesson to explain that unless we had some sort of discipline we should not be able to get on fast enough. One girl raised her hand. The trouble with our class is that although everyone knows the rules, we forget to keep them.' 'What are the rules?'I asked curiously. Well,' she answered, we know that we should raise our hands if we wish to ask questions, because if we all speak at once, it is impossible to hear. I think we should have socialist competition with the fourth class, as we did last term.' 'Yes, yes,' everyone agreed. These remarks seemed to serve as a reminder, for the class studied quietly until the end of the morning.36 In 1943, a new educational code tightened rules on conduct once again, imposing on every Soviet pupil the duty to stand up whenever a teacher or the director entered the classroom and when asked to speak in class, and to raise his or her hand before speaking. But even in this era of regimented discipline, there were some surprising aberrations, such as the survival of the Gnesin Institute, a formerly private music school, right through the Stalin era under its pre-Revolutionary director, E. F. Gnesina.37 And individual teachers could, if they wished, moderate the unregulated aspects of class discipline, choosing, for example, a more or less authoritarian form of address, and moderating, or exaggerating, the harshness of their intonation. The fact was that though state regulation had been tightened up, teachers now enjoyed a great deal more social status than they had in the 192os, particularly during the cultural revolution, when many unfortunate individuals had found themselves attacked, on the one side, as class outsiders' and 'kulaks', while, on the other, suffering verbal and indeed physical abuse when they actively involved themselves in official campaigns, for example the collectivization of agriculture.38 In medicine, rapprochement with the intelligentsia proved possible quite quickly, since state policy realized some long-standing objectives of the profession at an early stage. The influential Pirogov Society at first resisted the government's replacement of the zemstvo physicians' leading role in medical propaganda by the co-ordination and professionalization of prophylactic medicine. However, objections were in part outflanked by the incorporation of leading medics into the planning and policy-making of Narkomzdrav from the start (its formation was discussed at the First All-Russian Congress of Sanitary Sections, held in June 1918). And in fact the Sanitary Sections, later renamed Health Sections, allowed health professionals to play a significant role in health education, if they so wished.39 Even as late as the 194os, voluntary associations could still play some part in health policy: for instance, a campaign to clean up Leningrad housing in 1945 drew on the resources of the Red Cross as well as of local sanitary committees. All of this seems to bear out the hypothesis put forward by Sheila Fitzpatrick in The Cultural Front that the 192os and 193os saw the formation of an uneasy understanding between intelligentsia and state, accompanied by a loss of independence on the intelligentsia's part, but also by a blunting of class-war rhetoric in recompense. If control over the intelligentsia increased from the mid-192os, so, too, did the benefits available. In the early 192os, a university professor's salary was no higher than that paid to teachers in elementary schools. But in 1924-5, academic salaries began to rise again, and academic personnel became more militant in demanding privileges to which they thought they were entitled.⁴1 Moreover, the civil-servant status of doctors, academics, scientists, and (after the creation of the Writers', Composers', Film-Makers', and Artists' Unions in the 193os) creative artists entitled them to the benefits paid to Soviet civil servants, including special rations allocated through the place of work, annual visits to rest homes and sanatoria, relatively high pensions, and a more generous allocation of living space than that available to most members of the Soviet public, with some in the highest grades even allocated a kazennaia kvartira, the grace-and-favour residence also granted to high-ranking Party officials. Reinscription of the intelligentsia's mission civilisatrice was to take on particular importance from the late 192os, in connection with the Soviet government's attempts to effect a transition from the so-called dictatorship of the proletariat to socialist democracy. While on the one hand perpetrating purges against intellectuals, the authorities tried, on the other, to revive the old ideal of obshchestvennost, the engagement in social change of politically aware citizens who were not professional politicians. Sofiia Smidovich argued in 193o that the mobilization of obshchestvennost'was of the utmost importance for the reformation of everyday life; Nadezhda Krupskaia even went so far as to suggest that it might in time displace the state. Obshchestvennost' came to be associated with two main roles: the formation of a broadly based consensus supporting the mechanisms of local government, and the instrument of social regulation, a tool for monitoring public order and combating deviant behaviour.4² Though the practical consequences of these discussions remained muted, they were an indication of a new readiness to recognize the traditional role of the intelligentsia as a force for cultural change (albeit an intelligentsia with a much broader social base than before). And one manifestation of obshchestvennost' which did get off the ground (the obshchestvennitsa movement, on which see below) represented a piquant reworking of the activities of women philanthropists on which Social Democrat activists had traditionally poured scorn. ## The Price of Knowledge: State Centralization and the Reinstatement of Objectivity The interaction between intellectuals and the state was to be dramatized in some Soviet writings (such as Bulgakov's The Master and Margarita) as a Faustian pact’, but in truth there was no one moment at which the intelligentsia ‘sold its soul', rather a slow process of integration in different areas. What was more, the contradictoriness of official policy meant that regulation had its gaps and loopholes. The Soviet state's ostensible objective was to professionalize all intellectual activities: that is, to ensure that every person practising an intellectual activity was properly trained, appropriately remunerated, and occupied a rational niche in the planning of the centralized state. This was straightforward enough with science and other areas of academia, and to some extent also with music, the visual arts, and the performing arts, where there was an established history of institutionalized training, and (in the case of painting) of state regulation via the ‘gold medal'system. It was never more than partially achieved in literature. The Writers’ Union was always an elite organization, as were the writers' training colleges, from which only a few hundred graduates emerged each year; and, since there was never any attempt to ban the circulation of paper and writing materials, non-unionized writers could and did continue to produce, filling the in-trays of Soviet journals with unsolicited manuscripts (the so-called samotek). Moreover, this process was actually encouraged by the admission to the Writers' Union only of writers who had already proved themselves, which meant that the journals were under pressure to publish suitable work by débutant, non-unionized writers. The result was that journal editors became still more powerful figures than in the pre-Revolutionary period, operating not only in the repressive role of censors (rejecting or cutting work that did not ‘reflect Soviet reality', to cite the cliché that commonly appeared on rejection slips), but also in the productive role of patrons and literary advisers.⁴3 The literary establishment was not the only area in which the conflicting objectives of state policy empowered intellectuals. Professionalization of academic subjects, particularly the natural sciences, had from the first a highly elitist and impractical character. Though the state constantly called on scientists to aid in improving industrial and agricultural production, the number of scientists actively involved in industry remained low. So far from encouraging specialists to work directly with industry, the Soviet government opted, in the 192os, for the so-called German model, according to which prestige scientific projects were concentrated in specialized institutes. The admission of engineers to the Academy of Sciences in 1929 (they had not formerly been eligible to apply for membership) exacerbated the problem, by removing the most prominent applied scientists into the ivory tower.⁴ One consequence was that scientific charlatans, such as Lysenko, who propounded cure-all practical solutions from within privileged institutions, could be dangerously successful. Lysenko's'discovery' of'wonderworking' strains of Soviet wheat (actually pre-existing inferior varietals) made his more cautious academic colleagues seem out of touch, and the practical agronomists who might have given the lie to his arguments lacked the status to contradict him. However, at bottom, professionalization and bureaucratic regulation were intrinsically contradictory: as activities became more complex, it became harder for outsiders to monitor them. Lip-service might be paid to Stalin's scientific genius as 'the coryphaeus of all knowledge', but the leader's semi-literate excursions into complex fields such as linguistic history could only dent his prestige among the experts that the Soviet system had created. Increasingly, too, specialists themselves saw their professional knowledge as a weapon, as the Czech poet and biologist Miroslav Holub has recalled. Holub, working as a pathologist in Sovietized Czechoslovakia during the late 194os, was present at a meeting when a lecturer introduced colleagues to the theories of Ol'ga Lepeshinskaia, a quack trumpeted by the Soviet scientific authorities for her success in ‘healing' tubercular sores by exposure to soda baths. With deadly irony, a pathologist asked from the floor for more details of Lepeshinskaia's experiment: Could you give us the concrete quantitative conditions of the soda bath, concentration, duration, etc.?' Lamely, the lecturer had to confess, 'I am sorry, but the volume of the bath-tub of Ol'ga Borisovna has not been published.'45 As Holub also points out, experimental and theoretical sciences were not only under the strictest surveillance, but also most vulnerable to the Russian orthodoxy'. The rise of highly specialized, complex disciplines, already furthered by the rarefied character of the Academy of Sciences institutes, was further enhanced by a growing tendency among scientists and scholars to perceive as ‘objective' those areas which were most difficult to regulate in terms of Marxist-Leninist dogma. For orthodox Marxist-Leninists, on the other hand, objectivity meant precisely the opposite. According to Lenin's tract Marxism and Empirio-Criticism (19o8), all intellectual activities had by definition to be politically engaged (partiinye), but it was only those informed by Marxist-Leninist theory that were partiinye in a positive sense, cataloguing phenomena through the processes of dialectical materialism, and so avoiding the ‘dogmatism' and one-sidedness' that were held to be characteristic of ‘bourgeois science'.4⁶ In the Stalin years, Lenin's tenets were increasingly interpreted narrowly and crudely, forcing any accessible areas of intellectual activity to construct themselves according to the current interpretation of Marxist-Leninist (or Marxist-Leninist-Stalinist) ideology. So far from suffering ‘epistemological crises', intellectuals hostile to Stalinist ideology began to perceive specialized knowledge and mandarinic density of expression as means of establishing their independence from state control. Crises of confidence were much more prevalent, and objectivity far more closely contested in the 192os. At this point, state regulation of science and intellectual debate was less effective, but the status of knowledge was far less secure, and objectivity, in particular its links with visual observation and with materialism, was the subject of vehement debate. Attacks in the 192os on ‘individualism in science' had appeared to accept the nineteenthcentury positivistic view according to which the acquisition of knowledge depended above all on the suspension of individual viewpoint, on the adoption of a panoramic representation of facts that transcended the limitations of subjectivity. But the fierce disputes about particular areas of scientific or scholarly investigation—eugenics, quantum mechanics, linguistics, to name but three— stressed the essential political engagement of all scientific discourse, the fact that every theory, however neutral, had to be the expression of some ideological viewpoint—in other words, that there was no such thing as a universal perspective. The result was the evolution of competing discourses that constructed objectivity in vastly differing ways. In the area of literary history, for example, formalist theory, which aimed to adduce ideologically neutral rules governing cultural evolution, stood in radical opposition to the sociological approach, according to which all cultural forms were produced by different phases of the class struggle. The latter approach was later to be vilified, in the late 193os, as vulgar sociologism', and replaced by a restoration of the literary canon as an unassailable bastion of merit. Yet in the hands of talented and intelligent interpreters, literary sociology produced some work of exceptional merit, particularly in areas such as the history of the Russian theatre and the study of literary institutions (publishing, journals, salons). Here, the emphasis on objectivity in the sense of panoramic treatments of the historical context, rather than emphasis on the personal characteristics of famous writers, was enabled rather than hampered by literary sociologists' ideologized standpoint. There was similar diversity in the world of artistic theory, which was divided by disagreement about what constituted factual representation. At one level, there was a split between documentary and mythologizing interpretations of realism, expressed, for instance, in the distinction between monumentalizing sculpture (in which figures towered over the observer, stressing their part in a larger and more heroic struggle) and academic portrait painting (a key example of which, Isaak Brodskii's Lenin at Smol'nyi, represented the leader seen from above, as a small and physically frail middle-aged man on a self-consciously drab and homely brown armchair). There was also a division between traditional views, which saw the artistic representation as objective when it represented reality in a manner satisfactory to common-sense perceptions, and the more radical criteria of the avant-garde, which emphasized the need for objective representations to discard the conventional understanding of how reality should appear to the naked eye. One of the most interesting statements of this came from the film director Dziga Vertov, who argued from the necessary fallibility and subjectivity of the human observer to the notion of the camera as a more qualified and objective recorder of reality: The most thorough investigation does not reveal a single film, a single piece of research that is correctly designed to emancipate the camera which has been pitifully enslaved and subjugated to the imperfect and none too clever human eye. . . . Our starting point is: the use of the camera as a Cine-Eye, more perfect than the human eye for examining the chaos of visual phenomena that resemble space. . . . Until now we have coerced the film camera and forced it to copy the work done by our eyes. And the better the copy, the more highly we thought of the photography." In a statement by another, more moderate member of the avant-garde——the painter David Sterenberg, the first head of Narkompros's Representational Arts section (Izo)—the notion of objectivity as a panoramic view was quixotically combined with an assertion that objectivity depended on specific knowledge beyond the image: The cultivated and keen eye can open up a world of phenomena in nature that is still infinitely vast yet remains closed for the majority of people. Thanks to this organ and their capacities for invention, artists have given these phenomena concrete reflection in works of art. But even the works of art themselves can be understood completely only by a cultivated eye.48 The 192os saw an explosion ofinterest in adventurous work with the camera, not only in film, but also in still photography. A crucial direction was photo-montage, in which the notion ofseeing round' a subject was expressed (rather as in cubist painting) by collages of multiple images seen from different angles. The tradition of off-centre shots continued well into the 193osthe flagship thick journal Nashi dostizheniia (Our Achievements) has some remarkably adventurous images as well as quasi-documentary footage. Only in the 194os did a sort of greetingscard soft-focus style take over. Equally, in narrative (literature and film), objectivity was interpreted in very different ways by different groups of intellectuals. Among some, such as Serafimovich in his Civil War novella The Iron Flood (Zheleznyi potok, 1924), or Eisenstein, in Strike (Stachka, 1924), it signified a supra-individualist perspective according to which ‘the Russian masses' were seen as the collective and undifferentiated heroes of revolutionary upheaval. Granted, Leninist emphasis on the need for ‘conscious' direction of ‘spontaneous' popular aspirations meant that the people always had their tribunes, but there was no attempt to characterize these——the military leader in The Iron Flood, for example, is known, metonymically, as 'Leather Jacket'(Kozhukh), while the strike organizers in Strike are nameless figures whose public and private existences are indistinguishable from those of their workmates. In texts of this kind, characterization was kept for the villains——the barrel-dwelling lumpenproletarian strikebreakers in Strike, or the lolling members of the Women's Battalion in their cropped hair and lacy camisoles in Eisenstein's October (Oktiabr). For other writers and film-makers, however, the techniques adopted were to be those of a more conventional realism, with recognizable characters and omniscient narrator, a direction known, with considerable over-simplification of the alleged precedent, as the search for a Red Lev Tolstoi'.4 For others again, objectivity was a question of representing a perspective that was limited by individual experience: in fiction, of speaking with a voice self-consciously differentiated from that of the biographical author. This was the case, for example, in the 192os stories of Mikhail Zoshchenko, in which a working-class male city-dweller speaks with bewilderment of the trials that he undergoes at the hands of petty officials, or in Evgenii Zamiatin'sComrade Churygin Takes the Floor' (Slovo predostavliaetsia tovarishchu Churyginu', 1928), where a narrator from a remote village describes how he and his neighbours attempted to plunge the locality into revolution without understanding what it was that the Revolution required of them. ## Knowledge as Peril versus Knowledge as Power: Bulgakov's Notes of a Young Doctor and 'Heart of a Dog' The voice of Zoshchenko's confused little man' was in a sense a distorted echo of the voice of many subjects far better educated than he. Under Soviet power, intellectuals themselves were much more pushed around than had ever been the case before. Now that philanthropy was derided as voluntarism, and public service was a duty imposed from the outside, as well as an activity prompted by the inner voice of conscience, some of the self-respect that had been inherent in the intelligentsia's subject position had evaporated. Now that objectivity was bedevilled by the intelligentsia's integration into state service, and by uncertainty about what the activity constituted in a new society, it was extremely difficult to construct a position from which to offer detached social commentary. Yet at the same time, the competence ofbourgeois specialists', however derided by radical commentators, came increasingly to afford them social leverage. Racked by self-doubt about the morality of their social position though they might be, Soviet intellectuals could still feel a sense of pride, even arrogance, in the prestige that was afforded them by living in what one 193os popular song called the land of heroes, dreamers, scientists, and scholars'. Nowhere is this paradox more closely reflected than in two 192os texts by Mikhail Bulgakov: the shortstory cycle Notes of a Young Doctor and the novella ‘Heart of a Dog'. Bulgakov was himself by all accounts rather a reluctant medic, and in Notes of a Young Doctor (Zapiski iunogo vracha) his alter ego, Dr Bomhardt, goes through a significant crise de foi when presented with his first patients in a remote village some forty miles distant even from the 'district centre', with its blandishments of cinema, street-lights, and educated company.5º Bomhardt's overwhelming sense of his own uselessness is conveyed by the insistent polarization, in his mind, between the knowledge' to which he has been exposed as a medical student, and the practical situations with which he is confronted. Again and again, medical emergencies (the need to amputate the leg of a girl crushed in a beetling machine, a breech birth, a tracheotomy that must be performed to save a child from diphtheria) cause him to revert in his mind to the well-lit lecture hall where white-bearded professors demonstrated the appropriate techniques, or to the requisite page of the textbook he studied as a student. His experience of medical practice prompts him to a vivid sense of dislocation between the rational formulations of his education and the instinctive, indeed at times shamanistic process by which a physician actually achieves results. In the most striking story in the cycle, ‘The Sideways Christening', the tensions are especially obvious. When confronted with a breech birth, Bomhardt first rushes terrified to Doderlein's textbook on obstetrics as a source of information about what to do, but the knowledge accumulated in the book cannot bring enlightenment, only confusion (everything in my brain got totally muddled, and I realized immediately that I knew nothing' (136)). Help comes from elsewhere: from the advice offered spontaneously by Bomhardt's nurse, and from Bomhardt's own sense of what he should do: From [Anna Nikolaevna's] fragmentary words, her unfinished sentences and hints dropped in passing I grasped the essence, what you don't find in any books . . . All those learned words are no use in a moment like this. The only thing that matters is that I have to put one hand inside and use the other from outside to help the turn and, relying not on books, but on my own sense of proportion, without which a doctor is no use to anyone, carefully but firmly draw down one of the legs and behind it the infant. (137) The nurse's inarticulacy emphasizes the fact that medicine is a magical practice, one beyond concrete communication, while Bomhardt's preference of the tactile to the visual underlines his retreat from the brightly lit world of academic discourse on medicine to an older and more mysterious reality. Significantly, too, the story elides the actual moment when the child is turned (in his mind, Bomhardt refers to it as achild', rather than the clinical foetus', plod, preferred in the textbooks). Instead, two rows of suspension points are inserted, so that the movement from Bomhardt's resolution of his crisis to his successful performance of the task he has feared is left undepicted, as though it too were beyond description. The transition from an overwhelming sense of self-doubt in Bomhardt to serendipitous success is repeated again and again in the cycle. Medicine, it is clear, cannot finally be ‘known', or encompassed by the eye; it must be learnt by feeling (the Russian word chut'e suggests both sensation and instinct, sixth sense'). Yet Bomhardt's rejection of contemporary medical epistemology is only partial. The fact that the doctor's knowledge is professional rather than fortuitous is suggested by another repeated motif in the cycle—the nurse's congratulation to the doctor in having dealt with an amputation or breech birth in a manner that would do credit to an experienced professional. And there are stories in the cycle where Bomhardt's reconciliation with the medical orthodoxy of his day seems more whole-hearted. In ‘Starry Rash', for example, he has two chance encounters with patients who have been exposed to syphilitic infection: a man with the rash characteristic of secondary syphilis, and a woman whose husband may have infected her with the disease. The two encounters set up very conventional images of the 'good' and the 'bad' patient. The 'bad' patient is insouciant, rebellious, confident in his ignorance, reluctant to surrender his bad social practices, and male. The good' patient is terrified by her condition, aware that she is ignorant and helpless, and totally deferential before the doctor's knowledge. She is also innocent of any bad practice (her husband has contaminated her); finally, she is female (it is no accident that it is women's bodies on which the doctor performs his most successful acts of witchcraft). Bomhardt guides the good’ patient through her crisis, but is at first defeated by the bad' one (who lambastes him about bothering over the rash, rather than doling out a cure for the sore throat which gives the patient himself more cause for concern). However, the defeat spurs Bomhardt to a crusade: he gets the authorization for a treatment centre, and interns patients in an isolation ward, bullying them into completing their treatment, and treating them to hair-raising homilies when they try to leave. The story is a tribute to contemporary ideals of hygiene and appropriate therapy, and to the doctor's absolute authority over his patients. What weight one gives to ‘Starry Rash'as a resolution of Bomhardt's epistemological crisis' depends on where one chooses to place it in the cycle. When first published, Notes of a Young Doctor ended with two stories in which the medical ideal is again ruptured: Morphine', portraying the addiction to the substance on the part of Bomhardt's friend Dr Poliakov, and I Killed', a story in which Dr Iashvin relates how he had to kill apatient' in Kiev, a brutal colonel in Petliura's forces. Some editors, however, have reordered the stories, and in one possible layout ‘Starry Rash' is our last view of Dr Bomhardt. Whichever way, the key motif of the cycle, repeated again and again, is the impossibility of resolving medical problems through knowledge alone, a revelation that sits oddly with the emphasis onprogress' and ‘enlightenment' that some commentators have chosen to see in the cycle. Notes of a Young Doctor is a powerful set of stories that is very much in pre-Revolutionary tradition. Not only is the Revolution itself hardly mentioned (a point that most critics have noticed), but the ‘epistemological crisis' proceeds along the lines of those sketched in pre-Revolutionary texts, such as Valentina Dmitrieva's 'Round the Villages' (‘Po derevniam', 1896), which also portrays a young zemstvo doctor's anxieties about her position. Bulgakov's eerie sciencefictional fable 'Heart ofa Dog'(‘Sobach'e serdtse', 1924), by contrast, represents a thoroughly Soviet professional intellectual, morally compromised, but epistemologically empowered. At first sight, to be sure, the story is a savage indictment of the liberal, professional intelligentsia, in the person of Professor Preobrazhenskii, member of the All-Russian Association of Surgeons, internationally renowned specialist on endocrinology, with a profitable sideline in rejuvenation techniques. Preobrazhenskii's attempt to upgrade his rejuvenation techniques by implanting the hypophysis and testicles of a human being into a stray dog, Sharik, goes horribly wrong when the creature, far from being rejuvenated, is transmogrified into a low-browed, small, and stocky subhuman, 'Sharikov', who, or perhaps better which, proceeds to wreak havoc in the professor's comfortable seven-room flat. Preobrazhenskii's respectability as a professional is open to doubt throughout the cycle. Though he himself protests that he has pursued the experiment out of an abstract desire for knowledge, rather than a thirst for profit, he is portrayed in the story's opening scenes as a classic sleek bourgeois, smelling of cigars as well as hospitals, and his attempt to defend his right to seven rooms when this is under assault from the domoupravlenie (the building's management committee) hardly speaks of his disinterested love for science, or indeed his concern for other human beings. His experiment in vivisection can be seen as a form of pointless cruelty to animals: so much is suggested not only by the anthropomorphic treatment of Sharik before his transformation (we are shown his thoughts), but also by the use of the verb rezat', tocut up', to describe Preobrazhenskii's activities (the verb has also been used in the opening paragraph of the story, in which Sharik bewails the fact that a cook has cut into' his side by throwing boiling water at him). The experiment is also a sublime example of scientific discourse stymied by the phenomena it purports to represent. Dr Bormenthal, Preobrazhenskii's assistant, keeps a record of events whose 'neutral' scientific language gradually fractures as the phenomena observed move outside the ordinary domain of experimentation. The result is a pointed parody of the scientist's pretence to objectivity: 2 January. The subject was flash-photographed while in the action of smiling. It got up from its bed and stood on its hind paws for about thirty minutes. It is nearly my height. (On a sheet of paper stuck into the notebook) Russian science has narrowly escaped a terrible loss. History of the illness of Professor Preobrazhenskii. At 1.23 a.m. Professor Preobrazhenskii fell into a deep faint. In falling, he hit his head on the leg of a chair. Tincture of valerian was administered. In my and Zina's presence the dog (ifdog' is what it can be termed) told Professor Preobrazhenskii to foff.51 Yet this Soviet version of Frankenstein is not just an anti-intellectual diatribe. Preobrazhenskii is himself an advocate of objective, neutral observation: I am a man of facts, a man of observations, the enemy of unfounded hypotheses' (165; ch. 3). Alone among the characters in the story, he has the self-knowledge to realize that the experiment he has performed was fundamentally misconceived: You see, doctor, that's what happens when a researcher, instead of going in parallel with nature and feeling his way, tries to force the issue and lift the curtain on the mysteries: there's your Sharikov, enjoy him!' But Filipp Filippovich, suppose you'd tried it with the brain of a Spinoza?' . . . What the devil for, though? Answer me that. Tell me what on earth would be the point of confecting a Spinoza when any peasant woman can give birth to him in any case?’ (217; ch. 8) And if Frankenstein demands that we feel sympathy for the monster, the creation of a scientist's fantasy, Sharikov is never allowed to inspire readers' pity for a moment. Though his assertion that Preobrazhenskii is responsible for what he has created is undoubtedly just, he is himself a revolting embodiment of what Bakhtin called the lower bodily stratum' run riot. Drunken, foul-mouthed, and possessed of a low cunning, he represents 'hooliganism' (the word khuligan is used to describe him) and, still more abominably, a hooliganism that has come to pollute private, as well as public space. The transgression of boundaries is underlined by the fact that Sharikov is soon in league with the domoupravlenie, four young people whose appearance caricatures another shocking fact of Soviet reality—its abolition of gender boundaries: ‘Gentlemen, it's an extremely bad idea not to wear galoshes in weather like this,’ Filipp Filippovich interrupted him. For one thing, you'll catch cold, and for another, I have Persian carpets here.' The one with the quiff was silenced, and all four visitors stared at Filipp Filippovich in astonishment. The silence lasted for several seconds, interrupted only by the sound of Filipp Filippovich's fingers drumming on the painted wooden dish on the table. For one thing,' Filipp Filippovich interrupted him in his turn, are you a man or a woman?' 'In that case, you may leave your cap on, but I would ask you, my dear sir, to remove whatever it is that you are wearing on your head.' 'I'm not your dear sir,' the blond asserted in a rude tone, removing his hat. (157–8; ch.2) Here, Filipp Filippovich restores order by giving the four juvenile upstarts a lesson in manners and sexual differentiation, which they seem surprisingly prepared to heed. At the end of the story, he unmakes the monster that he has created by turning Sharikov' back into the docile, endearing Sharik, who knows his place and rewards the care given to him with suitably canine devotion. The viciously satirical portrayal of Sharikov—Bulgakov's story has a Swiftian force of hatred for the yahoos of Soviet society——illustrates that 'class conflict' in the 192os was not only a question of anti-intelligentsia feeling. However, the story is not simply an expression of the desire that order, and the social order, should be restored. It is also an illustration of the part played by knowledge in restoring order. It is only Professor Preobrazhenskii who has the skill to rehabilitate the monstrosity that he has created; rather than feeling that his skill and knowledge are negated, he has his power to arbitrate over life and death confirmed by the action of the story. The story is a deeply ambivalent portrait of the Soviet scientist as self-interested, but also self-aware, and a representation of science both as an unlicensed meddling in the structures of nature, and as a fundamentally reliable way of understanding the universe. Bulgakov's story, though wonderfully surreal, did have a curious real-life analogue: the biography of Pavlov, who shared not only Professor Preobrazhenskii's experimental relationship with dogs, but also his interest in the ageing process and its link with hormonal secretions. Like Preobrazhenskii, too, Pavlov had a privileged, yet wary, relationship with Soviet reality. He never made money out of private practice, and, as an émigré colleague put it, 'his integrity was beyond dispute'.52 But his international reputation, as the first Russian scientist to win the Nobel Prize (in 19o4), and his credentials as a ‘materialist'ensured him a dominant position in the Soviet science establishment from the start. A complaint from Pavlov in 192ı that he was not getting appropriate funding for his work led to a decree by Lenin that his research should receive state support, and from then until Pavlov's death it was underwritten by the state. By the end of his life, in 1936, he was in charge of three huge laboratories, including the Institute of Experimental Physiology in Leningrad, which he headed from 1925, and the purpose-built facilities at Koltushi. If Pavlov's position as an important critic, but also an important beneficiary, of the regime was ambiguous, so too was his pedagogical methodology. On the one hand, he imposed rigorous experimentation on his students, and named ‘modesty' as one of the most important qualities in a scientist; on the other, he conducted his lectures in a self-consciously theatrical manner, in which seduction of the eye was as important as illustration: ‘He demanded that the experimental table mounted on wheels with the ready-prepared experiment should appear before the eyes of his hearers at the exact moment required.' There was also a contradiction in Pavlov between a view of nature as the indifferent material of experiment and a deeply involved, even sentimental attachment to the animals on which he experimented. At the end of his life, he addressed a letter of thanks to the Sechenov Physiological Society, which had organized his jubilee, and spoke ofhaving acquired for the huge power of physiological investigation . .. the entire animal organism' as his major life's work: this is indisputably and wholly our Russian service to world science'.54 But he also welcomed the construction, outside the Institute of Experimental Physiology, of a monument to the laboratory dogs who had been his unnamed collaborators in this ‘investigation'. The resulting fountain, with a bronze of a dog on a cylindrical pedestal ornamented with quotations from Pavlov's works about the need not to cause unnecessary suffering, was a tribute to ‘man's best friend'in his rightful place, as uncomplaining acolyte of human endeavour. It was a fittingly ambiguous monument to the divided career of one of Russia's greatest twentieth-century scientists and exemplary Soviet intellectual. ## Conclusion: the Triumph of Knowledge A full-scale epistemological crisis' can take place only in societies where freedom of information (in however limited a sense) is a given. Chekhov's agonizing over his Sakhalin project depended on the fact that there were no external obstacles to his gathering and publishing the totality of data relating to the study that he intended to make. In Soviet society, where the state maintained much tighter control over the production of knowledge, the subject position of a researcher was quite different. Objectivity became a key strategy in defending the neutrality formerly taken for granted; discussions about whether, in principle, it was possible to be objective were, therefore, out of the question. Chekhov's standpoint is in intriguing contrast to the position adopted by Pavlov, whose apparently modest instruction to his students that any hypothesis must be discarded on the basis of a single contradictory fact depends on an unspoken assertion that there might be such a thing as a hypothesis uncontradicted by even one fact. In this sense, the determination of Soviet leaders to keep the circulation of information under Party control undermined, rather than upheld their own authority, creating the potential for intellectual critics to emerge as a formidable opposition force once political terror was suspended, in the post-Stalin era.