# Suggested further reading Education, Science, Cultural Institutions, the Urban Environment BRUMFIELD, W., A History of Russian Architecture (Cambridge, 1993). and RUBLE, B. A. (eds.), Russian Housing in the Modern Age: Design and Social History (New York, 1993). BOWN, M. C., and TAYLOR, B. (eds.), Art ofthe Soviets: Painting, Sculpture and Architecture in a One-Party State, 1917–i992 (Manchester, 1993). DUNSTAN, J., Soviet Schooling in the Second World War (Basingstoke, 1997). FITZPATRICK, S., The Commissariat of Enlightenment (Cambridge, 1970). —— Education and Social Mobility in the USSR 1921–1934 (Cambridge, 1979). — The Cultural Front: Power and Culture in Revolutionary Russia (Ithaca, 1992). GARRARD, J., and GARRARD, C., Inside the Soviet Writers’ Union (London, 1990). GRAHAM, L. S., Science in the Soviet Union: A Short History (Cambridge, 1993). \- The Soviet Academy of Sciences and the Communist Party, 1927-1932 (Princeton, 1967). HOLMES, L. E., The Kremlin and the Schoolhouse: Reforming Education in Soviet Russia, 1917-193¹ (Bloomington, 1991). KOTKIN, S., Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilization (Berkeley, 1995). MICKIEWICZ, E. P., Soviet Political Schools: The Communist Party Adult Instruction System (New Haven, 1967). MUCKLE, J., Education in Russia Past and Present: An Introductory Study Guide and Select Bibliography (Nottingham, 1995). vUCINICH, A., Empire of Knowledge: the Academy of Sciences of the USSR (Berkeley, 1984). 'Programmes for Identity' (Agitprop, Cinema, Children's Literature) BOWLT, J. E., and MATICH, O.(eds.), Laboratory of Dreams: The Russian Avant-Garde and Cultural Experiment (Stanford, 1996). CHUKOVSKAIA, L., Vlaboratoriiredaktora (Moscow, 1960). CHUKOVSKII, K., From Two to Five, tr. and ed. M. Morton (Berkeley, 1968). ETKIND, A., Eros nevozmozhnogo: Istoriia psikhoanaliza ν Rossii (St Petersburg, 1993). GELDERN, J. vON, Bolshevik Festivals (Berkeley, 1993). GLEASON, A., KENEZ, P., and STITES, R. (eds.), Bolshevik Culture: Experiment and Order in the Russian Revolution (Bloomington, 1985). KENEZ, P., The Birth of the Propaganda State: Soviet Methods of Mass Mobilization 1917–1929 (Cambridge, 1985). LEIGHTON, L. G., Homage to Kornei Chukovsky’, Russian Review, 31 (1971), 38–48. MALLY, L., Culture of the Future: The Proletkult Movement in Revolutionary Russia (Berkeley, 1990). MARSHAK, S., My Life's Beginning: Some Pages of Reminiscence, tr. K. H. Blair (London, 1964). MILLAR, A., "Chudesnye Ezhi" i "Veselye Chizhi": Two Soviet Children's Magazines and their Poetry, 1928–194r’, unpublished MA dissertation (London, 1995). RIORDAN, J., Sport and Soviet Society: The Development of Sport and Physical Education in Russia and the USSR (Cambridge, 1977). Russkie detskie pisateli: Bio-bibliograficheskii slovar'(1917–1957) (Moscow, 1961). SOKOL, E., Russian Poetry for Children (Knoxville, 1984). TAYLOR, R., and CHRISTIE, I. (eds.), The Film Factory: Russian and Soviet Cinema in Documents 1896–1939 (London, 1994). TROTSKY, L., Problems of Everyday Life (no translator credited) (New York, 1973). ## Populism and Popular Resistance ANDREYEV, C., Vlasov and the Russian Liberation Movement: Soviet Reality and Emigre Theories (Cambridge, 1987). BOREV, IU. (comp.), Staliniada (Moscow, 1990). CONQUEST, R., The Harvest of Sorrow (New York, 1986). FILTZER, D., Soviet Workers and Stalinist Industrialization: The Formation of Modern Soviet Production Relations, 1928–194l (London, 1986). FITZPATRICK, S., Stalin's Peasants (New York, 1994). McAULEY, M., Bread and Justice: State and Society in Petrograd, 1917–22 (Oxford, 1991). MANNING, R. T., and GETTY, J. A., Stalinist Terror: New Perspectives (Cambridge, 1993). TOLSTOY, V., BIBIKOVA, I., and COOKE, C. (eds.), Street Art of the Revolution: Festivals and Celebrations in Russia, 1918–1932 (London, 1990). TUMARKIN, N., Lenin Lives! The Lenin Cult in the Soviet Union (Cambridge, Mass., 1983). VIOLA, L., Peasant Rebels under Stalin: Collectivization and the Culture of Peasant Resistance (New York, 1996). ## Consumption, Kul'turnost', Commercial Arts BOYM, S., Common Places: Mythologies of Everyday Life in Russia (Cambridge, Mass., 1994). DUNHAM, V., In Stalin's Time: Middleclass Values in Soviet Fiction (Cambridge, 1979). OSOKINA, E. A., Ierarkhiia potrebleniia: O zhizni liudei v usloviiakh stalinskogo snabzheniia 1928–1935 gg. (Moscow, 1993). PAPERNYI, V., Kul'tura ‘dva'(Ann Arbor, 1985). STARR, S. F., Red and Hot: The Fate of Jazz in the Soviet Union (New York, 1983). STITES, R., Russian Popular Culture: Entertainment and Society since 19oo (Cambridge, 1992). YOUNGBLOOD, D., Movies for the Masses: Soviet Popular Cinema in the Twenties (Cambridge, 1992). ## Notes See C. Lodder, 'Lenin's Plan for Monumental Propaganda', in M. C. Bown and B. Taylor (eds.), Art of the Soviets: Painting, Sculpture and Architecture in a One-Party State, 2917–1992 (Manchester, 1993), 16–32. 2 A. Anson and V. Pulyshev, Nasha sila——sovety. Sibirskii bukvar'dlia vzroslykh (Novonikolaevsk, 1925), 3. 3 On working-class rebellion generally, see J. Aves, Workers against Lenin: Labour Protest and the Bolshevik Dictatorship (London, 1996); on attitudes among the peasantry, O. Figes, Peasant Russia, Civil War: The Volga Countryside in Revolution (Oxford, 1989). 4 These attempts to regulate sexuality and private behaviour are discussed in more detail in C. Kelly and D. Shepherd (eds.), Russian Cultural Studies: An Introduction (Oxford, 1998), ch. 5. The term totalitarianism' was already in use by the late 193os, and classic studies of the concept include H. Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (London, 1951); F. A. Hajek, The Road to Serfdom (London, 1944); C. J. Friedrich, Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy (Cambridge, Mass., 1956); and E. Fromm, The Fear of Freedom (London, 196o). The term is in no sense obsolete in the West; indeed, the collapse of the Soviet Union to some extent effaced old battle-lines and inspired a fresh look at the resemblances between fascist Germany and Italy and Stalin's Russia. However, totalitarian' theories dominate less in the West than among Russian cultural theorists, some of whom use the term in an unproblematized way see e.g. I. Golomstock, Totalitarian Art (London, 199o) and L. Gozman, The Psychology of Post-Totalitarianism in Russia (London, 1992). 6 V. Dunham, In Stalin's Time: Middleclass Values in Soviet Fiction (Cambridge, 1979 (reprint)), 13. 7 N. Timasheff, The Great Retreat; The Growth and Decline of Communism in Russia (New York, 1946), 354. 8 Dunham, In Stalin's Time, 18. 9V. Papernyi, Kul'tura ‘dva'(Ann Arbor, 1985). 10 See S. Fitzpatrick, The Cultural Front: Power and Culture in Revolutionary Russia (Ithaca, 1992), and R. T. Manning and J. A. Getty, Stalinist Terror: New Perspectives (Cambridge, 1993). I1 On the destruction of churches in Moscow, see Razrushennye i oskvernennye khramy: Moskva i Sredniaia Rossiia (Frankfurt, 198o); in Leningrad, A. P. Pavlov, Khramy Sankt-Peterburga: khudozhestvenno-istoricheskii ocherk (St Petersburg, 1995). The periodical Nashi dostizheniia is a particularly good source for idealized visions of the future and caricatures of the past. 12 See N. Tumarkin, Lenin Lives! The Lenin Cult in Soviet Russia (Cambridge, Mass., 1983). A very interesting recent study of religious imagery in the early Soviet period is M. D. Steinberg, 'Workers on the Cross: Religious Imagination in the Writings of Russian Workers, 1910–1924', Russian Review, 53 (1994), 213–39. 13 See Pavlov, Khramy Sankt-Peterburga, 227–30. 14 The memoirist Raisa Orlova recalls that the families in the old house where she lived, just off Gor'kii Street, campaigned successfully to have the house spared when the street was reconstructed in the mid-193os: see her Vospominaniia o neproshedshem vremeni (Ann Arbor, 1988), 31. 15 See S. A. Smith, Red Petrograd: Revolution in the Factories, 1917–1918 (Cambridge, 1983). 16 The most detailed account of the 193os purges is R. Conquest, The Great Terror Revisited (London, 199o). Among the many memoirs devoted to the subject Evgeniia Ginzburg's Krutoi marshrut (translated into English as Into the Whirlwind and Within the Whirlwind) is perhaps the most compelling. 17 B. P. Babkin, Pavlov: A Biography (Chicago, 1949/1979), 156. 18 L. S. Graham Science in the Soviet Union: A Short History (Cambridge, 1993), 131-2. 19 A harrowing account of this side of Soviet life is given in Iu. Trifonov's novel The House on the Embankment (Dom na naberezhnoi, 1976). 20 Graham, Science in the Soviet Union, 88. 21 V. Khodasevich, Proletkul't', in Proza (New York, 1982), 266. On Proletkul't generally, see L. Mally, Culture of the Future: The Proletkult Movement in Revolutionary Russia (Berkeley, 1990). 22 D. Kharms, Chetyre illiustratsii togo, kak novaia ideia porazhaet cheloveka, k nei ne podgotovlennogo', in Polet v nebesakh: Stikhi, proza, drama, pis'ma (Leningrad, 1988), 372. 23 L. E. Holmes, The Kremlin and the Schoolhouse: Reforming Education in Soviet Russia, 1917–1931 (Bloomington, 1991), 128. 24 Ibid., 5-11. 25 See J. F. Hutchinson, "Who Killed Cock Robin?" An Inquiry into the Death of Zemstvo Medicine', in Hutchinson and S. G. Solomon (eds.), Health and Society in Revolutionary Russia (Bloomington, 1990), 3–26. 26 The Academy of Sciences is extensively discussed in Graham, Science in the Soviet Union; see also A. Vucinich, Empire of Knowledge: The Academy of Sciences of the USSR (Berkeley, 1984). 27 Graham, Science in the Soviet Union, 84. 28 Dekrety Sovetskoi vlasti, ii (Moscow, 1959), no. 50. 29 Y. P. Frolov, Pavlov and his School: The Theory of Conditioned Reflexes, tr. C. P. Dalt (London, 1938), 266–72. 30 L.S. Graham, The Soviet Academy of Sciences and the Communist Party, 1927—1932 (Princeton, 1967); see also Vucinich, Empire of Knowledge. 31 See Holmes, The Kremlin and the Schoolhouse, 129–32. 32 N. Ognev, Dnevnik Kosti Riabtseva (Moscow, 1927), 9, 11 (diary entries of 27 September and 3 October); English translation by A. Werth, Diary of a Communist Schoolboy (London, 1929). 33 Holmes, The Kremlin and the Schoolhouse, 37. 34 Ibid., 40, 38. 35 See A. Etkind, Eros nevozmozhnogo: Istoriia psikhoanaliza ν Rossii (St Petersburg, 1993), ch. 8. 36 D. Levin, Children in Soviet Russia (London, 1942), 18–19. 37 See D. Paperno, Zapiski moskovskogo pianista (Ann Arbor, 1983), 125. 38 Holmes, The Kremlin and the Schoolhouse, 132–3. 39 See Hutchinson, "Who Killed Cock Robin?"', and N. B. Weissmann, 'The Origins of Soviet Health Administration: Narkomzdrav 1918-1928', in Hutchinson and Solomon (eds.), Health and Society in Revolutionary Russia, 97-12o. Ironically, recruitment to prophylactic posts, especially in the countryside, was to prove something of a problem throughout the 192os, an indication that intelligentsia commitment to the common good was not always wholly selfless. 40 See Za zdorovoe zhilishche (Leningrad, 1945), 5. 41 Fitzpatrick, Professors and Soviet Power’, in The Cultural Front, 55–64. 42 See Iu. Steklov, Sovetskaia demokratiia (Moscow, 1929), 12–15; S. Smidovich, O kul'ture i byte (Moscow, 1930); N. Krupskaia, O bytovykh voprosakh (Moscow, 1930). 43 Among the sources on this are V. Panova, O moei zhizni, knigakh i chitateliakh (Leningrad, 1975), and Iu. Trifonov, Zapiski soseda', in Kak slovo nashe otzovetsia (Moscow, 1985), 138–74. See also J. Garrard and C. Garrard, Inside the Soviet Writers’Union (London, 1990). 44 Graham, Science in the Soviet Union, 182. 45 In M. Holub, What Was it Like: Lepeshynskaya's [sic] Tub’, The Guardian (11 Jan. 1996), sect. 2, 13. 46 V.I. Lenin, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii, xviii. Materializmi empiriokrititsizm (Moscow, 1961), 7–384. 47 D. Vertov, ‘The Cine-Eyes. A Revolution. LEF, 1923’, quoted in R. Taylor and I. Christie (eds.), The Film Factory: Russian and Soviet Cinema in Documents 1896–2939 (London, 1994), 93 (emphasis in original). 48Quoted in K. Clark, Petersburg: Crucible of Revolution (Cambridge, Mass., 1996), 50. 49 For more detail on the Red Lev Tolstoi' campaign and early Soviet literary debates generally, see Kelly and Shepherd (eds.), Russian Cultural Studies, ch. 1. 50 The entire Zapiski iunogo vracha cycle is available in M. A. Bulgakov, Polnoe sobranie sochineni, i (Ann Arbor, 1982); all subsequent references to this edition in text. On Bulgakov's biography, see L. Milne, Mikhail Bulgakov: A Critical Biography (Cambridge, 199o) and J. A. E. Curtis (comp.), Manuscripts Don't Burn: Bulgakov, a Life in Letters and Diaries (London, 1990). 51 Bulgakov, ‘Sobach'e serdtse', in Khanskii ogon': Povesti i rasskazy (Moscow, 1988), 183; ch. 5. All subsequent references to this edition in text. 52 Babkin, Pavlov, 95. 53 Frolov, Pavlov and his School, 248. 54 Babkin, Pavloν, 352. 55 On the new woman', see e.g. B. E. Clements, 'The Birth of the New Soviet Woman', in A. Gleason, P. Kenez, and R. Stites (eds.), Bolshevik Culture: Experiment and Order in the Russian Revolution (Bloomington, 1985), 220-37. On the 'new man', see e.g. A. Etkind, 'Psychological Culture', in D. N. Shalin (ed.), Russian Culture at the Crossroads: Paradoxes of Post-Communist Consciousness (Boulder, 1996), 109–23. 56 L. Trotsky, Culture and Socialism’, in Problems of Everyday Life (no translator credited) (New York, 1973), 243, emphasis added. 57 On ‘biomechanics', Dalcroze Eurythmics, and other forms ofidentity-formation through movement, see the special issue of the journal Eksperiment, 2 (1996), and also J. E. Bowlt, Body Beautiful: The Search for the Perfect Physique', in Bowlt and O. Matich (eds.), Laboratory of Dreams: The Russian Avant-Garde and Cultural Experiment (Stanford, 1996), 37–58. 58 P.O. Afanas'ev, Pishi, chitai, schitai. Bukvar'(Moscow and Leningrad, 1925), 90,36. 59 Levin, Children in Soviet Russia, 23. 60 Orlova, Vospominaniia, 20, 54. 61 Holmes, The Kremlin and the Schoolhouse, 98, 134. 62 N. Grant, Soviet Education (Harmondsworth, 1974), 56. 63 See . Chukovskii, entry for 10 Apr. 1925, n Dnevnik ı90½–1929 (Moscow, 1991), 336. 64On children's homes in the 193os, see the interesting memoir by M. Nikolaev, Detdom (New York, 1979). The early Soviet period is dealt with in A. Ball, And Now My Soul is Hardened: Abandoned Children in Soviet Russia, 1918—1930 (Berkeley, 1994). 65On the institutional history of children's writing in the 192os, see Elena Sokol, Russian Poetry for Children (Knoxville, 1984), chs. 1, 4, 5, and A. Ivich, Detskaia literatura’, Kratkaia literaturnaia entsiklopediia, ii (Moscow, 1964), 611–12. 66 Ivich, Detskaia literatura', 611. 67 On Ezh and Chizh see A. Millar, “Chudesnye Ezhi" i "Veselye Chizhi": Two Soviet Children's Magazines and their Poetry, 1928–1941', unpublished MA dissertation (London, 1995). On the OBERIU writers' involvement with children's writing, see also G. Roberts, The Last Soviet Avant-Garde: OBERIU——Fact, Fiction, Metafiction (Cambridge, 1997). 68 On the children's theatre, see Teatral'naia entsiklopediia, v (Moscow, 1967), headword Teatr dlia detei. 69 A. B. Ustinov, Delo detskogo sektora Gosizdata 1932 g.: Predvaritel'naia spravka’, in G. A. Morev (ed.), Mikhail Kuzmin i russkaia kul'tura XX veka: Tezisy i materialy konferentsii 15–17 maia 1990 g. (Leningrad, 1990), 125–36, and I. Mal'skii, 'Razgrom OBERIU: Materialy sledstvennogo dela', Oktiabr', 11 (1992), 166–91. On Sats, see N. Sats, From a Woman's Viewpoint: An Interview with Il’ia Kucherenko (Moscow, 1989). 70 L. Chukovskaia, V laboratorii redaktora (Moscow, 1960), 220–1. This point is not intended to undermine the importance of Chukovskaia's book, which contains vital information on Detizdat as well as on many other areas of Soviet publishing practice. 71 Pervyi vsesoiuznyi s"ezd sovetskikh pisatelei: Stenograficheskii otchet (Moscow, 1934), 22. 72 On the pedologists, see e.g. N. Krupskaia, 'O Krokodile K. Chukovskogo', Pravda (1 Feb. 1928); English translation in Sokol, Russian Poetry, 207–9. 73 Pervyivsesoiuznyis"ezd, 25–6, 32. 74 Kharms, Polet, 238. 75 On the puppet theatre in the 192os, see N. Simonovich-Efimova, Zapiski petrushechnika (Leningrad, 1925), and N. I. Smirnova, Sovetskii teatr kukol, z918– z932 (Moscow, 1963); on the 193os and later, see S. Obraztsov, Moia professiia (Moscow, 1981). 76 B. N. Mironov, Peasant Popular Culture and the Origins of Soviet Authoritarianism', in S. P. Frank and M. D. Steinberg (eds.), Cultures in Flux: Lower-Class Values, Practices, and Resistance in Late Imperial Russia (Princeton, 1994), 54–73. 77 Statistics in Bol 'shaia sovetskaia entsiklopediia (hereafter BSE), 1st edn., xxv (1930), cols. 447 ff., headword zhilishche. The 1912 person-per-room figure had been adjusted to exclude those who owned their own homes, otherwise the achievement of the Soviet authorities would have looked still more modest. 78 M. Lewin, Society, State, and Ideology during the First Five-Year Plan', in S. Fitzpatrick (ed.), Cultural Revolution in Russia, 1928–193¹ (Bloomington, 1984), 55. 79 BSE, 1st edn., xxxvii (1938), cols. 651–2, headword Magnitogorsk; on Magnitogorsk generally, see S. Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilization (Berkeley, 1995). 80 See N. Lebina, Tenevye storony zhizni sovetskogo goroda 2o–3o-kh godov’, Voprosy istorii, 2 (1994), 30–2. 81 Za zdorovoe zhilishche, passim. 82 On collectivization, see S. Fitzpatrick, Stalin's Peasants (New York, 1994), and L. Viola, Peasant Rebels under Stalin: Collectivization and the Culture of Peasant Resistance (New York, 1996). 83 A. Getty, G. Rittersporn, and V. Zemskov, Victims of the Soviet Penal System in the Pre-War Years: A First Approach’, American Historical Review, 99 (1993), 1032-3. 84 Anson and Pulyshev, Nasha sila—sovety, 13. 85 This account is based on J. Riordan, Sport in Soviet Society: Development of Sport and Physical Education in Russia and the USSR (Cambridge, 1977), chs. 3–4; for the Semashko quotation, see p. 96. 86 See A. Ivanov (ed.), Pesni sovetskogo naroda (Leningrad, 1948), 137. 87 See ibid., 147. On mass song', see also G. S. Smith, Songs to Seven Strings (Bloomington, 1984), ch. 1; R. Stites, Russian Popular Culture: Entertainment and Society since 190o (Cambridge, 1992), 66–7; S. Boym, Common Places: Mythologies of Everyday Life in Russia (Cambridge, Mass., 1994), 110–20. 88 V. Tolstoy, I. Bibikova, and C. Cooke (eds.), Street Art of the Revolution: Festivals and Celebrations in Russia, 1918–1932 (London, 1990), 151; translation slightly adapted. On the festivals, see also J. von Geldern, Bolshevik Festivals (Berkeley, 1993). 89 See Clark, Petersburg, ch. 5. 90See B. A. Keller, 'K vsesoiuznoi sel'skokhoziaistvennoi vystavke', Oktiabr', 7 (1939), 3-10. The writer enthuses about everything, from grain yield statistics to super-sized tomato plants. This exhibition was a successor to various temporary agricultural displays, on the first of which, in 1923, see M. Shaginian, Sel'skokhoziaistvennaia vystavka', in Sobranie sochinenii v 9 tomakh, ii (Moscow, 1971), 626–47. 91 F. Deák, Blue Blouse', Drama Review, 17 (1975), 35–6; on the revolutionary theatre generally, see R. Russell, Russian Drama of the Revolutionary Period (Basingstoke, 1988), and K. Rudnitsky, Russian and Soviet Theatre (London, 1988). 92 On mass song in film, see K. Clark, ‘Aural Hieroglyphics?’, in N. Condee (ed.), Soviet Hieroglyphics (Bloomington, 1995), 1–21. The songbook Pesni sovetskogo naroda has a list of songs from films and operas, so that users could work out where to find the text of hit songs (272). 93 On Soviet radio, see Kelly and Shepherd (eds.), Russian Cultural Studies, ch. 3. 94 P. Kerzhentsev, Teatr i revoliutsiia (Petrograd, 1918), 42–3. 95 See Smith, Red Petrograd, 34–5, and R. Stites, The Women's Liberation Movement in Russia: Feminism, Nihilism and Bolshevism, 1860–193o (Princeton, 1978), 397. By 1939, the figure had risen to 83.4 per cent (ibid.). 96 See N. Funk and M. Mueller, Feminism and Post-Communism (London and New York, 1993); G. W. Lapidus, ‘Sexual Inequality in Soviet Policy', in D. Atkinson, A. Dallin, and Lapidus (eds.), Women in Russia (Hassocks, 1978), 127; and Z. Khotkina, Women in the Labour Market: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow’, in A. Posadskaya (ed.), Women in Russia (London, 1994), 85–108. 97 D. V. Kolesov, Besedy o polovom vospitanii (Moscow, 1980), 178. 98 E. A. Kaplan, Motherhood and Representation: The Mother in Popular Culture and Melodrama (London, 1992), 16. 99 For a fuller discussion of this theme, see L. Attwood, "Rodina-Mat'” and the Soviet Cinema', in M. Liljestroom, E. Mantysaari, and A. Rosenholm (eds.), Gender Restructuring in Russian Studies (Tampere, 1993), 15–28. 100 J. Goodwin, Eisenstein: Cinema and History (Urbana and Chicago, 1993) 117, and J. Aumont, Montage Eisenstein (Bloomington, 1987), 94. 101 Rabotnitsa, 36 (1936), 4. 102 L. H. Siegelbaum, Stakhanovism and the Politics of Productivity in the USSR, 1935–1941 (Cambridge, 1988), 237–8. 103 E.F.’, in Rabotnitsa, 2 (1937), 15. 104 O. Bulgakova, ‘The Hydra of the Soviet Cinema', in L. Attwood (ed.), Red Women on the Silver Screen (London, 1993), 158. 105 S. Fomin, Zelenyi seks’, Iskusstvo kino, 7 (1991), 102. 106 Ibid. 107 V. Ketlinskaia, Zheny i materi . . .’, Krest'ianka, 4 (1944), 19. 108 F. Panferov, ‘Tat'iana Khrebtova', ibid., 20 (1937), 11–13, and Rabotnitsa, 12 (1938),17–18. 109 This section was mostly written by Maureen Perrie. 110 See F. J. Oinas, Folklore and Politics in the Soviet Union’, Slavic Review, 32 (1973),46–8. 1 See ibid., 49–53, and F. J. Miller, Folklore for Stalin: Russian Folklore and Pseudofolklore of the Stalin Era (Armonk, 1990). 112 See S. Fitzpatrick, The Lady Macbeth Affair: Shostakovich and the Soviet Puritans’, in The Cultural Front, 183–215. 113 V. Kirpotin, Narodnost' i prostota’, Pravda (3 Apr. 1936), 4. 114 See A. Kemp-Welch, Stalin and the Literary Intelligentsia, 1928–39 (Basingstoke and London, 1991), 260. 115 See e.g. ibid., 260-1. 116 See Stites, Russian Popular Culture, 108–9, and Fitzpatrick, The Lady Macbeth Affair',210-13. 117 Nina Lobanov-Rostovsky, Revolutionary Ceramics: Soviet Porcelain 1917-1927 (London, 1990), plate 44. 118 A. Gide, Retour de l’URSS (Paris, 1936), 90. 119 Walter Benjamin recalls visiting one such muzei byta in his Moskauer Tagesbuch (Frankfurt am Main, 1980), 156–7. Other museum history sources include Obshchestvo ‘Staryi Peterburg'1921–1923 (St Petersburg, 1923), and the commentaries by A. M. Konechnyi, K. A. Kumpan, and D. S. Likhachev to N. P. Antsiferov, Dusha Peterburga (St Petersburg, 1991). 120 Among rare lower-class memoirs are W. Edgerton (ed.), Memoirs ofPeasant Tolstoyans in Soviet Russia (Bloomington, 1993), and Sud'by krest’ianskie (Moscow, 1993). 121 K. S. Petrov-Vodkin, letter to A. P. Petrova-Vodkina, in Pis'ma. Stati. Vystupleniia. Dokumenty, ed. E. N. Selizarova (Moscow, 1991), 200. 122 Petrov-Vodkin, letter to A. P. Petrova-Vodkina, 22 November-5 December 192o, ibid., 210. 123 E. Strogova, 'Womenfolk' [Baby'], tr. M. Schwartz, in C. Kelly (ed.) An Anthology of Russian Women's Writing (Oxford, 1994), 278; see also Tumarkin, Lenin Lives! 124 B.I. Kolonitskii, "Revolutionary Names": Russian Personal Names and Political Consciousness in the 1920s and 1930s’, Revolutionary Russia, 6 (1993), 210–28. 125 See Kh. Volovich, ‘My Past', in J. Crowfoot (ed.), Russian Women's Camp Memoirs (forthcoming). 126 Clark, Petersburg, 19. 127 See A. Pyman, The Life of Aleksandr Blok, ii (Oxford, 1980), 372. 128 On the Soviet popular cinema see D. Youngblood, Movies for the Masses: Soviet Popular Cinema in the Twenties (Cambridge, 1992), and Stites, Russian Popular Culture, chs. 2 and 3. 129 BSE, 3rd edn., xxii (Moscow, 1975), 453. 130 Ibid., v (Moscow, 1971), 166. 131 See Fitzpatrick, The Cultural Front, 218. 132 Gigienai zdorov'e,21 (1936), 7. 133 See Obshchestvennitsa, 1 (1937), 63. 134 Ogonek,5(1936), 19. 135 Gigienaizdorov'e, 8(1937), 9. 136 Stakhanovets,2(1937), 53. 137 Sotsialisticheskii gorod, 1 (1936), 35. These changes did not put paid to the traditional bania, but turned it into a facility that was less important for hygiene than for relaxation (on which see N. Condee, The Second Fantasy Mother, or All Baths are Women's Baths', in H. Goscilo and B. Holmgren (eds.), Russia: Women: Culture (Bloomington, 1996), 31–62). 138 Gigiena i zdorov'e, 20 (1936), 12–13. 139 Pravda (28 Oct. 1935). 140 Ibid. (24 Apr. 1936). 141 Ibid. (6 May 1936). 142 See R. Chartier (ed.), A History of Private Life, ii-iv (London, 1989). 143 Obshchestvennitsa, 4(1938), 12. 144 Ibid., 2 (1936), 9, and 3 (1937), 30–1. 145 Ibid., 2 (1936), 9. 146 Ibid., 4 (1936), 13. 147 Ibid., 5 (1936), 12. 148 Ibid., 3 (1937), 12. 149 Smena, 3 (1936), 26. 150 X s"ezd VLKSM: Sbornik materialov (Moscow, 1938), 41. 151 Klub, 1 (1937), 4. 152 Ibid., 6 (1936), I. 153 Ogonek, 1 (1936), 22. 154 Smena, 8 (1937), 25–6. 155 Ibid., 12 (1938), 20. 156 Ibid., 10 (1938), 5. 157 See Siegelbaum, Stakhanovism, 225–33. 158 A. Busygin, Zhizn'moia i moikh druzei (Moscow, 1939), 70. 159 Quoted in Slovar'sovremennogo russkogo iazyka, v (Moscow, 1956), headword kul'turnost’. 160 Ognev, Dnevnik Kosti Riabtseva, 216. 161 A. Radakov, Gimn dvuspal'noi krovati', Satirikon, 6 (191o), back cover. 162 Re-mi, Priiatnyi ugolok’, ibid., 5. 163 See Boym, Common Places, 5-11. 164 Za zdorovoe zhilishche, 25. From a different point of view, the regulations on pets were no doubt meant to stop flat-dwellers from introducing pigs, hens, or goats to their living quarters. 165 For example, in E. Sidel'nikov, Russkoe narodnoe tvorchestvo i estrada (Moscow, 195o), in which the Soviet variety theatre is seen as a genuinely popular' form, unlike its ‘vulgar' (meshchanskii) counterpart before 1917. 166 A. Karavaeva, Rodnoi dom (Moscow, 1950), 22-3. 167 Dunham, In Stalin's Time, 54. 168 The Bogdanov-Bel'skii portrait is illustrated in colour as lot 134, Sotheby's catalogue, The Russian Sale, London, Wednesday 17 July i996(London, 1996) (sale LN 6347). 169 Bulgakov, Master i Margarita, in Romany (Moscow, 1973), 553–4, 558; ch. 13. 170 E. M. Delafield, I Visit the Soviets: The Provincial Lady in Russia (London, 1937), 181. 171 E. A. Osokina, Ierarkhiia potrebleniia: O zhizni liudei ν usloviiakh stalinskogo snabzheniia 1928–1935 gg. (Moscow, 1993), 24, 33–5, 39. 172 Ibid., 42. 173 See S. Fitzpatrick, Supplicants and Citizens: Public Letter-Writing in Soviet Russia in the 1930s’, Slavic Review, 55 (1996), 78–105. 174 On Okhlopkov's production, see N. Worrall, Modernism to Realism in the Soviet Theatre (Cambridge, 1990), 161–6. 175 For an excellent detailed treatment of Stalinist industrial relations, see D. Filtzer, Soviet Workers and Stalinist Industrialisation: The Formation ofModern Soviet Production Relations, 1928–1941 (London, 1986). 176 See R. T. Manning and J. A. Getty (eds.), Stalinist Terror: New Perspectives (Cambridge, 1993), and S. Fitzpatrick, ‘Signals from Below', Journal of Modern History, 68 (1996), 831–66. 177 I. Il'f and E. Petrov, Retsept spokoinoi zhizni', in Sobranie sochinenii ν 5 tomakh, ii (Moscow, 1961), 294. 178 A rare case of a paid informer who has recorded the fact is Margaret Wettlin, an American married to a Soviet citizen who had herself taken Soviet nationality: Sixty Russian Winters (London, 1994). 179 V. Zenzinov (comp.), Vstrecha s Rossiei: Kak i chem zhivut v Sovetskom Soiuze (New York, 1944), 419. Our thanks to Martin Dewhirst for this reference. 180 N. Mandel'shtam, Vtoraia kniga (Paris, 1970), 429. There is some evidence that the language of kul'turnost' became common currency: cf. a visitor to the recently opened Novokuznetskaia metro station in 1953: It is tender and blindingly white as the first snowdrop of spring!' (quoted in S. Garniuk, A. Kats, and A. Sonichev, 'Kusok kommunizma: Moskovskoe metro glazami sovremennikov', Moskovskii arkhiv, 1 (1996), 360). 181 On this see V. S. Magun, Labor Culture’, in Shalin (ed.), Russian Culture at the Crossroads, 279–98. 182 Orlova, Vospominaniia, 182, reveals that the author only learned about the existence of Party dachas as late as 1955. 183 See Manning and Getty, Stalinist Terror, passim, and R. W. Thurston, Life and Terror in Stalin's Russia, 1934–1941 (New Haven, 1996). 184 Cf. the account of Central Asia in the 193os by F. Maclean in Eastern Approaches (London, 1949). 185 On collectivization, see Viola, Peasant Rebels under Stalin; R. Conquest, The Harvest of Sorrow (New York, 1986); and Fitzpatrick, Stalin's Peasants. On revolts in the prison camps, see the Vozvrashchenie publications Soprotivlenie γ GULage (Moscow, 1992, and continuing), and Resistance in the GULag (Moscow, 1992); and E. Bacon, The GULag at War: Stalin's Forced Labour System in the Light of the Archives (Basingstoke, 1994). 186 C. Andreyev, Vlasov and the Russian Liberation Movement: Soviet Reality and Emigre Theories (Cambridge, 1987); there were about one million Soviet citizens serving in the Wehrmacht alone by 1944. 187 On Stalin's sarcastic titles, see Z. Rossi, Spravochnik po GULagu (London, 1987), headword Stalin, 39o; on Stalin jokes, see Iu. Borev, Staliniada (Moscow, 1990), 34, 36. 188 O. Sliozberg, Put'(Moscow, 1993), 21. 189 Ia. Vaiskopf(ed.), Blatnaia lira (Jerusalem, 1981), 28. 190 On the Long Journey' autobiographical narratives of writers from the Extreme North', see Y. Slezkine, Primitive Communism and the Other Way Around', in T. Lahusen and E. Dobrenko (eds.), Socialist Realism Without Shores (South Atlantic Quarterly, 94 (1995)), 947–76; on Orientalism in Soviet architecture, see G. Castillo, Peoples at an Exhibition: Soviet Architecture and the National Question', ibid., 715–46. 191 I. Berlin, Personal Impressions (London, 1980), 162. 192 Quoted in Garniuk, Kats, and Sonichev, Kusok kommunizma’, 348. 1

## Index abortion 208,232,280 Academy of Arts 181-2,213 Academy of Sciences 43, 83, 85, 86, 93, 239, 240, 242–3, 246, 247 acmeism 4,130,210 adult education, see education, adult advertising 4, 149, 150, 152–3, 188, 292, 294,312 agitprop 179, 231,241, 260, 272–3, 291-2,297 see also propaganda agnosticism, see atheism alcoholism, see drinking All-Russian Congress of Women (1905) 205 anarchism 166 ‘mystical’175 anniversaries, ideological use of 235, 271,301 anthroposophy 174, 257 anti-rationalism 89, 178 see also rationalism anti-Semitism 73,179–80,189-90, 205,206,209 see also chauvinism; racism applied arts 182-4 architecture 151 avant-garde 227-8,233 of churches 169 constructivist 227,229, 293 of factories 79 functionalist 62,227–8 and national identities 169-70, 188 of railway stations 170, 184 revivalist 169-70,183 Soviet 229,293 Stalinist 212,233,236,315–16 Art and Craft movement 149, 183-4, 235 art galleries, see museums and art galleries art nouveau 183,186 atheism 172–3,175,176,205 autocracy 81,87,175,197,238,286 anachronism of 58—9 and national identities 28, 30—2,35, 181,188 Slavophiles' views of 33 Westernizers' views of 20 avant-garde: and architecture 227–8,233 and commercial culture 141-7 and literature 140-7,210,211 and popular culture 143-4 and visual arts 141–2, 144–52, 181, 183-4,210,248 see also constructivism; futurism; modernism babi bunty (women's rebellions) 314 balagany (fairground theatres) 115, 143,144 ballet 143, 167 and national identities 186, 187-8 Ballets Russes 186, 187–8 Baptists 173-4,191 behaviour manuals 130-4 see also etiquette 'Big Deal', the 233 biomechanics 268 Black Hundreds 189 blat 313 Bloody Sunday (1905) 169, 203 body 57,117,251,253,298 see also body-building; fizkul'tura movement; sport body-building 77 Bolshevik Revolution, see Revolutions, Russian: October 1917 Bolsheviks 70, 71, 152–3, 175–6, 180, 193,231,238,286,288,291 and Jewish question 211,213 Old'241-2 and women's equality 198, 199-200, 204, 211,258,279 see also Communist Party bourgeois attitudes 4, 232–3, 262, 263, 279 hostility of intelligentsia towards 5, 15, 19, 134, 171, 252, 304–5 and kul'turnost'300, 303, 304, 305–6 see also bourgeoisie; meshchanstvo bourgeoisie: and civic society 6r and consumption 109-11, 153, 304-5 emerging from merchant class 59, 73-4 and Stalinism 233, 293-5 and women's movement 197, 202, 204 see also bourgeois attitudes; meshchanstvo bureaucratization 231-2,246,293 capitalism 35–6,77, 153, 177, 182, 197–8,291,292 and national identities 24, 136–7, 178,317 card-playing 127-8 see also gambling careerism 240 cartoons 182,234,305 Catholicism 205 censorship 153 literary 2, 45, 47, 172, 174, 179, 181, 239,246,261–2,287,317 political 47,71 press 71,238 relaxation of(1905) 174, 179, 181 theatrical 81, 124, 272-3 ceremonial: nationalist 168-9,188 religious 242 Soviet 258,269,271,289 Stalinist 233,237 see also festivals charity 78-9 and urbanization 60-1, 65-6 women and 60-1,65,74,208 see also philanthropy chastushka 113, 128–9,152,154 chauvinism 189-90,232,317 see also anti-Semitism; racism Cheka 236,239 child-care 276 children's literature 123, 207, 259–64 didacticism in 262, 264 institutions of 260—1 modernism in 263-4 Church, Orthodox, see Orthodox Church churches, see architecture, of churches cinema 69, 93, 112, 128, 133, 144–5, 146, 214, 227, 231, 248–9, 270, 286, 291–2, 293 didacticism in 278 and kul’turnost’299, 300, 302, 312 and national identities 276, 282, 284, 285,287,317 popular taste in 69, 115, 120—1, 140-1,289-90 and propaganda 237,273-4,287 women and 118–19, 120-1, 128, 140, 273-4,275-85 circuses 30, 113, 125, 129, 130, 139, 152, 288 citizenship 14, 59 see also civic society; obshchestvennost'; public service city: as centre of commercialism 4, 30, 136-9 and consumerism 107-12,291 contrasted with countryside 30, 126, 136–7,165,280 cultural representations of 92-3, 136-9,141-2 and popular entertainments 113-21, 128-9 religion in 191 as site of identity-formation 57, 61, 192,227,266–7,315 see also urbanization civic society 4, 7, 23, 27 emergence of 57, 61, 64, 81, 202, 240 institutions of 61, 71, 79, 81, 153, 201 civil defence 269 civil rights 166, 167, 199, 203 Civil War(1918–21) 214, 228,231, 239,259–60,265,267, 280, 286 civilizing process, see identities, programmes for, formations of class, social, see social class classics (Greek and Latin) 83–4, 136, 180 clergy 73 clothes 60,69 and social identities 109–13, 117, 133-4, 295–6, 302–3, 307 see also fashion collective farms (kolkhozy) 280, 284, 292,294 collectivization of agriculture 231–2, 244, 266, 279, 285 commercialism: city as centre of 4, 30, 136–9 and culture 4, 30, 59, 113–25, 129–30,139–55,188,305 hostility of intelligentsia towards 15, 112–13, 121–3,130,139,143, 153, 291,292 and language 130–2, 134, 135, 136 and leisure 129 and literature 6, 43, 45, 47, 48, 121–2, 130–2, 139–47, 149, 151, 261 and sexuality 138–9 and theatre 123–4, 129, 139, 140, 147-9 and visual arts 141-2, 147–52 see also consumerism; consumption communal flats (kommunalki) 5, 266, 310 see also housing communism 232,280 Communist Academy 240, 243 Communist Party 237,238, 241, 280, 288,293,295,307,313,315,317 and bourgeois attitudes 232-3 and control ofintellectual life 239-40, 242–3, 245–6,255 policy on culture of 2, 28, 152–3, 227, 233, 260-1, 303; see als0 cultural revolution; kul’turnost'; socialist realism policy on women's rights 198, 199–200,204,211,274-6,285 see also Bolsheviks conservationism 232 Constitutional Democrats, see Kadets constructivism: in architecture 227, 229, 293 in visual arts 142 see also avant-garde; modernism consumer goods 107,112 and kul'turnost’ 292–3, 298–9, 304-5,307–8,312-13 shortages of 292, 293, 295–6, 308, 311,313 see also consumerism; consumption consumerism 106-7,291 and city 107–12 hostility of intelligentsia towards 112-13,291 see also commercialism; consumer goods; consumption consumption 106-7,233 cultural 4, 77, 153 and kul'turnost’295–6, 300–1, 302, 303,304-13 peasantry and 106-7, 111-12 and social identities 107, 109-13 women and 106, 108, 109–12, 118 workers and 109, 111-12 see also commercialism; consumer goods; consumerism; production contraception 280 copyright, laws of 93 countryside: contrasted with city 30, 126, 136–7, 165,280 corrupted by commercialism 136—8 cultural representations of 136-8 crime 60,81,97,120–1,178,309 see also penal institutions Crimean War(1854–6) 21,82, 165, 190, 195,203 Criminal Code, Stalinist 310 cruel romance'129, 152, 154 see also popular song cubo-futurism, see futurism cuisine 133 cult of personality: ofLenin 235,289 of Stalin 232,287 cultural revolution (1928–31) 115, 153, 231,239,244,285 culture: commercial 4, 59,113-25, 130-2, 135–8,139-55,188; see also commercialism consumer 77,106-13,291;see also consumer goods; consumerism; consumption culture (cont.): as contested terrain 4, 59–60 political control of 231; see also Communist Party, policy on culture of and science 88 as values to be acquired and disseminated 67–71, 113, 152, 154, 155, 171, 302,315–16 see also intelligentsia; kul'turnost’; mass culture; popular culture cycling 78 Dalton Plan 243 Darwinism 83-4 Decembrist uprising(1825) 30, 32, 46, 230 denunciation 240,289,310,311–12, 313 department stores 108, 109, 125, 292–3, 306 as sites ofidentity-formation 109-11,125 Detizdat (Detskoe izdatel'stvo) 260—1, 263 Detskaia literatura (publishing house) 260 dialectical materialism, see materialism, dialectical ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’232, 238,245,273,315 didacticism: in cinema 278 in literature 68, 69–70, 94, 121–5, 154, 209–10, 268 in popular culture 121–5, 154 in theatre 23–5, 154, 309 diet 198,199,308–9 dissidence, political 165 divorce law 202, 232 Doloi negramotnost'! (Away with Illiteracy!) movement 267 drinking 63, 69, 79, 111, 126–7, 129, 137, 138,154, 201, 241 regulation and prohibition of 79-8o see also temperance movements dress, see clothes dvortsy kul’tury, see palaces of culture education: adult 69–71,240–1,267 and early writing 39–40 increased access to 60, 66–71, 75, 81, 93, 124, 126, 177, 195, 233, 288, 293-5 Jews and 167 merchants and 136 moral (vospitanie) 83, 257, 259 and national identities 30—1, 197 nursery 259 Orthodox Church and 66–7, 190 peasantry and 67, 68, 80—1 as policy objective 57, 66–71, 241–2,257–8 private 57 public 66-8 self- 301-4 and social status 154 and socialization 257–9, 264-5,268 and urbanization 59 vocational 136 women and 65, 82, 83, 167, 194, 195–6, 198, 199, 200–2, 204, 207-8 workers and 5,69-71, 80-1 see also literacy; rabfaki; schools; science; universities egalitarianism 241,242, 288 elections, municipal 61-2 Emancipation of the Serfs (1861) 32, 34, 79, 83, 88, 106, 194, 195, 265 see also Great Reforms; serfdom enlightenment 16,43,252,287 Enlightenment, the 57–8, 177, 213 epistemology, see intelligentsia, epistemological crises of estate, see soslovie estrady (outdoor stages) 113, 115, 154, 272 ‘eternal feminine’209-10 ethnography 85,88, 96,97, 113,128, 137 etiquette: business 131-2,125 literary’41 and private life 132–4, 299–300, 302,303,304 social 4,121,123,312 Eurasianism, see identities, national Evangelical Christianity 173-4, 191 fairgrounds, see funfairs family 233 see also gender roles; motherhood famine 242, 265, 308 see also Great Famine fashion 4, 109–13, 121, 125, 133–4,296, 302-3 see also clothes feminism 166, 193, 194, 202, 203–4, 205–6,207–8,209 hostility towards 179, 196–7, 198, 199, 207, 209, 211 see alsowoman question'; women; women's movement festivals: post-Revolutionary 230, 235, 237, 269,272,288–9 religious 62 street 80,271-2 see also ceremonial film, see cinema First Five-Year Plan 231, 265–6, 285, 291,292 First World War 115, 151, 166, 176, 179, 190, 192, 193, 199, 206 fizkul'tura movement 267–71 see also body; body-building; sport folk dance 286, 287 folk music 285,286,287 folklore 128, 129, 188,264, 299 and literature 42, 210, 213, 261, 286 and music 30, 185, 187, 188, 286, 287; see also folk music and national identities 28, 29,32, 33, 182,185,187,285–7 and urban entertainments 113 and visual arts 182 see also chastushka; popular culture; popular song Fordism 256,268 formalism 48-9,247-8 denunciations of 233, 286 fortune-telling 128 freemasonry 3 Freudianism 91,257 funfairs 30, 62, 80, 113, 116, 139, 140, 141,144,288 furnishing 109, 112–13, 133-4 futurism 4, 130, 141–3, 166, 179, 210, 316 see also avant-garde; modernism gambling 69, 75, 127, 128, 130, 154 Gazeta-kopeika (Copeck Paper) 130, 144, 192, 193 gender roles 140, 153–4, 192–3, 194, 201, 205, 275–6, 280 represented in cinema 275–85, 287 see also identities, sexual; motherhood; women genre, see literature gentry, see nobility geography 84–5,88,94 gimnazii, see schools Gosizdat (Gosudarstvennoe izdatel'stvo) 260 gosudarstvo, see state Great Famine (1891–2) 75, 79, 87, 137 Great Patriotic War (1941–5) 282–4, 288,302 see also Second World War Great Purges (1937–8) 239, 242, 260, 307 see also purges Great Reforms (186os) 58, 61,67, 74, 83,87,93,177 see also Emancipation of the Serfs 'Great Retreat'232-3, 237, 243 Guide movement 258 see also Scout movement Gypsies, popular images of 189 Haskalah movement 213 Higher Courses of Education for Women 65,83,167,200,207 history: and cultural studies 2–4, 8 n. 7 and literature 1-5 hobbies 75 see also leisure; sport homosexuality 140,210,232 see also identities, sexual hooliganism 242, 266, 294, 302, 312 houses of rest (doma otdykha) 228 housing 234, 239, 244–5, 265–6, 291, 298,305,311 see also communal flats hygiene, promotion of 57, 75, 112, 227, 242, 251, 265, 266, 267, 269, 296–7, 298, 299, 300, 303, 304, 305 see also public health; sanitation iconoclasm 227,234,235-6 icons 147,184,187,188,190-1,215 ideinost'(political orthodoxy) 286 identities: collective 13, 16, 23, 166, 179, 191, 192, 271, 289–90, 295, 312; associated with narod 19, 22, 24, 26, 33, 35–6, 137–8, 166, 178, 265; see also obshchestvennost', sobornost' national 4,5, 6,7,13,59,153–4, 165–7; architecture and 169–70, 188;autocracy and 28,30-2,35; ceremonial expressions of 168–9; chauvinistic 189–90,232,317; cinema and 276, 282, 284, 285, 287, 317; conservative versions of 22–5, 32–5, 166, 172, 178; education and 30-1, 197; Eurasianism 166, 214; internationalist 213,232,285,316; Jews and 211-16; language and 24–5, 44; literature and 29, 30, 31, 40, 44, 167, 171–2, 178–80, 181, 187,256,301,315–16;museum culture and 170—1; music and 167, 187–8, 315; mysticism and 172–5;official' nationalism 167–72,181,182,185,188,190, 198; Orthodoxy and 22, 28, 30, 31,33,34, 35,167–8,172–3,176, 178, 180—1, 188, 286; pan-Slavic views of 34; popular views of 188–93; populism and 24, 35–6, 285; and pre-Petrine period 168–70,181,182,185; romanticism and 29, 30, 31; Russocentrism 232, 285, 286–7, 316; Scythianism 179; Slavophile versions of 6, 22–5, 32–5, 166, 172, 179-80; Soviet versions of 258, 262, 269, 284, 286–7, 290; Stalinist versions of 232-3; urbanization and 136, 152, 182; visual arts and 170-1, 180—5, 187 213–16, 315; Westernizers'views of 16–22, 25,32–5; women and 30–1, 197, 198, 206, 276, 282, 284, 285; see also nàrodnost'; Russia personal 3, 4, 6, 13, 153, 155, 165, 213–16, 271, 285, 295, 297, 303, 315; see also lichnost programmes for formation of 5, 74–5, 233–5, 256–7, 288; see also agitprop; biomechanics; children's literature; cinema; education; fizkul'tura movement; Fordism; indoctrination; kul'turnost'; leisure; literacy; pedology; propaganda; psychoanalysis; Tolstoyanism sexual 119-20,138–9,140,153-4, 201, 208, 209, 210, 212, 232, 253–4, 256–7, 281, 284–5; see also gender roles; homosexuality sites for formation of: city 57, 61, 192, 227, 266–7, 315; department stores 109–11, 125; private clubs and societies 74-5 social 73-5,107,109–12,233-5; see also social class ideology 227,230,231,232,236,237, 242, 247, 248, 256, 258, 263, 267, 275–6, 287,288, 295,296, 311, 312 Imperial Ballet 186 indoctrination 257,263-4 industrialization 66, 80, 107, 122, 152, 154,182,183,184, 198, 231–2, 275 cultural representations of 138, 141-3 and education 66 effects on social structure 58–9, 64, 72–4, 136,265, 293 see also urbanization intelligentsia: as arbiter of taste 59, 124, 141, 313 attacks on 239-41 civilizing mission of 5, 6, 15, 18, 27, 59, 66, 67–71, 81–2, 121, 125, 130-1,134,143, 152–4,155,238, 245, 315; failures of 126, 152, 177 epistemological crises of 81–98, 247,252, 255 hostility towards bourgeois attitudes of 5, 15, 19, 134, 171, 252, 304–5 hostility towards commercialism of 15, 112–13, 121–3, 130, 139, 143, 153, 291, 292 and kul'turnost’ 306–7 and pessimism 179–80 relations with state of 241–9, 250, 255,287 and religion 205 representation of narod by 2, 5, 15, 21, 24, 28, 35–6, 59, 70–1, 112–13, 175, 177,191–2 self-consciousness of 4–5, 15, 58, 74, 176–8,250,286 and social welfare 65 see also populism; radicalism; Slavophiles; Westernizers; worker-intelligentsia International Council of Women 202 internationalism 213,227,232,285,316 Jewish question’194, 213-16 see also Jews Jewish Society for the Encouragement ofthe Arts 213 Jews 73,205,261 and culture 211-16 discrimination against 34, 167–8, 315; see also anti-Semitism and education 167 and national identities 211-16; see also Judaism popular representations of 189-90 and public sphere 213 jokes 314-15 journalism, see press journals: art 149,183 children's 262 feminist 204–5,207,209 historical 73 literary46–7,70, 149,211,246,248,260 medical 87,96 photographical 92 religious/spiritualist 173,174 scientific 88 sports 77,78 ‘thick’139–40,141,172,204,207,249 see also magazines; newspapers; press Judaism 180,213,214,215–16 Weiningerian 166, 214, 216 Kadets (Constitutional Democrats) 203,206 Khlysty (Self-Flagellants) 174, 192 Khodynka disaster (1896) 168–9 kolkhozy, see collective farms kommunalki, see communal flats Komsomol (Kommunisticheskii soiuz molodezhi, Communist Youth League) 242,258,268,281,300, 301,302,303 Kronstadt Mutiny (1921) 231, 266 kulachnye boi (street-brawling) 69, 77, 128-9 kulaks 244,285 kul'turnost': definitions of 5, 131 expressions of 5, 295–312 as policy objective 5, 6, 294, 295-304,312 see also consumption; culture labour camps, see prison camps law 87,240,266-7 law and order 66,81 League of Equal Rights 206 learned societies 84-5,88 legal reform 87, 178, 195 and status of Jews 167–8,213, 238 and status of women 195, 202, 238, 274 leisure 233,302 and consumption 109-11 facilities for 227-8, 272 gender divisions in 127-8 organized 62,259 rational’77, 79,120, 267–71,272 traditional forms of 69, 113, 115, 126-8,129-30 urban forms of 126 women and 127 workers and 126-30 see also drinking; hobbies; sport lesbianism, see homosexuality Leninism 249 see also Marxism-Leninism; Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism 'levelling down’241, 242 liberalism 27, 195, 199, 200, 203, 205 and women's movement 197, 206 see also Westernizers libraries 60,80,227 lichnost13–26,287 as aspiration 69, 112, 153 elusiveness of 13, 27 see also identities, personal linguistics 246-7 literacy: drives for 67-9 and kul'turnost 301 levels of 45, 67, 271, 274 peasantry and 67, 69 political 60, 267, 274, 311 in pre-Petrine Russia 39-40, 190 and propaganda 230, 267 and socialization 257-9 uses made of 121, 126, 155, 191 women and 43, 67, 108, 274 workers and 69 see also education; reading literary criticism 40, 42–3, 46–8, 49, 59, 135, 207, 208, 263 development of 42-3 literature: anomaly' of Russian I-2, 49 and commercialism 6, 43, 45, 47, 48, 121-2,130-2,139-47,149,151,261 didacticism in 68, 69–70, 94, 121–5, 154, 209–10, 268 and folkore 42, 210, 213,261, 286 functionality of 1–2, 6, 21, 37–49, 121,237,276 and genre 40–1, 42, 44, 45–6, 48 and history 1-5 institutions of 2; authorship 39, 44–5; censorship 2, 45, 47, 172, 174, 179,181, 239,246, 261–2, 287, 317; patronage 45, 149, 246, 262–3; publishing 43, 45, 94, 139–40, 153, 208, 231, 248, 259–60; readership 40, 43, 44–5, 49, 69–70, 151, 289; salons 45, 248; see also journals; literary criticism Jews and 211-16 and kul'turnost300–2, 306–7 and literary language 39-40, 42-3, 44, 46, 47, 134–6, 216 modernism in 3, 48, 94, 98, 130, 135, 141-7,207,209-11 monumentalization of 171–2, 248, 286,315–16 and national identities 29, 30, 31, 40, 44, 167,171–2,178–80, 181, 187, 256, 301,315–16 and objectivity 4, 88, 89, 93–8,24 professionalization of 47, 139 proletarian 70 as propaganda 271, 289 and realism 3,93–8,116, 136–7,141, 207,208-9,211 and romanticism 29, 30, 31, 43, 44–5,135, 142,210, 211 as social commentary 1–2, 59, 66, 68, 95–6,135, 136–7, 138, 174–5, 178,209 translated 123,317 and Western literature 1, 14 women and 3, 44, 47,48, 70, 118, 121, 123, 140, 141, 179, 194–5, 198–9,201,205, 207–11, 284-5 workers and 69–71, 141 see also children's literature; literaturnost'; lubochnaia literatura; pis'mennost'; popular literature literaturnost6, 37–49 see also literature local government 72, 203, 245, 288 and education 66-8 and state 61-2,238 and urbanization 60-6 lubki (popular prints) 93, 147 see also visual arts lubochnaia literatura (penny dreadfuls) 30, 69, 120, 155 see also popular literature magazines 269,306 children's 260,263 fashion 133,296 humorous 304-5 illustrated 90-1, 111, 112, 121-2, 150, 268, 315; see also Ogonek women's 280,281,283,284 youth 300 see also journals; newspapers; press manners, see etiquette Marxism 25, 35, 36, 40, 173, 175–6, 196, 197–8, 201, 203, 242, 257, 291 Marxism-Leninism247,303 Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism 247 mass culture 113-21,273 see also popular culture mass meetings 237 mass song 269–71, 289 materialism 172-3,178 dialectical 247, 302, 303 media 237,272,311,315 see also journals; magazines; newspapers; press; radio medical societies 84 medicine 85–8,242, 244–5,250–2 women and 83,200-1,204 zemstva and 84, 87, 96, 244, 252 Mensheviks 176,238 mentalities, see identities merchants 62,132,137,238 conservatism of 61, 151 and education 136 and emergence of bourgeoisie 59, 73-4 literary representations of 121-3, 162 n. 64 and patronage of arts 151–2 and philanthropy 78-9 and public sphere 59 and publishing 43 and social mobility 73-4, 78–9 meshchanstvo: as petite bourgeoisie 60-1, 112-13, 291, 300, 305 as‘philistinism’6 as social estate (soslovie) 6—7, 72 see also bourgeois attitudes; bourgeoisie middle classes, see bourgeoisie military service 126, 267 women and 193,209, 282–3,284 modernism 130,174-5,215–16,256 denunciations of 233 in literature 3, 48, 94, 98, 130, 135, 141–7,207,209-11,263-4 in music 187-8,215 in opera and ballet 187–8 in sculpture 227 in visual arts 183-4 see also avant-garde modernization 58,71-2,113 belief in 81, 87, 152, 195, 202 see also progress monuments 227,235-6 motherhood 275,280-1 see also gender roles; identities, sexual; women museums and art galleries 68, 85, 133, 145, 170–2, 180, 236, 288, 316, 317 and national identities 170—1 see also museums of daily life museums of daily life (muzei byta) 288 music 167,246 and folklore 30, 185, 187, 188,286, 287; see also folk music modernism in 187–8,215 and national identities 167, 187–8, 315 see also ballet; opera; operetta; popular song music-hall 30, 115–18,119, 129,139, 140,141,189-90,288 Muslims 205, 206 muzei byta, see museums of daily life mystical' anarchism, see anarchism, ‘mystical’ mysticism 144, 173, 174–5,180, 257 names 289 Narkompros (Narodnyi komissariat prosveshcheniia, People's Commissariat ofEnlightenment) 69, 231, 240, 242, 243, 248, 256–7, 267 Narkomzdrav (Narodnyi komissariat zdravookhraneniia, People's Commissariat of Healthcare) 242,244 narod (people): definitions of 28, 285 as embodiment of Russian national character 28–9,31-2,33,136 representations of: in culture 88, 92, 116, 136–7; by intelligentsia 2, 5, 15,21, 24,28,35–6,59,70–1, 112–13, 175,177,191–2; by Marxists 35-6; by populists 24, 35–6, 137, 175, 285; by Slavophiles 32–3, 34–5; by Tsarist narod (cont.): government 31–2,35;by Westernizers 33-4 see also identities, national; narodnost'; peasantry; workers Narodnaia Volia (People's Will) movement 175 narodnost'6, 13,113,186–7 in culture 286-7 elusiveness of 28 official’30-2,34-5,286 origins of 28-30 in Slavophile—Westernizer debate 32-5 in revolutionary thought 35–6 see also identities, national narodnye doma, see people's palaces narodnye gulian’ia 80 see also street entertainments nationalities, demands for autonomy of 198-9,203, 205–6 nationalization 231,238-9,292 neo-classicism 29,48, 76,138,185 Neo-Kantianism 89 neo-primitivism 182,211 NEP, see New Economic Policy nepotism 240 'new arts'movement 130, 139, 208, 209 New Economic Policy (NEP) 231, 276–7,280,285,291–2,309 newspapers 71–2, 112, 121–2, 207, 268, 269,315 popular 120, 123, 130, 144, 155, 192, 193 see also journals; magazines; press nihilism 196, 197–8 nobility 59, 132, 200,238 and peasantry 58 and public sphere 65–6 as social estate (soslovie) 72–3 and social mobility 72—4 OBERIU (Ob"edinenie real'nogo iskusstva, Association for Real Art) 146,264 objectivity 58,201 cult of 88 and literature 4, 88,89, 93–8,249 and newspapers 72 and photography 88,92–3 problematic status of 88–98, 247–9, 250, 252–3, 254, 255 and science 82-3,88,247 obshchestvennitsa movement 245, 297-300 obshchestvennost'6, 26–7, 61, 71, 79, 81, 245,297,303 see also citizenship; civic society; obshchestvennitsa movement; obshchestvo; public service obshchestvo 6,26-7,33,153 see also obshchestvennost occult, see mysticism October Revolution, see Revolutions, Russian: October 1917 Octobrist movement 258 Ogonek 268,292,294,301–2 see also magazines, illustrated Old Believers 73, 174, 205 Old’ Bolsheviks, see Bolsheviks, Old' opera 124,167 and national identities 185—7 operetta 115,116 oral history 286,288 Orthodox Church 38,274 and culture 153 and education 66-7,190 and gender roles 105, 275 and poor relief 64 and state 172-4 and temperance movements 80 see also Orthodoxy Orthodoxy 95 and national identities 22, 28, 30, 31, 33,.34, 35, 167–8, 172–3, 176, 178, 180-1,188,286 popular attitudes towards 190—1 painting, see visual arts palaces of culture (dvortsy kul’tury) 227-8 Pale of Settlement 167–8, 213,238 parki kul'tury i otdykha, see Parks of Culture and Rest Parks of Culture and Rest (parki kul'tury i otdykha) 272, 294 partiinost'(Party-mindedness) 28, 247, 286 Party, see Communist Party Party-mindedness, see partiinost passport system 232, 266, 313 patriotism, see identities, national patronage, see literature, institutions of peasant poets 191-2 peasantry 72, 85–7, 132, 241, 274, 279, 287-8 and collective identities 19, 22, 24, 26, 33, 35–6, 137–8, 166, 178, 265 and consumption 106-7, 111-12 and drinking 126-7 and education 67,68,80–1 and leisure 126–30 and literacy67, 69 and nobility 58 and individual identities 14, 15 and protest 266 and urbanization 59, 64, 67, 107–8 and workers 35–6,273, 285 see also intelligentsia; narod; workers pedology 243,263,264 penal institutions 259, 267 see also prison camps penny dreadfuls, see lubochnaia literatura pensions 245 people, the, see narod People's Commissariat of Enlightenment, see Narkompros People's Commissariat of Healthcare, see Narkomzdrav people's palaces (narodnye doma) 65, 80-1 people's theatres 80-1 see also people's palaces People's Universities 68 Peredvizhniki, see Wanderers perestroika 277 Petrine reforms, see Westernization Petrushka (traditional puppet theatre) 120, 130, 144, 147, 189, 262 philanthropy 79, 80, 81, 95, 127, 138, 181,191,250,262 and education 66-7 merchants and 78-9 radical hostility to 65–6 small deeds’58 women and 198,201-2 see also charity philosophy 167 photography 88, 90–1, 92–3, 96, 97, 249,268 Pioneer movement 258,259,268,278 pis'mennost38-43 place names, alteration of 230 pleasure gardens 115, 116, 129, 272 pochvennichestvo 22 pogroms 190 poor relief 64–6 see also charity; philanthropy police, see law and order popular culture 3, 112, 273 didacticism in 121-5, 154 and elite culture 2, 139–55 as reflection of social conditions3 urban versus rural 30, 113 womenin 119 workers and 153–5 see also mass culture; popular entertainments; popular literature; popular song popular entertainments 113-21, 119, 120-1,125,149 commercialism in 130, 139, 143-4 traditional 113, 120, 144 see also leisure popular literature 47, 112, 113-15, 121–3, 124, 130, 139, 140, 144, 152, 155,292,317 see also lubochnaia literatura; popular culture popular song: cinema and 273 traditional 4, 113,128,211 in urban entertainment 116, 120, 129, 143, 146, 154 see also chastushka; cruel romance'; mass song populism 7,65,207 revolutionary 35–6, 175–6, 196, 197-8,203 see also identities, national; narodnost pornography 76,317 poshlost (vulgarity) 6–7, 121, 305, 312 postcards 92-3 posters 274 post-modernism 57 press 60,309-10 censorship of 71,238 mass-circulation 59,71 press (cont.): women and 194–6, 204–5,207, 208 see also journals; magazines; newspapers prison camps 165, 239, 259, 309, 314–15 private clubs 74–7, 113, 124 private societies 74, 113 privileges, material 287, 295, 307–8, 313 production 108,154, 291, 312 see also consumption production novels 262, 263 professional societies 59, 74, 87 progress 58,252 beliefin 79,81,83,242 celebration of 227, 234 see also modernization proletarian literature, see literature, proletarian proletariat, see workers Proletkul't (Proletarskie kul'turnoprosvetitel'skie organizatsii, Proletarian Cultural and Educational Organizations) 71, 240-1,273 propaganda: anti-religious 191 anti-Soviet 267 nationalist 188 political 69, 203 pro-revolutionary 147, 166, 175 pro-war 147, 166, 190 Soviet 230,235,237,263,271, 273-4,287,289,296,303,312 see also agitprop prosperity, sanctioned by Soviet government 293,295 prostitution 69, 119, 138-9,201,278 regulation of 66, 204 protest: by peasantry 266 by workers 266-7,309-10 see also rebellion Protestantism 173-4,205 provisional government (February-October 1917) 199 psychiatry 90,91 psychoanalysis 256-7 psychology, educational, see pedology public health 242, 244–5, 259, 274, 276 and urbanization 63, 66, 75, 79 see also hygiene; sanitation public service 233, 242, 250 see also citizenship; intelligentsia; obshchestvennost public sphere: emergence of 59, 60–6, 74–5, 164 n. 87 Jewsand 213 literature as 47 merchants and 59 nobility and 65–6 state and 60–6, 74–5 women and 194–6, 199, 206 public transport 62, 63, 234, 313 publishing, see literature, institutions of purges 232,241,280,295,313,315 see also Great Purges rabfaki (rabochie fakul'tety, worker faculties) 69, 267 racism 215,293 see also anti-Semitism; chauvinism radicalism 175–8,202–3,237,256,304 and intellectual life 240, 242–3 and science 83, 201 women and 196, 198, 200, 201, 207, 208,211,279 see also Marxism; revolution; socialism radio 268,269,273,311,312,315 RAPP (Rossiiskaia assotsiatsiia proletarskikh pisatelei, Russian Association of Proletarian Writers) 285 RAPM (Rossiiskaia assotsiatsiia proletarskikh muzykantov, Russian Association of Proletarian Musicians) 285 rationalism 58,201,233 see also anti-rationalism rationing 245,292,294, 308–9,313 see also shortages raznochintsy 21,24, 44, 73, 177 reading 301,303-4 see also literacy realism 130,264 in literature 3,93-8, 136-7, 141, 207, 208–9,211,249 and objectivity 4, 57, 93–8 in visual arts 91, 116, 171, 248 see also socialist realism rebellion 314-15 by workers 231 see also bab'i bunty; Kronstadt rebellion; protest reception, cultural 8 n. 7, 273–4, 286, 287-90 religion: popular attitudes towards 190—1 radical hostility to 18o, 201 restrictions on freedom of 167–8, 173-4,203,233 and science 172–3, 174 and women's movement 209 see also anthroposophy; Catholicism; Evangelical Christianity; Jews; Judaism; mysticism; Orthodox Church; Orthodoxy; Protestantism; sectarianism; spiritualism; theosophy religious festivals, see festivals, religious Religious-Philosophical Society 173-4 retailing 108–11,292 see also stores response, see reception revolution 155, 165, 175–6, 179, 203, 239 Bolshevik glorification of 227, 270, 291,295–6 and urbanization 64, 101 n. 14, 66, 81 women and 196, 197–8, 201 Revolutions, Russian: 1905: 81, 127, 153, 169, 175, 182, 189, 195, 197, 199, 200; commemoration of 23o; cultural dimension of 59–6o; and national identities 34-5; reforms resulting from 68, 167, 174; see also Bloody Sunday 1917(February) 165–6,168,189, 199, 200, 238, 259 1917(October) 36,68, 69, 165,166, 175,193,198,206, 233, 236–7, 252, 286; commemoration of 148, 230, 271, 279, 313; cultural consequences of 152–3, 192, 213, 227, 231, 239, 259; popular attitudes towards 288–90; seen as point of rupture 179, 215, 227–30, 232; women's movement and 199-200 ritual, see ceremonial romanticism: and individual 16, 43, 44–5 and national identities 29, 30, 31 and Russian literature 29, 30, 31, 43, 44–5, 135, 142, 210, 211 Russia: as backward’58–9, 106, 165, 179, 202 contrasted with West 5, 13–14, 16, 22–4,26,28–9,59,73,87,149 pre-Petrine 13-14,18–19,33,35, 37–43,77,113,129,191 unique destiny of 1,5, 6, 13, 18 see also identities, national Russian language: and commercialism 130–2, 134, 135, 136 and foreign influences 28 and kul'turnost298, 300–1, 302, 304 and literature 39–40, 42–3, 44, 46, 47,134-6,216 and national identities 24-5, 44 and social etiquette 132-4 and urbanization 60 Russian Women's Mutual Philanthropic Society 202, 204, 207 Russification: as official policy 31, 32, 34, 167–8, 185,194,205,316 popular attitudes towards 189 Russocentrism, see identities, national Russo-Japanese War (1904-5) 165, 179,203,206,235 Russo-Turkish War (1877-8) 165, 180,190 salons, see literature, institutions of samokritika (self-vilification) 313 sanitation 62,63-4,234 see also hygiene; public health schools 80,167,245 commercial 73,136, 242 curriculum in 240, 242, 243-4, 257–8,315 schools (cont.): gimnazii 82, 136,242 Party 242,267 private 136,244 religion in 190-1 science in 82 state 57,66–7,244,317 see also education; universities science 6, 67, 75, 82–91, 166, 200, 240, 254-5,263 discourses on 58,85 hostility to 88–90, 94, 172–3 and radicalism 83, 201 and religion 172-3, 174 in schools 82 Soviet privileging of 98, 233 state and 82–4,87–8,98,242, 246-7 in universities 87–8 see also Darwinism; objectivity Scout movement 78,258,267 sculpture 171,248,268 modernism in 227 Scythianism, see identities, national Second World War (1939–45) 232, 233, 279, 280, 287,300, 314, 316 see also Great Patriotic War sectarianism 174, 192, 205 sentimentalism 14, 29 serfdom 14-15,29,30-1,32,64, 175 see also Emancipation of the Serfs sexuality, see homosexuality; identities, sexual shop signs 108 in verbal and visual arts 141, 143, 145,147,148 shops, see stores shortages: of consumer goods 292, 293, 295–6, 308,311,313 of food 294,308–9,311 ofhousing 265–6 see also rationing show trials 237 Silver Age 139, 166 Siniaia bluza (Blue Overall) theatre group 272 Skoptsy(Castrators) 174, 205 Slavophiles 89,209 views on personal and national identities 6,22–5, 166, 172, 179-80 versus Westernizers 16, 22, 25, 26–7, 32-5,74 sobornost6,26-7,178 small deeds’, see philanthropy social class 176, 197–8, 200, 204, 287 as basis of conflict 231, 239, 241, 244–5, 254, 258, 273–4, 304 and cultural consumption 4, 152—5 and estate (soslovie) 73–4, 153 as explanatory category 2, 4, 59–60, 78,248 and national identities 26, 27 see also bourgeoisie; merchants; nobility; peasantry; social mobility; workers Social Democrats 176, 191, 199, 203, 204,236 social engineering 75 see also identities, programmes for formation of social mobility 59, 72–4, 75–7, 107, 153 socialism 17, 19, 24, 34–6, 144, 166, 175–6, 177, 213, 256, 285, 286, 292 302 women's movement and 205, 206, 275,280 see also Marxism; populism radicalism socialist realism 28, 233, 264, 268, 280, 284-5,286 in visual arts 181, 268,305 Socialist Revolutionaries (SRs) 175–6, 203,231,311 sociology 64,83, 86, 201 and study ofliterature 247–8 soslovie (estate) 6—7, 27,59, 72–4 and social class 73-4, 153 Soviet Artists' Union 245 Soviet Composers' Union 245 Soviet Film-Makers' Union 245 Soviet–Finnish War (1939-40) 311 Soviet Writers' Union 245, 246, 285 First Congress of(1934) 260, 261, 262,285,286 spiritualism 167,172-5,205 sport 75–8,259,272 see also fizkul'tura movement SRs, see Socialist Revolutionaries Stakhanovite movement 272, 280, 290, 296–7, 300, 301, 302, 303–4 Stalinism 232-3,234, 235,285 and culture 233, 261, 264, 268, 282 state 6 extension of power of 57, 238–9 and intellectual life 242, 245–6, 247, 255 and local government 61–2, 238 and national identities 31 and Orthodox Church 172-4 and personal identities 13 and public sphere 60–6, 74–5 and science 82–4, 87–8,98,242, 246-7 Slavophiles' views of 33 Westernizers' views of 17–20, 25 see also civic society state planning 246 see also collectivization of agriculture; First Five-Year Plan; industrialization stores (magaziny) 4, 108–11, 291, 308, 310 see also department stores; retailing street entertainments 62 see also funfairs; narodnye gulian’ia street festivals, see festivals, street street signs, see shop signs strikes 309,310 style, literary 40, 41, 44–5 style russe 149, 183, 188, 235, 236 suffrage: universal 203,206 women's 195,199,202-4,206 syllabus, see schools, curriculum in symbolism 4, 94, 130, 135, 146, 147, 167,173,174–5,177,183–4,210 see also avant-garde; modernism telephones 62 temperance movements 62-3,75, 79–81,127,152 see also drinking terror, political 232,255,313 terrorism 175–6,197,198,200,230,267 theatre 128,227,288–9 and agitprop 272–3 children's 260, 264 and commercialism 123-4, 129, 139, 140,147–9 didacticism in 23–5, 154, 309 musical 115-18 variety 115–18,154,188,272 see also music hall; popular entertainments; theatres theatres: imperial 113, 115, 124, 125, 140, 185, 187 private 113,115,121,124–5,187,231 theosophy 167, 173, 174, 205 thick' journals, see journals, thick Tolstoyanism 24, 191, 257 totalitarianism 232 tourism 75,78 town, see city trade unions 127, 149 Trans-Siberian Railway 58 trudovye knizhki, see work books unemployment 64 Union of Equal Rights for Women 203, 204, 206, 207 Union of Liberation 203 Union of Russian Men 34-5 Union of the Russian People 34-5 Union of Unions 205 universities 136,203,245 academic freedom in 84,86 expansion of 82-3 restrictions on access to 167 and science 87-8 see also People's Universities; rabfaki urbanization 58–9,74, 193,198,200-1, 265-6 andlocal government 6o-6 and national identities 136, 152, 182 and patterns of consumption 107—8, 111-12 and philanthropy 65–6,75 and popular entertainments 30, 62-4,119 women and 108,200-1 see also city; industrialization utopianism 256,288,291,302 Vekhi(Landmarks) 176–8 visual arts 2, 4, 68, 167, 246 avant-garde and 141–2, 144–52, 181, 183–4,210,248 and commercialism 141-2, 147–52 and folklore 182 Jews and 213-16 and kul'turnost’ 306–7 and national identities 170—1, 180–5,187,213-16,315 and photography 90-1 see also icon; lubki; Wanderers voluntary associations 59, 74–5, 80, 124 see also philanthropy vospitanie, see education, moral Vseobuch 267-9 Wanderers (Peredvizhniki), school of realist painters 68, 147–8,171, 180-2 War Communism 231 welfare services 259 see also charity; philanthropy; public health Westernization 168, 195 negative views of 28–9, 30, 33, 35 Petrine reforms 14, 15, 19, 29, 33, 41-2,43 see also Slavophiles; Westernizers Westernizers: versus Slavophiles 16, 22, 25, 26–7, 32-5,74 views on personal and national identities 6,16–22,25 woman question'(zhenskii vopros) 78, 194–5,199,201–2, 207, 213–15, 274 see also women; women's movement women: barred from elected office 64 blamed for social disintegration 137-8 and charity 60–1, 65, 74, 208 and cinema 118–19,120-1,128,140, 273-4,275-85 as commodities 118,119 and consumption 106, 108, 109–12, 118 and education 65,82, 83, 167, 194, 195–6, 198, 199, 200–2, 204, 207-8 emancipation of 75, 118–19, 194, 196–8, 199, 200, 206, 207, 211, 258,274–6,285 and employment 194, 195–6, 200-2, 208,275,280,284 and fashion 133-4 and leisure 127 and literacy 43, 67, 108, 274 and medicine 83, 200-1, 204 and military service 193, 209, 282–3, 284 and national identities 30—1, 197, 198, 206, 276,282, 284, 285 and philanthropy 198, 201-2 and press 194–6,204–5,207,208 and public sphere 194–6, 199, 206 and radicalism 196, 198, 200, 201, 207,208, 211, 279 and revolution 196, 197–8, 201 and sport 78 and suffrage 195, 199, 202–4, 206 and urbanization 108, 200—1 Westernizers' attitudes towards 19, 2I see also‘woman question'; women's movement Women's Battalions 193, 249 women's movement 4, 166, 193–207, 208 see alsowoman question'; women Women's Progressive Party 204 women's rebellions, see bab'i bunty Women's Section, see Zhenotdel work books (trudovye knizhki) 232, 266 worker-intelligentsia 69–71, 130, 155 worker poets 70–1, 191, 192 workers 59,60,132,241,287–8 and consumption 109, 111-12 and drinking 126-7 and education 5, 69-71,80-1 andleisure 126-30 and literacy69 literary tastes of 69–71, 141 literature by 70-1, 191, 192 and Marxism 176 and national identities 188-93 and peasantry 35–6, 273,285 and popular culture 153-5 and protest 266, 309–10 and rebellion 231 see also industrialization; narod; peasantry; urbanization World of Art movement 182, 183, 187-8 wrestling 77-8 zaum'(transrational language) 211, 263 Zemlia i Volia (Land and Liberty) movement 175 zemstva 66, 67,80,83, 112 and medicine 84, 87, 96, 244, 252 Zhenotdel (Women's Section) 199–200, 207, 274 zhenskii vopros, seewoman question' Z00S 115,125