## 6. Form and Function

A basic principle of slow technology is to amplify the presence of things to make them into something more than just a silent tool for fast access to something else. This amplification is not just a matter of aesthetical surface, but concerns the whole thing as it is used. We do not talk about functionality and design, but about the complete expression of a thing as it appears in the given context.

In the case of a word processor it is easy to point out its function; it is a tool that supports its user when writing and otherwise constructing documents. So when designing things that should invite and make room for reflection it seems obvious that function is all about supporting reflection on some given issue. So, why not simply put up a sign saying ‘‘PLEASE REFLECT ON X’’? One basic reason is that the sign through its message – its expression – does not give any precise meaning to the intended act of reflecting. Assume the function of a painting hanging on the wall in my room, as it seems to be used, is to make me happy, or at least to put me into the mood to smile. Why is it not enough to have a reminder sign on the wall saying in capital letters ‘‘SMILE’’ or ‘‘THINK OF YOUR FAVOURITE PAINTING BY MATISSE’’, etc? A key reason why this substitution is pointless is that the reminder sign is very imprecise in telling me what my favourite painting by Matisse is or why I should smile. It is the expression of the Matisse painting itself – or probably a reproduction – hanging on the wall that is important. The function of a thing designed to invite and make room for reflection is inherent in the precise meaning of reflecting that is given by the total expression of the given thing; function is inherent in design expression.

In slow technology as an environmental interaction design this interplay between form and function is clear; form is the process to learn and realise function, the structure of building a living environment. We may think of form as that structure that presents the design expression, i.e. the structure of appearance and presence. Thus in slow technology form brings forth function. But in the present context form is not necessarily a consequence of the primary functionality of an object. Take for instance a slow mirror, an object that only very gradually turns into a mirror and only gradually deletes the mirrored image. It functions as a mirror, but this ‘‘mirror’’ appears in a form that to some extent hides the basic functionality of a mirror. This is similar to how a puzzle, due to its form as a puzzle, hides a picture. In this case, form covers the primary functionality of an object as a bearer of slowness.

## 7. Evaluating Slow Technology

One of the implications of designing for ‘‘presence’’ instead of ‘‘use’’ is that evaluations will have to change as well. When evaluating a certain design given the objectives specific to slow technology, what are the relevant questions to ask? The need to build prototypes and expose them to real-world settings is likely to be as important to slow technology as it is to any other practical study of how to develop principles for interaction design.

In the present context the question about good design is intimately interwoven with questions concerning what a given designed thing really is. In the case of ‘‘tools’’ it can be argued that the basic of a tool is understanding how it is used – a tool is always something that is used for something. In the case of other artefacts, such as works of art, this basic understanding has to be something else. One cannot explain what a symphony by Beethoven is, as a piece of art, by empirical studies of a collection of concert visitors. To answer this question is more like formulating the theory, or model, of its inner logic, aesthetics, etc. on which a sensible empirical study can rest.

The examples of slow technology presented here are neither works of art nor tools. However, they share properties with both extremes. We have argued that good design of slow technology is primarily about inner logic and aesthetics, since these seem to be key factors in creating something that can serve as an incitement for reflection. Given these objectives design will have to be evaluated by investigating the design, perhaps in a way similar to the methods developed in art critique: cultivating evaluation as the art of explanation and understanding.

Evaluations of slow technology will, however, also share characteristics with more typical interaction design methodologies since we aim to create building blocks that people can use to furnish their environments. The empirical evaluations we have carried out clearly showed that slow technology has to be carefully framed and introduced in order not to be perceived merely as some poorly designed and, as a result, useless tool. Part of the problem is how to introduce a kind of technology that behaves in a way which we normally would expect to find at an art exhibition or when using a musical instrument, in the context of information technology in everyday life. For instance, we have tried the ChatterBox in a range of different settings with differing results [32]. When used at offices, many people perceived it as inefficient and the transformation of information as more of degradation than as inspiration. The very same prototype used at a reception party made people think about, laugh at and talk about its texts.

## 8. Developing Guidelines for Slow Technology

One of the basic ideas behind the examples of slow technology is to use simplicity in material in combination with complexity of form. Much design, especially of digital media, is about creating something that is immediately appealing and impressive. This is not the case with slow technology. Taking the ChatterBox as an example, the purpose is not to create an exciting visual presentation. Neither is it to create an innovative text generator or natural language parser. Although these are important parts of the system, the main purpose is to present the material submitted to ChatterBox in a special way, namely as recombinations and transformations of partly familiar fragments of texts. This makes the ChatterBox less impressive from a technological point of view, and many ‘‘users’’ started out with the question ‘‘So what?’’. This is nevertheless a starting point for reflecting upon it: What does it do? Where does this and that sentence come from? and so on. Similar questions can be asked about the other examples.

Simplicity in material invites people to reflect when there is an obvious complexity in form. The modest appearance of the ChatterBox or the SoundMirror does not stand in the way when one wants to find out more about their inner workings – their appearance even indicates that there must be something more to them than this appearance. The combination of a modest and a slow appearance is also what makes slow technology interesting in the case of environmental design – when trying to make technology interesting and stimulating when present over long periods of time. Given the experiences presented here, we propose two basic guidelines for slow technology:

. focus on slowness of appearance (materialisation, manifestation) and presence – the slow materialisation and design presence of form (F)

. focus on aesthetics of material and use simple basic tools of modern technology – the clear and simple design presence of matetial (M).

The design should give time for reflection through its slow form-presence and invite us to reflect through its clear, distinct and simple material-expression. It is a combination of simplicity in material with a subtle complexity in form focusing on time as a basic element of composition. Technology should bring forth the material, not hide it.

## 9. Concluding Remarks

Interaction design in the area of HCI mainly concerns itself with tools and work methods for certain specific tasks. But in a more general sense interaction design can also be concerned with the design of an environment in which these tasks occur. This is interaction design in the sense that we design structures within which we express presence and build our ‘‘work-worlds’’ and ‘‘life-worlds’’ through interaction with the environment. The notion of slow technology is, just like calm technology, a kind of leitmotif for this type of interaction design. It brings a uniform approach to basic notions like appearance, presence, expression, environmental interaction, etc. as well as to the inherent relation between form and function in environmental design. Slowness is a key factor that could bring forth, and make room for, reflection. The idea with a design leitmotif is to conceptualise the design style, the form of expression.

It is clear that there is a point of convergence of technology, design and art in a design philosophy like slow technology (cf. [33–35]). In practice, such a convergence can take on many different routes, ranging from examples such as Bauhaus to more modest forms of collaboration as in various artist-in-residence programs [19]. Slow technology should not be seen just as a call for more creativity or artistic expression in a world of information technology, but as an attempt to revisit some basic problems in interface design from a perspective that bears on ideas about environmental design derived from several different disciplines. It is also an attempt to discuss the foundations for design as such in information technology (cf. [36,37]).

The importance of aesthetics in slow technology is a consequence of the design objective, as is the focus on the inner logic of the design. It might be easy to confuse any study of technology with the design objective of functioning as incitements for reflection, with art. This might be because of the predominance of the study and development of tools. However, if we instead turn to architecture or interior design, where the environment as a whole is in focus, the combination of aesthetics and more technological issues is central. As computers increasingly become a part of our everyday lives, such a combination of interests is likely to be of great importance to interaction design.

We believe that the transition from, or rather complement to, the perspective on technology as ‘‘tool’’ to a perspective on information technology as being a part of a complex designed and inhabited environment will be important to future design methodologies [38]. Not only does this imply that we have to engage in a range of issues concerning the role and effects of new technology, it also opens up many interesting new possibilities. One such possibility is a technology, such as slow technology, that is not ‘‘used’’ at all but nevertheless is a part of the environment, adding to its ambience and supporting various activities taking place in it.

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Tobias Skog, Patricija Jaksetic, Peter Ljungstrand and Lars Erik Holmquist.

## References

1. Leopoldseder H, Scho¨pf C (eds). Cyberarts 99. Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, 1999

2. Schweppe M, Blau, B (eds). Electronic art and animation catalog. SIGGRAPH ’99. ACM Press, 1999

3. Fitzmaurice GW, Buxton W. An empirical evaluation of graspable user interfaces: towards specialized, spacemultiplexed input. In: Proceedings of CHI’97, ACM Press, 1997; 43–50

4. Streitz NA, Konomi S, Burkhardt H-J (eds). Cooperative buildings: integrating information, organization, and architecture. Lecture Notes in Computer Science Nr. 1370. Springer, Heidelberg, 1998

5. Weiser M. The computer for the 21st Century. Scientific American 1991; 933–940

6. Rekimoto J, Saitoh M. Augmented surfaces: a spatially

continuous work space for hybrid computing environments. In: Proceedings of CHI ’99. ACM Press, 1999; 378–385

7. Wellner P, Mackay W, Gold R (eds). Back to the real world. Special issue on Computer-Augmented Environments. Communications of the ACM, 1993; 36: 24–97

8. Weiser M, Seely Brown J. Designing calm technology. PowerGrid Journal 1.1.1996. Available at: http:// www.powergrid.com/1.01/calmtech.html

9. Ishii H,Ullmer B. Tangible bits: towards seamless interfaces between people, bits and atoms. In: Proceedings of CHI ’97. ACM Press, 1997; 234–241

10. Heiner JM, Hudson SE, Tanaka K. The information percolator: ambient information display in a decorative object. In: Proceedings of UIST ’99. ACM Press, 1999; 141–148

11. Pedersen ER, Sokoler T. AROMA: abstract representation of presence supporting mutual awareness. In: Proceedings of CHI ’97. ACM Press, 1997; 51–58

12. Wisneski C, Ishii H, Dahley A, Gorbet M, Brave S, Ullmer B, Yarin P. Ambient displays: turning architectual space into an interface between people and digital information. In: Streitz NA, Konomi S, Burkhardt H-J (eds). Cooperative buildings: integrating information, organization, and architecture. Lecture Notes in Computer Science Nr. 1370. Springer, Heidelberg, 1998; 22– 32

13. Jones JC. Design methods, second edition. John Wiley & Sons, 1992

14. Dunne A. Hertzian tales: electronic products, aesthetic experience and critical design. RCA CRD Research Publications, London, 1999

15. Gaver W, Dunne A. Projected realities: conceptual design for cultural effect. In: Proceedings of CHI’99. ACM Press, 1999; 600–607

16. Norman DA. The psychology of everyday things. (The design of everyday things). Basic Books, 1988

17. Buchanan R. Rhetoric, humanism and design. In: Buchanan R, Margolin V. (eds) Discovering design – explorations in design studies. The University of Chigaco Press, 1995; 23–66

18. Zaccai G. Art and technology, aesthetics redefined. In: Buchanan R, Margolin V (eds) Discovering design – explorations in design studies. The University of Chigaco Press, 1995; 3–12

19. Harris C. Art and innovation – the Xerox Artist-In-Residence Program. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1999

20. Resnick M, Berg R, Eisenberg M. Beyond black boxes: bringing transparency and aesthetics back to scientific investigations. Journal of the Learning Sciences 2000; 9: 7–30.

21. Falk J, Redstro¨m J, Bjo¨ rk S. Amplifying reality. In: Gellersen H-W (ed) Handheld and ubiquitous computing. Lecture Notes in Computer Science No. 1707. Springer, Heidelberg, 1999; 274–280

22. Lo¨vlie L. AudioLives, in community of the future. In: Caenepeel M, Benyon D, Smith D (eds) Proceedings of the i3 Annual Conference, 1999; 147–150

23. Camurri PF. Interactive environments for music and multimedia. Multimedia Systems 1999; 7: 32–47

24. de Marinis P. An archeology of sound: an anthropology of communication. In: Harris C (ed) Art and innovation – The Xerox Artist-In-Residence Program. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1999; 164–184

25. Shaeffer M. The tuning of the world. Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1977

26. Stockhausen K. Aus den sieben Tagen. Universal Edition, Wien, 1968

27. Addlesee MD, Jones AH, Livesey F, Samari FS. The ORL active floor. IEEE Personal Communications 1997; 4: 35–41

28. Redstro¨m J, Skog T, Hallna¨s L. Informative art: using amplified artworks as ambient displays. In: Mackay WE (ed) Proceedings of DARE 2000. Elsinore, University of Aarhus, 2000

29. Skog T, Holmquist LE. WebAware: continuous visualization of web site traffic in a public place. In: Szwillus G, Turner T (eds) Extended Abstracts of CHI ’2000 (Student Poster). ACM Press, 2000; 351–352

30. Arnowitz JS, Willems E, Faber L, Priester R. Mahler, Mondriaan, and Bauhaus: using artistic ideas to improve application usability. In: Proceedings of DIS (Designing Interactive Systems) ’97. ACM Press, 1997; 13–21

31. Prusinkiewicz P. In search of the right abstraction: the synergy between art, science, and information technology in the modelling of natural phenomena. In: Sommerer C, Migninneau L (eds) Art @ Science. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1998; 60–68

32. Redstro¨m J, Ljungstrand P, Jaksetic P. The ChatterBox: using text manipulation in an entertaining information display. In: Fels SS, Poulin P (eds) Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2000, Montreal, CHCCS, 2000; 111– 118

33. Goodman C. Art and technology: the ineluctable liaison. In: Sommerer C, Mignonneau L (eds) Art @ Science, Springer, 1998. pp. 247-261.

34. Naimark, M. Art (‘‘and’’ or ‘‘versus’’) Technology - Some Personal Observations. In: Sommerer, C. & Mignonneau, L. (eds.) Art @ Science. Springer, Heidelberg, 1998; 123–132

35. Weibel P. The unreasonable Eeffectiveness of the methodological convergence of art and science. In: Sommerer C, Mignonneau L (eds) Art @ Science. Springer, Heidelberg, 1998; 166–180

36. Dunne A, Seago A. New methodologies in art and design: the object as discourse. Design Issues 1999; 15: 11–18

37. Glanville R. Researching design and designing research. Design Issues 1999; 15: 80–92

38. Nardi BA, O’Dey V. Information ecologies: using technology with heart. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1999