expressed this grand narrative: the loss of spontaneous, symbolic human relations; more and more of society falling under the logic of signs and the code; the substitution of ludic and combinatorial practices with cultural signs for culture as a symbolic system; the achievement of communion through technical rather than symbolic means; sexuality as a spectre rather than as symbolic rejoicing and exchange; and the loss of authentic relationships. In the years that followed, Baudrillard actually clarified and extended this grand narrative. However, most recently, his work has become more obscure and elusive on this issue, and many other issues. Nonetheless, a good portion of it remains embedded in a grand narrative much like the one described above. Of course, a critique of Baudrillard from a postmodern perspective may be dismissed by him since he generally rejects the designation of a postmodernist and refuses to use the term. Another criticism of The Consumer Society may be traced to the fact that Baudrillard was in the process of transforming himself into less of a modernist and more of a postmodernist. Baudrillard is clearly trying to distance himself from the modern tendency to develop an Archimedean point (such as Marx's species being) from which to criticize society. However, while he may be making such an effort at an overt level, he seems to implicitly employ such an Archimedean point, symbolic exchange, throughout this book and ensuing works. Thus, Baudrillard had not yet shaken off his modernist inclinations and they were to continue to influence his work for some years to come. As a result of his Archimedean point, Baudrillard is led into a number of other problematic positions. For example, he is uniformly positive about primitive society. He fails to see anything wrong with it and, more generally, with symbolic exchange. For another, he fails to see anything positive about, or right with, modern (or postmodern) consumer society. He is unremittingly critical of that society. An even slightly more balanced portrait of both primitive and modern societies would have enhanced Baudrillard's analysis. As we turn Baudrillard's work around in our minds, it is clear that it has many flaws from many different perspectives. Yet, what important work in social theory is flawless? In exploring the weaknesses we must not lose sight of the fact that The Consumer Society is a significant contribution to social theory, and Jean Baudrillard demonstrates here something that was to become even clearer as his work progressed in the ensuing decade or so -- that he is a major social theorist. Baudrillard, Jean (1983/1990) Simulations. New York: Semiotext(e). Baudrillard, Jean (1980-5/1990) Cool Memories. London: Verso. Baudrillard, Jean (1986/1989) America. London: Verso. Baudrillard, Jean (1990/1993) The Transparency of Evil: Essays on Extreme Phenomena. London: Verso. Bauman, Zygmunt (1992) Intimations of Postmodernity. London: Routledge. Cohen, G.A. (1978/1986) Karl Marx's Theory of History: A Defence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Featherstone, Mike (1991) Consumer Culture and Postmodernism. London: Sage. Foucault, Michel (1963/1975) The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception. New York: Vintage. Foucault, Michel (1978/1980) The History of Sexuality. Vol. 1: An Introduction. New York: Vintage. Gabriel, Yiannis and Lang, Tim (1995) The Unmanageable Consumer: Contemporary Consumption and its Fragmentation. London: Sage. Galbraith, John Kenneth (1958/1984) The Affluent Society, 4th edn. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Jameson, Fredric (1991) Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Lyotard, Jean-François (1979/1984) The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Manning, Robert and Williams, Brett (1996) Credit Card Nation: America's Dangerous Addiction to Consumer Debt. New York: Basic. Marx, Karl (1981) Capital, Volume II. New York: Vintage. Merton, Robert (1968) Social Theory and Social Structure. New York: Free Press. Ritzer, George (1991) Metatheorizing in Sociology. New York: Lexington. Ritzer, George (1995) Expressing America: A Critique of the Global Credit Card Society. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge.