its monotony and its distractions. Or, alternatively, as we have seen, the consumer object produces distinction(s), produces status stratification. If, in this case, it no longer isolates, it differentiates. It collectively assigns consumers to a code, without, however, arousing any collective solidarity (in fact, it does the opposite). Overall, then, consumers as such are lacking in consciousness and unorganized, as was often the case with workers in the early nineteenth century. It is as such that they are everywhere celebrated, praised, hymned by \`right-thinking' writers as \`Public Opinion', that mystical, providential, sovereign reality. Just as \`the People' is glorified by Democracy provided that it remains the people (and does not intervene on the political and social stage), so consumers are recognized as enjoying sovereignty (Katona speaks of the \`powerful consumer') so long as they do not attempt to exercise it on the social stage. The People are the workers, provided they are unorganized. The Public and Public Opinion are the consumers, provided they content themselves with consuming. ## 6: Personalization or the Smallest Marginal Difference ## To Be or Not to Be Myself There is no woman, however demanding, who cannot satisfy the tastes and desires of her personality with a Mercedes-Benz! From the hue of the leather, the trim and the colour of the bodywork to the hubcaps and the thousand and one comforts offered by the fittings, standard or optional. As for men, though mainly concerned with the technical qualities and performance of a car, they will willingly fulfil their wives' desires, since they will be equally proud to be complimented on their good taste. You can choose your Mercedes-Benz from 76 different colour styles and 697 selections of interior décor. To have found your personality, to be able to assert it, is to discover the pleasure of being truly yourself. It often takes very little to achieve this. After a great deal of searching, I realized that a little light tint in my hair was enough to create perfect harmony with my complexion and my eyes. I found this blonde tone in the Récital range of rinses ... And this Récital blonde, which is so natural, has not changed me. I am more than ever myself. These two pieces (there are so many one could have chosen) were taken from Le Monde and a minor women's Weekly respectively. The prestige and social status evoked within them are worlds apart: between the magnificent Mercedes 300 SL and the \`little light tint' of the Récital shampoo there is an enormous social gulf, and the women represented in the two pieces doubtless never meet (except perhaps at the Club Méditerranée -- who knows?). They are at opposite ends of the social scale, but united by the same constraint of differentiation, personalization. The one is \`A', the other \`non-A', but the pattern of \`personal' value is the same for both, and for all of us beating a path through the \`personalized' jungle of \`optional' merchandise, desperately seeking the foundation cream that will reveal the naturalness of our face, the little touch that will show up our deep individual bent, the difference which will make us ourselves. All the contradictions involved in this theme, which is basic to consumption, can be felt in the desperate gymnastics performed by the language in which it is expressed, in the constant attempt to achieve an impossible, magical synthesis. If you are someone, can you \`find' your personality? And where are you while this personality is haunting you? If you are yourself, do you have to be miraculous unity of one's being? What does this \`so' natural blonde mean? Is it natural or isn't it? And if I am myself, how can I be so \`more than ever'? Wasn't I entirely myself yesterday? Can I raise myself to the second power? Can I represent an added value to myself, appreciating as a company's assets appreciate? One could find thousands of examples of this illogicality, of this internal contradiction eating away at all that relates to the personality today. \`But,' as Riesman writes, \`the product now in demand is neither a staple nor a machine; it is a personality.' The high point of this magical litany of personalization is achieved with the following injunction: ## Personalize your own home yourself! This \`over-reflexive' expression (personalizing oneself... in person etc.!) tells the real story. What all this rhetoric says, while floundering about unable to say it, is precisely that there is no one there -- no person. The \`person' as absolute value, with its indestructible features and specific force, forged by the whole of the Western tradition as the organizing myth of the Subject -- the person with its passions, its will, its character (or banality) -- is absent, dead, swept out of our functional universe. And it is this absent person, this lost instance which is going to \`personalize' itself. It is this lost being which is going to reconstitute itself in abstracto, by force of signs, in the expanded range of differences, in the Mercedes, in the little light tint, in a thousand other signs, incorporated and arrayed to re-create a synthetic individuality and, at bottom, to shine forth in the most total anonymity, since difference is by definition that which has no name. ## The Industrial Production of Differences Advertising as a whole has no meaning. It merely conveys significations. Its significations (and the behaviours they call forth) are never personal: they are all differential; they are all marginal and combinatorial. In other words, they are of the order of the industrial production of differences -- and this might, I believe, serve as the most cogent definition of the system of consumption. The real differences which characterized persons made them contradictory beings. Differences of the \`personalizing' type no longer set individuals one against another; these differences are all arrayed hierarchically on an indefinite scale and converge in models, on the basis of which they are subtly produced and reproduced. As a result, to differentiate oneself is precisely to affiliate to a model, to label oneself by reference to an abstract model, to a combinatorial pattern of fashion, and therefore to relinquish any real difference, any singularity, since these can only arise in concrete, conflictual relations with others and the world. This is the miracle and the tragedy of differentiation. In this way, the whole process of consumption is governed by the production of combined, it is precisely because the differences are not differences and, instead of marking a person out as someone singular, they mark rather his conformity with a code, his integration into a sliding scale of values. There is in \`personalization' something similar to that \`naturalization' effect we constantly meet in the environment -- the effect which consists in restoring nature as sign after it has been eliminated in reality. Thus, for example, a forest is cut down to build a group of buildings, which are then given the name \`Park Estate' and a few trees are planted to create a \`natural' feel. The \`naturalness' which haunts the whole of advertising is, similarly, a \`cosmetic' effect: \`Use Ultra-Beauty cosmetics for the smooth, even, lasting look in which your complexion has that natural bloom you dream of!' ... \`I'm certain my wife doesn't use make-up!' ... \`This veil of make-up, invisible and yet present.' Similarly, the \`functionalization' of an object is a coherent abstraction which superimposes itself upon -- and everywhere substitutes for -- its objective function (\`functionality' is not use-value, it is sign-value). The logic of personalization is the same: it is contemporaneous with naturalization, functionalization, culturalization, etc. The general process can be defined historically: it is industrial monopoly concentration which, abolishing the real differences between human beings, homogenizing persons and products, simultaneously ushers in the reign of differentiation. Things are much the same here as with religious or social movements: it is upon the ebbing of their original impulse that churches or institutions are built. Here, too, it is upon the loss of differences that the cult of difference is founded. 60 Modern monopoly production is never just the production of goods; it is always also the (monopoly) production of relations, and of differences. Thus, a deep logical collusion links the mega-corporation and the micro-consumer, the monopoly structure of production and the \`individualistic' structure of consumption, since the \`consumed' difference in which the individual revels is also one of the key sectors of generalized production. At the same time, under the sign of monopoly, there is very great homogeneity today between the various contents of production consumption: goods, products, services, relations and differences. All these things, once distinct, are now produced in the same way, and are thus equally fated to be consumed. There is also in the combinatorial personality an echo of the combinatorial culture we spoke of above. Just as that consisted in a collective realignment, through the mass media, to the lowest common culture (LCC), so personalization consists in a daily realignment to the smallest earthenware tiles in your kitchen as Françoise Hardy or the same built-in gas hob as Brigitte Bardot. Or use a toaster which makes you initialled toast, or put charcoal \`aux herbes de Provence' in your barbecue. Of course, the \`marginal' differences themselves are part of a subtle hierarchy. From the highly select bank, with its Louis XVI-style safes reserved for 800 choice clients (Americans who must keep at least 25,000 dollars in their current accounts) to the managing director's desk which is antique or Premier Empire (for senior managers, opulent functional suffices), from the arrogant prestige of nouveau riche villas to the nonchalance of highclass clothing, all these marginal differences mark out the most rigorous social discrimination, in accordance with a general law of the distribution of distinctive matter (and against that law -- even more than against the criminal law -- ignorance is no defence). Not everything is permitted, and violations of this code of differences, which, though it is a shifting one, is no less a ritual for all that, are punished. As can be seen in the amusing story of the commercial traveller who bought the same Mercedes as his boss and was fired. He appealed against his dismissal and was granted compensation by a tribunal, but the employer did not take him back. All men are equal before objects as use-value, but they are by no means equal before objects as signs and differences, which are profoundly hierarchical. ## Metaconsumption It is important to grasp that this personalization, this pursuit of status and social standing, are all based on signs. That is to say, they are based not on objects or goods as such, but on differences. Only in this way can we understand the paradox of \`underconsumption' or \`inconspicuous consumption', i.e. the paradox of prestigious super-differentiation, which is no longer displayed in ostentation (Veblen's \`conspicuous consumption'), but in discretion, sobriety and self-effacement. These latter merely represent a further degree of luxury, an added element of ostentation which goes over into its opposite and, hence, a more subtle difference. Differentiation may then take the form of the rejection of objects, the rejection of \`consumption', and yet this still remains the very ultimate in consumption. If you're wealthy and middle-class, don't go to the Quatre-Saisons. Leave the Quatre-Saisons to the young couples panicking over the funds they haven't got, the students, the secretaries, the salesgirls, the workers sick of living in squalor ... Leave it to all those who want nice furniture because ugliness is wearisome, but want simple furniture too because thev hate pretentious flats. Who is going to answer this perverse invitation? Some wealthy middle-class individual, perhaps, or some intellectual anxious to seem a man of the people. At the level of signs, there is no absolute wealth or poverty, nor any opposition between the signs of wealth and the signs of poverty: they are merely sharps and flats on the keyboard of differences. \`Ladies, come to X for the most windswept look you can find!' ... \`This simple dress leaves not a hint of haute couture. There is also a full-blown syndrome of anti-consumption, a very \`modern' phenomenon which is, at bottom, a metaconsumption and acts as a cultural indicator of class. The middle classes tend rather towards conspicuous consumption. They are, in this regard, heirs to the great capitalist dinosaurs of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This is where they are culturally naïve. Needless to say, there is a whole class strategy behind this: One of the few restrictions on the consumption of the mobile person is the resistance of the upper class to the arrivistes by exercise of the strategy of conspicuous underconsumption; in this way the already arrived attempt to impose their own limits on those who would become their peers. 61 This phenomenon, in its many and varied forms, is a crucial one for the interpretation of our society, since one might be taken in by this formal reversal of signs and mistake what is merely a change in the form of the distance between classes as an effect of democratization. It is on the basis of luxury that the lost simplicity is consumed. And this same effect is met at all levels: it is on the basis of the bourgeois condition that intellectual \`slumming' and \`proletarianism' are consumed, just as, in another sphere, it is on the basis of a lost heroic past that contemporary Americans go on package tours to prospect for gold in the rivers of the West: this \`exorcism' of opposite effects, of lost realities, of contradictory terms is everywhere the sign of an effect of consumption and over-consumption which, in every case, fits into a logic of distinction. It is crucial to grasp this social logic of differentiation as fundamental to the analysis and to see that the exploitation of objects as differential, as signs -- the level which alone specifically defines consumption -- is precisely established upon the relegation of their use-value (and the \`needs attaching to it). Preferences in the consumption field are not viewed as a development of the human ability to relate oneself discriminatingly to cultural objects. For the objects are hardly given meaning in private and personal values when they are so heavily used as counters in a preferential method of relating oneself to others. The cultural objects, whatever their nature, are mementos that somehow remain unhumanized by the force of a genuinely fetishistic attachment. 62 This factor (the priority of differential value), which Riesman applies to \`cultural' objects (though there is in this regard no difference between \`cultural objects' and \`material objects'), can be seen illustrated in an almost experimental way by the example of a mining town in the Quebec taiga, where, as the reporter tells us, in spite of the proximity of the forest and the almost total uselessness of a car, every family nonetheless has its automobile outside its door: This vehicle, washed and polished, and occasionally taken out for a run of a few miles on the local bypass (there are no other roads) is a symbol of the American standard of living, the sign that one belongs to mechanical civilization. (and the author compares these magnificent limousines with a totally useless bicycle found in the Senegalese bush outside the house of a black former NCO who had returned to live in his village). Even more strikingly, the same demonstrative, ostentatious reflex leads well-off executives to have summer cottages built in a 10-mile radius around the town. In this spacious, airy town, with its salubrious climate and open to nature on all sides, what could be more useless than a \`place in the country'! What we see at work here, then, is prestigious differentiation in the pure state, and we see to what extent the \`objective' reasons for owning an automobile or a second home merely provide a cover for a more fundamental determination. ## Distinction or Conformism? The logic of differentiation is not generally made a principle of analysis by traditional sociology. That sociology identifies a \`need of the individual to differentiate himself' as one more element in the repertoire of individual needs, which it sees as alternating with the opposite need to conform. The two coexist happily at the psycho-sociological descriptive level, in the most total illogicality and absence of theory -- a state of affairs dubbed \`dialectic of equality and distinction' or \`dialectic of conformism and originality', etc. This is to confuse everything. It has to be recognized that consumption is not ordered around an individual with his personal needs, which are then subsequently indexed, according to demands of prestige or conformity, to a group context. There is, first, a structural logic of differentiation, which produces individuals as personalized, that is to say, as different one from another, but in terms of general models and a code, to which, in the very act of particularizing themselves, they conform. The singularity/ conformism schema, regarded in terms of the individual, is not essential: it is merely the level of life- experience. The basic logic is that of differentiation/personalization, viewed in terms of the code. In other words, conformity is not status equalization, the conscious homogenization of the group (each individual aligning himself with the others), but the fact of having the same code in common, of sharing the same signs which make all the members of that group different from a particular other group. It is the difference from the other group which creates the parity (rather than the conformity) of the members of a group. Consensus is established differentially, and the effect of conformity is merely the result of this. This is a crucial point, since it entails that all sociological analysis (particularly where consumption is concerned) is to be shifted from the phenomenal study of prestige, \`imitation' and the superficial field of the conscious social dynamic towards the analysis of codes, structural relations, and systems of signs and distinctive material -- that is to say, towards a theory of the unconscious field of social logic. Thus, the function of this system of differentiation goes far beyond the satisfaction of needs of prestige. If we accept a hypothesis we advanced earlier, we can see that the system never operates in terms of real (singular, irreducible) differences between person.What grounds it as a system is precisely the fact that it eliminates the specific content, the (necessarily different) specificity of each human being, and substitutes the differential form, which can be industrialized and commercialized as a distinguishing sign. It eliminates all original qualities and retains only the schema generative of distinctions and the systematic production of that schema. At this level, differences are no longer exclusive: not only do they logically imply one another in the combinatory of fashion (in the same way as there is \`play' between different colours), but, in sociological terms, it is the exchange of differences which clinches group integration. Differences coded in this way, far from dividing individuals, become rather the matter of exchange. This is a fundamental point, through which consumption is defined: not any longer (1) as a functional practice of objects -- possession, etc., or (2) as a mere individual or group prestige function, but (3) as a system of communication and exchange, as a code of signs continually being sent, received and reinvented -- as language. In the past, differences of birth, blood and religion were not exchanged: they were not differences of fashion, but essential distinctions. They were not \`consumed'. Current differences (of clothing, ideology, and even sex) are exchanged within a vast consortium of consumption. This is a socialized exchange of signs. And if everything can be exchanged in this way, in the form of signs, this is not by virtue of some \`liberalization' of mores, but because differences are systematically produced in accordance with an order which integrates them all as identifying signs and, being substitutable one for another, there is no more tension or contradiction between them than there is between high and low or left and right. longer open and violent competition -- such as that of the market or a physical struggle -- but a ludic abstraction of competition. ## Code and Revolution It will be easier now to grasp the crucial ideological function of the system of consumption in the current socio-political order. That ideological function can be deduced from the definition of consumption as the establishment of a generalized code of differential values and from the function of the system of exchange and communication which we have just determined. Modern (capitalist, productivist, post-industrial) social systems do not, to any great extent, base their social control, the ideological regulation of the economic and political contradictions by which they are riven, on the great egalitarian and democratic principles, on that whole system of ideological and cultural values that is broadcast to all corners of the earth and is operative everywhere. Even when seriously internalized through schooling and socialization, these conscious egalitarian values -- of law and justice, etc. -- remain relatively fragile, and would never be up to the task of integrating a society whose objective reality they too visibly contradict. Let us say that at this ideological level, contradictions can always break out again. But the system can count much more effectively on an unconscious mechanism of integration and regulation. And this, unlike equality, consists precisely in involving individuals in a system of differences, in a code of signs. Such is culture, such is language, such is \`consumption' in the deepest sense of the term. What is politically effective is the creation not of a situation in which contradiction is replaced by equality and equilibrium, but of one in which contradiction is replaced by difference. The solution to social contradiction is not equalization, but differentiation. No revolution is possible at the level of a code -- or, alternatively, revolutions take place every day at that level, but they are \`fashion revolutions', which are harmless and foil the other kind. Here again, the proponents of the classical analysis are wrong in their interpretation of the ideological role of consumption. It is not by heaping comfort, satisfaction and social standing on individuals that consumption is able to defuse virulent social tension (that idea is linked to the naïve theory of needs and can only lead to the absurd hope of making people ever more destitute in order to have them rebel). It is, rather, by training them in the unconscious discipline of a code, and competitive cooperation at the level of that code; it is not by creating more creature comforts, but by getting them to play by the rules of the game. This is how consumption can on its own substitute for all ideologies and, in the long run, take over alone the role of integrating the whole of society, as hierarchical or religious rituals did in primitive societies. advert. And, indeed, what mother has not? Millions, then, have dreamt of the same washing machine, specially designed for each of them alone. \`The body you dream of is your own.' This admirable tautology, which self-evidently resolves down to an argument for a particular kind of bra, brings together all the paradoxes of \`personalized' narcissism. It is by coming close to your reference ideal, by being \`truly yourself', that you most fully obey the collective imperative and most closely coincide with a particular \`imposed' model. Fiendish trick or the dialectic of mass culture? We shall see how consumer society conceives itself as, precisely, a society of consumption and reflects itself narcissistically in its image. This process spreads right down to each individual, remaining all the while a collective function, and this explains why it is in no way incompatible with conformism. Indeed, the opposite is true, as the two examples above well illustrate. The narcissism of the individual in consumer society is not an enjoyment of singularity; it is a refraction of collective features. However, it is always presented as narcissistic investment of \`oneself' through smallest marginal differences (SMDs). The individual is everywhere invited, primarily, to enjoy himself, to indulge himself. The understanding is that it is by pleasing oneself that one is likely to please others. Ultimately, perhaps, self-indulgence and self-seduction may totally supplant the objective aim of seduction. The enterprise of seduction turns round upon itself in a kind of perfect \`consumption', but its referent remains, nonetheless, the instance of the other. Put simply, pleasing has become an enterprise in which the person to be pleased is merely a secondary consideration. Like the repetition of the brand name in advertising. This invitation to self-indulgence is mainly directed at women. But the pressure is exerted on women through the myth of Woman. Woman as collective and cultural model of self-indulgence. Évelyne Sullerot puts this well: Woman is sold to women ... while doing what she believes is preening herself, scenting herself, clothing herself, in a word \`creating' herself, she is, in fact, consuming herself. And this falls in with the logic of the system: not just one's relationship with others, but also one's relation to oneself becomes a consumed relation. Though this should not be confused, once again, with the fact of being pleasing to oneself on the strength of genuine qualities -- of beauty, charm, taste, etc. That is something quite different; in that case, there is no consumption, but a spontaneous and natural relation. Consumption is always defined by the substitution for this spontaneous relation of a relation mediated by signs. If woman does, in fact, consume herself, this exponential values of (artificially achieved) naturalness, eroticism, \`figure' and expressiveness. Like violence, 63 the forms of seduction and narcissism are laid down in advance by models produced industrially by the mass media and composed of identifiable signs (if all girls are to think they are Brigitte Bardot, then they must stand out from the crowd by virtue of their hair, their mouths or a particular feature of clothing -- that is to say, necessarily the same thing for all of them). Everyone finds his or her own personality in living up to these models. ## The Masculine and the Feminine Models Functional femininity has its counterpart in functional masculinity or virility. The models are, quite naturally, arranged in twos. They are the product not of the differentiated nature of the sexes, but of the differential logic of the system. The relation of the Masculine and the Feminine to real men and women is relatively arbitrary. Increasingly today, men and women play equally on the two registers in creating their significations, but, for their part, the terms of the signifying opposition only derive validity from their distinction. These two models are not descriptive: they govern consumption. The masculine model is the model of particularity [exigence] and choice. All masculine advertising stresses the rule of choice, in terms of rigour and inflexible attention, as a matter of \`professiona ethics'. The modern man of quality is particular or demanding. He will countenance no failing and he neglects no detail. He is a \`select' individual, though he is not so passively or by natural grace, but by practising selectivity (the fact that that selectivity is orchestrated by others is a quite separate matter). There is no question of letting himself go or indulging himself; his aim is to achieve distinction. Knowing how to choose and not to let one's standards slip are equivalent to the military and puritan virtues: intransigence, decisiveness, valour. These virtues will be possessed by the least young dandy who buys his clothes from Romoli or Cardin. The masculine model is, then, a model of competitive or selective virtue. Much more deeply, choice -- as a sign of belonging to the elect (he who chooses, who knows how to choose, is chosen, is one of the elect) -- is the counterpart in our societies to the rite of challenge and competition in primitive ones: it confers status. In the feminine model, women are, much rather, enjoined to take pleasure themselves. It is not, in this case, selectivity and particularity, but self-indulgence and narcissistic concern for one's own welfare which are indispensable. At bottom, men are still being invited to play soldiers, and women to play dolls with themselves. Even at the level of modern advertising, the two models -- the masculine and the feminine -- are always segregated, then, and masculine hierarchical pre-eminence still survives (it is here, in the models, that the fixity of the value system can be read: the hybridity of \`real' behaviour matters little in this regard, since the deep mentality is shaped by the models -- and the masculine/ feminine opposition, like that between manual and intellectual labour, has not changed). We have, then, to retranslate this structural opposition into the language of social supremacy. 1 The masculine choice is \`agonistic': it is, by analogy with the challenge, the noble behaviour par excellence. It is honour which is in play, or Bewährung (proving oneself), an ascetic and aristocratic virtue. 2 By contrast, what is perpetuated in the feminine model is the derived value, the vicarious value (Veblen writes of \`vicarious status' and \`vicarious consumption'). Women are only called on to gratify themselves in order the better to be able to enter as objects into the masculine competition (enjoying themselves in order to be the more enjoyable). They never enter into direct competition (except with other women over men). If a woman is beautiful -- that is to say, if the woman is a woman-- she will be chosen. If the man is a man, he will choose his wife among other objects/signs (his car, his wife, his eau de toilette). Under cover of self-gratification, woman (the feminine model) is consigned to the performance of proxy \`services'. She is not autonomously determined. This status, shown up at the narcissistic level in advertising, has quite other -- and equally real -- aspects at the level of productive activity. Woman, whose fate lies with the paraphernalia (household objects), fulfils not only an economic function, but a prestige function, deriving from the aristocratic or bourgeois idleness of women who, by that idleness, attested to the prestige of their masters: the housewife does not produce; she does not show up in the nation's accounts; she is not recorded as a productive force. She is, in fact, fated to be of value as a force of prestige, by her official uselessness, by her status as a \`kept' slave. She remains an attribute, reigning over those secondary attributes, the household objects. Or, in the middle and upper classes, she devotes herself to \`cultural' activities. These are also unpaid, unaccounted and generally unaccountable. That is to say, they are activities involving no responsibility. She consumes' culture, though she does not even do this in her own right: it is decorative culture. Thus she is engaged in cultural promotion, which, in spite of all the democratic alibis, always falls in with this same requirement that it be useless. Ultimately, culture is simply a sumptuary sideeffect of \`beauty' -- culture and beauty being not so much values in themselves, activities carried on for their own sake, as evidence of superfluity, an \`alienated' social function (performed by proxy). Once again, we are speaking here of differential models, which are not to be confused with real sexes, or with social categories. There is diffusion and contamination everywhere. Modern man (as we see everywhere in advertising) is also called on to indulge himself. The modern woman is called on to choose and to compete, to be \` particular' or \` demanding' . All this is, of course, in keeping with a society where the respective social, economic and sexual functions are relatively intermingled. However, the distinction between the masculine and feminine models remains, for its part, total (and, indeed, even the mixing of social and occupational tasks and roles is, in the end, a weak and marginal phenomenon). It is even possible that the structural and hierarchical opposition between the Masculine and the Feminine is growing stronger in certain respects. Thus, the appearance in advertisements (for Sélimaille knitwear) of Publicis's handsome young male nude marked the extreme point of contamination. This did not, however, change the distinct and antagonistic models one jot. What it did bring out was the emergence of a \`third', hermaphroditic model, everywhere linked to the emergence of adolescence and youth. This is a sexually ambiguous, narcissistic model, but one much closer to the feminine model of self-indulgence than the demanding masculine one.