Furthermore, what we are seeing very generally today is the extension of the feminine model to the whole field of consumption. What we have said of women in their relationshipto prestige values, and of their \`proxy' status, goes, virtually and absolutely, for Homo cansumans in general -- men and women together. And it goes for all members of social categories whose destinies lie more or less (increasingly, as the current political strategy has it) with \`paraphernalia', household objects and \`proxy' pleasures. Entire classes are thus fated, in the image of Woman (who, as Woman/Object remains emblematic of consumption), to function as consumers. Their promotion to the rank of consumers might thus be said to seal their destiny as serfs. Though, as is not the case with the housewife, far from sinking into oblivion, their alienated activity is today boosting the national economic figures. ## Part III: Mass Media, Sex and Leisure ## 7: Mass-Media Culture ## The \`Neo' -- or Anachronistic Resurrection As Marx said of Napoleon III, sometimes in history the same events occur twice: the first time with real historical import; the second merely as caricatural evocation of the event, as a grotesque avatar of it -- sustained by a legendary reference. Cultural consumption may thus be defined as the time and place of the caricatural resurrection, the parodic evocation of what already no longer exists -- of what is not so much \`consumed' as \`consummated' (completed, past and gone). The tourists who journey by coach to the far north to re-enact the Gold Rush, hiring Eskimo tunics and clubs to provide some local colour, are people who are consuming: they are consuming in ritual form something which was a historical event, and has been forcibly reactualized as legend. In history, this process is called restoration: it is a process of the denial of history and the anti-evolutionist resurrection of earlier models. Consumption too, is thoroughly imbued with this anachronistic substance. In its service stations in winter, Esso offers you its log fire and barbecue kit. This is a characteristic example: it is the masters of petrol, the \`historical liquidators' of log fires and their entire symbolic value, who serve these back up to you as the Esso neo-log-fire. What is consumed here is the simultaneous, combined, collusive enjoyment of the automobile and the defunct prestige of everything whose death-knell the automobile sounded -- these latter now resuscitated by the automobile! We ought not to see this as mere nostalgia: it is the historical and structural definition of consumption that, by way of this \`lived' level, it exalts signs on the. basis of a denial of things and the real. We have already seen how, through mass communications, the pathetic hypocrisy of the minor news item heightens with all the signs of catastrophe (deaths, murders, rapes, revolution) the tranquillity of daily life. But this same pathetic redundancy of signs is visible everywhere: the glorification of the very young and the very old, the front-page treatment for blue-blood weddings, the mass-media hymning of the body and sexuality -- everywhere we see the historical disintegration of certain excellence. It is honour which is in play, or Bewährung (proving oneself), an ascetic and aristocratic virtue. 2 By contrast, what is perpetuated in the feminine model is the derived value, the vicarious value (Veblen writes of \`vicarious status' and \`vicarious consumption'). Women are only called on to gratify themselves in order the better to be able to enter as objects into the masculine competition (enjoying themselves in order to be the more enjoyable). They never enter into direct competition (except with other women over men). If a woman is beautiful -- that is to say, if the woman is a woman-- she will be chosen. If the man is a man, he will choose his wife among other objects/signs (his car, his wife, his eau de toilette). Under cover of self-gratification, woman (the feminine model) is consigned to the performance of proxy \`services'. She is not autonomously determined. This status, shown up at the narcissistic level in advertising, has quite other -- and equally real -- aspects at the level of productive activity. Woman, whose fate lies with the paraphernalia (household objects), fulfils not only an economic function, but a prestige function, deriving from the aristocratic or bourgeois idleness of women who, by that idleness, attested to the prestige of their masters: the housewife does not produce; she does not show up in the nation's accounts; she is not recorded as a productive force. She is, in fact, fated to be of value as a force of prestige, by her official uselessness, by her status as a \`kept' slave. She remains an attribute, reigning over those secondary attributes, the household objects. Or, in the middle and upper classes, she devotes herself to \`cultural' activities. These are also unpaid, unaccounted and generally unaccountable. That is to say, they are activities involving no responsibility. She consumes' culture, though she does not even do this in her own right: it is decorative culture. Thus she is engaged in cultural promotion, which, in spite of all the democratic alibis, always falls in with this same requirement that it be useless. Ultimately, culture is simply a sumptuary sideeffect of \`beauty' -- culture and beauty being not so much values in themselves, activities carried on for their own sake, as evidence of superfluity, an \`alienated' social function (performed by proxy). Once again, we are speaking here of differential models, which are not to be confused with real sexes, or with social categories. There is diffusion and contamination everywhere. Modern man (as we see everywhere in advertising) is also called on to indulge himself. The modern woman is called on to choose and to compete, to be \` particular' or \` demanding' . All this is, of course, in keeping with a society where the respective social, economic and sexual functions are relatively intermingled. However, the distinction between the masculine and feminine models remains, for its part, total (and, indeed, even the mixing of social and occupational tasks and roles is, in the end, a weak and marginal phenomenon). It is even possible that the structural and hierarchical opposition between the Masculine and the Feminine is growing stronger in certain respects. Thus, the appearance in advertisements (for Sélimaille knitwear) of Publicis's handsome young male nude marked the extreme point of contamination. This did not, however, change the distinct and antagonistic models one jot. What it did bring out was the emergence of a \`third', hermaphroditic model, everywhere linked to the emergence of adolescence and youth. This is a sexually ambiguous, narcissistic model, but one much closer to the feminine model of self-indulgence than the demanding masculine one.