work of myth-making lies here. If all the denunciations, all the disquisitions on \`alienation', and all the derisive force of pop and anti-art play so easily into establishment hands, that is because they are themselves part of the myth, which they round out by providing the counter-melody within the formal liturgy of the Object we spoke of at the beginning -- and do so in a manner that is without doubt more perverse than the spontaneous adherence to consumer values. In conclusion, we shall say that this counter-discourse, which establishes no real distance, is as immanent in consumer society as any of its other aspects. This negative discourse is the intellectual's second home. Just as medieval society was balanced on God and the Devil, so ours is balanced on consumption and its denunciation. Though at least around the Devil heresies and black magic sects could organize. Our magic is white. No heresy is possible any longer in a state of affluence. It is the prophylactic whiteness of a saturated society, a society with no history and no dizzying heights, a society with no other myth than itself. But here we are once again speaking in morose, prophetic terms, caught in the trap of the Object and its apparent plenitude. Now, we know that the Object is nothing and that behind it stands the tangled void of human relations, the negative imprint of the immense mobilization of productive and social forces which have become reified in it. We shall await the violent irruptions and sudden disintegrations which will come, just as unforeseeably and as certainly as May 1968, to wreck this white Mass. ## Notes 1 The other major possibility would be Michel Foucault, but he is perhaps better [return] thought of as a poststructuralist than as a postmodernist. Baudrillard eschews the poststructural label and Foucault abhorred all attempts to label him. 2 I am using this term to mean those who take sociological theory as a subject of study [return] (Ritzer, 1991). 3 There are a few exceptions; a few things that do date the book. Examples include the [return] discussion of a now-forgotten 1960s radio quiz show, Brigitte Bardot as a paradigm of female beauty, and the hippies and their rejection of modern consumer society. 4 He had dealt with it in greater detail in his previous book, The System of Objects [return] (1968/1996). He also dealt with consumption, both directly and indirectly, in this earlier work, but in nothing like the detail in which it was to be analysed in The Consumer Society. 5 Two exceptions are Expressing America: A Critique of the Global Credit Card Society [return] (Ritzer, 1995) and Credit Card Nation: America's Dangerous Addiction to Consumer Debt (Manning and Williams, 1996). 6 Although his name is rarely mentioned, I think the most powerful presence is [return] Ferdinand de Saussure and the structuralism and structural linguistics he played such a central role in creating. 7 Fredric Jameson (1991) is one postmodernist who is often accused of this. [return] 8 Consumption is also described as a system of communication, but while this idea [return] too can be traced to Durkheim, it is better associated with other theoretical inputs into his work (see later). 9 Of course, there are those who see a great deal of functional thinking in Marx's work [return] (e. g. Cohen, 1978/1986). 10 While he is doing functional analyses, there is no clear indication that Baudrillard [return] had read Merton (1968) and his work on the functional paradigm. 11 Other pathologies dealt with by Baudrillard are a series of environmental \`nuisances' [return] (air, water and noise pollution), cultural \`nuisances' (like grim housing developments, planned obsolescence, insecure employment), as well as poverty. 12 There is, of course, a Marxian strand of structuralism (Althusser, Poulantzas, etc.). [return] 13 To this he adds a more sociological analysis of social differentiation and stratification. [return] And this has both a lived and a structural aspect. As a result of the latter, people are permanently controlled by a code that they are, in the main, unable to fathom. 14 In Chapter 4, note 1, Baudrillard seems to acknowledge that there is a difference [return] between a modern (presumably including modern sociology) and a structural approach to inequality. 15 Using a more sociological approach, Baudrillard also argues that the lower classes [return] engage in consumption in an effort to compensate for their lack of upward mobility. 16 The key here is the notion of \`social logic' which Baudrillard clearly intends in a [return] structural sense, but also associates with a sociological approach. 17 Baudrillard also critiques psycho-sociologists for being part of the service sector and [return] for being interested in solving social problems by being therapists involved in dealing with communication problems. 18 At this stage in his work, Baudrillard never discusses postmodern society. While the [return] term \`postmodern' had some early precursors, and C. Wright Mills had used it as early as 1959, it was not to begin to be used widely until the 1970s. 19 To take another example, he contends that desire is the truth of the body, implying [return] that the body's modern sexuality or eroticism is false. 20 The body had come under Foucault's scrutiny in the Birth of the Clinic (1963/1975), [return] but sexuality was not to become a focal concern until The History of Sexuality (1978/1980). 21 This is one of the many places in this work where Baudrillard remains locked in a [return] Marxian perspective, causing him, among other things, to make a series of analogies between consumption and production. This is one of the key areas in which it is abundantly clear that Marxian theory is at least as much of a hindrance as it is a help to Baudrillard. It is this kind of tension that sets the stage for Baudrillard's later abandonment of a Marxian perspective. 22 Although Baudrillard does not explicitly make the point, desire would predominate [return] in a society characterized by symbolic exchange. 23 The implication, once again, is that art in primitive society, in symbolic exchange, [return] would play such a contradictory role. 24 In fact, Marx (1981: 471) used the term \`means of consumption' and distinguished it [return] from \`means of production'. The former are commodities that enter individual consumption (as necessities or luxuries), while the latter enter productive consumption. However, Marx is not using \`means of consumption' as it is employed by Baudrillard and here to mean structures that serve to make consumption possible. They are to Marx consumer goods used by the proletariat (means of subsistence) and the capitalist (luxuries). 25 Although they can be seen as signs themselves (McDonald's, Burger King and [return] Wendy's are part of the sign system that is the fast-food industry) as well as settings which permit people to consume signs. 26 Credit cards might better be seen as \`meta-means of consumption', facilitating the [return] use of means of consumption such as shopping malls and ski resorts. 27 Although it is a simulated fantasy world since truly meaningful dreamwork is in [return] Baudrillard's view no longer possible. Yet again, the presumption is that truly meaningful dreamwork is only possible in primitive societies and/or those characterized by symbolic exchange. 28 Obviously, this author is dubious about Baudrillard's belief that he avoided falling [return] into the trap that ensnared Galbraith and others. 29 It is interesting to note that Baudrillard (1968/1996: 54) had earlier noted his [return] resistance to the idea of romanticizing the past. 30 Baudrillard (1976/1993; 1983/1990; 1990/1993) is later more explicit about this [return] historical model and takes it further. 1 K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Lawrence and Wishart, [return] London, 1971, p. 87. 2 Contrary to a rather odd assertion in Mark Poster's book Jean Baudrillard: Selected [return] Writings (Polity, 1988, p. 55, note 4), Flaine is not \`Baudrillard's parody of suburban communities around Paris' but a genuine ski resort in Haute-Savoie (Tr.). 1 This situation is almost ideally realized by a city like Berlin. Moreover, almost all [return] science-fiction novels have as their theme the situation of a rational and \`affluent' Great City threatened with destruction from without or within by some great hostile force. 1 Tables appearing in the original French have been removed at the author's request [return] (Tr.). 2 J.K. Galbraith, The Affluent Society, Penguin in association with Hamish Hamilton, [return] Harmondsworth, 1962, p. 210. 3 There is in this sense an absolute difference between waste in our \`affluent societies', [return] a waste that is a nuisance integrated into the economic system, which is a functional wastage not productive of collective value, and the destructive prodigality engaged in by all the so-called \`societies of scarcity' in their festivals and sacrifices, this latter being waste \`by excess', in which the destruction of goods was a source of collective symbolic values. Breaking up old cars that have gone out of fashion or burning coffee in locomotives is in no sense festive. It is a deliberate, systematic destruction for strategic ends. So too is military expenditure (perhaps only advertising...). The economic system cannot transcend itself in an act of festive waste, caught up as it is in its own alleged \`rationality'. It can only devour its excess of wealth as it were shamefully, practising a calculated destructiveness that is complementary to its productivity calculations. 1 The term \`inequality' is inappropriate. The equality/inequality opposition ideologically [return] linked to the system of modern democratic values, only fully covers economic disparities and cannot figure in a structural analysis. 2 Or the \`Great Society', recently imported into France. [return] 3 On this point, see Chapter 7 in relation to \`lowest common culture' and \`lowest [return] common multiples'. 4 It is, of course, in its functioning as a system of social differentiation (2 above) that [return] consumption takes on this unlimited dimension. As a system of communication and The consumer society exchange (1 above), where it may be compared to language, a finite range of goods and services (like the finite material of linguistic signs) can very well suffice, as we see in primitive societies. Language [la langue] does not proliferate because there is no ambivalence of the sign at that level, that ambivalence being grounded in social hierarchy and simultaneous double determination. By contrast, a certain level of parole and style does give rise again to distinctive proliferation. 5 On this point, see Chapter 5, section \`Consumption as the Emergence and Control of [return] New Productive Forces'. 6 This is the \`reserve army' of needs. [return] 7 This growing differentiation does not necessarily signify a growing distance from the [return] top to the bottom of the scale, a \`greater overall imbalance', but increasing discrimination, an increase in the quantity of distinctive signs within a hierarchy whose extremes have moved closer together. Relative \`democratization' and homogeinzation are accompanied by a related intensification in status competition. 8 In this sense, the distinction between \`real' and \`artificial' needs is also a false [return] problem. \`Artificial needs' do, of course, mask the non-satisfaction of \`essential' needs (television instead of education). But this is secondary to generalized determination by growth (the expanded reproduction of capital), in respect of which the terms \`natural' and \`artificial' have no meaning. We might even say that this natural-artificial opposition, which implies a theory of human finalities, is itself an ideological product of growth. It is reproduced by growth and is functionally linked to it. 9 Les Temps modernes, October 1968. [return] 1 Quoted by Galbraith, The New Industrial State, Signet, New York, 1967, epigraph to [return] Chapter 10. 2 In the survey carried out by Sélection du Reader's Digest (A. Piatier, \`Structures et [return] perspectives de la consommation européenne'), the pattern which emerges is not one of an immense middle class, as in the case of the USA, but that of a minority, a consumer elite (the As) serving as a model for a majority which does not yet possess that range of luxury goods (sports car, stereo, second home) which every European worthy of the name must have. 3 Galbraith, The New Industrial State, p. 215. [return] 4 Ibid., p. 222. [return] 5 This is the \`anti-coagulant' effect of advertising (Elgozy). [return] 6 Galbraith, The New Industrial State, p. 281. [return] 7 Ibid., p. 279. [return] 8 Ibid., p. 280. [return] 9 On this, see this chapter, section \`Consumption as the Emergence and Control of [return] New Productive Forces'. 10 J. Baudrillard, \`The ideological genesis of needs', in For a Critique of the Political [return] Economy of the Sign, Telos, St Louis, 1981, pp. 63-87. 11 This paragraph has been slightly modified by the author (Tr.). [return] 12 La Nef, no. 37. [return] 13 Galbraith, The New Industrial State, p. 49. [return] 14 On this point, see Chapter 10, 'The Mystique of Solicitude'. [return] 1 It is the same with relationships. The system is built upon a total liquidation of [return] personal ties, of concrete social relations. It is to this extent that it becomes necessarily and systematically productive of relationship (public relations, human relations, etc.). The production of relationships has become one of the key sectors of production. And because they no longer have anything spontaneous about them, because they are produced, those relationships are necessarily fated, like all that is produced, to be consumed (unlike social relations, which are the unconscious product of social labour and not the result of deliberate, controlled industrial production: these are not \`consumed' but are, in fact, the site of social contradictions). On the production and consumption of human relations and social relationships, see Chapter 10, \`The Mystique of Solicitude'. 2 D. Riesman, Abundance for What? And Other Essays, Chatto and Windus, London, [return] 1964, p. 129. 3 D. Riesman (with N. Glazer and R. Denney), The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the [return] Changing American Character, Doubleday Anchor, New York, n.d., pp. 98-9. 4 See Chapter 11, section \`Violence'. [return] 1 The reference is to the Le Président health clubs. See note 4 to Chapter 8 (Tr.). [return] 2 If beauty is to be found in the \`figure', the career is defined by its \`profile'. Such [return] connivances of vocabulary are significant. 3 See this chapter, section \`Pseudo-Event and Neo-Reality'. The term \`gadget' covers a [return] rather different semantic field in French, referring in particular to objects which are not necessarily technical implements, but merely useless objects of a \`gimmicky' kind. However, since the French usage will be reasonably clear from the author's argument here, I have generally retained the term \`gadget', which has at least equally pejorative connotations in English (Galbraith writes, \`The word gadget is itself a pejorative term for durable goods', The Affluent Society, p. 162) (Tr.). 4 Tirlipot is the name of a 1960s radio quiz game. [return] 5 Le Monde, 28 September 1969. [return] 6 There is, in this sense, a relationship of sorts between kitsch and snobbery. However, [return] snobbery is linked, rather, to the aristocracy/bourgeoisie acculturation process and kitsch essentially to the rise of the \`middle' classes in a bourgeois industrial society. 7 But it is not a toy, as the toy has a symbolic function for the child. However, a \`new [return] look' toy, a fashionable toy becomes a gadget once again simply by dint of such modishness. 8 The pure gadget, defined as something totally useless to anyone at all, would be an [return] absurdity. 9 An annual French competition for artisans and inventors (Tr.). [return] 10 See Daniel J. Boorstin, The Image, or What Happened to the American Dream, Penguin, [return] Harmondsworth, 1963. 11 The cubists were still searching for the \`essence' of space, seeking to unveil a \`secret [return] geometry', etc. In Dada, Duchamp or the surrealists, objects were wrenched from their (bourgeois) functions to be set up in their subversive banality, in a reminder of their lost essence and of an order of authenticity evoked by way of the absurd. In Francis Ponge, the apprehension of the naked, concrete object is still the act of a -- poetic -- consciousness or source of perception. In short, whether poetic or critical, the whole of art, \`without which things would merely be what they are', is fuelled (before pop) by transcendence. 12 Cf. the Conclusion, section \`The Consumption of Consumption'. [return] 13 Mario Amaya, Pop as Art: A Survey of the New Super Realism, Studio Vista, London, [return] 1965. 14 In this sense, the truth of pop might be said to be wage labour and the advertising [return] hoarding, not the contract and the art gallery. 15 \`Popular' art is concerned not with objects, but always primarily with human beings [return] and their actions. It would not paint cooked meats or the American flag, but a-man-eating or aman-saluting-the-American-flag. 16 In fact we often read this \`terroristic' humour in it, but we do so out of critical [return] nostalgia on our part. 17 Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, Sphere, London, [return] 1967, p. 27. 18 It is easy to see how one can, in this sense, \`consume' language [du langage]. As soon [return] as it becomes loaded with in-group connotations, and, instead of being a vehicle for meaning, turns into a group lexicon, a class or caste heritage (the style of the \`smart set', intellectual jargon; the political jargon of a party or grouping); as soon as it ceases to be a means of exchange and becomes a material of exchange for the internal usage of a group or class--its real function, under cover of conveying a message, being one of collusion and recognition; and as soon as, rather than putting meaning into circulation, it begins itself to circulate as password, as shibboleth, in a process of group tautology (the group speaking itself), then language is an object of consumption, a fetish. It is no longer being used as a language [langue], as a system of distinctive denotative signs, but consumed as a system of connotation, as a distinctive code. We find the same process in \`medical consumption'. There has been an extraordinary inflation of the demand for health care, closely linked to the rise in the standard of living. The line between \`justifiable' demand (though on what definition of a vital minimum and bio-psychosomatic equilibrium might it be considered justified?) and the consumer compulsion for medical, surgical and dental treatment is becoming blurred. Medical practice is turning into the use of the doctor him/herself and this sumptuary, conspicuous use of the doctor/object, the medicine/object, joins the second home and the car as part of the panoply of social standing. Here again, the medication--and, particularly where the wealthier classes are concerned, the doctor (Balint: \`The medication most frequently dispensed in general practice is the doctor himself')--cease to be the means of achieving health, considered as a final goal, and become themselves the focus of the ultimate demand. They are then consumed, on the selfsame pattern of a diverting of the objective practical function into a mental manipulation and a sign-based calculus of a fetishistic type. \`consumption' in so far as the doctor no longer has any specific value at this level: he is substitutable, as anxiety-reducer or care-provider, for any other process of partial regression: alcohol, shopping or collecting (the consumer \`collects' the doctor and medicines). The doctor is consumed as one-sign-among-others (just as a washing machine may be consumed as a mark of status and ease--see Chapter 7). At a deep level, then, what institutes \`medical consumption' is--beyond the neurotic logic of individuals--a social logic of status, which incorporates the doctor as sign (quite apart from any objective performance and on the same basis as any other value attribute) into a generalized system. We can see that it is on the abstraction (the reduction) of the medical function that medical consumption is established. We find this pattern of systematic abduction or rerouting [détournement] everywhere as the very principle of consumption. 19 Boorstin, The Image, p. 209. [return] 20 This is why all forms of resistance to the introduction of advertising on TV or [return] elsewhere are merely moralizing or archaic reactions. The problem lies at the level of the system of signification as a whole. 21 Boorstin, The Image, p. 213. [return] 22 Ibid., p. 217. [return] 23 Ibid., p. 219. [return] 1 The reference in the hymn is, however, not to the body, but to the soul (Tr.). [return] 2 The original cartes du tendre were, of course, actual \`maps' or charts depicting the [return] course of love (Tr.). 3 See also this exemplary text from Vogue: [return] A new wind is blowing through the world of beauty, a fresher, freer, healthier, less hypocritical wind of pride in one's body. Not pretentiousness, which is vulgar. But the honest awareness that our bodies are worth accepting, caring for, loving,if they are to be well used. We are happy that our knees are more supple, we are delighted with the length of our legs, with our lighter feet ... (for these we use a mask as we do for the face ... we massage our toes with an extraordinary \`supersonic' cream, we find ourselves a good chiropodist ... see how on page 72). We are all for the new body-spray perfumes, which give a satiny finish right down to our toes. Left, mules in South African ostrich-feathers with embroidery by Lamel (Christian Dior). Etc. 4 In French, le phrynéisme. The reference here is to the Greek courtesan Phryne, who [return] \`when she saw that in spite of the eloquence of her defender Hyperides she was going to be condemned, ... unveiled her bosom, and by this sudden display of her charms so influenced her judges, that she was immediately acquitted' (Lempriè's Classical Dictionary, Bracken, London, 1984, p. 526) (Tr.). 5 The male equivalent of the Elle text is the advert for Le Président entitled \`No pity for [return] executives?' This is an admirable text, which encapsulates all the themes we have analysed here (narcissism, the revenge of the neglected body, functional \`recycling'), except that here the masculine model centres on \`physical fitness' and social success, whereas the feminine model focused on \`beauty' and \`seduction'. Forty years old. Modern civilization commands him to be young. The paunch which was once a symbol of social success is now synonymous with decline and the scrapheap. His superiors, his subordinates, his wife, his secretary, his mistress, his children and the girl in the microskirt he's chatting to at his table outside the café (with who knows what in mind) all judge him on the quality and style of his clothes, his choice of tie and aftershave, the suppleness and slenderness of his body. He has to keep a watchful eye on everything: the crease in his trousers, his collar, his puns, his feet when he dances, his diet when he eats, his stamina when he is climbing stairs, his back when he makes a violent effort. If, only yesterday, efficiency in his work was enough, today he is required to possess both physical fitness and elegance. The myth of the healthy American businessman, part James Bond, part Henry Ford, confident and sure of himself, physically and psychologically well balanced, has taken its place in our civilization. Finding and keeping dynamic co-workers with pep and drive is the major concern of every business manager. The forty-year-old falls in with this image. This neo-Narcissus of modern times likes to take care of himself, and tries to enjoy himself. He savours his diet, his medication, his physical training, the difficulty he has stopping smoking. Aware that his social success depends entirely on the image others have of him, that physical fitness is his trump card, the man of forty is looking for his second wind and his second youth. There follows the advert for Le Président. There, it is chiefly fitness that is being: fitness, the magic word, that \`fairy godmother's gift' (after Narcissus, the fairies!), which managing directors, senior executives, journalists and doctors pursue \`in an air-conditioned, cocooned atmosphere and \`using 37 sets of apparatus with pedals, wheels, weights, vibrations, levers and steel cables' (as one can see, both athleticism and phryneism, both \`fitness' and \`beauty', are partial to gadgetry). 6 In the technical sense of simulations where the conditions of weightlessness are [return] simulated experimentally--or of mathematical models. 7 The truth of the body is desire. And this, being lack, cannot be shown. The most [return] exhaustive exhibition of that desire merely highlights it as absence, and ultimately, merely censors it. Will we one day see photos in which erections are shown? This would still be done under the heading of fashion. The censors thus ultimately have nothing to fear, except from their own desire. 8 Norman O. Brown, Life against Death: The Psychoanalytical Meaning of History, [return] Wesleyan University Press, Middletown, CT, p. 252. 9 On this point, see Chapter 6, section \`The Structural Models'. [return] 10 Sexuality is no longer a celebration [une fête]. It is an erotic festival, with all that [return] implies in terms of organization. Within the framework of that festival, everything is done also to revive \`polymorphous, perverse' sexuality. Cf. the first world fair of pornography in Copenhagen [this chapter, section \`The Sex-Exchange Standard']. 11 We find the same process in the \`consumption' of Technology. Without wishing to [return] contest the enormous impact of technological progress on social progress, one can see how technology itself falls into the domain of consumption, dividing into a daily practice \`liberated' by innumerable \`functional' gadgets and a transcendent myth of (capital T) Technology, the combination of the two making it possible to head off all the revolutionary potentialities of a total social practice of technology. See Utopie, no. 2-3, May 1969, \`La Pratique sociale et la technique'. 12 The French verb solliciter contains an ambiguity, referring at times to a demand or [return] even manipulation [the expression solliciter des textes implies forcing texts or documents to yield significations which they do not clearly contain (Tr.)], at times to solicitude and gratification. See Chapter 10, \`The Mystique of Solicitude'. 13 The Danish parliament (Tr.). [return] 14 This line does not actually seem to appear in either of Rimbaud's \`Villes' poems [return] (commonly known as \`Villes I' and \`Villes II') (Tr.). 15 This phrase occurs with slight variations of emphasis in two letters which Rimbaud [return] wrote in May 1871. The first of these is to Georges Izambard, the second to Paul Demeny. Originals and translations of both letters are to be found in Wallace Fowlie's Rimbaud: Complete Works, Selected Letters, University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London, 1966, pp. 302-11 (Tr.). 1 It might be thought that time is, in this respect, opposed to all other objects, whose [return] \`use-value' traditionally lies in being possessed, utilized, employed to advantage. But this is without doubt a profound error. The true use-value of objects is doubtless also to be consumed, to be expended \`as pure loss' -- a \`symbolic' use-value which is everywhere scored out [barrée] and replaced by \`utilitarian' use-value. 2 But the goal of the operation here remains strictly individual. In the archaic festival, [return] time is never expended \`for oneself': it is the time of collective prodigality. 1 Twenty per cent of national income for France. [return] 2 Advertising itself, as an economic process, may be regarded as a \`free celebration', [return] financed by social labour but delivered to everyone \`with nothing apparently given in return' and presenting itself as collective gratification (see later in this chapter). 3 Cf. Lagneau in Le Faire-Valoir, \`Advertising is the wrapping up of an unbearable [return] economic logic in the thousand seductive artifices of "exemption from payment", which negate it the better to allow it to operate.' G. Lagneau, Le Faire-Valoir, E.M.E., Paris, 1969. 4 On this problem, see the articles by J. Marcus-Steiff and P. Kende in the Revue française [return] de socioiogie, 1969, X, 3. 5 In German, the word werben, which means to ask for someone's hand in marriage and [return] hence implies loving concern [sollicitude amoureuse], also means competition, rivalry and advertising (commercial solicitation). 6 Riesman et al., The Lonely Crowd, p. 41. [return] 7 Ibid., p. 83. [return] 8 To take an example, \`In fact,' writes a specialist in sales promotion, \`if, before it was [return] presented to the public, Giscard d'Estaing's programme had been got into shape by an agency like Publicis, using the methods that were so successful in the Saint-Gobain affair, then French voters would probably have backed him.' And he adds: \`When you think of all the trouble you take to win the public's favour when you launch a new bar of soap, bringing all the modern resources of radio, TV and cinema into play, you are amazed by the antiquated methods the government employ when they want to "sell" an economic and financial programme running into billions of francs to the mass of the French people.' 9 Riesman et al., The Lonely Crowd, p. 224ff. [return] 10 Ibid., p. 225. [return] 1 \`Objectless craving' has its counterpart in \`objectless raving'. [return] 2 Galbraith, The Affluent Society, p. 14. [return] 3 Erostratus or Eratostratus was an Ephesian who burnt down the temple of Diana [return] solely with the object of achieving eternal fame. The Ephesians subsequently passed a law making it illegal to mention his name (Tr.). 4 Economists and psychologists base their thinking wholly on equivalence and rationality: [return] they postulate that, in all processes, the subject is always positively orientated, in a state of need, towards the object. If the need is satisfied, that is all there is to it. They forget that there is no \`satisfied need' a completed process, where there is only positivity, is something which is never found: there is only desire and desire is ambivalent. 5 Hence the very logical (American) idea of a motel for the suicidal where, for a [return] reasonable price, a \`suicide service', provided like any other social service (though not covered by social security!), ensures that you enjoy optimum conditions for death and undertakes to effect your suicide effortlessly, with a smile. 6 The original French text here is \`le malaise de la civilisation', the title of the standard [return] French translation of Freud's Das Unbehagen in der Kultur (English: Civilization and its Discontents) (Tr.). 7 J.S. Mill, On Liberty, ed. H.B. Acton, Dent/Dutton, London/New York, 1972, p. 124 [return] (my italics, JB). 1 There have been at least three versions of this film. From what he says, Baudrillard is [return] clearly not referring to the first of these (Stellan Rye, 1913) and it seems most likely that he is familiar with the 1926 film by the Dutch-born writer-director Henrik Galeen (who was also involved in the earlier production). A further German version was made in 1936 by the Chicagoborn director Arthur Robison (Tr.). 2 Like all myths, this one also seeks to ground itself in an original event. In this case, it [return] is the so-called \`Revolution of Affluence', a historical revolution of Well-Being, the last revolution of Western man after the Renaissance, the Industrial Revolution and the Political Revolutions. Consumption thereby presents itself as the opening of a new era -- the final era of achieved Utopia and the end of history. 3 Boorstin, The Image, p. 240. [return] 4 Ibid., p. 83. [return] 5 Ibid., p. 259. [return]