# Aaron Burns Aaron Burns's typography is about communicating with the printed word, using phototypesetting technologies that were state-of-theart at the time it was written. The color and texture" that can be created through the repetition of typographic forms is demonstrated in a design by the author. typography 1961 14 1/4 x 10 1/8 format Published by Reinhold, New York Aaron Burns cares passionately about typographic communication and has been a major participant in the recent revolutions, which, after four hundred years of adherence to Gutenberg's methods, occurred in quick succession beginning in the late 1940s. As director of The Composing Room (the legendary New York type house that not only set and sold type commercially but exhibited in its gallery the best practitioners in the world) he contributed to a qualitatively better environıment for advertising typography through a union of technique and aesthetics. In typography (1961), the first of many instructional guides" that marked major technological advancements, Burns was teaching designers about typographic expression and how to overcome the constraints of hot metal. He was an early proponent of the new phototypography. Pushing the technology that is taken for granted today was actually uphill all the way. As a founder, with Herb Lubalin, of International Typeface Corporation in 1970, he revitalized and modified for film many significant metal typefaces one thought lost because of the new technology. And today, with the digital revolution in full tilt, Burns is once again an evangelical typophile, working to provide personal computers with well-integrated typographic systeims. ## [ born 1922] Perfect communication is person-to-person. You see me, hear me, smell me, touch me. Television's the second form of communication; you can see me and hear me. Radio is the next; you hear me, but you don't see me. And then comes print. You can't see or hear me, so you must be able to interpret the kind of person I am from what is on the printed page. That's where typographic design comes in. The designer's job is to present as clearly and succinctly as possible the message of the author. Anything that comes between the author and the clarity of the message is bad. I was the first graphic designer in New York City, to my knowledge, to work for a type shop. Before that, an art director, working for an advertising agency, would make a layout and then send it to a type shop and say, “Set to fit." Type selection was left in the hands of a non-designer. There were some exceptional designers who loved type, but the type shop as we know it was a typographic service. They set type and provided proofs. If you didn't know what a good setting was, you simply accepted whatever came back. New technology made better, more expressive design possible. The specimen booklets that I developed at The Composing Room for metal type were an effort to create variety and color. They attempted to