# A Time Line of American Graphic Design, 1829–1989 Ellen Lupton and J. Abbott Miller are graphic designers and writers and are partners in Design Writing Research, New York. Lupton teaches design history at The Cooper Union and is curator of the Herb Lubalin Study Center of Design and Typography there. Miller teaches design history at the New School for Social Research, New York. This essay was researched and written in cooperation with the Herh Lubalin Study Center of Design and Typography at The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York. Ellen Lupton and J. Abbott Miller As a genre of graphic design the time line occupies an intermediate zone between pictorial and textual composition. Typically written in a terse, telegraphic style that dispenses with punctuation, the time line substitutes the rhythm of chronological order for the cohesion of traditional writing. The time line visualizes history in a way that traditional prose does not, distributing words across a grid that regulates their placement.¹ Yet often what the time line visualizes is merely the temporal proximity of one event to another. Time becomes an organizing principle that overwhelms all other criteria of analysis and interpretation. By its very structure, the time line adopts chronology as an explanatory model, conceiving of history as a ribbon whose sequence reveals its meaning. The condensed and schematic quality of the time line arises from its ambition to distill the “fundamental” points of its subject. In the interest of brevity and clarity the time line masks the interpretive character of historical narrative — hence its emphasis on “facts” and “information." The “objective" language commonly used in time lines and the exclusion of interpretive commentary obscure the presence of an active decision-making “author." This is reinforced by the fact that time lines are rarely “written” but are more often compiled, researched, and designed. By masking the opinion and subjectivity that are part of any kind of writing and research, time lines tend to foster the notion that history is a matter of fact rather than a question of values. They de-politicize the writing of history, attributions of influence, and assigning of roles. The continuous linear model of the time line promotes an understanding of history as an organic “progression" toward contemporary values. The following essay adopts the discontinuous, fragmentary character of the time line. But instead of trying to present a schematic picture of a monolithic, novelistically unified development, we have tried to show that “the history of graphic design” is diffused among a number of institutions and discourses. Rather than attempt to construct a spatial field for listing the “most important” events and names, we have used the time line format to create a chronological framework for a set of independent texts. Whereas many time lines divide a historical span abstractly according to decades or centuries, we have used the four-year cycle of the American Presidential term as our unit of measure. While some of the case studies directly consider the Presidency, we have employed the “Presidential grid” primarily for its familiarity in American public life. A number of these case studies are broken into two parts, reflecting an opposition within the text. This division exploits the graphic character of the time line genre, using typography to mark a shift in content. Each break indicates a polarity such as theory/practice, production/consumption, dominant/marginal, and artistic/anonymous; these divisions have allowed us to indicate contradictions, to bring together isolated disconrses, or to present a topic from two different vantages. We have thus tried to use the time line as a critical matrix for representing history.