In 1978 AT&T asked Mergenthaler Linotype to create a new typeface for its telephone books. Matthew Carter, then a staff designer at the company, developed the face called Bell Centennial that has been used ever since. Its numerals were digitized by hand, bit by bit, to provide increased control. The inked bitmaps opposite appear in their final printed form overleaf. # Matthew Carter During the fifteenth century a printing craftsman was often a type designer, and not infrequently a type designer was also an author. As time and technology advanced, these functions became fragmented and specialized; the designer designed, the punch cutter cut, the printer printed, and so on. In this age of digital typesetting Matthew Carter, a former printer's devil and printing historian, has effectively come full circle, bringing together the related, but disparate functions of typography. As the creative director of Bitstream Inc., a computer “type foundry," Carter has not only revived elegant metal faces, now redrawn for digital composition, but he has also developed programs that put design and production capabilities back into the hands of the single user. Under Carter's aegis the computer and laser printer are not wellsprings of outrageous computer-generated tricks but tools for typographic expression. Though Carter might very well be a perfectionist in matters of aesthetics, he also makes an effective case in word and deed for the democratization of printing and graphic design. Through Carter's experiments, written communications will certainly be enhanced by the professional but made friendly and available to the amateur. ## [ born 1937] In 1965 I became a staff designer at Mergenthaler Linotype (having come to the United States from England in 1960), where I worked on new faces and on converting metal faces to phototypesetting. Many of them were problem-solving or opportunity-taking faces, i.e., faces that compensated for the early defects of photocomposition. When the first commercial digital typesetter came out, I did similar compensatory work. Ultimately, I designed an alphabet commissioned by AT&T for use in the phone book; it was Bell Centennial. Mergenthaler Linotype had made Bell Gothic (designed in 1930 by Mergenthaler's Chauncey Griffith) for AT&T before the war. But, for a variety of reasons, some technical, some aesthetic, AT&T wanted to revisit the whole question of the typeface for phone books. It was a complicated problem, because everything that Western Electric came up with in the way of measuring the degradation of the typeface in the realistic conditions in which it was produced and prínted was contradictory. A typeface can be modified to compensate for under-inking, but then what can be done when it's over-inked? And both conditions occurred. Another problem was that the heavier face, which was used for the name and the number, was on the same width as the address face, which was lighter. One of the very