# Cipe Pineles ln 1933 Cipe Pineles, a Viennese-born art student, began working for Mehemed Fehmy Agha, the art director of Vanity Fair and Vogue. She was infused with his progressive principles of editorial design: generous amounts of white space, unconventionally wide margins, sans-serif type, and photography cropped and framed to heighten the graphic drama of the printed page. Pineles became art director of Glamour, and though she was working specifically for a fashion magazine (and would continue to do so until leaving her last magazine job, at Mademoiselle, in the late 1950s), she practiced design journalism, not decoration. During the war Pineles worked in Paris with her husband, the designer William Golden, on the army's Overseas Woman, a magazine for Red Cross and G.I. women. After the war she took on the art directorship of Seventeen magazine, where her most significant achievement was the innovative employ of painters as editorial illustrators, among them Jacob Lawrence, Robert Gwathmey, Philip Evergood, and her longtime friend Ben Shahn. After Golden's premature death she married another design pioneer, Will Burtin, whom she joined as a business partner. ## [born 1910] Usually an art director is hired because a change is needed or wanted. In my experience, the first thing a publisher does when a magazine is in trouble, no matter what is wrong, is alter the look, as if change is a panacea for whatever ails it. But design is not a matter of cleaning house, changing the typefaces or column widths just for the sake of doing so. Design is dealing with content. An exciting magazine comes with tackling issues that are usually reserved for the printed word and using this material in greater visual depth. So the art director on a magazine is responsible for interpreting, in visual terms, the contents of a publication, from the appointment of photographers and artists to deciding whether to use many typefaces or just one. But most important is the ability to harness all that, working with the editor to create momentum so that the reader will keep turning the pages. Magazine design should never play second fiddle to advertising. If the editorial content is very interesting and has a reason for being, it attracts advertising. A fashion magazine should report on what the industry has to offer. We are journalists in our special field.