Since the early 1960s (until 1989 under the watchful eye of Louis Silverstein) The New York Times has gradually been redesigned. As both the audience and substance of this and all American daily papers are in a constant state of flux, flexible yet concise design is a paramount need. One of Silverstein's most significant moves was the inclusion of more and larger photographs in a newspaper that in the past had used fewer than most. In this 1975 example from the Op-Ed page, the image of the rifle that many presume killed President Kennedy creates a powerful lead-in to the accompanying critical assessment of the Warren Commission Report. # Louis Silverstein Though some twentieth-century American newspapers were more logical and legible in their design than others, design was not given real importance until the ıid-1960s when the Sunday sections of The New York Herald Tribune were given new formats by Peter Palazzo. A few years later Louis Silverstein, who was then promotion art director of The New York Times, was asked by the publisher of The Times to address the need for a more legible text face for the daily newspaper. Silverstein began a chain reaction of change that culminated in the total redesign of the “Old Gray Lady." As assistant managing editor, responsible for visual aspects of the paper, Silverstein was a newsman as well as an aesthetician, and his design of Times sections was always based on sound “news judgments." He was most concerned not with how things looked but with how the reader's understanding of the vital information could be enhanced by the addition of new features or the repackaging of old ones. In a field where the word is paramount and designers are suspect, Silverstein's crowning achievement is not only that he brought The New York Times (and because of its example, other American newspapers) out of the nineteenth century but that he successfully commingled the art and news departments. [born 1919] It's fair to say that while the reputation of The New York Times remained undiminished, there was a period in the late 1960s when the company simply wasn't making a lot of money. Hence there was great soul-searching at the paper. People went off to executive retreats — spent weekends thinking about the future. There were strikes and union negotiations going on all the time. Several steps were taken. First was the self-examination process that relates to the paper as a product; the others were changes in the structure of the corporation. At that time newspapers were going through a technological change, from hot metal to cold type. In fact, all the guidelines of a four-hundred-year-old craft disappeared. We had chaos as far as quality was concerned. New guidelines had to be established. What was true in New York was true all over the country. Markets changed, readership changed, people were going out of the city to the suburbs. The Times did a lot of surveys in order to establish who we had to reach to continue growing. We realized we were competing with smaller newspapers that were taking full advantage of the same technology that we were having difficulty with. By the early 1970s magazines like Life and Look died. Television was growing. The world was becoming visual. Even T-shirts