# FOREIGN RELATIONS A Tokugawa period wood-block map of Nagasaki, printed for popular sale, shows one of the world’s most beautiful harbors (see illustration 4). The city itself is shielded from ocean storms by low mountains that enclose the bay to the north and west. The map’s legend indicates distances to other centers: Kyoto, 120 ri (ri - 2.44 miles) by land and 248 by sea; Edo, 332 by land and 470-plus by sea; Kumamoto, 35 by land, 46 by sea. The mapmakers add ships in the harbor to make things more attractive: one Dutch ship is at anchor, another, towed by a line of small Japanese ships, fires its guns in salute; one Chinese junk is identified as “Nanking,” another as “Fukien.” There are also guard ships, identified as part of the fleet of the lord of Hizen, who was charged (in alternation with the lord of Fukuoka) with the security of the port; many smaller scows are for freight. At the center right of the map, and quite out of proportion, is a curious, fan-shaped island connected to the mainland by a curved bridge. This is the artificial island of Deshima (see also illustration 5), prepared for the Portuguese and inherited by the Dutch in 1641. It is the center of Nagasaki lore, and the mapmaker/artist has expanded its dimensions out of deference to its importance. To the south is a second artificial fill that served as loading area, also connected to the mainland by a stone bridge that leads to a walled and moated area designated as to¯jin yashiki, or the Chinese quarter. These two foreign enclaves, the center of Tokugawa foreign trade, were what made Nagasaki unique in Japan. As the earlyeighteenth-century Confucian scholar Ogyu¯ Sorai wrote, “Nagasaki is a place where eastern barbarians [Japanese] and Chinese associate, where ocean-sailing ships come to port; it is the port of a myriad goods and strange objects, where people from the five directions gather, abandoning their homes and coveting profit; it is the first place of our land.”<sup>1</sup> Ogyu¯ , Confucianist that he was, thought poorly of those who worked for money and profit, but he was in the minority in that respect. Ihara Saikaku, whose prose writings were the rage among townsmen at the turn of the century, thought better of financial drive. He rhapsodized about the overseas ventures possible in the early Tokugawa years and argued that “to turn from Japan to risky speculations in the China trade, sending one’s money clean out of sight, needs boldness and imagination. But at least a Chinese merchant is an honest man, and keeps squarely to his promise: the insides of his rolls of silk are the same as the outsides, his medical herbs are not weighted with worthless ballast, his wood is wood, his silver is silver, and none of it changes as the years go by. For sheer duplicity one need go no farther than Japan.”<sup>2</sup> Nagasaki was where it all took place, and the exotic center to which one could come to see foreigners, Dutch and Chinese, albeit at a distance. The system within which the Tokugawa bakufu kept out most foreigners has highlighted most accounts of the period. Many writers have described Tokugawa Japan as a country hermetically sealed off from the rest of the world, and in consequence exaggerate the importance and achievement of the nineteenth-century “opening.” Textbook titles like Japan before Perry and Japan since Perry contribute to this misconception. One would think there were no foreigners and no foreign policy in Tokugawa Japan. In fact there was a foreign policy, and it is because it was concerned more with Asia than with the West that Western writers have used terms like “seclusion” and “isolation.” It was also a policy in constant change. Throughout the period, although limitations on foreign trade became more exacting, policymakers focused their fears more on the West than on Japan’s Asian neighbors. It can be argued that the famous decrees that closed the country were more of a bamboo blind than they were a Berlin wall. ## 1. The Setting The Tokugawa rise found Japan vitally affected by the process of empire and nation building of the maritime states of western Europe, by the Reformation and counter-Reformation in Europe, and by the tides of dynastic change in Asia. It began with the maritime explorations sponsored by Henry the Navigator of Portugal. His ships rounded the coast of Africa to find the sources for the riches of the spice islands of the East that had previously been brought by Arab ships to Venice for transshipment to the West. In the mid-sixteenth century the Portuguese established themselves at Malacca and then at Macao; Magellan’s Spanish fleet entered Philippine waters shortly afterward. The wealth in bullion the conquistadors seized from the mines of Central and South America justified ever wider probes. The Chinese economy was as eager for silver as was that of the Iberian peninsula, for China was in the process of shifting to a tax system based on silver. Trade was stimulated by the exchange of textiles. Ships from England and the Low Countries sought markets for their woolens and returned with spices and silks; the fine silk thread that came from China was keenly sought by the tailors who prepared the gorgeous costumes of the wealthy who stare at us from Renaissance paintings. Together Iberian and northern European ships broke the monopoly of Arab traders who had supplied the merchants of Venice with these goods. European guns that bested Arab navies, as the Portuguese did at Diu in 1509, were soon turned against one another as well. Freebooters from northern Europe like Francis Drake seized what they could not purchase. The revolt of the Protestant Netherlands against Catholic Spain brought with it Spanish efforts to subdue all of Protestant Europe and added ideological and religious sanction for violence and greed. During the English war against Spain more than one hundred privateers plied the oceans in search of prey. This maritime competition soon extended to the seas of Southeast Asia. There a trading network had been developed by Chinese junks. After the Ming dynasty lifted its ban on travel overseas in the 1560s, close to a hundred large vessels, containing some 20,000 tons of cargo space, sailed to Southeast Asia every year. In the words of one authority, “they brought thousands of pieces of silver back from Manila as well as tropical products. At Jakarta (which the Dutch renamed Batavia) the Chinese fleet in the early seventeenth century had a total tonnage as large or larger than that of the whole return fleet of the Dutch East India Company.”<sup>3</sup> With the goods came Chinese immigrants, and as the colonies grew a network developed into which Japanese traders, and after them the Europeans, could fit. The Chinese chain of trading posts throughout Southeast Asia thus served as the basis for Portuguese, Japanese, and Dutch trading activities in the area. Much of the activity that took place can be understood as the securing and maintaining of access routes for the transport of Japanese and New World silver to China and Chinese silks to Japan: more and finer silks for Japanese merchant princes, who supplied the warlord armies of Japan; more richly embroidered garments with family crests for the affluent warriors, and the glories of Momoyama design for the ladies at the daimyo courts. European ships competed with these junks. They frequently assaulted them and stole their cargoes, but they also utilized the network of bases and shipping lanes that had grown in response to the needs of the Chinese traders. In the sixteenth century the Protestant Reformation shook the Christian order in Europe and combined with the personal and political goals of monarchs to shatter what had once been Christian unity. Catholic Counter-Reformation monarchs struggled to regain and enlarge the ground that had been lost, and after mid-century they made spectacular gains in Asia. In 1540 Loyola’s Society of Jesus, manned by committed and able priests who were frequently drawn from restless and adventurous members of the minor nobility, began an advance that led it to the portals of India, China, and Japan. The knowledge and technology of early modern Europe contributed to this growth. Portuguese ships brought with them new instruments of navigation and of warfare as well as agents of the Counter-Reformation. Missionaries, trade, and war led to bases on the edge of the great states of Asia—Goa, in India, Malacca, in Malaya, and Macao, in China—from which probes could be launched to test the classic centers of Asian civilization. Enthusiasm for conversion intersected with political change in Europe. Marriage politics joined the Portuguese and Spanish thrones in 1580. Soon succession to the Holy Roman Empire combined Iberian with Habsburg expectations. All of this found echo in East Asia. Spanish Franciscans and Dominicans contested the Portuguese Jesuit monopoly, and Anglo-Dutch Protestants stood prepared to profit from Japanese rulers’ fears of becoming a base for struggles not their own. A glance at the chart of principal dates and events will show how direct an impact world politics had on Japan. In the sixteenth century commercial and political ferment also brought a renewed rise of trade and piracy in Japan. Fleets of buccaneers based on islands off the coast of Kyushu ravaged the coasts of China and Korea. Private shipping ventures sponsored by Japanese feudal lords and wealthy temples began to participate in the trading network established by Chinese ships in Southeast Asia. After the middle of the century the guns the Portuguese had brought helped to speed the process of unification in Japan. More powerful central governments were gradually able to put an end to the freebooting of neighboring coasts. Then, at the century’s end, the conqueror Hideyoshi added a new dimension to the violence as his armies ravaged Korea in their failed effort to invade China. At the same time Hideyoshi did his best to encourage foreign trade by granting permits to merchants for overseas voyages. The first of these authorizations, the shuinjo¯, were issued in 1592, the year his armies attacked Korea; they authorized voyages that ranged from Taiwan to Thailand and Macao to Manila. Hideyoshi thus replaced unorganized piracy with organized warfare, and piecemeal trading by ships bearing the unifier’s vermilion seal (shuin). Hideyoshi also turned against the missionaries, and ordered them out of Japan after he conquered Kyushu in 1587. His edict announced that Japan was the “land of the gods,” and that the diffusion from a kirishitan country of a “pernicious doctrine was most undesirable.” The fathers (bateren, padres) were to leave within twenty days. But trade, he made clear, was a different matter. “As years and months pass, trade may be carried on in all sorts of articles.” As before, all “who do not disturb Buddhism” could continue to travel freely.<sup>4</sup> Some of the missionaries left; but most did not. At Nagasaki some Jesuits considered organizing daimyo followers for an uprising, but it fortunately never came to light. By 1597, however, an increasingly exasperated and unpredictable Hideyoshi had become obsessed with fears of political difficulties arising from Christianity; converts, who included several prominent daimyo, might prove responsive to claims other than his, and Franciscans, <table><tr><td colspan="2">品</td><td>1 Principal Dates in Foreign Relations, 1497-1648</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>1497</td><td>Vasco da Gama rounds Cape of Good Hope</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1509</td><td>Portuguese victory over Arab fleet at Diu</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1540</td><td>Society of Jesus founded</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1542-1643</td><td></td><td>Portuguese land at Tanegashima south of Kyushu</td></tr><tr><td>1557</td><td></td><td>Portuguese established at Macao</td></tr><tr><td>1567-1648</td><td></td><td>Revolt of the Netherlands</td></tr><tr><td>1580</td><td></td><td>Union of Portuguese and Spanish thrones under Philip II</td></tr><tr><td>1588 1600</td><td></td><td>Defeat of Great Armada Arrival of Liefde (Will Adams, pilot) in Japan; English East India</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Co. (EIC) founded</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1602</td><td>United Dutch East India Co. (VOC) founded</td></tr><tr><td>1609</td><td></td><td>Dutch factory established at Hirado; Ieyasu grants trading rights</td></tr><tr><td>1609</td><td></td><td>Japanese-Korean treaty reestablishes trade</td></tr><tr><td>1613</td><td></td><td>EIC establishes factory, also at Hirado</td></tr><tr><td>1620</td><td></td><td>Date (Hasekura) mission returns from Europe</td></tr><tr><td>1623</td><td></td><td>EIC abandons Hirado factory</td></tr><tr><td>1623</td><td></td><td>Portuguese limited in residence</td></tr><tr><td>1634, 1635,</td><td></td><td>First three seclusion decrees; Deshima prepared for Portuguese</td></tr><tr><td>1635</td><td>1636</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1637</td><td></td><td>Chinese restricted to Nagasaki Shimabara rebellion</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1640</td><td></td><td>61 Portuguese put to death</td></tr><tr><td>1641</td><td></td><td>Dutch ordered to Deshima</td></tr><tr><td>1648</td><td></td><td>Treaty of Westphalia ends European war</td></tr></table> Dominicans, and Augustinians, who preached to ordinary Japanese instead of associating with the military elite, were finding a good response to their teachings. That year twenty-six Franciscan missionaries were executed at Nagasaki, their bodies left to rot on their crosses. After Hideyoshi’s death a year later, however, all major daimyo were preoccupied with the problem of succession. For a time Christians enjoyed a respite and their numbers even seemed to grow, but the grounds for political and ideological assault against the imported faith were being laid. Hideyoshi’s invasions of Korea also speeded the political and military disintegration of Ming China, which was soon to be tested by new invasions from the north. Manchu armies began to threaten first Korea, and then China itself. As Manchu armies subdued the heartland of Ming dynasty China, holdout forces on Taiwan and the southern coast sought help from Japan. The years in which Tokugawa rule developed thus saw enormous changes in world affairs. Communications were slow, of course, and no country was fully informed about events far beyond its borders. Nevertheless the new technology and navigation brought an end to the isolation that had prevailed. Europeans knew of warlord politics in Japan, church leaders followed the progress of Christian emissaries in Asia, and the Tokugawa founder Ieyasu struggled to secure the benefits of foreign trade without letting it enrich his rivals or undermine his own security. Western and Chinese traders were in Japan, Japanese trading ships were in Southeast Asia, and groups of Japanese settlers and adventurers could be found as far away as the Thai capital of Ayuthia. “Chinatowns” appeared along Japan’s coasts. Japan’s new rulers had need of a foreign policy. ## 2. Relations with Korea In late Tokugawa times shogunal officials spoke as though it had from the outset been a cardinal point of shogunal policy to repulse Western overtures for trade and professed their inability to change it out of respect to the sainted founder who had established the great Tokugawa peace. In fact nothing could be further from the truth. The Tokugawa years began with energetic efforts to encourage trade and international relations. It was only after Ieyasu’s death in 1616 that things began to tighten up. Ieyasu’s first problem was to undo the results of Hideyoshi’s disastrous adventure in Korea. As the leading daimyo in Japan, second only to Hideyoshi, he had to be aware of the ghastly toll in men and treasure the Korean invasions had taken. Of the approximately 158,000 men who crossed over to the peninsula, probably one-third failed to return. For the Korean side, of course, the cost was higher still due to the ferocity of Hideyoshi’s orders for vengeance after he was undeceived about the peace negotiations with China. After his victory at Sekigahara Ieyasu thus indicated a wish to negotiate. Peace was declared in 1605. Two years later a Korean mission of 504 men came to honor the accession of Hidetada as second shogun, and then went on to Sunpu to visit Ieyasu. Now came talks that resulted in the Treaty of Kiyu in 1609. By its terms Japan was permitted to resume trade with Korea, but while trade had previously been permitted at three ports it was now restricted to Pusan. There the Japanese were kept in a special quarter, the wakan, living under conditions somewhat comparable to those that were to be experienced by the Dutch and Chinese at Nagasaki later in the century. Japanese were closely monitored and denied permission to leave the quarter, and they could never venture closer to Seoul. The bakufu delegated the management of these relations to its vassal So¯, the daimyo of Tsushima. For Tsushima, Korea was the foundation of its wealth and importance. The domain was rated at only 5,000 koku, and the greater part of that income derived from its monopoly of trade with Korea. Studies of that trade by Tashiro Kazui make clear that the trade was lucrative for Tsushima and important to the bakufu.<sup>5</sup> Initially the Japanese traded silver bullion for Korean shipments of white Chinese silk thread. Even after the export of bullion from Nagasaki was prohibited, an exception was made for the Tsushima-Korea exchange. Naturally the trade was vital for Tsushima. The daimyo’s vassals derived their chief income from the trade, and one even forged a bakufu letter to Korea to help it along. Tsushima’s sponsored merchants operated sales centers in Nagasaki, Kyoto, and Edo. As urban culture and wants developed in Japan, the import of ginseng, a medicinal root, played a large part in the shipments, and when the cultivation of ginseng developed in Japan in the latter part of the eighteenth century it had distressing effects on the Tsushima economy. There were no formal Japanese missions to Korea, although Tsushima was ordered to send one in 1629, but twelve major Korean missions came to Japan during the Tokugawa years. Most of these, and all of those after 1655, came to mark the accession to rule of a new shogun. The bakufu made much of these visitors, parading them the length of the land to Edo and often on to the shogunal tombs at Nikko. By this means it showed daimyo and commoners alike that it was an important regional power with its own distinctive world order, and not a satellite orbiting within the Chinese world.<sup>6</sup> Major Korean embassies, the tsu¯shinshi, were imposing events involving three hundred to five hundred people. The Koreans took these very seriously, for they were cultural as well as diplomatic in purpose. There are thirty-four travel diaries written by Korean members of these missions. Cultural credentials were as important as diplomatic formalities. A diary written by a member of the mission in 1764 describes his audience with the Korean king, who interviewed candidates and had them compose lines of Chinese poetry within a fixed time limit to make sure that they would be able to hold their own when exchanging, and competing, with their Japanese hosts. In fact they more than held their own, for the Koreans were closer to the Chinese cultural tradition than the Japanese. The Koreans tended to disdain their vernacular hangul writing system in favor of classical Chinese, while for their Japanese hosts Chinese was an acquired literary language that supplemented writing in Japanese kana syllabary. Consequently one finds even accomplished Tokugawa scholars like Arai Hakuseki (1657–1725) eager to have the Koreans think well of his Chinese poems. When a Korean embassy visited Japan in 1682, Arai wrote that he sent to ask the “three leaders of the embassy, who were fine scholars, to write an appreciation of a collection of a hundred verses of occasional poetry I had composed”; the Koreans courteously asked to meet the poet, and the young Arai was gratified to have one of the visitors send him a foreword he had written for the collection.<sup>7</sup> Some years later the daimyo Maeda Tsunanori, a formidable scholar in his own right, noted that after a study group working on Ming law got into trouble they found it necessary to consult Koreans; “no one,” he wrote, “had any idea what it meant, but the question was put to Koreans, among others, and at length some understanding was gained.”<sup>8</sup> Koreans also served as transmitters in Tokugawa studies of the neo-Confucian scholarship of China. The works of the Korean scholar Yi Hwang (1501– 1570), better known by his honorific Yi T’oegye, circulated widely among Japanese scholars and acquainted many with what was to become a principal strand of Tokugawa thought. Korean medicine also attracted wide interest in Japan. From the first it was usual to include doctors with each Korean mission, and question-and-answer sessions with the physicians were held along the routes of travel. Nor did it end there. As has been mentioned, many of the daimyo who invaded Korea at Hideyoshi’s orders brought back with them groups of potters, a craft in which Koreans had excelled since medieval times. In the domain of Saga, Korean potters brought knowledge of the clays and glazes that made possible Japanese production of blue slipware porcelain that rapidly became highly prized and widely used. The simple blue-and-white designs called karakusa, “Chinese grass,” were soon shipped to all corners of Japan, and the secret of its production, rigidly guarded by the domain government, became a significant share of the cash income of the domain. Before long this ware made its way (via the port of Imari, for which it became named) to Nagasaki, whence Dutch merchants brought it to Europe. By the eighteenth century Delft, Meissen, and Worcester kilns were offering European versions of its glazes and patterns. In Satsuma, too, a smaller group of Korean potters located at Naeshirogawa performed a similar function in the production of earthenware ceramics; as late as the 1860s a visiting samurai wrote of his surprise at finding a community of potters set off by language and costume from the villagers who lived around them. Thus it is clear that relations with Korea remained an important thread throughout the Tokugawa period. The volume of the trade declined, to be sure, and as bakufu finances worsened the regime became less enthusiastic about hosting major embassies. The last embassy sent, in 1811, did not get beyond Tsushima. But that slowdown affected Tsushima finances more than it did the formal Korean-Japanese ties. Over time the intense hostility and fear of the early years, when the tsu¯shinshi were charged with making sure that Japan was not planning another invasion, gradually gave way to equanimity and moderate good feeling. Mention has been made of Arai Hakuseki. A contemporary of his was Amenomori Ho¯shu¯ (1668–1755), who studied Korean in the Japanese community at Pusan and prepared a language textbook that was used into the nineteenth century. On the Korean side there was Sin Yu-han, who visited Japan in 1719 as part of the mission that was sent to congratulate the shogun Yoshimune on his accession to rule. He noted in his travel diary that “a rush of people wanted to have my poetry; they piled papers on my desk to ask me to write something, and although I wrote for everyone who asked the papers continued to pile up like firewood.” Requests were particularly numerous in Osaka; “sometimes I could not sleep until dawn, or I was kept from eating, by these people. Japanese respect our writing as though we were gods, and keep them as treasure. Even a miserable palanquin bearer is happy to have a Chinese character written on a piece of paper by a Korean envoy.” Sin was not, however, impressed by what he saw of Japanese classical scholarship, and he was disturbed by a lack of formal reverence for Confucius. He found no shrines for the worship of Confucius at schools, and he deplored the absence of formal funeral dress to observe the death of parents or of monarchs, noting sadly that “they are born with good natures, but they do not know the Way.” On the other hand, he was overwhelmed by the evidence of urban prosperity he saw. In Osaka the road was “full of spectators. I am dizzy with its splendor, so dazzled that I cannot count the number of villages through which we have passed.” In Kyoto he found the To¯ji temple “decorated with gold and silver” and described his emotions on traversing “miles of streets with beautiful street lamps.” He fancied himself “in a dream paradise.” In Edo, where missions were paraded through the heart of the city, “long buildings along the road are shops of merchants. Spectators’ clothes are so colorful that I think Edo is much more prosperous than Osaka and Kyoto.” As a good Confucian Sin felt obliged to deplore this as materialistic, but as an observer he concluded that even Japanese villagers were rather well-off.<sup>9</sup> It would be pleasant to conclude that old enmities and complexes had been put aside and that the two countries now saw each other as equals, but there are disquieting signs that suggest that old attitudes lived on. Sin Yu-han recorded a conversation with Amenomori Ho¯shu¯ in which each complained about the other’s view of his country. We have been friendly with Korea for some time, Amenomori said, but Korean books still refer to us as pirates; how can this be? Well, said Sin, those books were probably written after the Japanese invasion of Korea, so it’s quite understandable. Still, how is it that Japanese refer to us as To¯jin (Chinaman)? Well, responded Amenomori, by law we are supposed to call you Cho¯senjin (Koreans). But because of your similarity to Chinese, we usually call you To¯jin; this means that we respect your culture. Unfortunately, Amenomori was disingenuous, for To¯jin had become a generic term for foreigner, which ordinary Japanese applied even to Westerners. Worse still, only a few years before this the diary of the Dutch mission head in Nagasaki notes of a summer day that “this day commemorates their victory over the Koreans, whose country they turned into a tributary nation.”<sup>10</sup> In other words, in Nagasaki the Japanese were explaining to the Dutch that they were celebrating Hideyoshi’s “victory” over the Koreans and that Korean missions were those of a tributary state. ## 3. The Countries of the West Ieyasu was no less eager to continue and expand trade with the West. His options had increased with the coming of the Dutch and English, who brought with them the rivalries and hatreds of seventeenth-century Europe. Will Adams, a Cornishman who arrived as pilot of the Dutch ship Liefde in 1600, remained in Japan until his death in 1620. He was the beneficiary of favorable treatment from Ieyasu and Hidetada, and enjoyed relatively high status: a small fief, a family, and the opportunity to profit from shuinsen (vermilion seal ship) voyages. Meanwhile he also supported his wife and family in England, and in his will divided his estate between the children of the two families. Ieyasu seems to have found him interesting and useful, for Adams broke the monopoly on news about the Western world previously enjoyed by Iberian missionaries and the interpreter Rodrigues.<sup>11</sup> The English East India Company (EIC) was formed that same year of 1600, and for a time Adams was in its employ as a consultant. The Dutch United East India Company (VOC) was chartered two years later through the union of a number of smaller trading companies. The companies were virtually independent principalities. Their directors were empowered to wage defensive war, build forts, conclude treaties of peace and to enter into alliances, all in the interest of expanding their trade. In its early years the VOC became a particularly formidable power. By 1648, the year the war for independence against Spain ended, Holland was in fact the greatest trading country in the world, carrying three-quarters of the trade in Baltic grain, the same proportion of the trade in Scandinavian timber that made Dutch shipbuilding possible, and much of the trade in Swedish metals; then there was salt from France and Portugal that went to the Baltic, and cloth that was finished in Holland and sold throughout Europe. Soon the VOC became the largest importer and distributor of spices, sugar, and porcelain as well. In so doing it ran into direct competition with Portuguese ships that came from Macao and Spanish ships that came from Manila. In the seventeenth century Dutch trading stations and maritime power saw the United West India Company, the counterpart of the VOC, establish forts and bases in Brazil, the Caribbean islands of Curac¸ao and Surinam, and the east coast of America with New Amsterdam, while the VOC extended its network of trade and power to South Africa, Ceylon, India, Australia, Java, and Taiwan, where the factory (as trading posts headed by a chief factor were called) of Zeelandia, established in 1624, was planned as a stable base that could rival Macao and guarantee steady trade with Japan. The union of the Portuguese and Spanish thrones in 1580 came at a time when the United Provinces of the Netherlands were waging their war of independence from Spain. Followed soon by the threat Philip II’s Great Armada posed to England in 1588, this union made possible Dutch and English cooperation and occasional alliance against Iberian power in the Pacific. Dutch and British companies established nearby bases at Surat, in India; on Java, where Batavia (Jakarta) was founded in 1619, and in Japan, where both companies settled on Hirado, a port north of Nagasaki, the Dutch in 1609 and the English in 1613. Dutch and British ships used Hirado as their base for several assaults on Spanish power and shipping outside Manila, and the Dutch also struck against Portuguese Malacca and gleefully raided the larger and more unwieldy Portuguese carracks wherever they intercepted them. Piracy and privateering were the expected manner of procedure. Chinese junks were also inviting targets, especially if they were plying between ports controlled by Spain or Portugal; they were spared only if they carried shuinjo¯ issued by the shogunate, which took a dim view of violence where its own profits were concerned. This was the setting in which Ieyasu had to make decisions about foreign policy and trade. The great Portuguese ships that came from Macao had long been the most important sources of trade, and they remained so until the expulsion of Portugal in 1639. Missionaries and Christianity, however, were another matter. The bakufu inherited Hideyoshi’s edicts and actions against missionaries and Japanese Christians. The union of Spain and Portugal complicated enforcement of that edict, however, for the union was followed by missionary rivalry between the Jesuits and the newer orders that came on Spanish ships. In 1593 free-wheeling Franciscans arrived from Manila; they came as emissaries and stayed as missionaries. Imperfectly aware of the setting into which they had come, they scouted the cautious approach the Jesuits had followed in the hope of delaying or evading enforcement of the prohibitions, and proceeded to carry out public preaching. Their success seemed to confirm their charge that the Jesuits were pusillanimous. Meanwhile bakufu officials were also becoming aware that communities of expatriate Japanese in Southeast Asia were attracting Christians fleeing from persecution, and they were suspicious that religion and politics, in the following of some of Hideyoshi’s former partisans, might intersect. It was disconcerting for them to see that the state documents that came from Manila and Macao in response to bakufu suggestions said more about propagating the faith than they did about trade. English requests for trade were somewhat less threatening. James I identified himself as “defender of the faith,” but he did speak of commerce. Consequently an English request carried by representatives of the EIC in 1613 was honored with a permit to come to “any port” in Japan. The Dutch, on the other hand, reinforced Japanese fears of Catholic missionaries and offered trade without any ideology at all.<sup>12</sup> A letter from Mauritz of Nassau of 1610 warned that “the Society of Jesus, under cover of the sanctity of religion, intends to convert the Japanese to its religion, split the excellent kingdom of Japan, and lead the country to civil war.” To emphasize the point the Dutch sent as gifts items likely to appeal to the old warrior—lead and gunpowder— instead of playthings for the rich and aristocratic. Ieyasu’s response was predictable. To Manila he sent a warning that Japan had been considered a Divine Country from ages past, and that he was not about to reverse the stand of previous generations. The Dutch, however, received so formal a permit to trade that it came to stand as a state-to-state agreement, the only one so issued. The result was that the Dutch chief factor could in future years come regularly to pay homage to the shogun as though he were a feudal lord and not the representative of a merchant company. As it worked out all parties to these agreements found their hopes of profit dashed. The English were the first to become discouraged. After some years of trading at Hirado they discovered that their permit had to be renewed by each successive shogun. Under Hidetada its new wording limited their purchasing privileges to the port of Hirado, thus denying them the leverage to exploit different markets. In 1623 the EIC, convinced that its representatives were skimming the trade to their personal advantage, closed its factories at Hirado and at Batavia to concentrate on the richer profits of India.<sup>13</sup> Shogunal officials who profited personally from the Portuguese trade also saw their chances fade as the association of that trade with Catholic Christianity became more firm. The bakufu strengthened its monopoly on trade by narrowing and then closing the opportunities for the shuinsen. Under Ieyasu these were frequently extended to daimyo and temples, and also to foreign merchants (Will Adams among them) and ships, many of them Chinese; not a few were used as cover for high bakufu officials. The daimyo were the first to be frozen out. In 1631 an additional guarantee came to be required that could be issued only by the ro¯ju¯. Now the permits were restricted to a select group of seven families or individuals, each with a particular tie to the Tokugawa. In 1633 overseas travel was ruled out for all Japanese. The Dutch watched these developments with satisfaction, expecting that they would end by monopolizing the trade with Japan. Their emissaries confirmed the Japanese in their fear of Iberian duplicity and encouraged doubts about overseas Japanese. “Let us do your trading for you,” they seemed to say. In the end they proved successful, but hardly in the way they had anticipated. An artificial island in the harbor of Nagasaki that had been prepared for the Portuguese instead became their home. In 1641 they were ordered to move from Hirado to Deshima, where they inherited all the misgivings official Japan had developed about foreigners and where their chances of profits through free trading privileges were constrained by regulations that limited them to dealing with merchant groups sanctioned by the bakufu. The Dutch achievement of peace with Spain in 1648 even raised bakufu doubts about their former enmity, while the political cooperation that had marked Holland’s earlier economic competition with England was replaced by wars with England from 1652 to 1654 and again from 1657 to 1667. ## 4. To the Seclusion Decrees Hideyoshi had ruled against Catholic Christianity in 1587 and moved to execute the first missionary martyrs in 1597, but the fate of Christianity was still not entirely clear in the early Tokugawa years. Ieyasu was eager to increase the volume of foreign trade, and he had more important political problems facing him with the need to reduce Hideyori’s castle and followers at Osaka. Numbers of highly placed feudal lords were also in doubt about the future of kirishitan, as Catholic believers were called. Some, perhaps impelled by desire for the wealth brought by trade, made wrong guesses. In 1582 three Kyushu daimyo had sponsored a mission of promising young samurai to Europe. They were greeted enthusiastically as harbingers of a Christian future, and requested, and were promised, more missionaries in the years to come. By the time they returned to Japan in 1590 Hideyoshi had issued his first orders against propagandizing Christianity, and the mission had come to nothing. But almost a quarter century later, in 1613, Date Masamune, the powerful lord of Sendai, sent his vassal Hasekura Tsunenaga to Rome by way of Mexico and Spain. Hasekura was accompanied by a Franciscan priest, Luis Sotelo. He accepted baptism in Madrid, and took as his Christian name Don Philip Francisco. It was his mission to negotiate for additional trading arrangements and mission exchange, but by his time churchmen, including Pope Paul V with whom he had an audience, were more on their guard. Hasekura returned in 1620 to find that the fall of Osaka in 1615 had been followed by stronger measures against kirishitan. The principal decisions against Christianity were made in the years around 1614–1615, and they bore little relation to the mistaken expectations of Date Masamune. They had their origins in a number of political, economic, and administrative considerations. Uppermost among these was the bakufu’s need to know that samurai, and especially daimyo, believers would have no higher loyalty than the one they bore their Tokugawa overlord. Ieyasu was receiving counsel from two Buddhist advisers, men who could have been expected to perceive the missionaries as their enemies. They were able to find arguments for their case against real or alleged Christian converts in a number of incidents that angered Ieyasu. In one, a Christian daimyo named Arima tried, through bribery at Ieyasu’s court, to win restitution of lands that he had lost. When exposed he hurriedly apostasized, but it did not save him from an early banishment. Next a bakufu official responsible for finances proposed a scheme for increasing the productivity of mines for precious metal and meanwhile added to his own wealth through dishonest reporting. He was accused, probably wrongly (since his twenty-four concubines denounced him), of being a Christian, but in any case further allegations that he was conspiring with missionaries heightened the scandal. These events were followed by an edict of 1614 once again ordering all Christian missionaries out of the country. This marked the start of a general persecution. Now too began measures requiring all residents in Tokugawaheld territories to register as parishioners of Buddhist temples; priests were to make regular reports to political authorities of the names and numbers of their communicants. In the mid-1680s this directive was made nationwide and annual. Buddhism was thus co-opted into the service of the Tokugawa state. It is probably not surprising that Christian daimyo, their numbers already drastically reduced by this time, by and large chose to maintain their rank and abjure their faith. For some, conversion must have been a matter of commercial and perhaps social convenience. What was striking, however, was the fortitude and perseverance of ordinary converts, most of whom had been evangelized by Augustinian preachers. It is undoubtedly a measure of the hardship of their lives as well as the tenacity of their hope that public executions of kirishitan who refused to apostasize frequently attracted large throngs of believers who seemed indifferent to the danger they were courting by singing hymns and offering prayers. It now became incumbent on suspected or formerly kirishitan daimyo to begin persecution of Christian sectarians in their domains in order to demonstrate their dependability to the shogunate. No area had been more evangelized than the rugged Kyushu countryside around Nagasaki. The city itself was now under direct shogunal rule. No area was more immediately subject to dragnet searches and tortures designed to force repudiation of faith in Christianity. As the intensity of persecution mounted it combined with social and political distress on the part of yeomanry and declassed samurai, now ro¯nin, former vassals of lords whose punishment had cost them their income and following. In 1637 these forces came together in an uprising on the Shimabara Peninsula near Nagasaki. It was an area that had experienced frequent changes of governance and misrule by cruel and rapacious feudal lords determined to extract more income from the impoverished peasantry. The Shimabara rebellion was a major test and shock for the bakufu and the third shogun, Iemitsu. Initially the uprising was far from being entirely Christian in makeup, but soon its most important leaders, including a young fighter named Amakusa Shiro¯ who became a legendary figure, were believers. Christianity had put down deep roots in the infertile soil of the Shimabara Peninsula. By 1637 the greater number of commoner believers throughout Japan, whose numbers are estimated to have approached 300,000, had been hunted down, executed, or had apostasized. Those who rebelled in 1637 and 1638 fought with the desperation of people who had nothing to lose. To the bakufu’s dismay they fought extremely well. The final result could nevertheless have been predicted; the rebel force found itself surrounded in Hara Castle, short of food and short of weapons. The end of the resistance was followed by the grisly slaughter of all who had survived.<sup>14</sup> The series of decrees that are considered to have “closed” Japan represented a gradual tightening of political controls over the daimyo. The bakufu had reason to be particularly alert where the large daimyo of the southwest— particularly Kyushu—were concerned. To that end it began with restrictions on their access to shuinjo¯, first limiting and then closing such opportunities. In 1609 it forbade them to have ships with a capacity exceeding 500 koku. After Ieyasu’s death in 1616 Hidetada, the second shogun, showed himself more hostile to Christianity and more suspicious of the foreign presence. The EIC experienced this in the limitation of the privileges it had previously enjoyed, and missionaries were ordered out. When the English factor Richard Cocks journeyed to Edo to remonstrate with the new authorities, he found himself grilled about his monarch’s profession to be “defender of the faith”; the Japanese demanded that he explain the difference between the faith of English and that of Iberian Catholics. At the same time that the English were being forbidden to trade outside Hirado, the daimyo of western Japan were forbidden to trade within their domains and ordered to see to it that all foreign ships that came to their ports be sent to Nagasaki or to Hirado. It did the hapless English no good to try to show their dependability by informing on the presence of Catholic missionaries known to them. Richard Cocks wrote in 1621: Yestarnight I was enformed that Francisco Lopas and a semenary priest were com to towne, and lodged in the house of the capt of the friggot taken the last yeare; of which I advised Torezemon Dono to tell the king [i.e., daimyo] thereof by Coa Jno. our jurebasso [interpreter]. It being late, and to give order noe strangers should passe out. And this morning I sent the same jurebasso to Torezemon Dono secretary, to know the kinges answer; which was, I might speake of these matters when Gonrok Dono came. Unto which I sent answer, it might be that then these pristes would be gon, and then it was to late to speake. Yet, for all this, there was noe eare nor respect geeven to my speeches.<sup>15</sup> Cocks persevered until he was called, with other witnesses, to identify the priests, and the matter ended with the daimyo forced, perhaps reluctantly, to send local Christians who identified them under duress, after which they were sent off in chains. The five principal decrees came in the six years between 1633 and 1639. In the first, a seventeen-article decree, forbade the sending of Japanese ships overseas, except for those properly certified, decreed death for Japanese who, having been overseas, returned (articles 1–3), ordered the reporting and offered rewards for identification of kirishitan (articles 4–8), limited trade in objects from abroad to channels of the authorized five guilds, and ordered that all ships be sent to Nagasaki (articles 9–17). Two years later, a second decree removed the exception of certification for overseas travel, made the ban all-inclusive and ordered punishment by death for any who disobeyed. Foreign ship captains had frequently employed Japanese seamen, but that too was now forbidden. The next regulations strengthened prohibitions on Japanese kirishitan and any missionaries who might be found. Now the count of prosecutions of believers found in violation of the decrees grew steadily. The Portuguese, as prime source of the infection, were exiled. In 1636 Portuguese and 287 of their offspring were sent to Macao. In 1639 a fifth and final decree settled the matter. When officials in Macao attempted a final remonstrance by sending a ship in 1640, the point was driven home by executing the captain and sixty others and allowing thirteen survivors to return to Macao with the story of what had happened to the others. The seventeenth century did not show examples of religious tolerance or freedom of conscience in many parts of the world. Within Japan fears of sectarian insurrection made for extirpation of ikko¯ Buddhism in the domain of Satsuma into the nineteenth century.<sup>16</sup> The other countries of East Asia remained hostile to Japanese visitors. Korea limited the Japanese to Pusan, Ming China maintained its ban on commerce with Japan, and memorialists at the Chinese court argued for laws against the construction of ships large enough to sail to Japan. From this one might almost argue that Japan’s was not the first, but in a way the last, sakoku (closed country) policy in East Asia. Nor were things very different in Europe. The fires of the Inquisition had not yet been banked. The long war of independence the Dutch fought with Spain came to an end in 1648, but that raised doubts in Edo about the wisdom of contact with even Protestant Europe. Nor was freedom of religion popular in the West. The Treaty of Westphalia of 1648 resolved the Protestant-Catholic standoff with a Latin formula that called for the acceptance of the ruler’s faith by those under his governance. Cuius regio, eius religio—the ruler’s faith prevails—as the formulation had it, left no room for individual decision. What was probably unique about the Tokugawa persecution was its ferocity. Japan’s insularity made escape impossible. In Kyushu sectarians went underground and maintained their community through ingenious devices, utilizing Buddhist images that opened to reveal Madonna and child. This pattern of indigenization made the kirishitan survivors almost a folk religion. For most, however, the inquisitor’s tortures brought death or apostasy. Captured priests were subjected to tortures so ingenious and fiendish that six European fathers renounced their faith. Several of these became authors of pamphlets that proved particularly telling in the inquisitors’ attempts to battle Christianity on the ideological level.<sup>17</sup> These measures may have owed something to the character of the third shogun. Iemitsu was a ruthless and paranoid ruler, and his leading inquisitor, Inoue Chikugo no kami Masashige, was able to prey upon his depraved tastes with particular skill.<sup>18</sup> The terror which their methods could inspire in victims has left its mark on historical and fictional accounts of those years.<sup>19</sup> ## 5. The Dutch at Nagasaki The departure of the English, followed by the expulsion of the Spanish and Portuguese, left the Dutch as the only Europeans in Japan. This had been the hope and purpose of their drive to monopolize the Japan trade. They had taken pains to assure the Japanese that their form of Christianity was very different from that of their Iberian rivals, and a Dutch ship had even obliged its Tokugawa hosts by lobbing shells into Hara Castle during the Shimabara rebellion. Nevertheless in 1641 the taste of victory turned to ashes when they were ordered to vacate their factory at Hirado, where a new building had carried the offensive date “1640 a.d.,” and move into the man-made island of Deshima in Nagasaki harbor. Deshima had been prepared for the Portuguese, its costs levied against Nagasaki merchant wards that stood to profit from foreign trade. It measured about 600 feet by 200 feet in a fan-shaped pattern. It was surrounded by a high board fence on its stone embankments, posted with signs warning people to stay away. It was connected to the mainland by a stone bridge with guards stationed on it. The Dutch were charged a yearly rental. Within the fence were a few warehouses, housing for twenty or so Dutch residents, and quarters for Japanese interpreters and guards. There was also space for a vegetable garden and a few cows, sheep, pigs, and chickens. Water came from the mainland through a bamboo pipe, and it was paid for separately. The contingent of VOC personnel was headed by the chief factor, called opperhoofd by the Dutch and kapitan by the Japanese. The group included a doctor, a bookkeeper, assistants, and usually personal black slaves for the ranking Dutchmen. None of them was free to cross the bridge without special permission, which was rarely given, and then usually for visits to the Nagasaki pleasure quarter; more often women from that quarter were permitted to cross to visit the Dutch.<sup>20</sup> Around this was a Japanese bureaucracy whose costs were charged against the Dutch; a headman and his deputy, five secretaries, fifteen laborer supervisors, and thirty-six treasurers, five gate guards, night guards, cooks, and grooms, and other hangers-on typical of a status society that was based upon the support of a large underemployed and nonproductive class. Samurai income, it will be remembered, was often phrased as “rations” for two or four or more servants. In street scenes in genre paintings and prints one always sees attendants carrying things for their betters, and “betters” was and remains a highly relative concept. Special mention must be made of the corps of interpreters. Portuguese remained the lingua franca of Western trade into the mid-seventeenth century, but with the narrowing of contacts to the VOC the study of Dutch became necessary. Nagasaki trade also required a corps of interpreters for Chinese and Southeast Asian languages for the China trade that is discussed below. To meet the needs of contact with the VOC some twenty families were given hereditary jobs as interpreters. They maintained their guild by co-opting successors, usually through adoption as family members. The patriarchal principle that characterized Tokugawa society meant that they would be arranged hierarchically under family heads as “major” and “apprentice” interpreters. It was Japanese policy to discourage the Dutch from studying Japanese lest the outsiders get too close to those they would contact. On a number of occasions representatives of the VOC were told to leave Japan because their knowledge of Japanese was becoming too good. The Japanese wanted to keep the contact on their own terms. The rhythm of life at Deshima was boring in its regularity. Ships arrived in July with the summer monsoon. Their approach would be announced by Japanese coastal lookouts, and they were signaled at the harbor entrance from Papenberg (“Pope hill,” named for kirishitan martyrdoms); the captain would then order his crew to unload the guns and lock all Bibles and other Christian literature into barrels. In at least the early years the crew was obliged to tread on images of the Madonna and child (fumie), a test that had been found particularly effective for interrogation of kirishitan. Crews remained on board as Japanese laborers unloaded the cargo. In the seventeenth century, when the trade was at its height, Chinese silk thread led the list of valuables. War-related raw materials—tin, lead, saltpeter, borax— came next, and curios and luxury items ranging from deer pelts to spices to tropical woods, and European-origin curios like eyeglasses, clocks, and mirrors came last. Once on land, the cargo was displayed for inspection by representatives of the merchant guilds authorized to deal with the foreigners. The most important of these guilds, the itowappu, literally “thread allocation,” represented merchants in the principal shogunal cities. Bakufu officials had first choice of objects and of course kept the materials of war for themselves. They could also give the Dutch order lists for the next year’s delivery. In return, the Dutch obtained bullion, first silver and, after mid-century, copper. Japan was a major exporter of silver in the seventeenth century, and remained a major exporter of copper. In addition, as direct access to China became difficult because of the wars that ended with the victory of Manchu invaders over the Ming dynasty in 1644, Japanese porcelain, blue-and-white slipware first produced by the emigre´ Korean potters in Saga, became an important item of trade, ideal for ballast and soon keenly desired in Europe and in the Near East. Japanese lacquerware and chests completed the list of items salable in a Europe experiencing the tastes of “Chinoiserie” that had grown out of Jesuit contact with Ming China.<sup>21</sup> VOC ships sailed back to Batavia with the fall monsoon in November. Their profits depended only in part on Japan-Java-Holland trade; what mattered was the carrying trade all through Asia and the Near East, and it is no accident that some of the major collections of Japanese ceramics survive in the Ottoman palaces of Istanbul. The details of this commerce make for dreary reading in the daily register kept by the Deshima chief factor and forwarded to Batavia and on to Holland. His successor normally came the following year, and with the exception of Hendrik Doeff, who was marooned on Deshima during the Napoleonic years, few factors spent very long in Japan. Actually the factor’s most important official duty came in the form of a November trip to Edo for a ceremonial audience with the shogun that took place after the departure of the ships for Java. The court trip (hofreis, as the Dutch called it) changed the chief factor’s status from merchant head to feudal lord. In this he stood above Korean ambassadors and Chinese captains, for he alone came there by virtue of Ieyasu’s permit to Mauritz of Nassau. The trip took place a total of 116 times in Tokugawa years; annually after 1633, biennially after 1764, and then every four years from 1790 to 1850, the last such trip. The round trip averaged 90 days, and the longest required 142. It began by boat to Shimonoseki, went on by procession to Osaka, and then moved along the Eastern Sea Route (To¯kaido¯) to Edo. It involved low-level haggling as well as high-level encounter. Costs were borne by the Dutch (as they were by feudal lords), and the opperhoofd was anxious to keep his entourage as small as possible. The Japanese wanted it as large as possible, to permit more attendants and the possibility of combining private with public business. Throughout the operation the Dutch felt that the Japanese did their best to maximize featherbedding. One purpose of the daily diary of the mission was to have evidence of precedents with which the Dutch chief factor could argue his case for economy. This regular look into a Japan that was increasingly remote and inaccessible made service at Batavia attractive for some remarkable and curious Europeans whose accounts provide invaluable pictures of Tokugawa Japan. The best known of these is Engelbert Kaempfer (1651–1716), who was at Deshima as doctor in 1690 and accompanied the chief factor on his journey to Edo in 1691 and 1692. His History of Japan, first published in English translation in 1727–1728, provides a rich storehouse of information. Kaempfer was able to gain information through the help of a young student interpreter who remained with him for two years and provided him with much information that he was not supposed to obtain. Although it is by no means the most important contribution of the book, Kaempfer’s account of the audience with the fifth shogun Tsunayoshi makes clear that Europeans had become little more than exotic and amusing creatures by the end of the century. Soon after we came in, and had after the usual obeysances seated our selves on the place assign’d us, Bingosama [the Lord of Bingo] welcom’d us in the Emperor’s [shogun’s] name and then desir’d us to sit upright, to take off our cloaks, to tell him our names and age, to stand up, to walk, to turn about, to dance, to sing songs, to compliment one another, to be angry, to invite one another to dinner, to converse one with another, to discourse in a familiar way like father and son, to shew how two friends, or man and wife, compliment or take leave of one another, to play with children, to carry them about upon our arms, and to do many more things of like nature. Moreover we were ask’d many questions serious and comical; as for instance, what profession I was of, whether I ever cur’d any considerable distempers, to which I answer’d yes, I had, but not at Nagasaki, where we were kept no better than prisoners; what houses we had? whether our customs were different from theirs? how we buried our people, and when? to which was answr’d, that we bury’d them always in the day time . . . Whether we had prayers and images like the Portuguese, which was answered in the negative . . . Then again we were commanded to read, and to dance, separately and jointly, and I to tell them the names of some European Plaisters, upon which I mention’d some of the hardest I could remember. The Ambassador [Opperhoofd] was asked concerning his children, how many he had, what their names were, as also how far distant Holland was from Nagasaki . . . We were then further commanded to put on our hats, to walk about the room discoursing with one another, to take off our perukes . . . Then I was desired once more to come nearer the skreen, and to take off my peruke. Then they made us jump, dance, play gambols and walk together, and upon that they ask’d the Ambassador how old we guessed Bingo to be, he answer’d 50 and I 45, which made them laugh. Then they made us kiss one another, like man and wife, which the ladies particularly shew’d by their laughter to be well pleas’d with. They desir’d us further to shew them what sorts of compliments it was customary in Europe to make to inferiors, to ladies, to superiors, to princes, to kings. After this they begg’d another song of me, and were satisfy’d with two, which the company seem’d to like very well. After this farce was over, we were order’d to take off our cloaks, to come near the skreen one by one, and to take our leave in the very same manner we would take it of a Prince, or King in Europe . . . It was already four in the afternoon, when we left the hall of audience, after having been exercis’d after this manner for four hours and a half.<sup>22</sup> The Japanese began to limit the number of VOC ships, banned the export of silver, and imposed restrictions on the export of copper, the item the Dutch were most eager to obtain. The diary the chief factor submitted to his superiors in Batavia and Holland is full of complaints about the cost of presents to Japanese officials, haggling with Nagasaki authorities about prices and the volume of goods, the quality of lacquer and porcelain that came in, and the efforts of Japanese officials to take advantage of them. Over time the physical restrictions imposed in the early Deshima years eased somewhat, although the Dutch were never permitted to step out of their role as merchants working through interpreters. But the trade, so profitable in the early decades when conditions were most difficult, declined steadily in bulk and in value. Despite restrictions, a number of remarkably astute observers left accounts of their experiences. Kaempfer remains the best known, and his achievement was a considerable one; he even managed to map the route to Edo secretly with his compass. A Swedish scientist, Carl Peter Thunberg, a student of the botanist Linnaeus, was at Deshima in 1775 and collected over eight hundred species of Japanese flora. The Hollander Isaac Titsingh was in Japan three times during the 1780s. By his time Japanese interest in the Dutch language had increased sufficiently for him to be able to correspond in Dutch with studious daimyo after his return home. Titsingh too prepared a massive study of Japan, but he retired to Paris and his materials were scattered and lost in the upheavals that followed the French Revolution. Hendrik Doeff, as mentioned, was marooned at Deshima from 1804 to 1817; he worked toward a dictionary of Japanese and left memoirs describing his experiences. The German Philipp Franz von Siebold, who was in Japan from 1823 to 1828, was an army doctor, and was permitted to establish a school for medicine in the city of Nagasaki. He had his students prepare essays about their country, and collected material for an important study of Japan before he was expelled for espionage after managing to obtain a map of northern Japan. In addition, there were a number of Dutch doctors who served at Deshima much longer than the famous men whose books informed the Western world about Japan, but few of their records survive. Why, then, did the Deshima station, with its dwindling quantity of trade, continue to exist? For the Dutch it was an extension of the Batavia station that became, as Netherlands East Indies, the country’s profitable colony and claim to continued great power standing. On the Japanese side, the Dutch contact provided intelligence about the outside world. Each arriving captain was obliged to submit a fu¯setsugaki, or account of what had happened since the last ship’s arrival. Indeed Kaempfer, in his closing chapter, opined that this was the reason Japan maintained the system even in his day. Japan could easily provide for its own needs, he wrote, and it lacked nothing of importance. Why then had Japan not expelled the Dutch as well? His answer was that “it was not thought advisable to oblige them also to quit the Country, and yet dangerous freely to admit them. For this reason they are now kept, little better than prisoners, and hostages under the strict inspection of crowds of overseers, who are obliged by a solemn oath narrowly to watch their minutest actions, and kept, as it seems, for scarce any other purpose, but that the Japanese might be by their means informed of what passes in other parts of the world. Hence, to make it worth their while to stay, and patiently to endure what hardships are put upon them, they have given them leave to sell off their goods to the value of about 500,000 Crowns a year. It is certainly an error to imagine, that the Japanese cannot well be without the goods imported by the Dutch. There is more Silk and other Stuffs wore out in the Country in one week’s time, than the Dutch import in a year.”<sup>23</sup> ## 6. Relations with China Ieyasu’s efforts to heal the relationships that Hideyoshi had broken with Asia extended also to his concern for China. Chinese goods, especially textiles, were after all the most important import in the seventeenth century, and the possibility of getting them directly at the source had to be attractive. Chinese artisans and traders had long evaded the Ming dynasty’s rules against trade with Japan. Indeed, “Chinatowns” were to be found everywhere along the coasts of Kyushu and as far east as Kawagoe and Odawara on the main island of Honshu. Chinese artisans had helped design the tiles for Nobunaga’s castles, and Ieyasu and his contemporaries recruited skilled Chinese for their capitals. Some were rewarded with land and residence. As order improved under Tokugawa rule and declined under late Ming rule many of those Chinese chose to remain in Japan and assume Japanese names and nationality. Then as trade became concentrated in Nagasaki most overseas Chinese found it necessary to move to that city; in the first decades of Tokugawa rule resident Chinese there came to number over two thousand. Ieyasu’s success in reestablishing relations with Korea in 1609 was followed by discussion of reopening trade relations with Ming China. Ming authorities were less forgiving than their Korean counterparts, however, and they showed little interest in Japanese overtures; memorials to the court argued that Japanese “pirates” were not to be trusted under any circumstances. In 1609 these doubts received substantiation when Satsuma, with bakufu knowledge, seized control of the Ryukyu islands, disarmed their inhabitants, and installed a shadow government that maintained the ruler in his Okinawan capital in an effort to continue, under the pretense of independence, a tributary relationship with China. In years to come it was easier for all parties to pretend that this had not taken place; when missions from China came to invest Okinawan rulers the Japanese supervisors kept a discreet distance. Satsuma thus had access to Chinese goods, and the bakufu gained in self-esteem from Ryukyu embassies that were paraded in Edo when they came to mark the installation of a new shogun. Late Ming memorialists were not taken in by this, however, and warned their emperor of new dangers from Japan. Since, moreover, the Chinese merchants most eager to travel to Japan were from the southern Chinese coast and farthest from the control of Peking, it is not surprising that memorialists also called for laws forbidding the construction of ships large enough to sail to Japan. Nevertheless, between 1611 and 1625 the bakufu addressed several letters to Fukien Province authorities concerning the possibility of reopening direct trade and commerce with the Ming. The letters, however, failed to meet the protocol requirements the Chinese court set for documents from its tributaries; they did not conform with standards of terminology and form, and they were not dated by the era names of the Chinese calendar. Worse yet, they made no apology for the seizure of Ryukyu but asserted that the island king now called himself Japan’s vassal.<sup>24</sup> Despite this, responses from provincial officials seemed to hold out the possibility of an arrangement. By the time these arrived, however, Osaka had fallen, Ieyasu had died, and the bakufu was very much more confident of its ability to have its own way. The same officials who had planned the original approach to China now dismissed the Chinese responses as impertinent and directed that future correspondence be routed through Tsushima, as was the case with Korea. Both regimes, in other words, chose to stand by principle and dignity and rejected any arrangement that did not bring protocol as well as commercial advantages. In the 1640s, when Chinese officials sought Japanese help against the Manchus, the Edo authorities were in a position to assert their full authority and respond with scorn. The Chinese, one daimyo wrote a retainer, “won’t allow Japanese ships to approach their shores; they even post picket ships. Therefore it is hardly proper for them to come, now that their country has fallen into civil war, and say, ‘We are having some trouble, so could you please send some troops?’ ”<sup>25</sup> Thanks to private Chinese traders, however, the bakufu found it possible to have it both ways. On the state-to-state level it maintained a haughty arrogance, while the VOC, Tsushima, Satsuma, and private Chinese merchants more than fulfilled its commercial needs. As conditions in Asia changed it seemed wise to cut off Japanese traders from sources of contamination in Southeast Asia and, after the 1630s, make them stay home altogether. But that did not by any means involve the sacrifice of goods, intelligence, or even technology from the outside world. Japan’s “seclusion” was thus aimed principally at the West. It is Western ethnocentrism to think that a country that chooses to cut itself off from Westerners has cut itself off from the world. Most bakufu trade policies were designed for access to Chinese goods, and in this regard they were highly successful. Foreign trade and the Nagasaki system were so important to the bakufu that it subsidized domains that produced copper for export in order to keep them going and to prevent them from selling it on the domestic market, where it brought higher prices. The “Dutch” trade was actually trade in Asian, chiefly Chinese, goods. And Chinese and Koreans brought more of those than the Dutch. The Nagasaki trade, as O<sup>¯</sup> ba Osamu has put it, was really China trade.<sup>26</sup> The Chinese had no headman and no formal authorization as the Dutch did, and they too experienced a gradual narrowing of freedom of movement and of commerce, but they were far more numerous. The Chinese quarter in Nagasaki, the to¯jin yashiki that was established in 1689, harbored thousands of people when the fleet was in; in its first year it housed 4,888 Chinese. It occupied an area larger than seven acres, double that of Deshima. In the 1740s, when things were going badly for the Dutch, Deshima was patrolled by over thirty Japanese guards; the Chinese quarter was administered by over three hundred officials, guards, and inspectors. Things were on a dramatically different scale. At Nagasaki interpreters were divided into two groups, one for the Dutch, and a far larger company for the Chinese. The “Chinese” interpreters were really responsible for all of Asia, with subcategories assigned to “other” countries beside China. In the seventeenth century this meant specialists for Thailand, Vietnam, “Luzon” (Manila), and India. For the most part ships from those areas were sent by colonies of overseas Chinese. The interpreters maintained a rather familial establishment, and their students and successors were normally relatives by blood or adoption. Chinese specialists received higher pay than those for Southeast Asia. As time went on, and the bakufu became more wary of representatives of areas beyond what one scholar calls a “Luzon-Macao,” or Catholic, line, they also became fewer. The trade assumed significant proportions, especially during the seventeenth century. It was in 1635 that the Chinese were ordered to come only to Nagasaki. Their numbers grew rapidly; in 1640, 74 ships came; a year later there were 97. After the Manchus seized Taiwan in 1683 the traffic became so heavy (193 ships came in 1688) that it became necessary to establish the Chinese quarter for their crews and to institute regulations to limit their number. The eighteenth century consequently saw a decline; in 1720 there were 30 ships, and in 1791, only 10. It is, however, the cultural role of the Chinese, at least prior to the late Tokugawa development of interest in the West, that provides the most striking contrast to the role and treatment of the Dutch. Kaempfer and his companions were obliged to humiliate themselves with several hours of silly pantomime to amuse the shogun Tsunayoshi, but that same shogun tried hard to be a serious student of the higher culture of China. He laughed at Kaempfer, but he treated visiting Chinese monks with the greatest deference. The Dutch were well advised to keep their faith under wraps, and they sealed whatever religious books they brought with them while their vessels were in port. But at Nagasaki the Chinese were permitted to build branches of their temples in Fukien and Chekiang, and shogunal officials accompanied captain and crew to these temples in processions of thanks for safe arrival. Three temples were established before the decrees of the 1630s; one to provide for the needs of provincials from Chekiang, Kiangsu, and Kiangsi (“Nanking”), and two more added for sailors from Fukien, Foochow, and Changchow-Ch’uanchow. In 1678 a fourth temple was established for men from Canton (Kwangchow). For over a century priests and abbots came from China to staff these temples. The “Nanking” temple also served as the avenue of introduction for Chinese monks who moved on to central Japan to found the O<sup>¯</sup> baku Rinzai Zen temple of Manpukuji at Uji. The first abbot was Yin Yu¨an (Japan’s Ingen), who brought a revised ordination procedure. He was soon put in touch with the (Kyoto) Myo¯shinji abbot Ryo¯kei, who saw to it that he was invited to Kyoto for an audience with the retired emperor Go Mizuno-o; he also enjoyed the patronage of Tokugawa Ietsuna, the fourth shogun. Until 1740 all Manpukuji abbots were from China. Thereafter they alternated with Japan-born abbots for sixty years, and only after that were they all Japanese.<sup>27</sup> Ingen and other Chinese Rinzai monks were honored guests at the court of the shogun Tsunayoshi. Tsunayoshi prided himself on his knowledge of the Chinese classics. He presided at 240 seminars on the I Ching (Book of Changes) at which monks, officials, daimyo, and Confucian scholars were expected to be present.<sup>28</sup> His chamberlain Yanagisawa Yoshiyasu organized groups for the study of spoken Chinese, and the court Confucianist Ogyu¯ Sorai went to great effort to try to master spoken colloquial Chinese. Sorai’s letters to these learned Chinese are full of almost cloying respect and flattery. Yesterday I visited a Buddhist place and for the first time I met your compassionate and gracious person. We had a marvelous conversation on various subjects. It was like the playing of bells: when they [i.e., you] sounded high inquiries were answered; when they [i.e., I] sounded low, there were gasping sounds. The brushes flew over the paper [i.e., as we communicated in writing] creating a wind, the ink came down on paper producing flowers . . . Now, untiringly and diligently you presented me with your beautiful teaching. The spirit of harmony could be felt. Having returned home, I felt close to fainting and I was filled with memories . . . I have just tasted the sweetest taste of sweets, it still sticks to my teeth and cheeks, and I cannot get it rinsed from my mouth . . . if at your leisure, after practising your Zen meditation you would trouble your august brush, and if I could attach it to my simple hut, a word from an eternally connected, it would shine there for ever and ever [i.e., could I persuade you to send me some calligraphy I could display?].<sup>29</sup> In short, the contrast between the treatment of these Chinese prelates and the dragnet that was out for Catholic priests brings home the fact that although for a century and more the seclusion system tried to exclude Western thought and religion, during the same period the Japanese elite was struggling to master the Chinese cultural tradition. That same respect was extended to Chinese goods. The bakufu saw to it that the best of Chinese silks came into its own hands and that the best of Chinese books were available to its scholars. In some ways this respect extended to Korean scholars, partly because they could help in the transmission of Chinese texts and thought. Amenomori Ho¯shu¯ struggled to master Korean, but before that he went to Nagasaki to study spoken Chinese. Members of Korean missions exchanged more than poems, paintings, and calligraphy with their hosts. Japanese were also keen to learn of medicine as it was practiced in Korea, and sought out the doctors who accompanied each mission; question-and-answer sessions with the visiting physicians were held along their route of travel. In addition, as has been mentioned, Korean potters brought knowledge of the clays and glazes that made possible Japanese production of blue slipware porcelain, in patterns and shapes so closely identified with Ming dynasty Chinese pottery that Ming dates were often stenciled on the bottom, and the result, as Japanese Imari, was exported by the Dutch to the Near East and Europe for further emulation by Dutch, German, and English artisans. In some respects, in other words, “closed” Japan was a transmission point for international cultural and technological exchange. Studies of bullion flows also show that seventeenth-century Japan was a major player in economic exchange as well.<sup>30</sup> In the time of the eighth shogun, Yoshimune, the study of Chinese precedents extended to institutional patterns with particular emphasis on Ming administrative law. The Six Maxims of Shun-chih, the first Manchu emperor, were forwarded from Ryukyu by Satsuma. Yoshimune, who saw that these simple moral exhortations could have direct application to Japan, ordered a simplified translation of a popular text containing the maxims for use in lower schools. There are records of daimyo who ordered village leaders to explain the importance of the maxims on the first day of every month. The influence of the document extended into modern Japan. In the Meiji period the Imperial Rescript on Education of 1890, which served as the chief ideological text for prewar Japan, drew on the use of this document as a precedent.<sup>31</sup> In addition to all this, Tokugawa period contacts with China had room for popular culture also. We have the names of about 130 Chinese painters who came and stayed at Nagasaki for a time. They were not the great artists of their day; most of them were priests and merchants who were sufficiently skillful for Japanese to admire their work. The ablest of these men enjoyed enormous fame in Japan. Shen Nan-p’in, the best known, came in 1731 and again in 1733. After his return to China he continued to send his paintings to Japan for sale; about two hundred of them survive. He and three others became known as the “four great teachers” who introduced late Ming and early Ch’ing styles of bird and flower painting. Theirs was a pleasant, bourgeois style that was easy to live with. It was popular with the urban residents of central China, and it quickly became popular with the townsmen in Japan. The Chinese painters also introduced Chinese “literati” painting, which found echo in the Japanese nanga and bunjinga styles of Buson, Ike no Taiga, and late Tokugawa eclectics. Ming period prints also played a role in the development of Japanese printmakers’ skills, skills that led to the burgeoning production of prints that were eagerly sought by townsmen in Japan’s fast-growing cities. Meanwhile the formal art patronized by Japan’s feudal elite, of course, drew on the examples of earlier and greater schools of Chinese art. By Yoshimune’s time in the early eighteenth century the bakufu’s interest extended to practical imports from China in the hope of reducing what was becoming a serious trade imbalance. As Japanese mines ran out, restrictions were put on the export of bullion in 1685, in 1715, and once more in 1790. Both the Dutch and Chinese were now sharply limited in the number of ships they could send and the amount of copper they could export. New measures to control smuggling came into effect, with drastic punishments carried out publicly in order to intimidate any who might be bold enough to try.<sup>32</sup> More interesting, however, was the bakufu’s eagerness to encourage the production of things like silk, sugar, and pharmacopoeia that had figured high on the list of imports. This brought with it the hiring of specialists from China to help in the search for useful plants and appropriate locations in Japan. In other words, during the years of “seclusion” there was a continuous process of change in Japan’s international trade. As the need for, and interest in, raw materials for war such as gunpowder and saltpeter diminished, the Dutch too found themselves sending different kinds of goods to Nagasaki. Sugar was high among these, and it was a crop whose domestic production Yoshimune did his best to encourage. When the sugar available to the Dutch dried up after a Chinese insurrection on Java resulted in destruction of refining facilities there in the eighteenth century, it endangered the whole arrangement with Deshima; bakufu administrators provided less copper, and the Dutch threatened to break things off altogether. Significantly, they knew they had the inhabitants of Nagasaki on their side, for the city lived for and on foreign trade. So did the officials lucky enough to be appointed to deal with the Dutch and Chinese, as they were able to improve their income many times through quiet peculation. ## 7. The Question of the “Closed Country” The Japanese term sakoku, “closed country,” was coined by a Japanese scholar who translated the chapter in which Kaempfer discussed the “closed country” and, incidentally, argued its benefits. The translation circulated privately and was not published until the 1850s. It became, and has remained, a standard term. As we shall see, in the last decade of the Tokugawa period kaikoku, or “open country,” served as the antithesis to jo¯i, “expel the barbarians!” in fevered political discourse. Commodore Matthew Calbraith Perry was serenely convinced that he was bringing civilization to a benighted land that lived in flagrant violation of all norms of international society. From the account above, however, it seems clear that we should pause before accepting the verdict of Kaempfer the way his translator did. The seventeenth century should be judged by seventeenth-century standards, and a number of qualifications are in order before we accept Perry’s nineteenthcentury view of the matter. Japan itself, as we have seen, was far from fully “closed.” For Japanese, forbidden on pain of death from leaving and trying to return to the country, the fact was clear enough. These draconian rules were relaxed a bit toward the end as the regime saw utility in the news and skills that returnees might bring with them, but they held good through most of the period. Nineteenthcentury English and American captains who thought they were ingratiating themselves with the Japanese government by bringing shipwrecked sailors and fishermen back to their home country were helping neither the castaways nor their own cause. Europe was far more multinational and international. Korea, however, was if anything more secluded. Yet the world of the Japanese was far from closed mentally, culturally, or even technologically. Chinese scholars, artists, and priests came to Nagasaki throughout the Tokugawa years; educated Chinese received cordial hospitality from their Japanese hosts, and even Chinese commoners who had skills and ability were able to make an important contribution to Japanese culture. As the eighteenth century went on the same was true of the Dutch; they were gradually exempted from the humiliation of being displayed like Martians at the shogun’s court. As Japanese scholars began to develop the ability to read Dutch, the books Dutch ships brought to Nagasaki became more important than the copper they took back with them. In the 1820s Dr. Philipp Franz von Siebold, as mentioned, was even permitted to open a school for Japanese students in Nagasaki. At the same time the Japanese paranoia about Christianity was never relaxed. In Nagasaki even Chinese books that entered were checked for references to Christianity. In 1704 a courageous Sicilian named Giovanni Battista Sidotti made his way to Manila, where he studied Japanese with expatriates, and in 1708 managed to land on the island of Kyushu with the hope of evangelizing for his faith. He was speedily intercepted and transported to Edo, where he spent the remaining seven years of his life in the dungeon ironically referred to as the “Christian residence.” There he was interrogated by the shogunal scholar Arai Hakuseki, who admired his intelligence and courage but professed dismay at his credulity. Sidotti then confirmed Japanese views of the danger of his creed by converting his jailers. Soon interpreters were sent to inform the Dutch that Sidotti and his converts had been confined in small square boxes from which they would not emerge again. This took place in 1715. Over a half century later the diary of Dr. Sugita Ganpaku, a pioneer specialist in Western medicine, noted that ordinary villagers had been seized, tortured, and executed on the basis of charges that they were secret Christians. Allegations of belief in Christianity remained one of the most effective ways of dealing with political enemies and demonstrating personal vigilance. It was not that Christians were necessarily evil; quite to the contrary, wrote the samurai Aizawa Yasushi in 1825; rather, they were able to mislead stupid commoners by kindness and thereby prepare them to become traitors to their country. One can grant that what are now called “civil rights” were nonexistent without dismissing Japan as “closed.” To be sure, after the awareness of Russian advances on the Kurils and Hokkaido from the north and English advances on China from the south, Japanese authorities tightened their guard and closed their minds anew. National security was now at stake. By that time Ieyasu had been credited with the design for national isolation, and it had become an apparently inviolable part of Tokugawa tradition. Foreign trade had also run its course; fewer ships came to Nagasaki, and what they brought—except for books—was far less important to the Japanese economy, which had now matured in production of silk, of cotton, and of sugar. It was precisely in eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries that the West had changed most dramatically. The long interval of peace in Japan contrasted with an almost unbroken series of wars in the West. In the process dramatic changes in military technology made the weapons Japanese carried as obsolete as the class structure of those who carried them. Intellectual, political, and economic transformation in America and Europe had led to the participatory state with its citizen soldiers, while in Japan ordinary people took little interest in the activities of samurai. The relative standing of the Western powers had also changed dramatically. At the start of the Tokugawa period Holland was becoming one of Europe’s great powers, with stations in all parts of the world, but by the nineteenth century it had been transformed into a small trading state that minded its own business almost as quietly as Tokugawa Japan did. Japanese students sent to Holland in the 1860s concluded with dismay that they had been studying the wrong Western language and country. Matsuki Ko¯an, the future Terajima Munenori, spoke for them in a letter he sent in 1862. “Many scholars in England and France raised their eyebrows when they heard that we read Dutch books,” he wrote; “even the Hollanders themselves all read their books in French or German . . . Beyond the borders no one knows Dutch. I must honestly say that the country is so small and mean as to startle one.”<sup>33</sup> He might, of course, have said the same things about a Japan in which scholars read books in Chinese and in Dutch. It is this feeling of having made the wrong choice, and having fallen behind in consequence, that helps to account for the large literature modern Japanese have produced about their “closed” country. Additionally, they began to study world history at a time when European writers emphasized the primacy of interstate relations and war as formative in the creation of modern states.<sup>34</sup> What “history,” then, had an isolated Japan experienced? It became the more natural to highlight the “seclusion” laws, and blame them for Japan’s failure to achieve international standing in early modern times. In the closing days of World War II the philosopher Watsuji Tetsuro¯ described sakoku as the “tragedy” of Japan, responsible for most of the problems the country had experienced in modern times. It forced, he thought, the rushed modernization under state control that followed, and contributed to the drive to compete and excel with its disastrous end in the Pacific War. A half century later, however, the Edo period has come to look very different to Japanese historians. This generation has not, of course, been frustrated by its cruelties or preoccupied with its failings in the way their forebears had been. Generations of research have made it clear how much things actually changed during the Edo years. Contemporary Japanese are no longer obsessed by Japan’s “backwardness” in comparison with the West. The disasters that dominated Watsuji’s consciousness are now far behind them. Consequently they show a calm and dispassionate willingness to equate Japan’s experience with that of other countries. For some liberal, even internationalist, scholars, the entire system of seclusion needs to be rethought and reevaluated. They prefer to see it as the normal, or at least reasonable, response of an early modern state that was defining itself and its boundaries. They draw on the evidence of vigorous intellectual life in Edo times to deny that seclusion choked off intellectual curiosity and variety. One scholar indeed has been quoted as saying, no doubt with tongue in cheek, that “the country was far more open to new currents during the sakoku period than it is today . . . foreign goods and information flowed in abundantly.” If one followed this, it would be necessary to conclude that the generalizations of the textbooks have been badly overblown, and that the heroic mold in which Western writers have cast the achievement of Commodore Perry is ill deserved. It is not necessary to take so benign a view of the Tokugawa system to suggest that the issue has been badly overdone. What if the Tokugawa founders had taken a less restrictive view of Japan’s place in the international system? Things probably would not have been so very different. China and Korea, after all, were part of a world order that was closed to Japan unless it was willing to make substantial modifications in its professions of sovereignty and autonomy. Tributary status would have had its costs, and rejection of close ties with the West would have been one of them. But in any case those ties remained unlikely. The English had left of their own accord in the 1620s, and thereafter found themselves increasingly involved in the subcontinent of India, where profits and glory were far greater. The Iberian empires of Spain and Portugal were already in decline by the seventeenth century, hardly capable of threat to Japanese policymakers. That left the maritime holdings of the Dutch in Southeast Asia, holdings that were consolidated with full political control only in the late nineteenth century. Things might not, in other words, have been very different. With one exception: the ferocity of the Christian extirpation, though an internal matter, was what led to the external restrictions. That control over sectarians, in turn, was central to the bakufu’s assertion of control over its feudatories. In that sense “seclusion” and bakufu “power” were interchangeable.