# EDUCATION, THOUGHT, AND RELIGION The eighteenth century in Japan brought little political change. The country was at peace; the large-scale transfers of land carried out by the first five shoguns came to an end, and bakufu and domains consolidated and structured their administrative machinery. Vassals lost the opportunity to win reward through valor in war, and resigned themselves to the status and honor their forebears had earned for them; ritual and precedent took priority over courage and initiative, while performance in administrative position—or personal favoritism—provided the only avenue to recognition and reward. The samurai now had need of different skills, and many had difficulty squaring those new requirements with their sense of identity as members of a military caste. For commoners the growth of urban concentrations and the rise of commercial farming brought new opportunities and challenges that also called for skills acquired by literacy. When the Tokugawa years began, relatively few Japanese, even among the samurai, had been literate. By the end of the eighteenth century this had changed radically. Outwardly Japanese society seemed unchanged, but in fact it had been transformed. The fruits of an intellectual renaissance had penetrated downward through society. A new civic religion bound society together in patterns of values and belief; a nation was emerging from the groupings of earlier days. ## 1. Education Before the Tokugawa years members of the aristocracy, the Buddhist priesthood, and the upper reaches of the warrior class had access to private tutors, but most Japanese did not. Early rulers made little effort to change this, but by the Genroku period Tsunayoshi, the fifth shogun, styled himself a Confucian sage and Buddhist ruler and did everything he could, by precept and example, to encourage learning as the central element of the arts of peace. A quarter century later the eighth shogun, Yoshimune, who was determined to restore the spirit and attitudes of the samurai class, also realized the importance of education. The nativist scholar Kada no Azumamaro, who will be discussed below, petitioned successfully to establish a school for Japanese studies. A group of merchants petitioned for shogunal support of an academy in Osaka. The Kaitokudo¯, which developed as a result, became a powerful source for rational analyses of problems of political economy.<sup>1</sup> A third period of concern with education came at the end of the century in the Kansei era (1789–1801), when a reform administration reorganized the bakufu school, ruled out contrary or possibly subversive teachings, and campaigned extensively for the selection of men of ability in important offices instead of accepting the incumbency of well-born incompetents. Education efforts began with attention to the samurai. Domain, or han, schools usually restricted entrance to the sons of the ruling class. They were for the most part a development of the eighteenth century, and they grew rapidly in number. Forty were established before 1750, 48 between 1751 and 1788, 78 between 1789 and 1829, and 56 between 1830 and 1867. In most schools leadership was in the hands of Confucian scholars. About 60 schools had Confucian shrines on the grounds and carried out regular services dedicated to Confucius, designed to impress students with the importance of learning, on the half-yearly observance of the equinox. Administrative control was usually provided by a senior retainer, who might or might not be a scholar himself. Instruction was seldom stimulating, and concentrated on learning to read Chinese texts; the purpose was simply to construe the text by “reading it off ” in a clumsy mixture of Chinese and Japanese. There was a heavy weight of ceremonial and formal bureaucratic regulation, all designed to heighten the student’s sense of the seriousness of learning. The teachers have been described as “retailers of packaged knowledge, not participants in a developing branch of inquiry, and one could hardly expect them to convey a sense of intellectual excitement.”<sup>2</sup> Students took their seats strictly in order of age seniority, regardless of rank, and older students tutored those who were younger. In some respects these samurai schools showed a curious ambivalence toward book learning, for the military calling took precedence. Teachers were not of very high rank, and instruction in the military arts was usually rated more highly than that in book learning. Private academies (shijuku) also proliferated.<sup>3</sup> Most were the creation of an individual, often a rather charismatic scholar who inspired his young students with ideals of perseverance and managed to instill a sense of discipleship and loyalty. Popular fiction, then and later, was full of examples of influential figures of this sort: beloved, often eccentric, and invariably demanding of their young charges.<sup>4</sup> Private academies might specialize in one or another of the several schools of learning that are detailed below. Last but not at all least were commoner schools that are usually grouped together as “parish” or “temple” schools (terakoya) and village (go¯ko¯) schools. The former were by no means Buddhist in sponsorship or staffing, though they sometimes met in village temples; indeed it seems probable that the identification with “temple” came after the Meiji government, anxious to replace them with its own network of schools, saw the term as pejorative. These commoner schools did not concentrate on the Chinese classics that were the stuff of the samurai schools, but concerned themselves with practical skills at the same time that they inculcated simple morality. ## Some Terakoya Precepts • To be born human and not be able to write is to be less than human. Illiteracy is a form of blindness. It brings shame on your teacher, shame on your parents and shame on yourself. The heart of a child of three stays with him till he is a hundred as the proverb says. Determine to succeed, study with all your might, never forgetting the shame of failure. • At your desks let there be no useless idle talk, or yawning or stretching, or dozing and picking your nose, or chewing paper, or biting the end of your brush. To imitate the idle is the road to evil habits . . . • One who treats his brushes or his paper without due respect will never progress. The boy who uses carefully even the oldest, most worn-out brush is the one who will succeed. Treat your brushes carefully. • Luxurious habits begin with the palate; eat what you are given without fads and complaints. Any child who buys food in secret is guilty of unworthy conduct and can expect to be expelled. • Keep seven feet behind your teacher and never tread on his shadow, as the saying goes. Every letter you know you owe to him. Never answer back to your parents or your teacher. Observe carefully their admonitions and seek their instruction that you may walk ever more firmly in the Way of Man. From R. P. Dore, Education in Tokugawa Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1965), pp. 323f. Changes in Japanese society made education important for commoners. The complexity of merchant management and the responsibilities that village leaders carried produced the rise in literacy and publishing that has already been discussed. Private academies, commoner schools, and village schools came in response to those needs. By the early decades of the nineteenth century Japan had become one of the most highly literate countries among agricultural societies. It is not possible to quantify this with meaningful figures. In early modern England, for instance, the criterion of literacy usually used by scholars is the ability to sign one’s name, an act that assumes further acquaintance with the entire range of alphabetic symbols. In the case of Japan, however, “signing” has been done by the use of a small name stamp. It is not possible to use the criterion developed in England, for the nature of the Japanese writing system rules it out. A “name” usually consists of two or three Chinese characters, and few who tried can have been so dull as to be unable to give evidence of so small an accomplishment. In any case, surnames among commoners did not become universal in Japan until the reforms of the Meiji (1868–1912) period. R. P. Dore’s landmark study instead uses estimates of student numbers and extrapolates them against the entire population. He estimates that by the end of the Tokugawa period some 40 percent of boys and 10 percent of girls were receiving some sort of education outside the home. On that basis, it is probable that Japan was behind only two or three Western countries, and well ahead of all other countries, in the percentage of its people with access to education and literacy. It is to be noted, moreover, that, as the chart indicates, the figures and percentages were steadily on the increase as the period went along. <table><tr><td colspan="5">Numbers of Schools by Date of Establishment</td></tr><tr><td>Year</td><td>Shijuku</td><td>Terakoya</td><td>Gōkō</td><td>Han schools</td></tr><tr><td>pre-1750</td><td>19</td><td>47</td><td>11</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td>1751-1788</td><td>38</td><td>47</td><td>11</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td>1789-1829</td><td>207</td><td>1,286</td><td>42</td><td>78</td></tr><tr><td>1830-1867</td><td>796</td><td>8,675 10,202</td><td>48 118</td><td>56</td></tr><tr><td>Totals</td><td>1,076</td><td></td><td></td><td>225</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Source: Richard Rubinger, Private Academies (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982), p. 5.</td></tr></table> ## 2. The Diffusion of Confucianism The political scientist Maruyama Masao once characterized Confucianism as “a set of categories through which people saw their world.” In Tokugawa times those categories began with loyalty. They went on to include filiality, obligation, duty, harmony, and diligence. These values were not, of course, exclusively Confucian—few civilizations think poorly of those qualities—but for Japanese they were phrased in Confucian terms and examples. They spoke in terms of the “five relationships” (ruler-subject, father-son, husband-wife, elder-younger, and friend-friend) and struggled for a “rectification of names” that would enable the individual to live up to the responsibilities that accompanied the realization of his position in this structure of relationships. “Selfcultivation” was essential to the moral life, and the key to social order and harmony. These teachings were imbedded in the Confucian classics and reinforced by primers of moral guidance that came flooding from the printing press. As they made rulers better rulers and the ruled easier to rule, they undergirded the authority structure of society and had the full support of Tokugawa administrators. Even so, it was not an exclusively one-way process, for there was also assumed a basic reciprocity involved. Some have even described this as a “covenant.” The moral posture of those above, shown in “benevolence,” would evoke an obligation (on) from those below; but in turn the respectful cooperation of the ruled imposed the obligation to be just on those above. The network of relationships that resulted extended throughout society and included ruler and ruled, master and servant, landlord and tenant, and of course lord and vassal. There were obligations on both sides. Teachings of this sort were basically this-worldly and rational. They did not require, and did not receive, sanctions or rewards of supernatural forces for their implementation. Yet there was also a spiritual cultivation involved. Self-cultivation and the search for morality, like that for Buddhahood or for Zen illumination, struck a responsive chord in Japanese tradition and expressed a truth that was common to the Buddhist and Shinto traditions as well as to Confucianism. Confucian thought had entered Japan much earlier as part of the stream of Chinese influence that included Buddhism. One of the first documents, the seventh-century “Constitution” of Prince Sho¯toku, contains a mixture of both teachings, and is in fact almost a dialogue between them. Learning for court aristocrats was based on Confucian texts at the same time the Buddhist world view dominated the court. During the medieval centuries learning had survived chiefly in monastic establishments, and it was Buddhist scholars who preserved the Confucian tradition. Then and later Buddhist pilgrims to China brought back the Sung scholarship of the twelfth-century Confucian scholar Chu Hsi. Chu Hsi, a contemporary of St. Thomas Aquinas in the West, had encased Confucian teachings in Taoist and Buddhist metaphysics to found a powerful synthesis. Moral principles were now described as the reflection of higher, universal principles that led up to the “Supreme Ultimate” of a cosmic metaphysics. New emphasis was placed on the “investigation of things,” for study of the particular could lead the seeker to comprehend universal principles. By extension, this could also be extended to the principles of the authority structure; self-cultivation, requisite to sincerity, would best equip ruler and subject alike to fulfill their proper relationships. Adherence to them produced harmony between the individual and the cosmos. It was a demanding search, and Neo-Confucianism sometimes developed a religious and confessional dimension in the search for and attainment of truth. For many the encounter with the writings of Chu Hsi marked a pivotal point in personal development that approached Zen enlightenment. Sung dynasty Confucianism provided a powerful synthesis and ideology for early modern China and Korea. In China the civil service examinations offered social and political reward for demonstrated talent, and the writings of the Sung scholars became official truth. In Korea too, although admission to the examinations was increasingly limited to the special social ranks of socalled yangban, similar sanctions and rewards obtained. It is significant that the writings of the Korean scholar Yi T’oegye became known and influential in Japan in the wake of the cultural treasures brought from the continent by Hideyoshi’s generals after his invasions of Korea. Japan, with its restrictions of a fixed status system and assumptions of the priority of heredity, could not have been expected to conform to this Confucian ideal, nor did it. Nevertheless, after the Sengoku wars came to an end the Tokugawa peace provided a setting conducive to the support that elements of this scholarship provided for the authority structure. But it made its first appearance in Buddhist dress, and it required time to give Confucian teachings a role independent of monastic establishments. Hayashi Razan (1583–1657), progenitor of a line of Confucian scholars who served “by appointment” (goyo¯ gakusha) to the shoguns, was ordered by Ieyasu to take the Buddhist tonsure, but his successors succeeded in placing some distance between themselves and institutional Buddhism. Indeed, it was said in praise of Nakae To¯ju (1608– 1648) that his filial piety was so strong that he read Buddhist sutras which he personally deplored to his ailing mother. At the upper reaches of warrior society “Confucianists” (jusha) became part of the elite establishment as advisers and educators. In 1630 a school for samurai was established in Edo with the Hayashi family as rectors. Daimyo followed shogunal policy, and by the mid-seventeenth century Confucian advisers were to be found at most castle towns. Jusha were usually men of modest and even low status. The list of Chu Hsi specialists includes a smattering of commoners, a good many doctors, and more sons of jusha, but the majority were samurai of modest rank. They were able, but also rather marginal men in warrior society, and their advocacy of the importance of scholarship and rule by ability must often have reflected personal frustration as well as intellectual conviction.<sup>5</sup> As adviser to the daimyo the Confucian teacher felt himself responsible for grounding him in classical learning as a way of developing his moral, and hence political, potential. By the second century of Tokugawa rule, shoguns and daimyo were more symbols than figures of authority, and they were trained very much the way modern Japanese emperors have been. They developed a stoic patience to show their respect for the classics and for learning. Arai Hakuseki (1657–1725) wrote that he lectured to his lord 1,299 times in nineteen years and praised both his demeanor and his endurance. To show respect for the classics that Arai was expounding, the future shogun Ienobu sat motionless despite the cold of winter and the mosquitoes of summer.<sup>6</sup> Some daimyo became such splendid representatives of Confucian principles that they became lauded by scholars as “sage rulers” (meikun). Tokugawa Mitsukuni (1628–1700), lord of Mito, established Confucian temples and transferred to them the duty of personal registration normally carried out by Buddhist temples. He gave shelter to a refugee Ming dynasty loyalist scholar and installed him as the central figure in a long-term project for the compilation of a massive “dynastic history” that followed Chinese models, the History of Great Japan (Dai Nihonshi). Its emphasis was on imperial loyalty, and the sponsors prudently stopped their account short of the Tokugawa rise. Ikeda Mitsumasa (1609–1682), daimyo of Okayama, weakened Buddhism by disestablishing half of the temples in his domain and ordered people to register with Shinto shrines instead of Buddhist temples. He set stern standards for himself, announcing that “the ruler must regard his own filial behavior as the most important thing . . . [he] treats samurai and farmers with benevolent love, and causes the country to prosper . . . The truly learned man . . . cultivates himself before trying to rule others.” Mitsumasa followed Chinese Confucian example by honoring outstanding instances of filial piety; in a three-year period he issued official commendations to 1,684 people of all classes for praiseworthy demonstrations of filiality, loyalty, truthfulness, and exemplary service.<sup>7</sup> In cases like these, daimyo acted almost as propagandist for Confucianism, somewhat in the pattern of Ming magistrates and Korean yangban. Still, although many established Confucian rites and temples, most remained within the patterns of sectarian Buddhism. The shogun Tsunayoshi’s enthusiasm for Chinese studies, especially those of the Book of Changes, has already been noted. It was natural for him to consult Confucian scholars when the problem of the proper response to the emergency created by the case of the forty-seven ro¯nin came up. Some sternly argued the need to punish the assault on a bakufu official as rebellion, while others argued that the extraordinary loyalty displayed by the ro¯nin could serve as justification for something short of dishonorable execution. The solution, it will be recalled, was honorable self-immolation. Arguments from Chinese precedents were often compelling, but selecting and applying them in complex circumstances was not a simple matter. Arai Hakuseki provides a case in point. Arai Hakuseki was called in for his advice in a case in which a wife reported her husband missing. On investigation it proved that he had been murdered by her father. This proved a problem in filial behavior: had she, by a report that ultimately brought judgment on her father, violated the tenets of filial piety? The Hayashi family head held that she should be executed, arguing from the Lu¨ Shu that those who informed about their parents’ crimes deserved death. He cited a passage in which “Chi Chung of Cheng asked her mother, ‘Which is dearer, father or husband?’ and had been answered, ‘Any man can be the husband; only one man can be the father.’ ” Not so, argued Arai; the woman was a victim of circumstances, and had not realized that her father and brother had killed her husband; this was very different from informing against them. He argued that “There is absolutely no reason to put this woman to death. If, on the day that her father’s and brother’s crime in murdering her husband was revealed, she had killed herself at once, she would have been faithful to her husband, filial to her father, and sisterly to her elder brother. We would have had to say that she had shown great virtue in a case which was an extreme example of abnormal morality.” But perfection, alas, eludes us all, and Arai’s more “reasonable” counterproposal carried the day: “If it is privately suggested to her that she should become a nun for the sake of her father and husband, and if we send her to a convent, have her take the tonsure, and offer the property of both her father and husband to the temple, we will be saving her from the danger of destitution and protecting both the law of the country and women’s chastity.”<sup>8</sup> The jusha were an interesting and important group. They took themselves very seriously as the carriers of scholarly morality. They carried out literary projects for their daimyo and compiled genealogies, codes of law, and administrative precedent. Many studied and classified local flora, something highly appropriate to the “investigation of things.” Not a few left personal accounts of their accomplishments. It is natural that their activities, scholarly and educational background, and personal records have received a great deal of study. Nevertheless, despite all this it is important to remember that they were never part of the real power structure they served. ## 3. Scholars and Scholarship Tokugawa Confucianism developed in a setting of eclectic variety and profited from the efforts of extremely able and independent specialists. Because they were not tied to the power structure of any particular band of retainers, they could profit from the ability to seek guidance from several sources and respond to offers from other domains. Collectively, they struggled with a sense of crisis and frustration. The crisis was the result of the disjunction between the ideals of an earlier, no doubt imagined, past that had known a direct correspondence between morality and action, and the far more complex society of ritual and status of which they became a part. Commercialism seemed to be shredding the values of frugality and simplicity they espoused, and domain and bakufu government were simultaneously at war with, and dependent upon, the rising power of merchants and tradesmen. The scholars’ frustration derived from the awareness that they were marginal to the decision centers of warrior society and often irrelevant to the concerns of the ruling figures. Despite this, or perhaps because of it, Tokugawa Confucian scholars made distinguished contributions to the wisdom they inherited and ended by changing the discourse of politics and policy so drastically that their achievements deserve to be considered a Japanese intellectual renaissance. Space does not permit extended treatment of the vitality of that setting, but its principal features and figures require mention. Yamazaki Ansai (1618–1682) was born the son of a ro¯nin, and spent some years as a novice in several Buddhist temples. Beginning in Kyoto, he moved on to Tosa, where he encountered Sung scholarship as taught by that domain’s line of Confucianists, before opening his own school in Kyoto. Later he moved once more to Edo. There he encountered powerful influence from a school of Shinto studies, and he spent the rest of his life advocating and teaching a blend of Confucianism and Shinto that was very much his own. Nationalist urges, one might suggest, had come to temper his fervor for imported thought. Perhaps seeing himself as a Japanese Chu Hsi, he wrote an “Elementary Learning for Japan” (Yamato sho¯gaku) for a daimyo. In this he based himself on an earlier text of loyalism and imperial history. He went on to work Japan into the cosmological charts of Sung scholarship, and devised elaborate proofs for the superiority of ancient Japan.<sup>9</sup> During his years of activity Ansai is credited with having had some six thousand students; his advocacy of the unity of Confucianism and Shinto helped spark the revival of studies of ancient Japan. Once Yamazaki Ansai asked his students a question: “In case China came to attack our country, with Confucius as general and Mencius as lieutenant-general at the head of hundreds of thousands of horses, what do you think we students of Confucius and Mencius ought to do? The students were unable to offer an answer. “We don’t know what we should do,” they said, “so please let us know what you think about it.” “Should that eventuality arise,” he replied, “I would put on armor and take up a spear to fight and capture them alive in the service of my country. That is what Confucius and Mencius teach us to do.” Later his disciple met [the Sinophile] Ito¯ To¯gai and told him about it, adding that his teacher’s understanding of Confucius and Mencius was hard to surpass. To¯gai, however, told him smilingly not to worry about the invasion of our country by Confucius and Mencius. “I guarantee that it will never happen.” 10 Kaibara Ekken (1630–1714) sprang from distinguished samurai vassals of important daimyo, but this did not keep him from experiencing during his life the sort of ups and downs of official favor that characterized the lives of many Tokugawa samurai. His father was trained as a doctor. The son began to follow in that path, but moved successively from Buddhism to Chu Hsi Confucianism. As a member of the retainer band of Fukuoka he had duty opportunities in Nagasaki (where Fukuoka alternated with Saga in defense responsibilities), in Edo on sankin-ko¯tai duty, and in Kyoto, where he was sent for seven years of study as a domain-sponsored scholar. By the time of his maturity he had known a period of drift as a ro¯nin in addition to the opportunity to experience the widest variety of educational breadth that was available in seventeenth-century Japan. Ekken became and remained an orthodox adherent of Chu Hsi scholarship, and his medical training and personal predilection invested his “investigation of things” with great rigor. Medical studies led to concerns with herbal remedies and botany as well as the compilation of what became a classic study of the flora and fauna of the Fukuoka domain. Ekken was also known for studies of local history and topography, essays on farming, travelogues, and genealogies of the (Kuroda) Fukuoka daimyo house. In addition, of course, he lectured and taught and established so sound a reputation that the German physician Philipp Franz von Siebold, who served at the Dutch station in the early nineteenth century, hailed him as the “Aristotle of Japan.”<sup>11</sup> Like every good Confucian scholar Ekken was a moralist as well, and author of influential books of precepts that became standard texts for filial piety. A discourse on the education of women that is credited to him remained influential into the nineteenth century. Though designed as guidance for upper-status daughters, Onna daigaku (The great learning for women) prescribed so drastic a bondage to the family system that it has caused its author’s name to be execrated by twentieth-century feminists. Seeing that it is a girl’s destiny, on reaching womanhood, to go to a new home, and live in submission to her father-in-law and mother-in-law, it is even more incumbent upon her than it is on a boy to receive with all reverence her parents’ instructions. Should her parents, through excess of tenderness, allow her to grow up self-willed, she will infallibly show herself capricious in her husband’s house, and thus alienate his affection, while, if her father-in-law be a man of correct principles, the girl will find the yoke of these principles intolerable . . . More precious in a woman is a virtuous heart than a face of beauty . . . The only qualities that befit a woman are gentle obedience, chastity, mercy, and quietness . . . From her earliest youth, a girl should observe the line of demarcation separating women from men; and never, even for an instant, should she be allowed to see or hear the slightest impropriety . . . Even at the peril of her life, must she harden her heart like rock or metal, and observe the rules of propriety . . . A woman has no particular lord. She must look to her husband as her lord, and must serve him with all worship and reverence, not despising or thinking lightly of him. The great life-long duty of a woman is obedience. In her dealings with her husband, both the expression of her countenance and the style of her address should be courteous, humble and conciliatory, never peevish and intractable, never rude and arrogant . . . Let her never dream of jealousy. If her husband is dissolute, she must expostulate with him, but never either nurse or vent her anger. If her jealousy be extreme, it will render her countenance frightful and her accents repulsive, and can only result in completely alienating her husband . . . The five worst maladies that afflict the female mind are: indocility, discontent, slander, jealousy, and silliness. Without any doubt these five maladies infest seven or eight out of every ten women, and it is from these that arises the inferiority of women to men . . . Parents! teach the foregoing maxims to your daughters from their tenderest years! Copy them out from time to time, that they may read and never forget them!<sup>12</sup> It is probably true that most eighteenth-century educators in Europe with advice for parents preparing young women for marriage would have had more or less similar advice to offer, but what is special and Japanese about Ekken’s strictures is the bondage to the family system. Still, it may be encouraging to note that he laments the fact that seven or eight out of ten fall short of his goal of perfect docility. Among all the jusha, Ogyu¯ Sorai (1666–1728) was probably the finest and most influential scholar. His thought has been analyzed with great care by a line of intellectual historians and political scientists, including the distinguished Maruyama Masao, and is relatively accessible in English.<sup>13</sup> Sorai’s career straddled the Genroku and Kyo¯ho¯ eras and the shogunates of Tsunayoshi and Yoshimune, a time when the social changes produced by urbanization—higher standards of living for the fortunate, an increase of luxury, and a rise in warrior indebtedness—were becoming obvious. His life also illustrated the uncertain fate that could befall even the most distinguished of scholars. Born the second son of a doctor, he spent much of his youth in rustic exile that had been brought on by his father’s political reversals. After he had founded a small school in classical studies attended by Buddhist monks, Sorai came to the attention of the shogun Tsunayoshi’s counselor, Yanagisawa Yoshiyasu. Soon he was the central figure in a coterie of Chinaoriented scholars at the capital. His salary increased from rations for fifteen followers to 300 koku, and then to 500. He was one of those consulted in the case of the forty-seven ro¯nin, and it was his proposal for the middle path of seppuku for the ro¯nin that eventually carried the day. With Tsunayoshi’s death Sorai’s sponsor fell from favor. For some years he was again in relative obscurity, overshadowed by Arai Hakuseki. When Yoshimune took office as shogun in 1716 things changed once more as Sorai became a member of the shogun’s brain trust. He renewed his contacts with O<sup>¯</sup> baku Zen monks and directed studies in the Ming dynasty statutes. He wrote at length about contemporary problems in political economy. In addition he was able to steep himself in studies of philology that were his passion; treatises on literature, thought, law, history, military science, and music also came from his brush. Sorai was an unabashed enthusiast for things Chinese. Once, when he moved his house in Edo, he expressed his pleasure at being that much closer to China, and on another occasion he referred to himself as an “eastern barbarian.” Later nationalist detractors did not forgive him for that, but the context of the statement was his desire to express his satisfaction that he, a non-Chinese, was the equivalent of China’s best scholars. Despite all this, however, Sorai, for all his talent, never received high samurai status. The humility he expressed in his correspondence with learned Zen monks from China may not have been altogether artifice. Sorai was leader of a new school in Confucian scholarship, one that had profound significance for Japanese culture. The Sung Neo-Confucianists had staked their position on the existence of an ultimate principle which was in turn reflected in all things and spirits. The spirit (li; Japanese, ri), or principle, of all things material and immaterial had its origin there. Human nature, the spirit of interpersonal relationships, the political order—each and all of these were reflections of this cosmic principle. So too with the “thingness” of inanimate and animate objects—table, plant, or beast—all were emanations or reflections of that higher, cosmic Supreme Ultimate. Consequently to investigate anything thoroughly was to begin to apprehend the whole. Nature, as Tetsuo Najita has put it, was all encompassing, and ultimately one. “A timeless and absolute norm drawn from outside historical time and transcending the chaotic warfare of the recent past was called on to establish the baku-han structure of non-centralizing governance as being ‘principled.’ ”<sup>14</sup> By Genroku times Sung scholarship, while not the ideology it became in the late Tokugawa decades, and indeed never as prescriptive as it was in China and Korea, was nevertheless gaining in favor and seemed to be becoming dominant. Sorai and his followers took powerful exception to these ideas. He argued that Chu Hsi Neo-Confucianism distorted history; Sung learning was based on later accretions to the Confucian canon. Worse still, Japanese scholars were getting it at third or even fourth hand. In good measure the problem was one of language, and it could only be attacked through meticulous philology. The twelfth-century texts of Sung scholars were distanced by a millennium from the classical Confucian canon. Worse, Japanese scholars were reading those texts in the peculiar version of Sino-Japanese (kanbun) in which signifiers and markers were distorting the grammar to make it conform to Japanese rules. The result was a poor mishmash of translation rendered in a sort of gibberish, “what language I do not know.”<sup>15</sup> “Chinese,” Sorai went on, “is different in nature from the Japanese language. And even within the Chinese language, there are differences between the ancient and modern varieties.” Sorai set himself to unravel this by serious study of contemporary Chinese and careful study of ancient Chinese. He compiled dictionaries and glossaries that gave definitions in modern, contemporary Japanese. In that sense he might be thought of as a philological equivalent of Saikaku’s commoner prose and Basho¯’s diction. Yet Sorai was not content to stop there. Ultimate comprehension of the classics required an effort to return to the source by reading the canonic texts the way men would have read them almost two millennia earlier. “Ancient Learning,” as it is often called, or kobunjigaku, went “behind” Neo-Confucian talk of “principle” and “nature” in an attempt to meet the ancients on their own ground and terms. From this Sorai derived the view that what had been achieved by the system builders or “sages” of the remote past, the ritual and music that ordered society, was not so much the reflection of a moral principle, as the Sung scholars would have it, as it was the product of their genius and invention. The same was true of the institutions of the shogunate; Ieyasu, no less a “sage” than those of ancient times, had devised them. Sorai thus restored will and initiative to politics. What Ieyasu had done others, building on his work, could continue. Modern men could tap into this well of wisdom by direct contact with the ancients through the words those ancients had invented. Sorai’s “amoral modernism,” to use Sumie Jones’s term, gave the past an immediacy and reality, and his Confucian texts were records of objectified and standardized historical reality. The moral exegesis of the Chu Hsi school was quite beside the point. Philological wrestling with the works of antiquity required confidence and often produced arrogance. The wordy battles of scholars like Lorenzo Valla in the Italian Renaissance were echoed in the assurance and aggressive exposition that Sorai and his disciples gave these ideas. From this it is possible to understand the leading role that Sorai could take at the court of the shogun Tsunayoshi, with its enthusiasm for the study of Chinese and deferential reception of Chinese Buddhist abbots, and his preparedness to prescribe remedies for social and political maladies for Yoshimune a few decades later. Unfortunately those proposals assumed it was possible to look back to the institutions and time of Ieyasu. Daimyo and samurai on sankin-ko¯tai duty in Edo spent their time and income like travelers at an inn, he argued; they should be returned to the countryside, thereby reversing the trends toward urbanization and merchant growth that had overtaken Japan. Rites and music, too, should be re-formed; Ancient Learning could be the guide to a reconstruction of politics. In fact none of this took place. Scholars can turn to more ancient texts, but governments cannot reverse social trends. Tokugawa institutions had been designed to ensure shogunal control over daimyo and daimyo control over vassals, and they could not be lightly set aside. Consequently Confucianism served the realities of Japanese society imperfectly. Confucian scholars and advisers writing for posterity usually exaggerated their impact on the warriors they served. At the outset of Tokugawa rule Ieyasu showed intense interest in precedents of earlier regimes and institutions in China as well as in Japan, and specialists in Chinese studies frequently found employment. Hayashi Razan, whose descendants served as educators and court Confucianists, was awarded his post after an interview with Ieyasu in which—according to his own account—he demonstrated unusual command of Chinese history and precedents. He served Ieyasu for the next eleven years. But Ieyasu relied more on the counsel of Zen priests Su¯den and Tenkai, and Hayashi himself was obliged, as we noted, to shave his hair in accordance with Buddhist practice. He was, as one scholar puts it, involved in many bakufu activities, but he helped and did not originate; on occasion his counsel was not even requested.<sup>16</sup> Despite the attractions of Confucianism for rulers and educators, it was not equipped to be a state ideology. Moreover, there was a consistent antiintellectualism in warrior society, and loyalty and valor received higher marks than book learning and benevolence. Sorai’s assertion that ancient sage-kings had invented the rites and music with which they ordered society made it possible to praise the Tokugawa founders as social planners, and to that extent it could be deemed constructive, but the Edo rulers were not likely to follow the suggestions of Arai Hakuseki or Ogyu¯ Sorai and his followers that they reform and establish rites and music as the basis of their rule.<sup>17</sup> The school of Ancient Learning enjoyed tremendous intellectual prestige during much of the eighteenth century, but the wrangles between its partisans and their opponents confused things so much that warrior rulers with little tolerance for complexity ruled against it. In 1790 Matsudaira Sadanobu, a grandson of Yoshimune who served as the bakufu’s first minister, warned against “heterodox teachings.” “The teaching of Chu Hsi,” the edict read— not altogether accurately—“has had the full confidence of successive shoguns since the Keicho¯ era . . . Not only in your own school [the Sho¯heiko¯, the bakufu’s school], but in all others as well, you are advised to see to it that the orthodox doctrine alone is taught as the basis for the training of men for public service.”<sup>18</sup> Thereafter the educational establishment, beginning with the bakufu’s own Sho¯heiko¯, concentrated on Neo-Confucian explanations of nature and morality. By late Tokugawa times, when Sorai’s writings enjoyed a revival, they had come to be considered almost subversive by bakufu scholars, some of whom wrote to describe the sense of daring with which they perused them.<sup>19</sup> In private life, however, the newly proclaimed orthodoxy never completely closed the door to alternate forms of expression. Many a Sho¯heiko¯ teacher managed to compartmentalize his life, giving public adherence to Sung scholarship while maintaining a private interest in other schools of Confucianism. ## 4. The Problem of China It is natural that men whose standing derived from their command of traditional Chinese culture would be sensitive to criticism from their countrymen that they were praising a foreign civilization. It would be tedious to trace in close detail the dialogue that resulted, but a glance at the response of some leading Tokugawa Confucian scholars to this problem shows that it was one they struggled with themselves. An early stage, as Kate Wildman Nakai shows,<sup>20</sup> was to claim that Japanese and Chinese traditions were entirely congruent. Hayashi Razan, who served Ieyasu, went into eclipse under Hidetada, and reemerged after the second shogun’s death, identified Shinto with the Confucian “kingly way,” and tried to establish a correspondence between Confucian and Shinto ideas, even to the point of working Japanese mythology into the cosmological theory of Neo-Confucianism. The steps advocated by the sages of China, in other words, had already been realized in the Japanese past. He could also argue that it was only by chance that the canons had been composed in China, for the ideas they espoused were universal and applied to all humankind. “One may say it is the way of the kami [gods] of Japan,” he wrote, “while at the same time it is the way of the sages in China.” Elsewhere, he wrote that “There are people among the Japanese who are superior to the people of China. Superiority does not lie in teaching nor inferiority in learning. Superiority lies only in the exemplification of the virtues of knowledge, benevolence, and valor.” It was also argued that classical China should be distinguished from the China of the eighteenth century. Even Ogyu¯ Sorai, who styled himself an “eastern barbarian,” vaunted himself on his mastery of texts that were becoming difficult for contemporary Chinese. In that sense, China was no longer China; the place called China had fallen under the rule of barbarian Manchus. Moreover, China had always known tides of rebellion and dynastic upheaval. In one sense the “Way of Japan,” which combined religion with government, represented a better parallel to the wisdom of the ancients than China’s dynasties of conquest did. Sorai’s disciple Dazai Shundai (1680–1747) carried this a step further with a discussion of political economy in which contemporary China came out second. China, he pointed out, had moved from feudal to central government, while Japan’s progression since the eighth century had reversed this sequence. China’s centralization, with its rotating magistrates, men who were never assigned to their own areas, had no provision for a bond between officials and people; Tokugawa domains did. Was not Japan’s order, with its built-in localism, more conducive to virtue, and was it not closer to the institutions Confucius had known and praised? Other Confucian scholars worked out a proud affirmation of Japaneseness. Yamaga Soko¯ (1622–1685) moved from the Neo-Confucianism of his early education through Taoism and Buddhism and on to a final position in which he reconciled Confucianism and Shinto. He was an immensely influential teacher; the forty-seven ro¯nin considered themselves followers of his strategy. Yamaga set himself the task of explaining the justice in a system in which one class, the samurai, lived on the labors of another, the farmers. “The samurai,” he wrote, “eats food without growing it, uses utensils without manufacturing them, and profits without buying or selling. What is the justification for this?” He found that justification in the higher morality of the samurai’s calling. The work of the samurai, as he saw it, was to reflect on his station in life, give loyal service to his master, deepen his fidelity with his friends, and “devote himself to duty above all.” In short, in a world in which others were out for themselves, the samurai should stand as a moral ideal for the three classes of the common people who respected him and took him as an object lesson. “By following his teachings, they [commoners] are enabled to understand what is fundamental and what is secondary.”<sup>21</sup> Yamaga Soko¯’s was the most satisfactory exposition of these ideas, and from his time bushido¯, the “Way of the warrior,” became a standard term. And yet the problem of China remained. China-centrism was built into Chinese civilization. China was referred to as the “Central Country” or the “Central Efflorescence,” and dynasties styled themselves as “Great.” What were Japanese Confucianists to do about this? Sorai simply denied the applicability of “Great” to any fallen dynasty, and thought it better to use it for his own country in “Great Japan” (Dai Nihon). Yamaga Soko¯ re-arranged the basic Confucian virtues to Japanese advantage by grouping valor with knowledge and benevolence. From that perspective, he argued, it was Japan and not China that deserved designation as the “Central Country.” In the nineteenth century a blend of Confucian and nativist scholarship that developed in the domain of Mito prepared the way for a final, rousing affirmation of this. By then China was being bested by a new and stronger West. Aizawa Seishisai (or Yasushi; 1781–1863), when he wrote his Shinron (“New Theses”) in 1825, flatly named Japan as Chu¯ka, the central efflorescence. He began with the ringing affirmation that “our Divine Realm is where the sun emerges. It is the source of the primordial vital force sustaining all life and order. Our Emperors, descendants of the Sun Goddess, Amaterasu, have acceded to the Imperial Throne in each and every generation, a unique fact that will never change. Our Divine Realm rightly constitutes the head and shoulders of the world and controls all nations.”<sup>22</sup> New and important notes are being struck here. Confucianism has been warped to emphasize imperial loyalty. Japan’s uniqueness no longer derives from samurai nobility but from dynastic continuity, and myth and religion are in the service of, in fact united with, government and politics. In line with Confucian “rectification of names” the ground is beginning to shift to the advantage of the imperial court and at the expense of the bakufu. “Mito scholarship,” as it became known, pointed to an imperial future. It is clear that advocacy of Confucian solutions to Japanese problems, by scholars somewhat marginal to the power structure of their society, resulted in significant psychological strains. Those strains were worsened by the erosion of samurai self-confidence and autonomy under the restrictions of bakufu and domain centralization, an erosion that made it necessary to argue the case for samurai and for Japan. As Nakai has put it, Tokugawa Confucians tended to become involved in a game of one-upmanship played with the invisible opponent of China, and this lent a certain quality of shadowboxing to much of the eighteenth-century dialogue.<sup>23</sup> In the crisis that lay ahead affirmation of national identity would outweigh the impulse for national apologetic. That in turn was affected by the fact that in the eighteenth century Chinacentered scholarship was facing additional problems as a vigorous anti-Confucian and anti-Chinese polemic was mounted by a new school of nativist scholars. ## 5. Ethnic Nativism Kokugaku, “National Learning,” provided another thread in the rich tapestry of scholarship and thought that distinguished the eighteenth century. It developed in a setting of conscious opposition to the “Chinese Learning” (Kangaku) in which Confucianism was encased, and affirmed the superiority of Japan and Japanese culture. It began with antiquarian literary study in the seventeenth century, but by the early nineteenth century it carried a powerful political message as well. Intellectually kokugaku should be seen as ancillary to the other movements of its time. The passion of Ogyu¯ Sorai and others for the “ancient learning” of China could have been expected to have its parallels in scholars concerned with Japanese antiquity, and the sort of Confucian loyalism shown by the Mito domain’s sponsors of the History of Great Japan could be expected to have its impact on evaluations of the role of the Japanese emperor in antiquity. Tsunayoshi, the Genroku shogun, made it part of his civilizing mission to encourage the study of ancient Japan, and sponsored renovation and identification of imperial mausolea. Many leading scholars of national learning received sponsorship from shogunal or Tokugawa-related houses. It would be quite wrong to restrict the study of nativism to its bearing on later loyalism and insurrection, for it found resonance with many other trends in the intellectual life of its day. The first concern of the founders of kokugaku was with early Japanese literature, especially poetry. The evocation of nature and praise of emotion that they found there seemed to them to be far removed from the formal didacticism of much of the Confucian teaching as they came to know it in Japan. Normative “forms” seemed to stand in direct opposition to “nature,” as different as the often lengthy Chinese poem was from the evocative simplicity of Japanese poetry. Japanese poetry best captured the spirit of Japan; its only standards were those of beauty and emotion. Motoori Norinaga wrote that questions of morality and duty had no relation to those of aesthetics. As he put it, “Poetry . . . attempts neither to trespass on the teachings of Confucian and Buddha nor to pass moral judgments. Its aim is merely to express a sensitivity to human existence.” For a scholar or holy man to admire the tinted leaves of autumn, but to pass by a beautiful woman pretending not to notice her, he argued, was insincere and dishonest; “It is as if a hundred ounces of gold were desirable but not a thousand.”<sup>24</sup> Beauty was its own excuse for being, and made all moralizing superfluous. The focus by nativist scholars on ancient Japanese literature in the context of a revival of Japanese tradition inevitably brought them into conflict with the Sino-centric world of most Japanese Confucianists. Kada no Azumamaro (1669–1736) was a Shinto priest influenced by Sorai’s call for return to the language and texts of the past. In his studies of the Manyo¯shu¯ (a.d. 759), the first Japanese poetic anthology, Kada argued that its poems were quite free of Chinese influence; they were “the natural expression of our ancient heritage; they are the voice of our divine land.” This was the beginning of a lifelong battle he waged against syncretism and multiculturalism. While Sorai struggled to undo the influence of medieval texts that stood between the scholar and a true understanding of Chinese antiquity, Kada and his student Kamo tried to throw off the accretions of the entire Chinese tradition. In 1728 Kada petitioned the shogun Yoshimune for permission to establish his own school in Kyoto. It was needed, he thought, because Japanese learning was being overwhelmed by Chinese and Buddhist learning. Confucian terms had become household words, but “the teachings of our Divine Emperors are steadily melting away, each year more conspicuously than the last. Japanese learning is falling into ruin.” Almost no one was conversant with the terms of antiquity any longer, and therein lay a danger: “If the old words are not understood the old meanings will not be clear. If the old meanings are not clear the old learning will not revive . . . The loss will not be a slight one if we fail now to teach philology.”<sup>25</sup> This sounds very much like Sorai. Kokugaku teachings spread rapidly, and the ever wider circle of students these men attracted provides evidence of the cultural integration of Japan. Kada’s best-known student was Kamo no Mabuchi (1697–1769). Like his teacher, Kamo was the son of a Shinto shrine priest. In 1738 he opened his own academy in Edo, where he attracted many students and lectured to important Tokugawa family members. The vow of loyalty his students took exemplifies the almost religious nature of the influence his teachings exerted. Each student signed a pledge assuring the master that he had a “burning desire to learn the way of former days in the sacred land of the Tenno¯s, which Master Kamo is good enough to teach . . . I will not whisper what I am taught to others until the time comes when it fills me and when I am given permission. Nor will I conceive an unwilling or contrary thought to the Master. If I fail to keep this faith, may the earthly and heavenly kami punish me.”<sup>26</sup> Kamo closed his school in 1760 and began travels to Ise and other places sacred to the Shinto tradition. In so doing he attracted more students, among them Motoori Norinaga, who was to become the best known of all the kokugaku scholars. In 1765 Kamo wrote his most important work. Kokuiko¯, “A Study of the Idea of Our Country,” was not published until 1806, but it circulated widely in handwritten copies. This represented a frontal attack on the Chinese tradition, from Confucianism to the writing system. Kamo argued that the Chinese history so esteemed by his contemporaries was fraudulent and designed to cover up rebellion and deceit; the changeovers of dynasties stood in startling confrontation to the purity of Japan’s tradition of an unbroken imperial line. He found merit only in the Taoist canon of Lao Tzu, with its rejection of formalism and structure. He contrasted Chinese rationalism with Japanese commitment and belief. The human mind, he argued, was limited in its power to understand and explain, and men should be willing to trust and accept. “The acts of the gods are illimitable and wondrous.” Faith was more powerful than reason. Motoori Norinaga (1730–1801), like most of the nativist scholars, was from nonsamurai stock; he was born the son of merchants near the great Ise shrine to the sun goddess Amaterasu. His life passion was the study of poetry and of ancient texts. Study of “The Record of Ancient Matters” (Kojiki) of 712, Japan’s first text to chronicle the origins of the gods, the creation myths, and the sun goddess’s commission to her descendants to rule the Japanese islands, occupied thirty years of his life. He went on to a detailed study of Lady Murasaki’s tenth-century masterpiece, The Tale of Genji. Motoori was more concerned with the individual than with politics. Kokugaku, he argued, accepted man as he was instead of trying to remake him as Buddhism and Confucianism did. Moral exhortation was ultimately vain and insincere. The goal of literary study was something he termed mono no aware, a term that, we have noted, conveys sympathetic awareness of the pathos or sadness of things. This required an intuitive, aesthetic empathy conveyed as a simple, heartfelt expression of sentiment. Any deep emotion—happiness, joy, or sorrow—could be classified as aware. To try to control it, or discipline it, or conceal it with samurai rigidity or “Chinese” rationalism, was simply dishonest. Genji, for instance, had long been interpreted as allegory, or denounced altogether as immoral. But the book, like all real literature, was not concerned with good or evil, but simply with mono no aware. And no branch of literature was more expressive of awareness than poetry. A further point was that women, who were less indoctrinated in the repression of emotion than men, were usually truer judges of real emotion. Poetry was in fact essentially feminine. And if Japanese poetry was the heart of Japanese expressiveness, then the Japanese “spirit” overall, especially that part of it that related to the tenno¯ (emperor), was also feminine.<sup>27</sup> Norinaga was a master of rigorous philological study, but he also held a highly irrational belief that the Kojiki mythology was historically authentic. He argued that what was recorded in that classic had to be true, and that adherence to its teachings constituted the “Way.” For this term he used the Japanese michi rather than the Sino-Japanese do¯; and rather than accept the usual reading for “The Record of Ancient Matters” as Kojiki, Motoori insisted on avoiding Chinese phonetic derivations and substituting purely Japanese words to read those characters as furu koto bumi. To succumb to innovations that had been introduced into the Japanese language together with Chinese characters was to lose the “pure Japanese heart” (yamatogokoro) in favor of an “errant” magokoro, thereby running the risk of accepting a foreign tradition of formalism, dishonesty, and insurrection. The stories about the gods had to be true, he argued; no one could have made them up. Harry Harootunian has argued that this obsession with the Chinese tradition on the part of Tokugawa nativists was more metaphor than literal fact, and that they used “China” as a shorthand signifier for rationality and logic.<sup>28</sup> There is room for agreement here. It is also true that the Confucianists the kokugaku scholars warred against were Japanese Confucianists, who often lived up to their reputation as fastidious bores. Nevertheless the close identification of China with everything that was wrong with Japanese culture had important ramifications for the future. By the time of his death, Motoori is credited with having had five hundred disciples in forty provinces. But even this impressive network was dwarfed by the influence of Hirata Atsutane (1776–1843), under whom nativism became firmly associated with Shinto and spread throughout the countryside. With Hirata kokugaku became more religious and also more political. There was new emphasis on ancient prayers and affirmation of the ancient ideal of matsurigoto, a union of worship and politics. In this ancient concept it was the emperor who linked the aura that was his by virtue of descent from the gods with the governance of his people. He served the gods, and they in turn joined him to share the burdens of rule. This revival of ancient, indeed primitive, ideas was one of the dubious contributions of the nativist revival to the Meiji state in the nineteenth century. Nativism was by its very nature intensely parochial and particular. Indeed, one kokugaku assertion had it that other countries were assembled from the less worthy materials rejected in the original generation of the Japanese islands. At the same time, Hirata’s preparedness to accept whatever might be useful in other traditions was somewhat contradictory to this. The nativists, no longer bound to the Sino-centric focus on Chinese antiquity, were prepared to see merit in other traditions. Hirata in particular was out for arguments that contributed to Japan’s superiority. He himself had been trained as a physician, and he had some knowledge of Western medicine that had filtered in through books imported by the Dutch at Nagasaki. He found it easy to justify this; the gods had taught medical lore to all countries, but virtuous Japan had not produced as many cures as had medicine in more polluted countries. But after Japan became damaged by its acquaintance with pernicious foreign doctrines, it had need for their healing too. And in any case, whatever was useful in “foreign” countries was ultimately Japanese. When Hirata learned of the Copernican revolution in astronomy, he argued that it provided proof of the greatness of the sun goddess. The story of Noah’s flood, which he learned through some Jesuit translations that had made their way into Japan, went to show that Japan, which had experienced no flood, was on higher ground than other countries. He even found a creator god in the Shinto divinity, Takami-musubi. “These truths,” he wrote, “are by no means confined to Japan. In many other countries it is believed that the seed of man and all other things owe their existence to the powers of this god.” Ultimately, then, Japanese learning was superior to all others because it represented a sea in which many rivers joined. As he put it, “We may properly speak not only of Chinese but even of Indian and Dutch learning as Japanese learning: this fact should be understood by all Japanese who delve into foreign studies.”<sup>29</sup> Even so, it should not be thought that his ability to co-opt foreign learning made Hirata think better of foreigners. He was virulently anti-Chinese and contemptuous of the Dutch at Nagasaki. “As everybody knows who has seen one,” he assured his readers, “[the Dutch] shave their beards, cut their nails, and are not dirty like the Chinese . . . [but] Their eyes are really just like those of a dog. Apparently because the backs of their feet do not reach to the ground, they fasten wooden heels to their shoes, which makes them look all the more like dogs . . . [this] may be the reason they are lascivious as dogs . . . Because they are addicted to sexual excesses and to drink, none of them lives very long.”<sup>30</sup> It would nevertheless be wrong to dismiss Hirata on the ground of his hyperbole in polemics. One feature of nativism in Hirata’s work, and a very important one, is the extent to which his influence took root in rural Japan. He and his disciples developed an emphasis on productivity—originally of the cosmos in the Kojiki mythology—that grew into highly practical discussions of the cultivation of rice. Ritual and prayer that had always been part of folk festivals focused on the well-being of the community or common folk. Agriculture was becoming more productive than it had ever been, in part through the writings of agronomists like O<sup>¯</sup> kura Nagatsune (1768–?). O<sup>¯</sup> kura, born the son of farmer-merchants in Kyushu, first planned a life of scholarship, but changed directions in conformity with his father’s warning that book learning would divert him from farming and lead to ruin. “Even if I could not study the classics and thus learn the secrets of ruling a country,” he consoled himself, “I refused to spend my life doing nothing of value; so I concentrated my ambition on learning the art of farming and studied it for many years.”<sup>31</sup> O<sup>¯</sup> kura was one link in a line of influential writers that began with Miyazaki Yasusada (Antei, 1623–1697), whose classic Treatise on Agriculture went through numerous editions. O<sup>¯</sup> kura’s writings emphasized ways to make farming more efficient and productive: timely cultivation, better seeds, better equipment, supplementary crops, and the care and culture of silkworms. Nor was he alone in this. The spread of literacy and opportunities for commercial farming as city markets grew larger resulted in a reading public of rural leaders that encouraged publishers to issue first editions of two and three thousand copies of relevant books for village readers. Hirata propagandists for nativism worked their way into this readership and their ideas into journals and books. Their almanacs and calendars combined Shinto observances with practical advice. They also produced a flood of practical and pseudoscientific counsel that made such learning popular among village headmen.<sup>32</sup> The nativist tradition of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Japan is full of paradoxes. It found its intellectual beginnings in the surge of scholarship concerned with antiquity and it produced studies that are monuments of philological exactitude, and yet its leaders also advocated uncritical acceptance of wildly improbable assertions. It deplored the pollution of primitive Japanese sincerity by foreign, especially Chinese, ideas, while calmly laying claim to any strain of foreign thought that seemed useful. Co-optation of foreign thought was combined with contempt for foreigners. The Tokugawa peace and, frequently, Tokugawa sponsorship made possible work that was ultimately used to buttress the claims of the imperial court and the construction of the modern state religion of Meiji Japan. ## 6. Dutch, or Western, Learning (rangaku) By this time it should be clear that the intellectual trends that have been discussed were seldom mutually exclusive. All educated men had a good knowledge of the Chinese classical tradition, for that was the medium in which scholarly literacy was transmitted. The practical needs of communication, on the other hand, naturally put the emphasis on Japanese. Ogyu¯ Sorai, the most formidable scholar of Chinese learning of his day, wrote his memorials on statecraft for his shogun in Japanese. The eighteenth-century development of nativist learning added dignity and depth to work in that language, but even so Kada wrote the petition in which he asked permission to open a school for native learning in classical Chinese. Popular culture and folk tradition was of course couched in Japanese, as were the numerous handbooks and manuals of daily use that circulated in town and country; so were domestic records and the diaries so many people kept. What mattered for them was practicality and utility. In the eighteenth century an additional school of specialization developed in response to the apparent practicality and rationality of Western learning that filtered in through Nagasaki. It began with medicine. Seventeenth-century European medicine was not always scientific or reliable, but it was grounded in study of the body. Dutch paintings of a class gathered over a dissection for the study of anatomy represent a direct observation that was less common in East Asia. Classical Chinese texts of medical lore were based on theories of balance and cosmology, and treatments followed from this. Physicians worked to maintain a proper balance of the five elements and the negative and positive (yin and yang) principles in conformity with the same normative expectations that were applied to maintenance and restoration of the social order. Surgery was a basic of Western medicine from its early days, but it was neglected in East Asia, where invasive techniques ran the risk of doing damage to a body inherited from the ancestors. The little Dutch station at Deshima played a role in the transmission of medical techniques, particularly surgery, from early on. Although chief factors at Deshima rotated annually, many doctors attached to the station were there for years. Unlike Kaempfer, they did not leave ethnographic descriptions or compile histories; their names have come down to us but not, unfortunately, their correspondence. Nevertheless they surely exchanged information with Japanese curious to learn about their skills.<sup>33</sup> Thus there was a “Casper” (von Shaumbergen) school of surgery, known as Kasuparuryu¯. Then paradoxically, as Dutch trade diminished in the early eighteenth century, interest in Dutch (- Western) techniques increased. In the 1720s the shogun Yoshimune, eager to increase domestic production of goods that had to be imported, relaxed restrictions on books that could be imported at Nagasaki. The shogun’s curiosity about Western ways extended to horses and horsemanship, which was demonstrated by a Hollander ordered to come to Edo. In the same years he was inviting botanists and doctors from China. Yoshimune also wanted to know more about the Western calendar, and commissioned several young scholars to go to Nagasaki and study with the Dutch. As the century advanced such interests grew. The study of Dutch gradually became fashionable among a small coterie of educated Japanese. Toward the end of the century the Dutch station head, Titsingh, on his return to Europe, was able to exchange letters in Dutch with several daimyo he had come to know during his stay in Japan. The daily record kept by the Dutch station indicates that during the stay of the Dutch in Edo on sanpu visits, as they were known, more and more questions were being asked by Japanese doctors who were permitted to see them. The story of the struggle of Japanese to learn more about the West from the Dutch is one of the most extraordinary chapters in cultural interchange in world history. There were two groups of Japanese involved. One was in Nagasaki, where the interpreters guild was headed by four families. Under them were another dozen or more families that enjoyed hereditary rights in this occupation. Each, in turn, had junior members, and in the 1690s Kaempfer estimated that there might be as many as 140 enrolled altogether. In Edo a much smaller group, mostly physicians, worked in almost complete isolation from the men at Nagasaki. The Edo doctors were mostly of modest rank, but they were interested in adding some of the skills of Western surgery to their knowledge of Chinese medicine. There was very little contact between the two groups, for the Nagasaki experts were not eager to see their monopoly on language broken. Moreover, there was no private system of internal mail, and communication was possible only through access to men attached to processions or shipments for other reasons. Consequently the Edo scholars had to work entirely from books. Those fortunate enough to be personal physicians to daimyo, however, could urge their patient to purchase items for them, either books already in Japan or titles that could be added to the “order list” that bakufu officials gave the Dutch. Fulfillment of an order required at least a year, however, and the process must have been maddeningly slow. The Edo doctors could hope to see a real Hollander only on the visits of the Dutch to the capital, and these were biennial after 1764 and every four years after 1790. On one occasion one of the doctors, O<sup>¯</sup> tsuki Gentaku, found himself unable to get the floor with a question and noted ruefully that he would have to wait four years for another chance.<sup>34</sup> The books available became the more precious, and they were frequently copied out by hand. Deciphering them, however, was harder because there were no language tools. An early effort used a French-Dutch dictionary in which Japanese words were substituted for the French. But even this was available in handwritten copy only in 1796, and it was not published until 1855. On rare occasions an Edo scholar received permission or orders to study at Nagasaki. Such an opportunity was tantamount to the chance to “study abroad” and usually marked its fortunate recipient as a future leader. In 1771 a milestone event took place: a little group of Edo scholars was permitted to be present at the execution of an old woman and allowed to direct the executioner, who was a member of the ostracized subcaste community, to dismantle the corpse. There had been a few dissections earlier, but they had been conducted without a reliable chart at hand and represented undirected curiosity. On this occasion, however, the scholars had with them a Dutch book on anatomy (which in turn had been translated from the German) entitled Anatomical Tables, which had charts showing and identifying the parts of the body. The man who organized this gathering was a doctor named Sugita Genpaku (1733–1817), whose name and career became closely identified with the development of Dutch learning. His life also illustrated the interdependence of the intellectual trends that have been discussed, for he had been influenced by Ogyu¯ Sorai’s call for careful preparation in all study. Sugita’s autobiography provides the standard account of that occasion, and it is probably not an overstatement to describe this as a pivotal day in Japanese intellectual history and science. The corpse of the criminal was that of an old woman of about fifty years, nicknamed Aocha Baba, born in Kyoto. It was an old butcher who made the dissection. We had been promised an eta named Toramatsu, known for his skill in dissection, but because he was sick his grandfather came instead. He was ninety years old, but healthy, and he told us he had been doing this since his youth. According to him up until this time people had left it up to him, and he had not shown them where the lungs, kidneys, and other organs were. They would pretend that they had studied the internal structure of the body directly. But the parts naturally weren’t labeled, and they had to be satisfied with the way he pointed them out. He knew where everything was, but he had not learned their proper names . . . Some of the things turned out to be arteries, veins, and suprarenal bodies according to our [Dutch] anatomical tables . . . We found that the structure of the lungs and liver and the position and shape of the stomach were quite different from what had been believed according to old Chinese theory.<sup>35</sup> On their way home Sugita and his friends reflected on how shameful it was that they had tried to serve their lords as doctors without first having a true knowledge of the human body. They vowed, he writes, that thereafter they would seek facts only through experiment. “I suggested,” he went on, “that we decipher the Tafel Anatomia (the book they had used) without the aid of interpreters in Nagasaki, and translate it into Japanese. The next day we met and began . . . Gradually we got so we could decipher ten lines or more a day. After two or three years of hard study everything became clear to us; the joy of it was as the chewing of sweet sugar cane.” This began a new age of translation. Long ago there had been another project to translate from Chinese, but this time it was Dutch science and technology that was the focus. The earlier effort to translate the corpus of Chinese learning, Sugita noted, had the backing of an imperial court that sent student monks to China, but this time a much smaller number of men had to work things out on their own. Sugita and his associates thus had a consciousness of themselves as partners in a venture of historic importance. At the same time, he granted, the earlier tradition “probably prepared our mind” for the task at hand. By the time Sugita wrote his memoirs in 1815, he could marvel at the spread of rangaku (Dutch learning; the “ran” from “Oranda,” Holland) and looked back on a career that was rich in reward and interest. Private practice and official recognition had given him an income the equivalent of an upper samurai. He took delight in his grandchildren, his students, and his success. “In the beginning,” he wrote, “there were only three of us . . . who came together to make plans for our studies. Now, fifty years later, those studies have reached every corner of the country, and each year new translations seem to be brought out . . . And what particularly delights me is the idea that, when once the way of Dutch studies is opened wide, doctors a hundred or even a thousand years from now will be able to master real medicine and use it to save people’s lives. When I think of the public benefits this will bring, I cannot help dancing and springing for joy.”<sup>36</sup> In time this new wave of foreign learning would reinforce the ideological assault that kokugaku was making to challenge the dominance that Chinese learning had enjoyed. Nativist scholars could argue that Chinese learning was foreign and spiritually harmful to Japanese “purity,” but Sugita and his friends could prove that Chinese wisdom was occasionally wrong, as in the morphology of the body, or impractical. And of course each persuasion seemed personified by its representatives; in late-eighteenth-century Japan “China” began to be associated with conservatism and even obscurantism. In a dialogue he wrote in 1775 Sugita had an interlocutor protest, “Look here! Korea and Ryukyu are not China, but they at least received the teachings of the same sages. This medical learning you are teaching, though, comes from countries on the northwest frontier of the world, 9000 ri from China. Their language is different from China’s and they don’t know anything about the sages. They are the most distant of all the barbarian countries; what possible good can their learning do us?” Sugita’s alter ego answered this as follows: it was all very well for the Chinese to profess scorn for barbarians, but notice that it was the barbarian Manchus who were ruling them now! More important, though, people were the same the world around, and China itself was only one country in the Eastern Seas. Real medical knowledge had to be based on more universal grounds than on the wisdom of a few. Experiment proved that the sages’ ideas about anatomy were not correct, and one simply could not dismiss the Dutch or their learning out of hand.<sup>37</sup> Dutch studies spread rapidly in the last quarter of the eighteenth century. Sugita could count 104 men from thirty-five provinces as disciples by the time of his death. Nor was his case as isolated as he wanted his readers to believe, for many others were at work. Medicine led in this, but not to the exclusion of other disciplines. Nagasaki served as entry port for artistic inspiration as well. Vanishing point perspective came to characterize prints and maps, and experiments with copperplate engraving added to the eclectic nature of mid- and late Tokugawa art. Many were, in other words, prepared to act on Hirata Atsutane’s assertion that ultimately everything was “Japanese learning.” The common element here, whether in art, medicine, or, in the nineteenth century, mathematics and physics, was accuracy and practicality. What was true to life began to compete with what was in conformity with the universal principles of the Neo-Confucian universe. Even so, it is too much to argue, as some have, that the rise of Dutch studies sounded the bell for the demise of Tokugawa feudal institutions. Scholars of Dutch learning were dependent on their superiors for the resources that made their studies possible. Far from imagining a revolutionary role for themselves, they saw their new specialty as helping them personally and strengthening the society of which they were a part. In some cases their authorities granted them the ranking of jusha, “Confucianist,” indicating how varied an assemblage of talents that term could cover. At first almost none of their writing circulated among the general public. The first generation of Dutch scholars did not overturn tradition. Nor, for that matter, did they modernize Japanese medicine as rapidly or as profoundly as Sugita thought they had. It was not a matter of an either-or contrast. Most doctors added aspects of Western medical lore to the mix of Chinese and Japanese therapies they used. Moreover, the process of selection for translation was far from scientific and in fact quite random. In any case medicine was changing rapidly in eighteenth-century Europe. Translators sometimes spent months on works that were already dated. Rather, the importance of the first generation of scholars of Dutch learning lies in the attitude and mind-set that they showed. Rangaku brought a delight in the new, the different, and the difficult. It was new, for it opened windows onto a body of learning that was radically different from what had been available and, in its assumptions, often farthest removed from the classical knowledge of the China-centered world. And it was difficult, difficult beyond the imagination of scholars in our day who have access to instruction, learning tools, and dictionaries. It added important strands to the rich tapestry of Tokugawa intellectual activity; it also had profound consequences for the future. ## 7. Religion The importance of the intellectual currents in eighteenth-century Japan should not be allowed to overshadow the beliefs that had meaning for the millions of Japanese in countryside and city. Japan’s earlier religious traditions lived on in Buddhism and folk religion, but both underwent significant change in response to the direction of the state and the diffusion and dilution of the ideas of the scholars who have been discussed. Buddhism had been the religion of Japan long before the Tokugawa unification, and it remained so in Tokugawa years. At the turn of the seventeenth century Christianity had offered a serious threat in some areas, but although it lived on in southwestern Japan as a secret underground sect, the Tokugawa suppression of Catholic sectarians ended its ability to compete with Buddhism. Throughout Japanese society Buddhist doctrines of karma, rebirth, and denial of the reality of corporeal existence became and remained basic to the worldview of millions of Japanese. Buddhism was also intimately related to the power structure. At the highest reaches of society court nobles were closely intertwined with the priestly hierarchy. Younger sons of the imperial family were routinely assigned to selected monzeki (court-related) temple establishments. Among the samurai elite the stern intellectual and physical discipline of Zen influenced many men. Learned Zen statesman-priests were central to diplomatic intercourse with the continent and found sponsorship for some of the most celebrated and beautiful temple and garden monuments to austerity and contemplation in the population centers of Kamakura and Kyoto. In early Tokugawa the new land settlement cost most temples their land and political influence, but the kind of systematic horror that Nobunaga had brought to the Enryakuji complex gave way to daimyo patronage and subsidies for the reconstruction of buildings that had been damaged or burned. Ieyasu himself relied on several canny Buddhist monks for counsel, and the Tokugawa family tombs remained with the popular faith Jo¯do-Shin sect temple of Zo¯jo¯ji in Edo. Jo¯do-Shin itself, however, having been battered by its struggles against Nobunaga and Hideyoshi, was now absorbed into the administrative structure by charging it with the requirement of registering communicants in the shu¯- mon aratame surveys to certify their hostility against Christianity. The “temple guarantee” (terauke) system came full cycle in the eighteenth century. From then on the family, rather than the individual, had to register with a parish temple. The temple’s attestation was required for marriage, employment, change of residence, and travel permits. In this way the Buddhist organization became an arm of state control. In some domains even Buddhist sects with a history of insurrection were also outlawed; the bakufu discriminated against some branches of Nichiren, and the Satsuma domain, which required all commoners to wear wooden identification tags, forbade Ikko¯ Buddhism as well. The bakufu did its best to control, as well as use, the Buddhist establishment. Temples of each sect were organized along hierarchic lines to facilitate supervision by the commissioner for temples and shrines ( Jisha bugyo¯). The great Honganji sect was divided into an east and a west branch to make it more manageable. Temples were ordered to simplify and purify their doctrines and to avoid feuding with one another. Such close relations with despotic government did not make for moral fervor or spiritual depth. Guaranteed adherents and discouraged from competing with one another, Buddhist temples and priests seldom enjoyed respect or high prestige. Popular writers and printmakers of the cities often lampooned their eccentricities, while samurai intellectuals scorned their doctrines. The seventeenth-century Confucian scholar Kumazawa Banzan wrote that “from the ordinance banning Christianity on, a faithless Buddhism has flourished. Since throughout the land everyone has his parish temple, unlike in the past, monks can freely indulge in worldly affairs without concern for either discipline or scholarship . . . The freedom with which they eat meat and engage in romantic affairs surpasses that of even secular men.” There were outstanding Buddhist reformers and scholars of quality who did their best to reverse these trends and change that image, but they had to battle against the main current. It is noteworthy that such individuals usually offered teachings that reflected aspects of the intellectual atmosphere that has been considered. Jiun Sonja (also known as Onko¯, 1718–1804), for instance, combined a scholarly command of Sanskrit with restorationist views of Buddhist law with affirmation of basic Confucian morality like filial piety. He was a distinguished calligrapher and painter, studied Confucianism with Ito¯ To¯gai, and practiced Zen meditation. He was above all a pioneer in the study of classical Sanskrit. Before him the Japanese had relied chiefly on Chinese translations, but Jiun pushed beyond and behind this screen; he thus provides a Buddhist variant of the enthusiasm for antiquity and philology that animated Sorai and Norinaga.<sup>38</sup> But while Buddhism remained the religion of the Japanese, it was losing a good deal of its vitality. For the great majority of the villagers who made up most of the population it was closely intermingled with folk religion that pieced together ancestor worship, portents, directions, and concern with a beneficent though capricious nature. In late Tokugawa days much of this became structured into something called Shinto, but it was long in getting out from under the wide, though porous, umbrella of Buddhism. At the end of Tokugawa rule in 1868 there were 87,558 temples and 74,642 shrines.<sup>39</sup> Since there were about 70,000 villages (mura), this averaged out to one of each. Yet they were seldom separate. Most shrines were small and lacked a full-time priest. More often than not the shrines were close to or within a temple complex and controlled by Buddhist clergy. This mix held true even at Ise, the ancestral imperial shrine dedicated to the sun goddess Amaterasu, which had almost 300 temples connected with it. For the most part “Shinto” priests were subject to the Buddhist registration laws and were technically “Buddhist.” There was also a plethora of popular cults. Many were regional in focus, centering on sites that drew pilgrims. Mt. Fuji, Kumano on the Wakayama Peninsula, and Iwashimizu were the outstanding examples of this. Their regional focus could nevertheless encompass a considerable area; the Mt. Fuji cult, for instance, had a complex system of traveling circuit priests (oshi) who organized and visited groups of believers (ko¯) on a regular rotation. Itinerants in a world of status and stability, these priests constituted a special category, and it was understandable that officials might be wary of them. Government regulations for Shinto were necessarily rather loose due to its amorphous character. Major shrines usually had hereditary priesthoods, and sometimes confraternities organized for pilgrimages. Tutelary shrines connected with daimyo lineages also had hereditary priesthoods. In an effort to regulate this confusion the bakufu, in 1665, decreed that all priests and shrines were to apply to the Yoshida house, descendants of an ancient ritualist clan, for approval of vestments with indications of ranks and titles. Within this complex pattern the Ise shrines were special in the range and breadth of organization and support, for their network of oshi circuit priests and the village confraternities (ko¯) on which they drew were to be found all over the country. The circuit priests moved constantly along major communication networks, and might come through once or twice a year. One man might supervise as many as ten thousand households. Oshi were intimately related to the cycle of agricultural life. They distributed almanacs with the allimportant agricultural calendar and information about the progress of the sixty-year cycle with its zodiacal referents, as well as simple emblems or talismans for health, good harvests, good fortune, and purification. They were supported by a modest sum appropriate to the village’s tax assessment. The Inner Shrine at Ise had 309 oshi related to it, and the Outer Shrine, 555. The sixty-year cycle (based upon the interrelationships of the five elements and twelve horary animals) had entered Japan from China and had been used as early as the seventh century to back-date the inauguration of the ruling family to 660 b.c. Completion of a cycle, whether in an individual life or larger era, was an auspicious event that signified a renewal. In Edo this became associated with pilgrimages to the Ise shrines. The oshi received the pilgrims at an Ise lodge; sacred dances (kagura) would be performed, and the pilgrims were then free for sight-seeing and relaxation. Pilgrims returned with magic slips or talismans (fuda) that brought good luck. Sometimes affairs took on a carnival nature; rumors of magic appearances of talismans implying promises of health and harvest could bring a rush to acquire one. Joyous celebration and dancing could become lubricated by sake provided by the rich, whether in generosity or, more often, an urge for self-protection from the crowd. The almanacs the oshi distributed kept people informed of approaching dates, guided their route, and directed them to rustic hostels (“Iseya”) along the way. With the spread of travel that has been described it gradually became accepted that an Ise pilgrimage was a once-in-a-lifetime experience. Not everyone waited for the festival year; indeed the timing of the major pilgrimage “happenings” showed only a loose correlation with what should have been banner years. By the eighteenth century upwards of a half-million pilgrims came to Ise annually. Intimation that a festival year was at hand could bring astonishing numbers on the road: in Genroku an estimated three and a half million, in 1771 two million, and in 1830, three to four million. It should be noted that there was little specifically “Shinto” about this, except that the sun goddess was the focus of the ceremonies at Ise. For most people the Ise pilgrimage was a rare interval of joyous, even delirious, passage from the familiar. In every corner of Japan festivals, matsuri, were the opposite, a regularly scheduled form of collective piety that served to reaffirm ties with person and place. Carried out at appropriate points in the agricultural calendar, these shrine-centered events were occasions of local jubilation and pride; their preparation and execution absorbed the cooperation of every age group, from the village leaders and adults who organized and contributed support for food and costume, to the boisterous young men whose strength carried the ponderous ujigami, or local kami, from and to the shrine, to the excited children who ran behind. Another mix of Buddhism, folk religion, nature worship, and pilgrimage could be seen in the phenomenon of Shugendo¯, a religious order active throughout rural Japan.<sup>40</sup> Mountains had religious significance in Japan from very early times. Emperors and aristocrats made pilgrimages to mountainous areas, particularly Kumano and Yoshino, and the same sites attracted ascetics who purified themselves by entering the mountain in a symbolic transition from a profane to a sacred world. The consecration of Zen temples was also referred to as “opening the mountain.” The mountain ascetics were credited with magical powers of endurance to heat and cold, and levitation and transport to heaven. When they came down from the mountains and returned from their purifying rites they could function as shamans, with power to overcome the spirits that caused sickness. With the institutionalization of these practices both Kumano and Yoshino became centers for Shugendo¯. They were fiercely competitive, but both were associated with the esoteric practices of Shingon Buddhism. Here, again, the bakufu entered to tidy things up. In 1613 all yamabushi (“mountain priests”) were ordered to affiliate with one or another of the Shugendo¯ lines, in order to structure and legitimize the cult. At the same time Shugendo¯ was now free to widen its links with ordinary people, and its influence. As the yamabushi gained authority they also abandoned much of their asceticism. They married and ate meat; instead of remaining itinerant mendicants they settled in villages and performed rituals for a regular clientele. The rationale for mountain asceticism also changed, from personal mysticism or repentance to services of healing for nonascetic villagers. Parish populations in turn were organized into confraternities that launched pilgrimages and sponsored the worship of specific deities. Shugendo¯ practitioners became a large group of men and women; one study estimates that there may have been 170,000 by the nineteenth century. Leaders often doubled as clergy of Buddhist temples or of local shrines. Sometimes they operated parish schools, and in many respects became close to or part of the upper level of landowner village society. Not infrequently, members of that elite engaged in Shugendo¯ discipline themselves in the belief it could contribute to the order and discipline of village life. Like the new religions of nineteenth- and twentieth-century Japan, Shugendo¯ had a place and role for women. In temple records they were sometimes registered as priests’ wives, but they usually functioned like partners. A female medium (miko) worked with the yamabushi in healing rites; he, the stern, unbending chief, gave the orders, but she, the yielding, empathetic part of the team, entered into a trance in which the spirit spoke through her, revealing what was required as compensation or correction. Miko had their own bounded territories, and they trained under female mentors who taught them their craft. Some (the itako of northern Japan) were blind. Shugendo¯ rituals were vitally connected with pregnancy, childbirth, the location of lost articles, healing, the exorcism of malevolent spirits, ancestral rites, and pilgrimages.<sup>41</sup> Services were usually communal events in which the sponsoring family had to provide refreshments for the community, and they could constitute a considerable burden for all but wealthy villagers. All this illustrates both the variety but also the harmony of ritual and religious thought. The language and the imagery owed everything to Buddhism, but the elements of nature worship and shamanist practice clearly had more ancient roots. ## 8. Popular Preaching The syncretic nature of the teachings that attracted villagers in the countryside was also present in the popular preaching and lecturing in local towns and castle cities. There were long traditions of popular preaching in Japan; storytellers had acquainted commoners with the heroism of medieval warriors, and Buddhist reformers of the Kamakura period had made their way through the country attracting great crowds. Yet it is safe to say that preaching had never been so accessible or so tuned in to the practical problems of daily life. It was not unusual for lecturers to speak to hundreds of listeners. Hosoi Heishu¯ (1728–1801) wrote that after his tour of a domain in northern Japan the “villagers were all choked with tears, and especially the older men were so sad to see me go that when I left for Yonezawa 700 or 800 of them prostrated themselves in the snow and wept aloud.”<sup>42</sup> Hosoi’s message was one that must have pleased authorities who invited him to speak: sincerity, frugality, modesty, and diligence were essential to life, and if villagers only knew how careful their superiors were about their finances they would gladly reciprocate by paying what was due them. Nevertheless, even if one makes allowance for the lack of alternative forms of education or diversion available to the villagers, these figures speak to the driving urge for self-improvement on the part of those who came. Lecturers included popularizers of Zen Buddhism who reached to lay audiences or wrote in easily understood vernacular Japanese. They tried to reduce Zen teachings to their essentials, and spoke directly to the concerns of their auditors. Suzuki Sho¯san (1579–1655), who had fought as a samurai in the battles of Sekigahara and Osaka, argued that in the life of commoners ordinary, daily work could lead to enlightenment. What mattered was internal attitude; when this was properly adjusted and focused, all trades could become the roads to spiritual emancipation. Enlightenment involved a focus on attaining one’s “true mind,” a concern that was shared, to differing degrees and different but related terms, with Neo-Confucian idealism. Ideas of this sort received powerful expression in the teachings of Ishida Baigan (1685–1744), a farmer’s son who was apprenticed to a Kyoto merchant family. After studying what he could of Buddhism, Shinto, and Confucianism, Baigan began a series of lectures in Kyoto in 1729 from which his movement, Shingaku (“Heart study”), can be dated. Basing himself principally, though not explicitly, on the teachings of Chu Hsi, he regarded learning (“gaku”) less as an intellectual activity than as a challenge to investigate human nature through personal experience and reflection. Becoming convinced of the universal nature of morality, Baigan argued that when it came to moral practices the merchant, supposedly the lowest in the status order of society, should in no wise be thought inferior to anyone else. This in effect postulated a merchant ethic, “the Way of the townsman,” that deserved equality with the Way of the samurai (bushido¯). These ideas were further developed by a number of disciples, principally Teshima Toan. Baigan’s thought was “less a philosophical system than a type and method of spirituality directed to townsmen and merchants.”<sup>43</sup> Shingaku grew through the multiplication of reading and study groups which were conducted under the guidance of a certified master who would test the spiritual advancement of his charges. Meetings were held in utmost simplicity, and masters usually declined to accept gifts or payment. This was entirely congruent with the emphasis on merchant values of frugality and diligence. Shingaku was in no sense political or subversive, although its valorization of the traditionally scorned merchant class might have been deemed so. Quite the reverse: it was said of Teshima Toan that when he passed in front of a government proclamation board (the ko¯satsu described earlier) he would take down his umbrella, bow, and keep from using his walking stick (lest he seem to raise it against authority). In periods of reform bakufu administrators tended to exempt Shingaku preachers from their bans on public gatherings and performances, and it was in fact this seeming compliance with feudal authority that guaranteed that with the Meiji Restoration and abandonment of status restrictions Shingaku too would come to an end. Its importance, however, is to be found in the way that it once again showed the way the quest of ordinary Japanese for spiritual cultivation characterized commoner, perhaps even more than samurai, society in Edo Japan. Whether searching for one’s “original mind,” or attempting to “attain Buddhahood” or become like a (Shinto) kami, Japanese of many stripes strove to restrain their “selfish” desires and calculation, and they were endlessly patient in listening to expositions of and exhortations to makoto (sincerity). Notwithstanding the bounds of a feudal status system and rule that was frequently arbitrary, the values of all groups within Japan’s society had become congruent, each group persuaded of the importance of its contribution to the larger whole.