# CHANGE, PROTEST, AND REFORM On February 19, 1837, O<sup>¯</sup> shio Heihachiro¯, a samurai bureaucrat who had abandoned government for Confucian philosophy, set fire to his Osaka house as the signal to his followers to rise in revolt. Farmers were to seize and burn tax records, and the urban poor were to seize the property of the wealthy merchants and distribute it. It was not clear what was supposed to happen after that, but there was no doubt that the evils of Tokugawa rule were contrasted to the absolute purity of the sun goddess and her descendant, the emperor. The fires raged for two days through the merchant centers of Osaka, and the poor sacked the homes and storehouses of the wealthy until bakufu troops put down the rebellion. O<sup>¯</sup> shio had abandoned Neo-Confucian orthodoxy for the rival (and prohibited) school of Wang Yangming, which preached the unity of knowledge and action. He had come to see himself as a sage who would court death to “save the people,” the slogan on his banners. His memory, ideals, and thought survived him and moved Japanese of many sorts to direct action in later years: loyalist activists in the Meiji Restoration, samurai like General Nogi struggling against the perversion of warrior purity by selfishness, young military radicals in the years before World War II, and their successors, student radicals in the 1960s as well as the author Mishima Yukio who ended his life with a spectacular suicide in 1970. Like them, O<sup>¯</sup> shio acted from moral rather than political impulses. His illfated revolt served as the climax to the Tokugawa tradition of protest, and it foreshadowed later expressions of nihilistic violence. It therefore serves as an introduction to the forms of crisis and response to crisis in Tokugawa society. All discussions of political economy and changes in religious belief during the Tokugawa years took place against a background of steady change in authority and society. Outward forms of deference and hierarchy remained as they had been, but this often masked almost continuous change. That change also varied by place and time, for Japan was far from monolithic. Economic change around the great metropolitan areas outsped that in relatively backward provinces, but even so there were few areas in which life retained its early Tokugawa patterns in all respects. Contemporaries often record their regret at the way things were going; as Conrad Totman has put it, “eighteenth and nineteenth century rulers glorified the age of the founders, urban people recalled the wonders of pre-1657 Edo, and merchants enshrined Genroku as an era of unparalleled opulence.”<sup>1</sup> There was a gradual shift in the balance of forces between bakufu center and domain periphery, another in the balance between rulers and ruled, and still another in the balance between village leaders and villagers. Each of these had its impact on the events that accompanied the mid-nineteenth-century collapse of the bakufu, and each contributed to the dynamics of the modern Meiji state and society. ## 1. Population If economic and social hardship was often sufficient to spark protest, consideration of the root causes involved has to begin with the balance between people and land. The relation between population growth and economic development presents important problems. The underdeveloped world of the twentieth century is full of cases in which population growth consumes the resources of agricultural societies without leaving a surplus for investment, and the urban blight accompanying that population growth often seems to prevent economic development. Until recent decades scholars usually described Tokugawa Japan in comparable terms. They argued that rapid growth in the seventeenth century brought the population to a Malthusian limit, exhausting possible resources and leaving a countryside heavily taxed and incapable of further growth. Tokugawa authorities were understood to have squeezed agriculturalists to the limit of what was practicable, and farmers seemed taxed to the point that they could neither live nor die. Early-twentieth-century Japanese historians, often heavily influenced by Marxist assumptions, found convincing substantiation in the writings of contemporary observers who recorded the desperate conditions that accompanied periods when famine stalked the land. Yet this view accorded poorly with other descriptions; foreign travelers who came to Japan in the 1850s and 1860s described a smiling and apparently prosperous countryside. The Malthusian emphasis was also difficult to reconcile with the dynamic growth of the later nineteenth century. More recently demographers who work with village records and the national surveys of religious affiliation required by the shogunate come to different conclusions. They begin with the contention that the earlier picture erred in overestimating the size of Japan’s population at the time of Sekigahara; earlier studies estimated the 1600 population at twenty million. It now seems probable that some twelve million would be a more reasonable estimate. A group of demographers led by Hayami Akira go on from there to discern extremely rapid growth in the seventeenth century. Figures remain estimates, for records omit many of the elite and urban floaters, but Japan’s population seems to have tripled during the entire Tokugawa period. A major element in that growth relates to the shift from extended and patriarchal families to nuclear families among the peasantry; smaller units made for more rapid growth. The land filled out, new fields were opened, and before long even unpromising slopes were exploited for step-paddies and dry fields. Seventeenth-century daimyo encouraged such developments by offering tax advantages and, in some cases, conferring status (go¯shi, country samurai) on men for undertaking agricultural expansion. From 1720 on the central government also interested itself in such developments by ordering land surveys every six years. The eighteenth century brought a slowdown of such expansion, one that seems at first glance to justify discussions of a more or less Malthusian stagnation. Now the demographers discern important regional differences. Some areas, particularly those around Edo to the northeast, grew particularly rapidly at first and later began to exhibit a net decline; others, previously “behind,” continued to grow, although more slowly. Thus the most urbanized and economically advanced areas showed a stabilization or even a decline, while less “developed” provinces continued to grow. Later, in the nineteenth century, growth was resumed in most areas. Other scholars, notably Kozo Yamamura and Susan Hanley,<sup>2</sup> have made important contributions to our understanding of checks on population growth. At times natural disasters provided severe checks. The domain system of regional autonomy made it difficult to fight famine by importing grain from other areas. In the Kyo¯ho¯ years of 1732–1733 climatic disturbances supplemented by insect infestation destroyed almost half of the rice crop in some areas, and authorities reported many deaths and several millions struck by undernourishment. In 1783 (the Tenmei era) volcanic eruptions showered ash that destroyed productive fields and engulfed villages through entire districts, and bad weather followed to bring crop failures for almost all of the harvest in northeastern Japan; this disaster inevitably led to large-scale starvation and population decline in the areas affected. Then, in 1837 and 1838 (the Tenpo¯ era) cold weather once again led to crop losses, and in the city of Osaka epidemics carried off one-tenth and more of the population during the Tenpo¯ famine.<sup>3</sup> Nevertheless demographers contend that specific disasters of this sort (like astounding civilian casualties in modern wars) tend to be made up within a generation. On the other hand the ecological damage that followed from erosion, and the substitution of commercial crops like cotton for food grains, clearly left villagers less able to survive severe climatic setbacks. In another sense the relative stability of Japan’s population left the country fortunately situated for the demographic developments of the latter nineteenth century. China’s population very nearly doubled during the eighteenth century, but Japan’s did not. By the early years of the twentieth century Japanese publicists were worrying about overpopulation and discussing possible loci for emigration and settlement, but it had required almost a half century for things to reach that point. Recent studies also focus on means of population control that were practiced in Tokugawa years. Marriage in Japan was relatively late, and as a result women faced fewer child-bearing years. In many parts of Japan young men were sent off for out-of-season employment in urban centers, a process that continues in modern times under the classification of dekasegi (“going off to work”). Hayami argues that by the eighteenth century bakufu five-family units (the goningumi) and prohibitions on the sale and division of land were virtually dead letters with very little practical meaning for the way people actually lived.<sup>4</sup> Inheritance was, however, unequal, with the result that many younger sons and daughters were sent off into service. Early forms of abortion were common. In famine and hardship years contemporary moralists deplored the practice of infanticide, but recent scholarship challenges assertions that it was common.<sup>5</sup> Rulers, who saw the practice as an implied reflection on their morality as governors, frequently warned against it. In any case, whatever its prevalence, the practice varied by area, and within area by class and income, which established the dividing line between those who could afford to raise all their children and those who could not. One would expect infanticide (mabiki, an agricultural term used for “thinning out” seedlings to ensure better growth) would be more common among the desperately poor than among the well-off, and Thomas Smith bears this out. His study of a village gives the picture of constant movement in and out of economic categories (defined in terms of possession of land) and provides eloquent refutation of theories of “stagnation” and torpor.<sup>6</sup> ## 2. Rulers and Ruled Another aspect of structural change in the Edo period was a blurring of distinctions within the elite. In the seventeenth century the bakufu had been at pains to wall off the imperial court from contact with daimyo, and in the early years the distinction between fudai and tozama lords was also of critical importance. As years of peace followed those of war, and the ceremonies of civil life and status replaced those of violence, the court had new attractions for the heads of military houses. Marriage alliances were eagerly sought. Bakufu approval was required for them, but the central government too began to concern itself with attention to the imperial tombs. Daimyo, whether fudai or tozama, were increasingly preoccupied with the management and economic health of their domains. High bakufu appointments tended to be monopolized by a relatively small number of fudai houses, leaving other lords free to pursue their own interests and advantage. So too with alliances formed by marriage and adoption. Shogun Ienari’s progeny by his numerous concubines led him to place sons wherever he saw an opening. He himself chose as his consort a daughter of the (Satsuma) Shimazu tozama lord, a lady who was first “naturalized” by adoption into the Konoe family of court nobles. The dual court-military elites of Ieyasu’s day were beginning to merge. In the 1880s the new Meiji government made that official in creating the new class of peers, though subtle distinctions of “old” and “new” aristocrats remained and the “new,” former daimyo, peers usually had more money but less prestige. In the Tokugawa system, however, status and honor carried a high price. In the ranking of domains and their lords the koku rice assessment brought its appropriate honor and ceremonial reward. As time passed there was less and less congruence between the real, or “inside” yield of areas as reflected in koku assessments and their original, or “surface” rating. The fine distinctions of honor and hierarchy that the system required were, of course, relative. As a result the alteration of one ranking would have an immediate impact on others. Although two centuries of economic growth and agricultural expansion gave many a lord a tax base almost double that with which he was credited, formal koku rankings of domains were left much as they had been in the days of Ieyasu. In the southwestern domain of Tosa, for instance, the daimyo’s “inside” or real yield was at least one-quarter greater than the 202,600 koku with which he was credited. But since the “outside” rating was factored into the daimyo’s court rank, the size and location of his mansions in Edo, his seat when in audience in Edo castle, the size of retinue he was permitted, and his ceremonial obligations, it would have been difficult to change his ranking without changing many others. During the shifts of daimyo and domains in the seventeenth century, many houses experienced dramatic changes in their gradations of honor, but they usually did so in inheriting another house’s position or losing their own. At times a strong shogun might catapult a particular favorite over the heads of his betters, and young and ambitious daimyo or their vassal mentors sometimes lobbied for elevations in the gradation of honor. Success could be expensive, however, and conservative advisers seldom thought the game was worth the candle. What is more surprising, though, is that in most domains the koku assessments of villages tended to remain unchanged as well. Thomas Smith’s study of tax data for eleven villages found that, despite the increase in acreage under the plow and improvements in agronomy that surely brought village productivity to higher levels, village assessments showed no change at all for long periods between the years of 1700 and 1850. Furthermore, land was not surveyed systematically after 1700; by the “middle of the nineteenth century, therefore, taxes were based on assessments a century to a century and a half old.”<sup>7</sup> If this is so, then the benefits of good farming—improvements in irrigation, in seeds and fertilizers, recourse to books on agronomy that circulated widely—stayed, at least in part, in the village. There were other taxes, to be sure, levied in money, produce, and labor, and these could be extremely burdensome. Matsudaira Sadanobu, of whom more will be said below, noted that “it is difficult to recite the different types of taxes and miscellaneous exactions in existence. There is a tax on vacant lots and gardens, a tax on buildings, a tax on doors and windows, and there is even a tax on girls who have reached a certain age. Taxes are also imposed on cloth, sake, herbs, and sesame seeds.”<sup>8</sup> Nevertheless the basic produce tax, the nengu, remained at or near its original level in the cases Smith studied. It is difficult to explain this moderation and abstention on the part of samurai administrators who have so often been credited with pitiless severity. One element, though surely a minor one, may have been deference to the wisdom and rulings of the past. A more important reason is likely to have been the cost and difficulty of a large-scale regional reassessment. In the annals of peasant revolt to which we refer below, even the threat of a reassessment often brought complaints and protests. The village world, however, was largely self-regulating, administered by landholding families who often had considerable pride of name and background. They intermarried with one another in preference to forming alliances with “ordinary” peasants, and they were often permitted the dignity of (family) name and sword. They were also the ones who stood to gain, and retain, the growing surplus of their land. The ability to retain part of that surplus must have provided good incentives to increase it by diligence and planning. Good farming brought its own reward. Hayami is probably not far off the mark when he observes that although Japan did not experience an “industrial revolution” (kikai kakumei), it did produce an “industrious revolution” (kinben kakumei) that prepared those situated to profit from it admirably for a longer future. If leading peasants and village leaders stood to gain and increased their share of the pot, as did prosperous urban merchants, the same could not be said of most samurai. The lucky ones, to be sure, could afford to relieve their boredom by entering the Edo equivalent of cafe´ society. In the 1770s Edo culture developed a select circle of writers who produced a playful and satirical gesaku genre that encoded some of the changing styles and values of their day. Young samurai—those who were sufficiently attuned and could afford to—mingled with theater and merchant connoisseurs to form a brittle and witty circle of brilliant dilettantes in search of variety and pleasure. For many samurai it must have brought relief from the suffocating life of barrack and punctilio, and for merchant sons this represented freedom from diligence and the search for profit. The pen names these samurai writers used were often full of self-mockery that revealed their frustrations; “Troubles with curfew,” “Drunken indiscretion,” and, for one daimyo son, “Monkey with rusty bottom.” Equally striking was the section on sartorial advice for samurai in a handbook (“The Essence of Current Fashions”) for young men about town written in 1773 by an “undercover” samurai from the northern domain of Akita at the time it was negotiating for bakufu favor. The work is full of worldly advice on attire, with sections appropriate to each social status group. Samurai are told how their kamishimo trousers should be stiffened with whalebone, with the outermost folds stitched down. The obi sash, they are advised, should be worn on the level of the navel with the front slightly elevated. Done right, it is known as a “Bye-bye Obi” or “Cat Teaser.” “Curve your back a little to get the right effect,” goes the advice. Fashion extends to the sword; “When you are wearing kamishimo, pull the narrow sword a little forward to keep the tip pointed upward. But when you are wearing only haori, wear the sword straight down for casual chic.” Illustrations supplement the text. As for kimono, “black silk with crests. Lining in chic brown. Hem linings should show about seven bu; revealing too much is vulgar . . . Since the general principle of formal wear is elegance, stick with the classics. Don’t overdo it, though, or you’ll end up being stuffy. The trick is in balancing the classic and the contemporary . . . in the manner, so to speak, of bun and bu.”<sup>9</sup> This is tantamount to sacrilege. The long-sacred warrior values of sword and brush, bun and bu, stressed in every Code for the Military Houses since the Tokugawa founders, were now whimsically suggested as guides for proper dress for a night on the town. But those pleasures were reserved for the few who could afford them. Samurai lucky enough to have petty fiefs could try to squeeze more out of the farmers who worked their lands, but the majority had to live on fixed incomes measured in rice from the lord’s warehouse. For them good harvests that were accompanied by modest prices for rice were not good news. Urban residents, forced to purchase items of daily need, they might encourage their wives in the production of salable handicrafts, but this seldom made up for their disadvantage relative to successful tradesmen and landholding farmers. Thousands, in the words of Yamamura, “were motivated by the painful necessity of trying to live from day to day and not get further into debt . . . It is important to realize that the traditional samurai class was a heterogenous group of men whose modal income was only sufficient to classify them as poor by almost any standard applying to the ruling class of most societies.”<sup>10</sup> The problem was, however, that a bannerman had to maintain a certain standard of living appropriate to his honor. In 1855 one writer complained that Edo samurai “treat those who are fresh from the country as bumpkins, and the latter are anxious to become men of the world.” Another writer noted that it was increasingly difficult to live on the income of a bannerman. “with a stipend of 300 koku, in accordance with the law of 1633, the hatamoto must keep two samurai, one armor carrier, one spear carrier, one traveling-case carrier, two stablemen, one carrier of sandals, and two porters for military services . . . Then the living expenses of the family of four or five, including a maid servant, require an additional thirty ryo¯ . . . if a hatamoto with an annual stipend of 300 koku owes 600 ryo¯, his annual net income is reduced to an equivalent of seventeen ryo¯, since he must pay an annual interest of thirty ryo¯ for his debt.”<sup>11</sup> The Yamamura study focused on the shogun’s bannermen, the hatamoto from whom many bakufu functionaries were recruited, and provides numerous examples of their difficulties. The bannermen did what they could to reduce the number of dependents they had to support, sending younger sons off for adoption and resorting to abortion and even infanticide as their economic position relative to those they ruled declined over time. Daimyo tried to reduce their costs by “borrowing” from retainers’ stipends, and the retainers in turn tried, when possible, to borrow against future taxes from those below them. Yamamura provides the response made to a bannerman of 700 koku rating by three village leaders under his authority in the mid-1850s: 1. Because of your promise to reduce expenditures, we have, during the past years, advanced tax rice and made loans. However, we see no sign of any efforts to achieve necessary reductions in your expenditures. 2. Your brother is an immoral idler. As long as such a person is supported by your household, there is little chance of reducing expenditures. Last winter, we asked that some actions be taken against your brother. What is your plan? 3. You have more than six servants including maids and horsemen. Some should be dismissed. 4. Your representative asked us if we could assist in negotiating a further loan. Even if a low interest loan were to be made to you, it would be of little use as long as you have your useless brother. The temple from which you hope to borrow does not know that you already have 200 ryo¯ in debt, but you know that you already have a large debt. 5. What is the purpose of your debt? As far as we can determine, you are sufficiently provided for; and 6. To keep your brother is uneconomical. If no action is taken, we intend to resign our post as village leaders.<sup>12</sup> Not long before this, the bakufu itself discovered that its command relationship with even fudai daimyo had changed. As mentioned earlier, in 1840 the lord of Sho¯nai, on the Japan Sea coast, was ordered to change his seat for another half its size to make room for the son of one of the shogun’s favorite consorts. The Sho¯nai retainers, expecting to have to move with their lord, started collecting funds from major merchants and landowners. They, in turn, were disturbed because the daimyo family to which the shogun’s son had been assigned had earned an unpleasant reputation for extravagance—perhaps understandably, since it had been forced to move eleven times in two centuries. Meanwhile the shogun, Ienari, died, but bakufu officials, their prestige at stake, let the order stand. Leading commoners went into action. Petitioners singing their lord’s praises were sent to Edo, only to be rejected. Then groups got up their courage to go to Edo to press petitions on high officials. The punishment they received was unexpectedly light and encouraged others to try. Petitioners were sent to neighboring daimyo to ask their help; still other groups headed for shrines and temples to seek divine assistance. Conveniently, the young lord who had been designated beneficiary of the switch died. At this point twenty-three powerful tozama daimyo who shared audience privileges in one of the Edo castle galleries intervened by sending a joint query to ask what was going on. “As we have had no notification from [the bakufu] and have not been given any information,” they asked, “we humbly offer this communication . . . since Sakai [Tadakata] Saemon-no-jo¯ [the daimyo slated to be moved] comes from a line of hereditary officials, why has he now been ordered to move and take over Nagaoka Castle? We hereby inform you that we wish to be told.”<sup>13</sup> The order was canceled. One can imagine how preposterous this upshot would have seemed to the shogun Iemitsu, a century earlier. The daimyo interference, the protests of leading commoners, the preference of local merchants for the continuation of familiar problems rather than risking new overlords: all signified corrosive weakness at the center and dramatic changes in authority relationships. ## 3. Popular Protest If authorities failed to extract most of the surplus from the countryside it was not for lack of trying. Despite their best efforts, however, attempts to do so were thwarted more often than they were successful. A great deal of writing about Japan emphasizes a “consensus” model that would lead one to anticipate a smoothly functioning social organism, one lubricated by deference on the one side and paternalism on the other. The facts do not bear this out. Dispute was endemic throughout the country in the Tokugawa period. A modern scholar, Aoki Ko¯ji, has tabulated a total of 7,664 instances of social conflict and political protest between 1590 and 1877, and more recently James White, eliminating 333 that were wholly within-channels petitions, has classified the remaining 7,331 to see what conclusions can be drawn.<sup>14</sup> In a brief comparison he finds Japan slightly less contentious than Europe with respect to peasant, manorial, and other popular protests in selected periods, but probably more contentious than China was during the Ming (1368–1644) era.<sup>15</sup> It has to be stressed that the vast majority of Tokugawa protests were nonviolent. They had little “revolutionary” content, and they were not designed to secure basic changes in the way Japan was governed or the way Japanese society was structured. There was little talk of “rights” that inhere in a “just” society that were being violated by officials. But there was, nonetheless, a broader and less legalistic concept of “justice” and reciprocity.<sup>16</sup> Cooperative and deferential conduct deserved “compassionate” regard from those above. Most disputes were brought on by the efforts of those in authority to extract more than they were getting from those they governed—by a proposed reevaluation, by the imposition of new monopoly controls in marketing local products, or by failure to check on an unusually abusive or capricious official. Disputes could focus on unfairness shown by village authorities (who allocated, after all, the basic land tax), or they could represent a communal protest against excessive demands for additional taxes or corve´e labor. “Assisting” villages along the major highways could resent demands for men and horses to accommodate unusually heavy traffic. Village headmen were responsible for remonstrating with higher offices as representatives of their people, and failure to do so could earn them the wrath of their constituents. Theirs was not an easy role. They were the links between villagers and samurai officials, and they frequently faced the uneasy choice between “representing” their villagers—a role likely to bring on punishment—or becoming themselves the focus of popular anger, and risking destruction of their property by the crowd. Still other disputes could be between villages; there could be arguments about village boundaries and about villagers’ rights of access to woodland for compost for fields and building materials. In extreme cases, disputes might become regional and reflect shared indignation of villagers along highways or, as the period went along, economic zones. In such cases outsiders, little-known individuals, could come to rally enthusiasm and discontent. Such “entrepreneurial leaders,” as White calls them, might help create or intensify an ethos of rebellion. The Tokugawa village was relatively autonomous, and as long as taxes were forthcoming, protests few, and order maintained, the authorities left its elders and headmen to run things their way. Preventive coercion was difficult to exercise. On the other hand, in those instances in which large-scale protests were being mounted the first concern of the authorities was getting the farmers to go back to work. The typical pattern of response began with conciliation; exactions would, authorities promised, be studied, and rethought. Frequently they were even reversed. Then, once order had been restored and there was time to investigate, the allocation of blame was possible. Those judged to have been in the lead of the protests would be punished harshly. The village headman faced a dilemma that had no easy solution. If he resisted the crowd he was likely to lose his reputation and the honor essential to successful implementation of his role, and if he cooperated and “led” the crowd he was likely to lose his head. For honorable men desperate conditions frequently made the latter choice the preferable one. It could also bring posthumous renown. Sacrificial figures sometimes became the subjects of tales of heroism and even deification as a merciful and self-sacrificing daimyo¯jin, commemorated by a local shrine. Peasant narratives praising such men provided the text for memory of social wrongs and individual self-sacrifice.<sup>17</sup> The classic case is that of So¯goro¯, a headman who tried to intercede with his lord for his oppressed villagers. When this failed he is said to have tried to intercept a shogunal procession in Edo with a petition, and for that presumption he was crucified together with his wife and children. So¯goro¯ was honored with a shrine at the present town of Sakura, the site of the National Museum of History. His story became the stuff of legend and was performed on the popular stage. It also provided inspiration for modern-day farmers who stoutly resisted the inclusion of their fields in the nearby Narita International Airport. In this manner gimin, “virtuous men,” became associated with a tradition of protest, punishment, and ultimate triumph in peasant memory.<sup>18</sup> As traced by White, the rhythm of protest movements provides an important insight into the health of the Tokugawa political economy. In early Tokugawa years protests were importantly affected by the sweeping changes that accompanied the urbanization of the samurai, disarmament of the countryside, and retainers’ upheaval related to daimyo transfer. Some early protests were led by farmer-soldiers, but shifts in authority were not easy for farmers who had to pay the price. On occasion large bodies of peasants would simply defect and move across the border of the neighboring domain and negotiate from there. When the population was still low daimyo were helpless without agriculturalists, and many lords, recently moved to larger jurisdictions, were themselves understaffed and unable to apply coercion. Early-seventeenthcentury codes often showed their predicament. In Tosa a code noted that harboring a runaway “probably deserves the death penalty, but if we become too severe the result would only be to make them flee to the next province . . . the main thing is to keep them from leaving the province.”<sup>19</sup> When they did leave the domain peasants sometimes applied for residence, as though for sanctuary; more often the “host” daimyo, who could be expected to side with his peers, would send a vassal to broker some kind of settlement. Then, once the runaways returned, it would be possible to exact vengeance on the presumed ringleaders. After the daimyo domains were settled and adequately staffed there was less likelihood of a large group’s absconding, but instances can still be found in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In Tosa in the 1780s, rural papermakers struggled against the fixed price at which the domain forced them to sell their product to chartered guilds. Over five hundred villagers moved across the mountainous border to Matsuyama. Their initial wish was to stay there, but when that desire was denied they negotiated their return with Tosa authorities. Matsuyama granted them sanctuary during the negotiations, and a temple served as intermediary. The Tosa administration gave way on seventeen complaints, after which the protesters moved back for a “final” agreement. That was followed by the execution of three peasant leaders. A few years later the paper monopoly was reinstated.<sup>20</sup> Again, in 1853 several thousand peasants in the northern domain of Nambu decamped to neighboring Sendai. They protested onerous corve´e for public works, being forced to support too many officials, and having to pay excessive supplementary taxes. As usual, they demanded amnesty for the protesters. After the domain gave way on the issues under contention they returned to their villages. The domain then hunted down the leader, a headman named Miura Meisuke, and executed him.<sup>21</sup> There were also disputes within village communities, usually against village authorities for unfair allocation of labor and taxes, arrogance, and dishonesty. There were disputes between communities, about rights to irrigation water, forest products, and borders. Undoubtedly, though, most protests concerned taxes; there were appeals against existing taxes, against additional taxes, and against planned reassessments. The reassessment process was almost sure to arouse contention, both for its probable results and for the cost to villagers who had to house and entertain the official parties making the reassessment. Again, a new and unknown lord could inspire fears of change for the worse. So could new samurai officials at the county office, the point at which farm life encountered officialdom. Collectively these protests are termed ikki. The word is sometimes used to signify rebellion, but it would be more accurate to say it constituted an agreement to seek redress. White defines the term as a “spontaneous, specialpurpose organization created contractually among (or between) either elites or people designed for the pursuit of goals impossible to achieve through ordinary channels or by individual striving.”<sup>22</sup> Ikki represented explicit compacts and oaths, based on a relatively egalitarian principle in which those subscribing—something usually done by signing names in a circular (“umbrella”) pattern—shared responsibility equally.<sup>23</sup> Some idea of proportional frequency can be gained by one classification of 2,051 disputes: categories of ikki included 552 osso, in which complaints were addressed to higher officials, typically by village leaders who could get no satisfaction from those immediately responsible (White characterizes these as “end runs”); 783 go¯so, in which villagers presented complaints without going through their village heads; 230 cases of flight; 78 ho¯ki, or protests that led to violence; and 408 urban uchikowashi, or “smashings.” It goes without saying that all of these were illegal. Indeed, Tokugawa edicts warned against unauthorized gatherings of any sort; they were termed to¯to¯, or rebellious group. (This was not without its problems for modern political parties (to¯); in the nineteenth century members were careful to describe their organizations as “public” parties, or ko¯to¯). White’s figures show that, from the first quarter of the eighteenth century to the end of the Tokugawa era, contention gradually increased in frequency and magnitude. In the mid-eighteenth century bakufu officials responded to this with warnings to all daimyo that they were to cooperate if necessary to suppress revolts. By then, clearly, the population had increased dramatically, agriculture had reached some sort of limit of productivity in central Japan, and urban developments made integrated economic zones of what had been separate localities. The old rules against daimyo cooperation had to be sacrificed in the face of this greater danger from ordinary Japanese. Each period of natural disaster, of crop failure and famine, punctuated this steady rise of contention with spectacular increases: the 1780s, 1830s, and 1860s produced waves of ikki. Within this pattern, however, one looks in vain for truly “revolutionary” purpose. There was little real thought of devising a different social order. Two exceptions are sometimes posed. In the last few decades of Tokugawa rule “world renewal” (yonaoshi), vaguely millenarian, movements swept major urban areas. But their net total was as often ludicrous and carnival as it was purposeful. On such occasions rumors flew that divine signs had been seen to fall mysteriously, usually on the homes of the wealthy. This would spark rejoicing, dancing, and celebration. The wealthy so favored by the gods usually found it prudent to share their goods, particularly drink, with the throng; the resultant enthusiasm could sweep an entire region. Yet the “world”—yo—of those who rejoiced was more a cosmos than a society, and most participants seem to have assumed the imminence of a more just and moral society than the one they knew. A better case for revolt can be made for the intended rising of O<sup>¯</sup> shio Heihachiro¯, the samurai official whose abortive 1837 rising in Osaka opened this chapter. His was a special case, however, and it will receive more attention below. Even he achieved little more than a conflagration that destroyed much of a city that was central to the national economy and distribution system. Cumulatively, suppression worked poorly. Popular narratives of insurrections indicate a massive incompetence and often pusillanimity on the part of samurai officials. These accounts are often based on fact. At Ueda in 1761, for instance, the samurai officials retreated behind their defenses and communicated with the crowd by dangling messages from poles rather than risk a confrontation that might turn violent. Elsewhere authorities might show sporadic vengeful brutality in the suppression of a particular protest, but the coercion was seldom consistent or sustained. The parcelized sovereignty of the bakuhan structure also made possible gross discrepancies in tax burdens between even nearby domains. As a result sources of dissatisfaction rose as respect for samurai declined. In any case, bakufu and domain officials were aware of the tide of protest, worried about it, and looked for solutions that would solidify their control. ## 4. Bakufu Responses The contrast between the urban opulence of the Genroku and later eras and the rural hardship punctuated by protest, and between the comfort of successful merchants and the discomfort of indigent samurai, left few observers in doubt that something was out of balance. For the samurai well-being depended on getting a good price for the income they received in rice. Crop failure brought high prices, but also made it difficult to collect taxes, while abundant harvests drove prices down. Yamamura has argued that during the first century or more land was relatively more valuable than labor; reclamation and paddy construction accompanied the rise in population. Then, as commercialization brought new markets for indigo, oils, sesame, and other products, labor rose in value relative to land. Small landowners began to lose land to large, prosperous farmers (go¯no¯) and became tenants, wage earners, or joined the urban poor. Commercial agriculture brought with it expensive fertilizers. An entire industry, financed from Osaka, developed ground fish from the far north in Hokkaido for the fields of central Japan.<sup>24</sup> The expansion of cotton, tobacco, and textile production increased the possibilities for byemployment. Writers now began to complain about arable land lying unused, and about insubordinate and presumptuous landless farmers. In turn the poor grumbled about the new agricultural elite. These changes came at different rates of speed in different areas, of course, and benefits were unequally shared. Japan’s rulers and those who advised them put the well-being of the samurai first, but few of them were confident they knew how to further that. Japanese historians distinguish three periods of shogunal rule as “reforms,” and then refer to the Meiji “restoration” of 1868. In many respects, however, it would be more meaningful to refer to the “reforms” as attempted “restorations,” since each of them tried to bring about a return to the remembered fiscal and administrative health and vigor of the seventeenth century. The Meiji changes, on the other hand, better deserve the term “revolution,” for they brought permanent change to Japan’s institutional life. Not one of the “reforms” succeeded in its goals, but each added institutional innovations in its attempts to deal with the increasingly complex problems of Japanese society. ## kyo¯ho¯ The rule of the eighth shogun, Yoshimune (1716–1745), has become known for the reforms of his “Kyo¯ho¯” era. By the time Yoshimune came to power the direct shogunal line had run out, and his position as Ieyasu’s great-great grandson and the last surviving grandson of Iemitsu won him the succession. What mattered, however, was the fact that the new shogun was already mature and experienced as the daimyo of Kii (Wakayama), one of the “three great” cadet houses. Time and again the adoption of a vigorous “outsider” into ruling lines, whether shogunal or daimyo, made for vigor greater than that shown by pampered favorites who had known only the bloodless ceremonies of the sheltered elite in youth. Yoshimune provides a case in point, for he did what he could to breathe new life into the institutions of samurai society. We have already noted the vigor with which he sponsored Chinese and Dutch learning. Bakufu administration reflected the hands-on direction of a leader who knew his mind. Although he owed his appointment to the decision of the ro¯ju¯, Yoshimune allowed that institution to atrophy through attrition.<sup>25</sup> He instituted a system of office salary so that able men whose income level was too low to qualify them for office could serve. He also developed an inspection or intelligence agency to inform him of the activities of the daimyo. In an effort to improve communication, he set up a “petition box” (meyasubako) in 1721 to encourage suggestions and complaints, a device that was soon adopted by many of the daimyo.<sup>26</sup> In an effort to regularize administration and make it more efficient, the shogun paid particular attention to administrative and law codes. In 1742 the government worked out a comprehensive code of procedure and precedents that became the basis for all subsequent jurisprudence. This was not made public, but it remained the preserve of officialdom. Provisions limiting the use of torture in interrogation and exempting relatives of those found guilty from punishment represented steps toward a more rational legal system. At the same time Yoshimune’s bakufu had no intention of being deflected from its work by commoner squabbles; the government washed its hands of commercial suits and ordered complainants to work things out for themselves.<sup>27</sup> Commoners were expected to keep their place. Yoshimune ordered the diffusion of precepts used in China through commoner schools (terakoya) that were beginning to dot the land, and children were coached in the importance of Confucian familial relations. Useful plants and methods were imported from China, and a number of specialists came to teach as well. In 1721 an edict permitted the import of Chinese translations of Western books. Confucian scholars like Ogyu¯ Sorai were put to work preparing memoranda on political economy. In all this, the watchword was practicality. Tsuji Tatsuya goes so far as to suggest that Yoshimune’s rule helped to change the direction of Japanese thought from speculative philosophy toward areas of natural science, classical study, and textual analysis, a “shift that helped clear the way for the intellectual revolution of the eighteenth century.”<sup>28</sup> Yoshimune also encouraged the establishment of the Kaitokudo¯, a merchant academy, in Osaka. Its scholars stood out for the practicality and rationality with which they approached problems of the day. One outstanding figure, who wrote under the name Yamagata Banto¯, was in his business incarnation the commercial agent for the lord of Sendai and thus deeply experienced in the complexities of Osaka trade and finance.<sup>29</sup> The economic problems Yoshimune’s administration faced were complicated by a crop failure in 1732. The next year this was followed by the first urban riots Edo had known. In the years that followed the bakufu’s determination to get more out of the countryside even led to a once-only levy on all the daimyo. For commoners, tax assessments were changed from an annual inspection of the crop to a levy based on average yields over a period of years in the hope of providing a better basis for planning. While this avoided the expenses involved in annual surveys, it also left farmers helpless in years of natural disasters. In 1721 Yoshimune banned all presentation of petitions and took steps to deter agriculturalists from mass flight, thereby cutting commoners off from the few measures of recourse they had known. Draconian severity on the part of tax collectors produced bumper tax yields for a time, but the result was a rise in Osaka warehouse inventories and the decline in price that resulted damaged samurai interests. In addition attempts to produce a higherquality currency by recoinage and to ban the issuance of paper money within domains meant that there was less coinage in circulation, further lowering the price of rice. In trying to control this process the bakufu ordered money changers to organize themselves within licensed guilds, and in 1721 it extended this policy by requiring the formation of guilds for ninety-six categories of merchants. The Kyo¯ho¯ reforms, in short, reflected the changes that had come over Japan’s political economy with the rise of commercialism. Samurai administrators had no sure recourse for dealing with this. The measures attempted indicated a new solidarity between daimyo and bakufu; at one point the bakufu even borrowed money from the Kaga domain. Gradually the old problems of security against daimyo disloyalty were beginning to seem moot; the desire for frugality led Yoshimune to substitute a screen of evergreens for what had been a formidable, but expensive, wall around the great shogunal castle in Edo. It was gradually becoming more important to cooperate with daimyo against commoner opposition to excessive levies. Toward the end of his reign, Yoshimune seemed to retreat from some of his measures. The bakufu canceled its prohibition of paper money in domains, and it vacillated in its policies on merchant guilds as well. In 1736 the bakufu gave up on the sound coinage it had worked so hard to strengthen by lessening the proportion of precious metal in coins. Gold and silver mines had been exhausted. No further gold coins were minted until 1818, and silver coins were minted again only in 1820. New copper mines, however, were coming on stream, and in a period of less than a decade the bakufu minted more than half the copper coins issued during the entire Tokugawa period. The Kyo¯ho¯ “reforms” did, however, result in a stronger administrative structure as the bakufu tried to influence and regulate. Yoshimune’s measures showed that bakufu officials had come to realize that changes in administrative procedures were necessary to deal with economic changes that had taken place, and in that sense his rule stands out as one of vigor and innovation. Unfortunately Japan’s problems had grown beyond the capacity of the regime to deal with them by administrative measures, and deep-seated contradictions remained to frustrate bakufu reformers. For a time the bakufu managed to extract unprecedented amounts of rice in tribute from its domains, but those measures fell far short of the institutional changes that would have been required to bring a real solution. Ogyu¯ Sorai advised Yoshimune that daimyo should be released from the “hotel existence” which found them at the mercy of the urban, commercial economy, but it was no longer possible to re-create the conditions of an earlier day. ## tenmei Tokugawa policies were characterized by broad swings between austerity and consumption. Yoshimune’s Kyo¯ho¯ measures were followed, a few decades later, by a new wave of extravagance in the Tenmei (1781–1789) era. It is not surprising that when this in turn was followed by one of the most severe famines of Tokugawa times, there was a new interval of administrative and policy change. The chief policymaker was now Tanuma Okitsugu, a shogunal favorite whose meteoric rise from page to grand chamberlain and member of the ro¯ju¯ earned him the envy and dislike of bakufu traditionalists. Tanuma had his son appointed a member of the Junior Council, and built up a faction of officials within the finance office that gave him leverage over every request. He himself became the center for favoritism. There was a good deal of gift giving built into the administrative system, but Tanuma seems to have carried this to new heights. He undoubtedly deserved the charges of corruption that were directed against him, but it is also true that any attempt like his to increase shogunal power at the expense of that of traditionalist fudai, particularly by a relative parvenu, would have stirred opposition and would have required extraordinary measures. To some degree the tug of war between bakufu and daimyo, center and periphery, had become a zero-sum game in which one side could gain only at the expense of the other. Daimyo, especially the lords of major, integrated domains, responded to financial pressure by developing mercantilist measures for “national” (that is, provincial) profit, kokueki, by maximizing exports to central (that is, shogunal) cities. The bakufu, in contrast, was trapped by its responsibility for the national markets that surrounded the great cities, but the points of origin of such products were beyond its reach. The bakufu, with its consumption centers, relied upon these “sending” areas, but they were able to concentrate on exports and restrict imports in the interest of their domain economy. A century and more of economic as well as political autonomy had accustomed administrators and merchants to think of the domain as countries, kuni, as opposed to the larger “realm” of Japan.<sup>30</sup> In trying to resolve this problem Tanuma was not afraid of innovation. Earlier reforms had focused on the allocation of existing resources, which were regarded as fixed, but he envisaged increasing them through policies of economic growth. He took steps to increase foreign trade, and went so far as set quotas for production for Akita copper mines with the purpose of channeling their product into the Nagasaki trade, even though the domestic market brought higher prices.<sup>31</sup> Tanuma’s officials went on to grant monopoly patents, usually for a fee, for iron, brass, sulphur, camphor, cinnabar, ginseng, lamp oil, and other products, actions which placed the bakufu in direct opposition to daimyo interests.<sup>32</sup> He also invested major resources in a massive public works drainage program designed to increase agricultural acreage. When this failed, and when it was followed by crop failures that led to serious famine, and as drought was followed by floods, the country was swept by protests and peasant rebellions and urban riots so serious that Edo was practically without a government for three days in 1787. Traditionalists had ready explanations for this sequence; the “voice of Heaven” had been followed by the “voice of the people.”<sup>33</sup> Tanuma’s influence did not long outlast his years in office. The death of the shogun who had been his patron and the assassination of his son brought a swift fall in his status, and he ended his days in disgrace. The Tanuma years brought a new flowering of urban and middle-class culture. They witnessed the medical experimentation under the influence of Dutch sources that has been described. Urbanized samurai and affluent commoners shared in the new wave of playful, satirical, and cynical writing of gesaku. This was accompanied by a great flowering of the multicolored (nishiki-e) wood-block prints that conveyed the delights of travel, theater, and licensed quarter to townsmen who could afford them. Inevitably, traditionalists also associated this cultural flowering with the political corruption and moral shortcomings they ascribed to those in power, and a new wave of austerity was in prospect. ## kansei The “Kansei” (1789–1801) reforms were under the direction of Matsudaira Sadanobu (1758–1829), a grandson of Yoshimune who had been daimyo of a domain in northern Japan before being appointed to his bakufu post by the young shogun Ienari. Ienari, who was born in 1773, served as shogun from 1787 to 1837, and remained the final authority until his death in 1841. His fiftyyear incumbency was the longest of the Tokugawa shoguns. It was a half century that marked a further blurring of lines within the ruling elite, for Ienari’s consort was the daughter of a great tozama daimyo; to become eligible she was first adopted into the Konoe family of aristocrats at the imperial court. Ienari cultivated that court aggressively. He had himself appointed to a series of honorific posts that ended with his designation as minister of state (dajo¯ daijin). He accumulated a large harem that produced fifty-five children, and these became his pawns in marriage politics with daimyo from all parts of the country, and that in turn contributed to the development of a cosmopolitan and largely undifferentiated aristocracy. The neat designations of an earlier era no longer had much meaning. Matsudaira Sadanobu’s period of influence was actually short, for he fell out with his strong-willed master and resigned after a little more than four years.<sup>34</sup> He was determined that relations between the Edo and the Kyoto courts be based on the primacy of Edo and that appropriate terminology be maintained. In a famous dispute with Kyoto the emperor, who had been adopted, tried to give his natural father the status of ex-emperor—but Sadanobu had his way and put a stop to it. Unfortunately in the next dispute he ran afoul of his shogun, for Ienari too had been adopted from a cadet house and decided to try to get his natural father the protocol due a retired shogun. Sadanobu succeeded in blocking this too, but the standoff that resulted led to his resignation. Sadanobu was at the helm of shogunal policy for only a few years, but steps he took proved so lasting and important that they can be seen as pivotal for early-nineteenth-century Tokugawa administration. He began with measures to curb the corruption and ostentation of the Tanuma years. Frugality was once again the order of the day. A vigorous purge replaced many officials. District administrators were instructed to prepare injunctions to villages stressing the importance of diligence, self-denial, and filial piety. Publishers once again had to look out for censors, on pain of confiscation of their equipment. Several authors of material judged indecent found themselves in stocks and manacles. All reformers were sticklers for propriety in such matters, however, and these concerns were not in any sense new. Sadanobu’s efforts to strengthen the economic position of Edo in the national economy are more interesting. The city that had begun as a consumer of products from the western cities of Osaka and Kyoto had now become the center of economic life in eastern Japan. The currency was revalued to diminish the price advantage enjoyed by Osaka, where the economy was based on silver. Sadanobu wanted to make the area around Edo more self-sufficient and lower its imports from western Japan. In a sense, he was adapting the mercantilist policies developed by major domains to bakufu purposes. Local sources for sake, cotton, oil, and paper, commodities traditionally imported from western Japan, were developed. To reduce needs for food Sadanobu ordered recent migrants to return to their villages. The city itself became the focus of administrative reforms. Sadanobu established a Town Office to oversee social services and surveillance. He set aside a portion of land taxes for the construction of granaries as a device to regulate prices. He ordered officials to direct more attention to systematic record keeping, fire control, and roads and bridges. Urban problems were now beginning to receive the attention they required. In struggling to deal with the effects of urban commercialism Sadanobu resorted to rather crude measures. The bakufu announced that loans to samurai were canceled, and rates for house rentals were to be controlled. This was not very effective, for if samurai had become dependent on merchants it did not really help them to try to punish the merchants. Sadanobu, a student of Confucianism, was particularly intent on ways to tidy up the educational and intellectual scene. Here he had more success. The “Kansei prohibition” of dissident teachings proclaimed for the first time that Chu Hsi Confucianism was the orthodox teaching. Earlier shoguns had been relatively indifferent to ideological distinctions between schools, and Sadanobu himself had written that for practical administrators what mattered was the way one lived and not one’s philosophical preferences. Once in power, however, he was concerned with order and convinced that the growth of competing philosophical schools created confusion. From this came the proscription of heterodoxy (igaku no kin) of 1790. “Novel doctrines” of recent times, he decreed, threatened the order of the realm; there was to be a “return” to a central doctrine. This campaign began with appointments to the bakufu’s central academy. Daimyo and domain schools, which were experiencing their most rapid period of growth, soon followed the shogunal pattern. By the midnineteenth century the writings of Ogyu¯ Sorai had come to be considered almost subversive reading in the bakufu’s Sho¯heiko¯ academy. Not that other schools of thought and interpretation died out. Many teachers maintained a compartmentalization between what they could teach and what they thought. In addition nativist teachings continued to grow in popularity and volume, and kokugaku (National Learning) was becoming diffused throughout much of rural Japan. Dutch studies grew apace; Sadanobu sponsored them and saw to it that the bakufu itself began to collect Western books. He also tried to contain them and restrict such learning to official channels. “The barbarian nations are skilled in the sciences,” he wrote, “and considerable profit may be derived from their works of astronomy and geography, as well as from their military weapons and their methods of internal and external medicine. However, their books may serve to encourage idle curiosity or may express harmful ideas.”<sup>35</sup> The solution was for the government to collect useful works at the point of entry at Nagasaki and make sure that they did not fall into unauthorized hands. Sadanobu also reduced the volume of foreign trade that was permitted, and he lengthened the period between Dutch visits to Edo. Many of these steps were extensions of earlier moves, though they were also reversals of the policies of Tanuma. In many respects the Kansei years stand as a symbol of an impressive increase in education and the importance placed on it in Japan. Sadanobu’s concern with orthodoxy was related to his desire for a more educated and responsible officialdom. He recruited scholars from many areas for the bakufu’s Sho¯heiko¯ academy. Daimyo too paid more attention to education in their domains. Throughout Japan the steady increase in the number of schools showed that new expectations and requirements were at hand. The bakufu, meanwhile, had now taken a stand on its “tradition” and tried to define it. Henceforth the term “as in earlier years,” ju¯rai no gotoku, was applied in areas as different as foreign trade and philosophical inquiry to discourage experiment and innovation, and it came to stand as a powerful and negative warning. In retrospect it can be seen that the regime had become more rigid, less resilient, and less adventurous. ## kasei: bunka (1804–1818) and bunsei (1818–1830) The first three decades of the nineteenth century, sometimes referred to as the Kasei eras, encompassing Bunka (1804–1818) and Bunsei (1818–1830), are often described as something of an Indian summer for Tokugawa rule. There were no crop failures. Peasant protests took place, but they were not of the scale or intensity of late-eighteenth-century uprisings. School building continued to expand; there was now truly large-scale development of private academies and commoner schools. The “Indian summer” extended to include harvest time for many of the trends that have been described, and it brought them into focus. At the highest level of society the fixation on loyalty that had made daimyo categories so important in the seventeenth century had given way to a much more undifferentiated aristocratic class that had never known war and was deeply rooted in the urban culture to which bakufu policies had directed it. At lower levels, and particularly in urban areas, there was less differentiation between the more affluent commoners and most sectors of the ruling samurai class. This was partly the result of increasing differentiation within the previously monochromatic village. Commercialization and developments in agronomy had brought with them an increasingly visible village elite whose whiteplastered storehouses, heavily timbered residences, and carefully tended evergreens and gardens left little doubt of economic well-being. Many village disputes originated in resentment against the favored status of the wealthy who dominated village affairs, and had as goals alternation of or election to the office of village headman. Some aspirations of the commoner elite overlapped with the needs of indigent samurai. Purchase of samurai commissions became common. In Morioka, in northern Japan, there was even a price list for status. Full samurai standing required 620 ryo¯, and 50 ryo¯ got the purchaser the privilege of wearing a sword. But at the same time youth organizations (wakamono gumi) were resentful of such pretensions. They corralled their members by ritual and coercion to maintain a different hierarchy. In 1827 the bakufu attempted to ban such organizations, but its success was limited. Nevertheless the reasons cited in the ordinance are revealing: edicts warned against harassing prosperous villagers and suggested that the motive was envy of their wealth; they warned against organizing an end to village litigation, and urged more respect and gratitude for “the benevolence of the shogun.” 36 Most injunctions of this sort fell on deaf ears. Japan’s feudal administrators were operating in a system of parcelized sovereignty, and they were unable to affect the root causes or areas of trends that influenced the areas they governed. The bakufu could devise policies that would be helpful to its urban centers, but vassals and daimyo who controlled the hinterland often had different ideas. Lords of great domains like Tosa and Cho¯shu¯ had their own problems extracting exportable goods from their villages and limiting imports from “abroad,” but they could at least control their borders. The bakufu could even run into trouble within areas under its own jurisdiction. In the early nineteenth century the metropolitan hinterlands were well on their way to developing rural industrial and finishing techniques that were beyond the control of the bakufu-licensed guilds in the big cities. In the 1820s villages in the plains around Osaka became restive when bakufu orders forbade them from pressing their own oil from rape seeds and ordered them to sell to and buy from metropolitan processors instead. Petitions from over a thousand villages repeatedly asked for a free market, and the bakufu gradually loosened its controls to avoid violence. As the economic role previously restricted to official urban guilds became shared with rural enterprises, the importance of the metropolis diminished somewhat, but only because it had become an engine of growth in surrounding areas. By 1800 Japan had five of the world’s cities with over 100,000 inhabitants, three of the world’s twenty cities with more than 300,000 inhabitants, and probably, in Edo, the world’s most populous city, one with more than one million inhabitants.<sup>37</sup> As northern Japan developed, Edo’s importance as a transportation and market center grew. Travel and pilgrimage continued to develop, and with this came even closer integration with other metropolitan areas. From its early days the bakufu had designed its system of highways and post stations to provide speedy and reliable communications. The standard time for official runners to reach Edo from Osaka, a distance of 500 kilometers, was six days. Then private operators in Edo and Kyoto began to supplement and compete with the official network. With improvements in security and economic development private operators in Edo and Kyoto provided express messenger service, shortening the time to five, four, and then three and a half days. Skilled operators managed to infiltrate the official communications network and increase its productivity by purchasing the right to acquire, affix, and display official insignia for commercial shipments. By the early nineteenth century express communication service between Kyoto and Edo broke the two-day barrier. Additional private express and freight shipping operators also spread their networks into the rural sending areas that surrounded the major cities. Private as well as official travel grew proportionately.<sup>38</sup> With additional advances in literacy, the role of publishers also grew. Guidebooks held out the pleasures of distant places for readers and told of some three hundred temples in Kyoto. Other, more worldly booklets told of the joys that awaited travelers to the restaurants, local products, and brothels of Osaka. Santo¯ Kyo¯den and Takizawa Bakin, two leading authors of popular fiction, had readers waiting anxiously for publication of the next section of their works. Bakin, in fact, used his profits to secure samurai status, something his family had once enjoyed, for his grandson. Books were relatively cheap, but the cost was brought even lower by the spread of book-lending shops. Edo had eight hundred of such lending libraries, and in all parts of the land circuit lenders traveled to even distant villages with packs of printed material on their backs. One would expect social commentators to note, and usually deplore, such shifts, and so they did. In 1816 an otherwise unknown writer, perhaps a ro¯nin, used the pen name Buyo¯ Inshi to produce a long jeremiad that provides a useful summary of the changes we have mentioned. Daimyo, he wrote, were infatuated with the splendor of their Edo mansions, and once frugal samurai were living lives of idle luxury like that of the Kyoto aristocrats. Those who competed in this desperate race for consumption frequently stooped to the adoption of merchant sons and to renting out space to commoners in their Edo homes; they sold their valuables and nevertheless incurred staggering debts at ominous rates of interest. Their military skills were long forgotten, and they performed almost no soldierly service. Conditions in the countryside were equally deplorable. The poor were poorer, the rich were putting on airs. Their wealth made it possible to bribe officials, avoid taxes, and take even minor personal matters to court. Happiness for the few had come at the cost of misery for the many. Things were worst near the great cities. Prosperous farmers in the vicinity of Edo, he wrote, had no hesitation in heading for the courts, and they were not in the slightest fear of the magistrates who presided there. The peaceful, relatively prosperous years of Bunka and Bunsei, in short, were not without their Cassandras.<sup>39</sup> ## tenpo¯ In 1833 a new series of natural disasters seemed to prove that these warnings had been correct; Japan was once again in crisis. Reform attempts revealed deep cleavages between bakufu and even fudai daimyo, between urban residents and inefficient administrators, and within the central bureaucracy itself. The reforms of the Tenpo¯ (1830–1844) era clearly failed to achieve their purpose, and the era itself is frequently described as the point at which the end of the bakufu began to be in sight. Harold Bolitho has written that “despite its auspicious opening, its reforms, and its cultural achievements, the Tempo¯ era was to prove calamitous for both the common people of Japan and those who ruled over them . . . for damage inflicted on Tokugawa Japan’s system of government, the Tempo¯ era had no peer.”<sup>40</sup> That damage centered first of all on public order and satisfaction with government. The bakufu cannot be blamed for all of this, for the crop failures that began in 1833 and reached a height in 1836–1837 were caused by climate, though it is true that the bakuhan system made it difficult to move grain from one area to another. By 1836, however, years of unnaturally cold weather that destroyed the delicate balance of warmth and water needed to produce a rice crop had spread the damage from northeastern Japan, where it began, to central and western Japan as well. Famine was widespread. In Mito officials removed corpses from the roads so that the daimyo, Tokugawa Nariaki, would not have to see them on his trips to Edo. In the cities the price of rice reached levels it had never known before. These hardships produced waves of popular protest. The yearly average was even higher than it had been in the 1780s, which marked the previous peak. The most careful tabulation registers 465 “disputes,” 445 uprisings, and 101 urban riots for the Tenpo¯ years. The peak of violence coincided with the peak of crop failures in 1836. The riots and insurrections were large-scale; they took place in many areas, and involved more people than had ever been the case before. Bad weather, hunger, and anger knew no political boundaries; entire economic districts and communication networks rose in protest. It was in this context that the Osaka revolt planned by O<sup>¯</sup> shio Heihachiro¯ took place. O<sup>¯</sup> shio was a moral, rather humorless and conscientious samurai administrator who withdrew from his official duties in disgust at what he saw as the immorality and indifference of Tokugawa administrators. He then set up a school to which he admitted students from all social classes. Himself a stern samurai taskmaster, he did not hesitate to use the rod on his pupils. He taught chiefly through historical analogy, and his lectures were replete with examples of Ming dynasty loyalists. His intelligence, honesty, and learning won him wide esteem. In his teaching O<sup>¯</sup> shio followed the Confucianism of the Ming dynasty scholar-official Wang Yang-ming (1472–1529), the most famous exponent of a Confucian school that argued the unity of knowledge and action. In early Tokugawa times several distinguished philosophers had taught this; Nakae To¯ju (1608–1648), revered as a saint in his lifetime, had abandoned an earlier commitment to Chu Hsi for Wang Yang-ming, and Kumazawa Banzan (1619– 1691), his student, had incurred bakufu displeasure for the severity of his criticism of misgovernment. Gradually implications of subversion had become attached to these teachings, however, and Sadanobu’s designation of Chu Hsi Confucianism as bakufu orthodoxy in 1790 had seemed to end its influence altogether. But O<sup>¯</sup> shio was not concerned with orthodoxy. On the contrary; he found the assertion that thought and action were inseparable a compelling mandate to correct the ills of his day, and he traveled to Nakae To¯ju’s home as a pilgrimage. He saw himself as a sage-hero destined to reform society.<sup>41</sup> The sage-hero’s mission was to “save the people” (kyu¯min), and that is the slogan O<sup>¯</sup> shio had on his banners for revolt. He lived what he preached. He sold his extensive personal library and used the proceeds to buy food, which he distributed. It was never enough, of course. He also managed to acquire some firearms and a small cannon. He then prepared a gekibun, or manifesto, which he quietly distributed in the area around Osaka. O<sup>¯</sup> shio’s manifesto read in part: To the village officials, elders, farmers, peasants and tenant farmers in the domains of Settsu, Kawachi, Izumi and Harima: From the time of the Ashikaga the emperor has been kept in seclusion and has lost the power to dispense rewards and punishments; the people therefore have nowhere to turn with their complaints . . . If the four seas suffer destitution, the beneficence of heaven cannot long survive . . . . . . We who are confined to our homes find it is no longer possible to tolerate the existing conditions. We lack the power of King T’ang and King Wu [of ancient China]. We do not have the virtue of Confucius or Mencius. For the sake of all under heaven, knowing that we have no one to depend on and that we may bring on punishments to our families, those of us who are of like mind are resolved to do the following: First we shall execute those officials who torment and harass those who are lowly. Next we shall execute those rich merchants in the city of Osaka who are accustomed to the life of luxury. Then we shall uncover gold and silver coins and other valuables they hoard as well as bags of rice kept hidden in their storage houses. They will be distributed to those who do not own fields or gardens in the domains of Settsu, Kawachi, Izumi and Harima, and to those who may own lands, but have a hard time supporting fathers, mothers, wives and other members of the family. The above money and rice will be distributed. Thereafter as soon as you hear that there is a disturbance in the city of Osaka, mind not the distance you must travel, but come immediately to Osaka. What we do is to follow the command of heaven to render the punishments of heaven.<sup>42</sup> In this statement O<sup>¯</sup> shio pointed to the natural disasters as sure signs of Heaven’s discontent with the government. It was in the hands of arrogant bureaucrats who were indifferent to the misery of the people. It was vital, he wrote, to “respect heaven’s command and carry out its wrath.” He called on farmers to break into government offices to destroy tax records. Others were to seize control of the city’s great warehouses in order to distribute rice to the needy. O<sup>¯</sup> shio’s Confucian certainty was supplemented by Shinto belief and incipient imperial loyalism. Saving the people went hand in hand with restoring the moral government of the legendary dynastic founder, Emperor Jimmu. Famine, ignorance, and suffering for the people, who were fundamentally good, was related to the bakufu’s disregard for the court; O<sup>¯</sup> shio spoke in the name of the great Ise shrine to the sun goddess. Yet while he spoke often of “Heaven,” he was concerned with the three provinces he knew, and his program did not go far beyond killing the evil and distributing their riches. The revolt, when it came, was a fiasco for all concerned. O<sup>¯</sup> shio and the few hundred confederates he had prepared for action had to advance their timetable because treachery by an informer alerted the authorities. O<sup>¯</sup> shio then set fire to his own house as a signal to his followers, who sallied forth with banners marked “Save the People!” and “Amaterasu the Sun Goddess.” They proved poorly trained in the use of the few weapons they had assembled, but their incompetence was matched by the commanders of the bakufu’s force, who fell from their horses and temporarily demoralized their troops. They soon became subjects for popular ridicule. Before long, however, bakufu strength prevailed. In the end all that O<sup>¯</sup> shio achieved was a raging fire that destroyed over 3,000 houses and 30,000 to 40,000 koku of rice. He himself fled to the mountains, and his followers committed suicide or took flight. Before long O<sup>¯</sup> shio was hunted down, his hiding place surrounded by his pursuers. Before they could take him he set fire to the building and perished in the flames together with his son. Predictably, the government exacted savage vengeance. Of twenty-nine conspirators who remained to be condemned, only five survived incarceration and interrogation. They were pickled in salt so that their bodies could be mounted on crosses for the crucifixion to which they had been sentenced. Despite all this, it is quite unclear what O<sup>¯</sup> shio’s political program and strategy were. He based his objection to the stratification of society, and the betrayal of morality, on Confucian universalism. By implication he can be made to seem a genuine revolutionary, and later dissidents wrote in his praise. On the other hand there is no evidence of planning beyond his desire to make a moral statement. His complaint was with the “immoral” excesses and evil administrators of his day. It was a pattern that recurred in Japanese history, and in this he resembled the leaders of most protests. Even so O<sup>¯</sup> shio’s revolt marked something quite new. It had been led by a samurai official of outstanding rectitude. The fires O<sup>¯</sup> shio started devastated part of a metropolis that was central to Japan’s distribution networks, and virtually every domain had some sort of station or warehouse there. Consequently the affair was soon known to people all over Japan. O<sup>¯</sup> shio’s manifesto also had an afterlife of its own, for it circulated widely in handwritten copies. The evils of which he complained were recognized by people in all parts of Japan. Moreover the country was being drawn increasingly into international politics once again, and it seemed vital that its social and economic problems be addressed. In the Tenpo¯ years reform became a matter of urgency for most domains of any size. The Edo bakufu was slow to address them, for Ienari, the former shogun, was still in charge and not inclined to sacrifice his comfort. Yet it was widely recognized that domains and their lords were in trouble. Honda Toshiaki, in a document he was too wise to publish, had written earlier that “in recent days there has been the spectacle of lords confiscating the allocated property of their retainers on the pretext of paying back debts to the merchants. The debts do not then decrease, but usually seem rather to grow larger . . . there is not one [daimyo] who has not borrowed from the merchants. Is this not a sad state of affairs? The merchant, watching this spectacle, must feel like a fisherman who sees a fish swim into his net. Officials harass the farmers for money, which they claim they need to repay the daimyo’s debts, but the debts do not diminish. Instead, the daimyo go on contracting new ones year after year.”<sup>43</sup> Domain administrators did not have many options. They could “borrow” from retainers by lowering or even confiscating their stipends, but only at the risk of ruining morale or losing followers. For many samurai the advantages of status, accompanied as they were by marginal income and boring routine, were becoming marginal, and the prospect of personal freedom and possible economic opportunity could lead them to give it up altogether. Administrators could also try to get more out of their people. Every regime tried to increase the taxes borne by its farmers, but here the risks of protest were obvious. Moreover, there was frequently not very much more to be had. Even Matsudaira Sadanobu had written, when he was still a daimyo, that “farmers fear officials like tigers and foxes.” Nevertheless the effort had to be made, and most domains did their best. The “reform” invariably began with attempts to limit consumption through sumptuary regulations and exhortation. As had been the case with each earlier reform, austerity was expected of rulers and ruled alike. The next problem was that of debt and interest costs. Daimyo could try to announce cancellation of debts to their own merchants, but debts to metropolitan merchant agents, who were under bakufu jurisdiction, were more of a problem. Often they were renegotiated on better terms. The danger here was that once a domain lost its credit it could expect to have even more difficulty, and higher interest rates, in borrowing more money. And everywhere there were efforts to increase han income. Methods varied with the degree of imagination on the part of the domain, the means of coercion available, and the resources that could be exploited. Some domains put an end to monopolies in the hope of stimulating producers and of selling permits to new economic actors, but others established monopolies in order to keep the profits from commercial crops out of the hands of merchants. Some programs were clearly successful; others equally clearly failures. The programs in Satsuma and Cho¯shu¯, southwestern domains that were to play a large role in future politics, were relatively successful; in Tosa and in Saga reforms achieved little. In Tosa the domain took steps to strengthen official control of exports to Osaka, but much of the drive was lost in partisan wrangling within the han bureaucracy. Saga was perennially in debt; on one occasion in the early nineteenth century its lord was unable to leave for his domain because debtor Edo merchants were camped around his estate. In the Tenpo¯ “reforms” the domain proposed renegotiating its debts with Edo creditors over a 250-year period, and in effect tried to declare bankruptcy. In view of their future military and political importance, however, the reform measures in Satsuma and Cho¯shu¯ deserve closer attention. Both areas, it will be recalled, were large and integrated areas with a high proportion of samurai, which were populations that provided the potential for coercion. Both also had coastal locations that made it possible to exploit maritime trade. Satsuma had the many islands south of Kyushu and its tribute system with Okinawa, while Cho¯shu¯ had control over the Straits of Shimonoseki through which much commerce moved. Satsuma began with its debt of nearly five million ryo¯. A domain administration under Zusho Hirosato cut that Gordian knot with military ruthlessness. On the ruse of conducting a survey he ordered all debtors to submit their promissory notes, and once they were in his hands he burned them and declared the problem solved. Merchants had little recourse against so determined and large a domain; a number of Osaka houses went bankrupt, but Zusho was never called to account. Further, the Satsuma administration deprived them of future leverage by seeing to it that no more debts needed to be negotiated. Meanwhile the han also took steps to take advantage of its geographic location. Its Ryukyuan connection and control of Okinawa made it possible to increase trade with China, and in time a trading station facilitated the import of weapons from the West through Nagasaki. Satsuma’s southern location and warm climate proved even more advantageous, for the domain had long enjoyed a virtual monopoly on the growth of sugar cane. Zusho ordered that all paddies on the islands south of Kyushu be drained and planted in cane. Food had to be imported, and the zone became a giant sugar plantation that was frequently referred to as a “sugar hell” (sato jigoku). Draconian measures established quotas for production and made it a punishable offense for even children to lick their fingers for the sweetness of the cane; adults caught smuggling or diverting cane could be executed. Zusho also made major efforts to improve quality control of other commodities Satsuma could export. Monopolies were established over lacquer, rape seed, wax, medicinal herbs, saffron, cinnabar, paper, and livestock. The result was that by the 1840s Satsuma showed a surplus. As a result the domain could afford to begin to develop military strength.<sup>44</sup> Cho¯shu¯ too had a large samurai class that should have made coercion possible. By one estimate samurai, rear vassals, and family members numbered 50,000, over 10 percent of the domain’s 470,176 commoners. The domain was wracked by very large-scale uprisings in 1831 and 1836 that must have sharpened the administrators’ awareness of problems. They proved themselves remarkably inventive and systematic in their response. A government bureau for savings and investment, the buikukyoku, had been set up as early as 1762, and it was now directed to investment in income-earning projects like land reclamation and harbor works, the latter in order to be able to attract shipping from western Japan that came through the Straits of Shimonoseki. The domain was remarkable for its meticulous and systematic planning; an inventory of the domain foodstuff production capacity of 1841, for instance, provided detailed figures for each subdistrict. This kind of bureaucratic planning, combined with a location reasonably remote from Edo and its distractions, made it possible to whittle down indebtedness and bring the domain into late Tokugawa days in relatively stable financial condition.<sup>45</sup> The bakufu’s Tenpo¯ reforms had to wait until the death of the former shogun Ienari in 1841. This time the leading figure was the ro¯ju¯ Mizuno Tadakuni. The reforms were deliberately cast in the tradition of earlier programs. In 1842 a bakufu edict announced that “we are re-creating the policies of the Kyo¯ho¯ and Kansei eras,” and like the earlier efforts those policies began with calls for frugality, sobriety, and rectitude. In contrast, however, to the martinet Yoshimune and the moralist Matsudaira Sadanobu, whose concern with personal perfection reached religious proportions,<sup>46</sup> Mizuno was a “known glutton, debaucher, dilettante, and taker of bribes.”<sup>47</sup> One might have expected calls to reform to have a hollow ring when coming from such a source. Nevertheless the minister lived up to his role. The bakufu warred more vigorously than ever before against unseemly mores and morality, arresting performers charged with lewdness, regulating areas of prostitution, banning licentious wood prints, and making examples of popular authors of off-color tales by placing them in manacles and stocks. Frugality was enjoined as seldom before; a stream of edicts warned against luxurious living and tried to regulate deportment with rules affecting Edo hairdressers, commoners’ clothing, specialty foods, and festival toys. Once again officials were subject to searching inquiry and purged if found delinquent. Farmers were warned against moving to cities. Everyone, in short, was ordered to resume or maintain a proper station and status. In addition to striking against urban frivolity the bakufu looked for ways to curb merchant profits and lower prices. Mizuno ordered dissolution of the great guilds that had been licensed to control internal commerce. Here he miscalculated badly. The guilds had operated to suppress producer prices in order to maximize profits, but with a free market those prices now rose instead. Mizuno’s campaign against monopolies also extended to daimyo enterprises, and in this his administration broke new paths. A year after ordering dissolution of commoner monopolies, a bakufu order noted that daimyo of Kinai, Chu¯goku, Saigoku, and Shikoku have been, by various methods, buying up the products not only of their own domains, but of other domains also; . . . sending them to their warehouses, and then selling them when the market price is high . . . This is most irregular, particularly bearing in mind our frequent instructions to reduce prices.<sup>48</sup> With attempts like this Mizuno was reversing the precedents of Yoshimune and other reformers who had interpreted the tradition left by Ieyasu to mean relative autonomy for the great daimyo. The concentration and rationalization of national commerce had now created a contradiction between the needs of the bakufu and those of domains with “national profit,” kokueki programs. To the degree that Mizuno had his way, domains were hurt; in Cho¯shu¯ the reform administration of Murata Seifu¯ was soon out of power. Mizuno’s efforts to increase bakufu income came at daimyo expense in two other respects. In 1843 the bakufu tried once again to drain the Inbanuma swamp along the Tone River, north of Edo, to reclaim it for paddy agriculture. It was an effort that had been attempted by Yoshimune in 1714 and Tanuma Okitsugu in 1785. Five daimyo were ordered to shoulder the expenses. Mizuno’s stay in office, which ended the following year, was too short to see the project through. It failed a third time, and was to succeed only after World War II in 1946. By all odds, however, Mizuno’s most ambitious and controversial plan was one that alienated fudai daimyo and led directly to his dismissal. In 1843 the bakufu sent out orders to daimyo and hatamoto to surrender lands within a radius of Edo and Osaka. The argument could have been cast in terms of political efficiency and centralization, but instead it stated simply that “it is inappropriate that private domains should now have more high-yield land than the bakufu.” Had this been successful, the bakufu would have benefited from an income increase of major proportions. This effort marked the most direct challenge to daimyo autonomy since the seventeenth century. Moreover it was to come at the expense of the shogun’s closest vassals, hatamoto and fudai daimyo. Unfortunately they were also the ones best situated to intrigue and protest within bakufu councils and channels, and within the year Mizuno was out of his post. He was brought back briefly a few months later to deal with a crisis in foreign policy, but his power within the bakufu was at an end. By then he was widely detested, and after he left office commoners stoned his Edo residence. How should we evaluate these alternating cycles of prosperity and protest? What do the events we have considered tell about the fundamental health or contradictions of Tokugawa society? When seen in retrospect, in the knowledge that the bakufu was to fall in the 1860s, it is easy to class the recurrent crises as handwriting on the wall. Peasant protest and urban riots, complemented by contemporary descriptions of commoner misery and maladroit samurai response, surely suggest an early end for the bakuhan order. And yet, as harvests improved, towns rebuilt, and order returned to the land after each cycle, the system seemed to renew itself. Social change was continuous, but there was a remarkable dearth of suggestions for changing society. Devices to cushion change were everywhere. The village was largely autonomous, and at its best it operated in a communal manner. Agriculture was constantly more efficient and productive. Gradations of status and well-being outlined an organism that functioned smoothly. Notions of reciprocity, obligation and tolerance were diffused by every public function. Perhaps because there was in any case no real possibility of exit or escape, the Japanese tolerated inequality and inequity, thankful that they were not worse. It would thus be incorrect to think the countryside simmered with discontent. But it would be equally erroneous to mistake its placidity for contentment. Outward deference masked substantial distrust and tension that broke easily in emergency. It is clear that each period of reform showed that problems were more intractable and options fewer. Central Japan—the Osaka-Kyoto and Edo plains that were the bakufu heartland—was steadily less “feudal”; government pronouncements were dangerously close to becoming empty bombast. Popular culture was full of mockery that lampooned pompous formality and hollow pretension. A commercialized countryside was no longer as willing to subsidize urban guilds. Petty daimyo and bannermen were unwilling to bear the cost of administrative rationalization and centralization, and a government desperate for income could have met that need only by decreasing the support it owed its samurai retainers. Samurai, except for the fraction that found public office, were becoming irrelevant and superfluous, consuming but not producing wealth. It was somewhat different in southwestern and northeastern Japan. Commercialism and urbanism were less advanced. A larger proportion of the population was samurai; and their efforts, if successfully enlisted by their superiors, could make meaningful reforms designed to strengthen the domain economy. Granted, their task was also less complex; the problems of administering Kagoshima or Yamaguchi were not as intractable as those their bakufu counterparts faced in Osaka and Edo. But although those domains remained more military than did the Tokugawa lands, they were not therefore more “feudal.” Reform governments turned their attention to surveys and plans designed to meet the domains’ fiscal and military problems. For this reason the Tenpo¯ reforms have long been the center of debates about their meaning. Many historians contend that the sort of government leadership that was shown—successfully in Satsuma and Cho¯shu¯, unsuccessfully in the bakufu—marked a new and more intrusive regime, prepared to sweep away status divisions and restraints in the construction of a new and proto-modern absolutism.<sup>49</sup> It is also clear, however, that the system seemed quite able to continue, perhaps through sheer inertia, until a shock administered from without made it clear that changes so basic that the institutional structure could not sustain them were required if Japan was to retain its sovereignty and integrity. During all this internal change an awareness of Japan’s lack of preparedness to face problems from without added to the concern of informed Japanese. Mizuno Tadakuni had shown a somewhat greater willingness than his colleagues to discuss this and listen to men who had made a study of world affairs and modern armaments, but effective action would have required more central power than even he had tried to exert. In the process the bakufu had proved, as Bolitho puts it, too weak to offer protection for domains that were trying to strengthen themselves, and too strong to allow domains to prepare for their own defense.