# BUILDING THE MEIJI STATE The deaths of Kido, Saigo¯, and O<sup>¯</sup> kubo at the end of the first decade of the Meiji period moved the next group into leadership slots. The Meiji leaders were by any measure a remarkable assemblage. If we take 1880 as the date by which the leadership had become firm, some interesting facts emerge. Iwakura Tomomi, at fifty-five the senior figure, was a survivor of the original team, but he was to live only three more years. The others averaged forty years of age and were young men in the prime of life. They had been born as samurai of modest rank in the domains that led the Restoration movement. Two (Itagaki Taisuke and Goto¯ Sho¯jiro¯) were from Tosa, and one (O<sup>¯</sup> kuma Shigenobu) from Saga, but they were soon muscled out by those from Cho¯shu¯ and Satsuma. It was the military strength of those domains that brought about the Restoration, and the new leaders had, without exception, participated in those wars. Ito¯ Hirobumi and Inoue Kaoru were members of the original group of sangi (councillors) of the infant Meiji government; the others soon joined them, and they kept their seats as its numbers shrank from 106 to 26 and finally to 7 when the modern cabinet system replaced that designation in 1885. Key members of the group had been overseas; Ito¯ Hirobumi and Inoue Kaoru were members of the little group that Cho¯shu¯ sent to England in the 1860s, while others like Yamagata Aritomo (Cho¯shu¯) and Matsukata Masayoshi (Satsuma) were soon abroad investigating military and financial systems. They were given lower bureaucratic posts in the initial round of assignments, but the 1870s saw them move up rapidly as Satsuma and Cho¯shu¯ control asserted itself. In their early twenties when the boy-emperor Mutsuhito assumed his role in 1867, they remained his councillors and servants as he matured in his twenties and thirties. Beginning in 1889 he expressed his debt by a series of proclamations designating them his genkun, “meritorious elders,” a title China’s emperors had sometimes granted ministers at the founding of dynasties. In common usage this became genro¯. The throne also honored them with titles in the new aristocracy that formed, and with monetary gifts; those benefits, though hardly nominal, were eclipsed by the advantages that came to them in a nascent and fast-growing capitalist economy. Intermarriage, adoption, and honorary posts put the little oligarchy at the center of Meiji society, key figures in a web of influence and power. By the 1890s a new generation of ambitious young publicists began to decry the conservatism of the “men of the Tenpo¯ era.” The departure of Yamagata (1922) and Matsukata (1924) ended the sway of the original group, but it was not until the death of the court noble Saionji Kinmochi in 1940 that their quiet, unobtrusive guidance from behind the throne came to an end.<sup>1</sup> No one of the Meiji leaders gained exclusive ascendancy in one area. Specialization was particularly marked in areas like finance and arms, but their backgrounds were so similar that specialized bureaucracies did not emerge until the successor generation took over. The Meiji leaders considered themselves all-purpose authorities and expected to participate in foreign as well as domestic decisions and in national as well as local institutions. Despite this, what emerged became so closely identified with individual contributions that it is convenient to take them up under such headings. ## 1. Matsukata Economics Economic problems were so central to the concerns of the Meiji government that it would be quite wrong to credit everything that was done to the work of Matsukata Masayoshi (1835–1924), but his long tenure of more than ten years as finance minister beginning in 1881 has understandably resulted in terms like “Matsukata Economics” and the more dubious references to “Matsukata deflation” and “Matsukata depression.” As a young Satsuma samurai Matsukata was befriended by O<sup>¯</sup> kubo Toshimichi, who would be his mentor until he was assassinated in 1878. By that time Matsukata had already held a number of important posts, often simultaneously. Immediately after the Restoration he was charged with holding Nagasaki for the new government; after a period as governor of Hida Prefecture he moved to the central government. His recommendations were central to land tax reform. Subsequently O<sup>¯</sup> kubo, before leaving as a member of the Iwakura mission, put him in charge of a new Bureau of Industrial Production and called on him to oversee relief for destitute former samurai. At the time of the Satsuma Rebellion Matsukata’s family was still in Kagoshima, but they managed to make their way to Tokyo after escaping the flames that destroyed the city.<sup>2</sup> The longest-lived of the Meiji genro¯, Matsukata was not as adroit in politics as his Cho¯shu¯ counterparts—Ozaki Yukio’s autobiography, in fact, deprecates him as the slowest and most obtuse of the Meiji prime ministers—but his personal staying power and the clout of the financial web that formed around him—referred to as the “Matsukata zaibatsu” (financial conglomerate)—guaranteed immense influence throughout his life. “The major preoccupation of the Meiji government,” E. Sydney Crawcour has written, “was to create a sound fiscal base for its needs.”<sup>3</sup> The economy over which Matsukata came to preside in 1881 was anything but that. The government had assumed debts of all the domains that acceded to its rule in 1871. It then took on the crushing burden of providing income for a samurai class that was being displaced by its land and conscription policies. Samurai stipends consumed almost one-third of the new government’s revenue, and the swift steps to reduce them and permit and finally force the substitution of interest-bearing bonds helped to bring on the samurai rebellions. Suppression of those, particularly the Satsuma uprising of 1877, forced the government to print increasing quantities of yen, the unit that replaced the Tokugawa ryo¯ in 1871. Government efforts to operate the monopolies that domains had begun failed, and newly instituted trading and finance companies operated by substantial Tokugawa-era merchant firms under government control took their place. These were ordered to hold in cash the equivalent of the notes they issued, and when the government abruptly ordered them reconstituted as national banks in 1872 a number of Osaka houses were driven into bankruptcy. Inflation of the note issue brought a decline in real income for urban workers and samurai who tried to make do with their bonds, until by 1880 the market value of 7 percent bonds was less than two-thirds of their face value. Meanwhile the land tax reform, announced in 1873 and implemented over the next six years, changed life for the large majority of Japanese living in the villages. Land became a capital asset that could be freely sold, and with taxes fixed in money terms and a government note issue growing by one-third in the three years prior to 1881, farmers stood to profit as the yen value of their crops increased. Government leaders tried desperately to ward off foreign investors. The example of Egypt, brought to colonial status through foreign loans, was constantly held up as a counter to the proposals of O<sup>¯</sup> kuma Shigenobu of Saga, who was most inclined to inflationary policies. The international order of the day did not in any case favor developmental efforts through institutions like the World Bank; foreign aid was a thing of the future. The Meiji leaders ventured only a single foreign loan, and that to finance the beginning of the railway network with an eighteen-mile line from Tokyo to Yokohama. By 1877 only sixty-four miles of track were in place, and those on British narrow gauge for reasons of economy. British example also contributed to the decision to have traffic keep to the left and not to the right. The long-standing bakufu system of land transport through packhorses maintained by post stations and “assisting villages” was discontinued in 1871 and delegated to private management. In the process entire mountain routes that had been established for and maintained by men and horses gradually lost their meaning and income, and local elite—like Shimazaki To¯son’s Hanzo¯ —who could not maintain their primacy on the basis of their holdings in land became as obsolete as the samurai to whom they had reported. Coastal trade continued as vital as before, but government leaders worried about inroads by faster and better foreign shipping. A semigovernmental shipping company designed to use bakufu and domain vessels soon failed, and in 1875 the regime presented thirty of its ships, free of charge, to the Tosa domain official Iwasaki Yataro¯, whose Mitsubishi company also received a generous operating subsidy. Mitsubishi services to the government during the Satsuma Rebellion resulted in further benefactions, and gave the company the ability to compete favorably with the American Pacific Mail and British P & O lines that had grown up with the treaty ports. Telegraph communications were cheapest and fastest of all, and contributed importantly to the government’s ability to overcome the Satsuma Rebellion. By 1877, 2,827 miles of line had been installed. The government also invested heavily from its slender resources in industrial development. It inherited and retained title to all mineral and modern industrial plants that had been begun by the bakufu and domains. Ironworks, munitions plants, and shipyards existed in a narrow band of coastal and pro-Restoration areas. The country’s forests and major mines were now the state’s, often to the distress of local residents whose customary rights were no longer of interest to new officials. To these were added the few cottonspinning plants that had been started in unsuccessful efforts to reverse the growing deficit incurred through foreign trade. Late Tokugawa Japan had profited from European demand for silkworm eggs and tea, but as the European silkworm blight was conquered and the superior quality of foreign textiles and thread became apparent the trade surplus of the past was soon reversed. Government efforts to counter this through the import of cottonspinning plants enjoyed only modest financial success, but served, it was hoped, to familiarize Japanese managers and workers with factory methods and standardize export products. The government ordered sweeping surveys of production in $1 8 7 4$ and again in $1 8 8 4 ,$ , and tried urgently to categorize and catalogue the country’s resources with an eye to finding some sort of plan for economic development. A major problem was that posed by the unequal treaties, which limited Japan’s power to protect infant industries. One finds this awareness made explicit by Ito¯ Hirobumi in a memorandum he wrote for his fellow ambassadors in the Iwakura embassy. British hosts and statesmen, he warned, would champion free trade in their talks, but it was important that the Japanese be prepared to counter their arguments. Ito¯ here extended the “national profit” long sought by domain administrators to the needs of the larger entity of a centralized Japan, but still found it necessary to argue the case for setting aside Confucian morality in working toward the goal of modern “civilization”: Unless domestic products are cheaper than foreign products one’s own people will not buy them, so one increases import tariffs in order to put up the price of foreign goods . . . such a tariff is called a defensive tax . . . Countries like our own that have not yet attained full development will delay the arrival of civilization if they do not apply this method. For example, we should keep the tax low on domestic goods such as books and machinery and make it high on goods such as silk textiles, alcohol and tobacco, thus helping to stimulate our own production. A country such as America, by using solely this method in relation to alcohol and tobacco has already reached a stage where the people have greatly increased production . . . From the point of view of morality this favoring of one’s own [country] looks like seeking one’s own profit and one’s own advantage and abandoning the usual principles of justice. But for enriching one’s country, making one’s country prosperous, it is in fact an indispensable means . . . use of the protective tariff is how Britain reached its present prosperity and came to dominate the world’s manufacture.<sup>4</sup> This fascinating document illustrates perfectly the problem the early Meiji government faced. Ito¯’s logic is incontrovertible; developing countries, he thought, needed to protect their industries, but the unequal treaties made it impossible for Japan to do so. It could, however, also be argued that Japan was fortunate in its inability to put up tariff walls, and that what it was forced to do was ultimately more healthy. What it now had to do was to launch a bootstraps-operation of self-help, and that is what Matsukata and his associates undertook in the 1880s. In 1877, immediately after the suppression of the Satsuma Rebellion, Matsukata went to Paris to head the Japanese exhibit at the Paris Exhibition of that year. While there he took as his mentor the finance minister Le´on Say, the grandson of a well-known exponent of free trade. Say himself, however, had raised French tariffs sharply in order to pay off the indemnity incurred through France’s defeat at the hands of Prussia, and Matsukata, like Ito¯ before him, was convinced of the necessity for Japan to regain the freedom to adopt protectionist policies at the earliest possible date. Meanwhile the only course to follow in order to lower Japan’s foreign trade deficit was one of austerity. Government income was reduced because of inflation, government bonds were being discounted, and the value of land was rising rapidly. As Matsukata later recalled, “farmers, who were the only ones to profit from these circumstances, took on luxurious habits . . . imports from foreign countries were increased. Merchants, dazzled by the extreme fluctuations in prices, all aimed at making huge speculative profits and gave no heed to productive undertakings.”<sup>5</sup> The solution for this “bubble economy” was austerity. What followed was the “Matsukata deflation.” Government expenditure was drastically reduced, and government industries were sold off to private interests. New taxes were imposed and the note issue was brought back to pre–Satsuma Rebellion levels. The results were disastrous for many small farmers who found creditors and tax men seizing their assets, and rates of bankruptcy and tenancy rose sharply. In terms of purely economic rationality, the process transferred resources to the government, to the banking system, and to stronger and more competitive elements of both urban and rural economy. In human terms the decade was nevertheless one of wrenching difficulty for many small farmers. It is not surprising that problems of the “Matsukata economy” have generated a vast quantity of scholarship of great importance to the interpretation of Japan’s subsequent history. Studies of tenancy and rural immiseration have related trends discerned there to sharp economic differentiation in the modern Japanese countryside and a depressed and apathetic peasantry susceptible to manipulation by a capitalist and militarist government. Some studies are more hesitant to ascribe a straight-line process to rural differences of the twentieth century, however,<sup>6</sup> while one study goes so far as to reject the thesis altogether.<sup>7</sup> A second area of dispute concerns the sale of government enterprises. The conglomerates, or zaibatsu, that emerged constituted industrial concentration so striking that many have credited this to collusion and charged it with making impossible the growth of democracy in Japan. Thomas Smith, however, concludes that the sales were dictated by government difficulties and that those fortunate enough to have vision and, especially, capital to buy them, were so few that better bids were not forthcoming.<sup>8</sup> Whatever the case, it is certain that the concentration that resulted gave firms like Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Sumitomo, and Yasuda a commanding position that led to an oligopoly in control of markets. The rural and industrial solutions both combined to reduce the development of consumer orientation, a pattern not unfamiliar in other late-developing countries after World War II. Neither arguments based upon classical economics, which stress the positive impact for future economic growth, nor those on Marxist economics, which stress immiseration and a static countryside, do justice to the variety that characterized Japan as its economy stabilized, for the proportion of winners and losers differed by place and time. What is certain, however, is that the decade saw the Meiji leadership commit itself to modern economic growth.<sup>9</sup> The drive was encapsulated in the slogan fukoku kyo¯hei (rich country, strong army), a goal that had already been held up by late Tokugawa domains. Modern scientific thought and technology began to be applied to production, per capita productivity accompanied population growth, and the changes were made in full consciousness of the pressures and possibilities posed by international contacts. The Matsukata decade did not bring striking improvements in industrial efficiency or individual well-being, but it did see the development of a substructure that was probably essential for later economic change. ## 2. The Struggle for Political Participation These same years saw the inception and intensification of a struggle for political participation that began as a movement of disgruntled samurai, but soon engulfed the political and social scene. Its opening stages are inseparably associated with the career of the Tosa military figure Itagaki Taisuke (1837–1919), who left the Meiji government at the same time as Saigo¯ Takamori. Many of Itagaki’s followers wanted to revolt against the new regime as Saigo¯ did, but Itagaki saw a different path of resistance. “Saigo¯ fights the government with arms,” he told his men, “but we will fight it with people’s rights (minken).” In 1874 Itagaki and Goto¯ Sho¯jiro¯, with the cooperation of Soejima Taneomi and Eto¯ Shinpei of Saga, submitted a petition that argued that the handling of the Korean issue, on which the leadership group had parted company, proved the need for the council chamber that had been promised in the Charter Oath. It had been assumed, they wrote, that after the Iwakura mission members had observed the workings of Western governments, plans would be set in motion for representative government in Japan, but “although several months have elapsed since the return of the embassy to this country we do not learn that any measures have been adopted.” The 1874 memorial calling for an assembly continued: [T]he decrees of the government appear in the morning and are changed in the evening, the administration is conducted in an arbitrary manner; rewards and punishments are prompted by partiality, the channel by which the people should communicate with the government is blocked up and they cannot state their grievances . . . The people whose duty it is to pay taxes to the government possess the right of sharing in their government’s affairs and of approving or condemning. This is a principle universally acknowledged and it is not necessary to waste words in discussing it . . . How is the government to be made strong? It is by the people of the empire becoming of one mind . . . The establishment of a council chamber chosen by the people will create a community of feeling between the government and the people, and they will mutually unite into one body. Then and only then will the country become strong . . . Gradual progress has not been the case with council-chambers only; all branches of knowledge and science and art are subject to the same conditions. The reason why foreigners have perfected [council chambers] only after the lapse of centuries is that no examples existed previously, and these had to be discovered by actual experience. If we can select examples from them and adopt their methods, why should we not be successful in working them out? If we delay the use of steam machinery until we have discovered the principles of steam for ourselves, or wait until we have discovered the principles of electricity to construct an electric telegraph, our government will be unable to work . . . By establishing such a council chamber public discussion in the empire will be established, the spirit of the empire will be roused to activity, the affection between governors and governed will be greater, sovereign and subject will be brought to love each other, our imperial country will be maintained and its destinies developed, and prosperity and peace will be assured to all.<sup>10</sup> Several themes pervade the fascinating document Itagaki and his friends prepared. One is that of rights, an assumption that requires no defense. A second is that participation will bring unity and a common purpose; far from becoming partisan, politics will be single-minded. The third is the note of progress that pervades the document; Japan can do things more rapidly than the West did, since it can profit from that example. “Latecomers” to modernity and civilization can leapfrog over experimentation. The debate over Korea had divided the Restoration coalition, and the disgruntled losers resigned from the government and returned to their provinces. In Saga Eto¯ Shinpei was soon drawn into the leadership role in the Saga rebellion; his attempts to get help from Saigo¯ and from Itagaki were, it will be remembered, unsuccessful, and he himself was executed. In Tosa things went differently. On returning home Itagaki and his followers organized a society they named the Risshisha. Its name was adapted from the (1870) translation of Samuel Smiles’s Self-Help (Saikoku risshi hen, “Tales of men who achieved their aims in Western countries”). This curious little book was made up of a series of inspirational stories of men who had overcome difficulties by struggle and determination, and it was meant to inspire workers in England to do their best. It became and remained immensely popular in Japan, where many readers undoubtedly transferred its moralisms to the nation; Japan, a poor boy in the company of competitors, could achieve its goals of wealth and strength if it persevered. The Risshisha arranged its activities through representative elections of the sort its leaders urged on the government, and they also sponsored mutual aid and education for the former samurai, now shizoku, who made up the group’s members. But a class-bound movement had little future, and Risshisha statements embodied the ambivalence of condescension and compassion that characterized so much early Meiji rhetoric. More important, the government, worried about shizoku discontent, did everything it could to checkmate the movement by persuading Itagaki to accept political office again, as it did through a meeting in Osaka in 1875. There was new talk of an elective chamber, but when the progress seemed to slow he withdrew once more. New press laws and a steadily more effective police organization exerted enough pressure on those advocating representative institutions for them to adopt names like that of Risshisha’s successor, which called itself the “Public Society of Patriots” to make it clear that it was not a secret group of violent subversives. It has to be added, in the government’s defense, that it was not unreasonable to associate shizoku disaffection with violence. A group of Itagaki’s Tosa supporters did plan to support Saigo¯’s efforts in the Satsuma Rebellion, but the police uncovered the plot before anything came of it. O<sup>¯</sup> kubo Toshimichi himself, it will be recalled, was struck down by assassins in 1878. It was natural for the government to monitor the activities of dissident former samurai. Prior to that, in 1876, the government requested the members of the Genro¯in (a consultative body established in 1875 at the time the government persuaded Itagaki to rejoin the government, and not to be confused with the oligarchs, or genro¯), to prepare a possible draft for a constitution, something it did two years later. Key figures, particularly Ito¯ and Iwakura, rejected the result as unsatisfactory because it seemed to divide authority between emperor and legislature and had no provision for imperial ordinances that would have the force of law. Government leaders now turned to the task themselves. Elective institutions were clearly in the air. Enthusiasm for them soon broke out of the narrow social base with which Itagaki’s movement had begun. Minken, people’s rights, became linked with jiyu¯, freedom, to give its name to the jiyu¯-minken movement that dominated and very nearly transformed Japanese life in the early 1880s. These were new words, now encased in the four-Chinese-character format that was so common in Meiji years. They emerged as part of a series of translations of Western thought that began to flood the country. Each part of the slogan had its problems in the East Asian context, and the memoirs of numerous contemporaries describe a confused but genuine conversion experience as people struggled to fathom the meaning and significance of the words. They conveyed genuinely new ideas, and it required time for them to be appropriated in a “Western” sense. As their priorities and understanding changed individuals could often exhibit puzzling changes. For some, jiyu¯ had overtones of a Taoist formless but freely moving spirit, something rather foreign to Confucian categories. For some, it suggested self-indulgence and selfishness. Fukuzawa Yukichi, in his seminal book about the West, apologized for the use of the characters he appropriated for “freedom,” and warned that they should not be misinterpreted. Minken, “people’s rights,” also had an uncertain derivation, but probably entered Japan through translations into Chinese of Western books on international law. It followed that it was more easily understandable in the mass—the national rights of sovereignty or the rights of all people against autocratic government—than as something to which the individual was entitled. Add the fact that early translators of John Stuart Mill sometimes confused “society” with “government,” and the overtones of Western liberal thought could vary widely. In 1881 the Itagaki partisans again presented a petition, and shortly afterward they took advantage of a sake brewers’ convention in Osaka to organize a national Jiyu¯to¯, “Liberal” or “Freedom” political party. New local tax laws, including a levy on sake, that were part of the Matsukata deflation, angered regional entrepreneurs and gave meaning to calls for participation in decisions. The Tosa leaders were soon moving around the country on speaking tours. Reporters for the rapidly growing urban press were drawn into the movement, frequently making as well as reporting news as they addressed regional gatherings. The government responded with harsher press and police provisions, but could not succeed in dampening the eagerness of rural and town audiences to hear the new evangel. Itagaki, stern warrior leader, became an effective public speaker and symbol of the movement. The role was not without its dangers. In 1882 he narrowly escaped death at the hands of a police officer assigned to a meeting he was addressing in Gifu. Legend has it that he had the foresight to shout, “Itagaki may die, but liberty never!” as he collapsed. The emperor ordered a government physician, the future political leader Goto¯ Shinpei, to take care of him, and later he received a monetary grant as well.<sup>11</sup> By then there was a second political party in the field. The Saga councillor O<sup>¯</sup> kuma Shigenobu (1838–1922) had survived the narrowing of governmental leadership in the 1870s, but as the sole “outsider” in a Satsuma-Cho¯shu¯ group his days proved to be numbered. For a time he was seen as a possible competitor for power with Ito¯. His chance, and his downfall, came in response to a request by Prince Arisugawa for ministers of state to submit their ideas for a constitution. The drafts were to be submitted in confidence, so that the government could make its decisions without the intervention of outside opinion. O<sup>¯</sup> kuma waited till the other drafts were in, and then submitted to Prince Arisugawa a draft that was much more radical than the others. His draft had been prepared for him by O<sup>¯</sup> no Azusa, a student of English constitutional practice. The other ministers’ drafts offered only limited degrees of participation, but O<sup>¯</sup> kuma’s proposed a British system of majority rule based on party strength. Worse, he proposed almost immediate implementation.<sup>12</sup> The emperor had just left on an inspection tour of the island of Hokkaido, and in his absence politics came to a boil. Ito¯ denounced O<sup>¯</sup> kuma for proposing a draft that weakened imperial sovereignty, and threatened to resign if it were adopted. O<sup>¯</sup> kuma’s bold attempt to bypass the Satsuma-Cho¯shu¯ group brought on a governmental crisis. There were other elements at work. The sale of government assets in Hokkaido, undertaken as part of Matsukata’s decision to sell off early investments in industrialization, had been carried on by cronyism at considerable loss to the treasury. Press and politicians were vocal in denunciation, and O<sup>¯</sup> kuma too made his objections known. The other leaders, particularly Ito¯, were furious with O<sup>¯</sup> kuma and suspected him of wanting to gain primacy. In hurried meetings during the emperor’s absence they reorganized the government and drove O<sup>¯</sup> kuma from office. Modifications were announced in the contractual arrangements for the Hokkaido assets. Most important, a rescript was prepared for the young emperor to issue upon his return. In it he announced that a constitution would be drawn up at his command, with elections to be held for a Parliament to meet in 1890. “Systems of government differ in different countries,” the rescript went on, “but sudden and unusual changes cannot be made without great inconvenience . . . We perceive that the tendency of Our people is to advance too rapidly, and without that thought and consideration which alone can make progress enduring, and We warn Our subjects, high and low, to be mindful of Our will, and that those who may advocate sudden and violent changes, thus disturbing the peace of Our realm, will fall under Our displeasure.”<sup>13</sup> It was not the last time the Meiji leaders would maneuver the emperor to slow political change. A considerable number of O<sup>¯</sup> kuma’s friends and followers, some of them, like Ozaki Yukio, destined to play distinguished roles in Japan’s constitutional movement, left office with him. O<sup>¯</sup> kuma himself, undaunted, proceeded to organize a second political party, the Rikken Kaishinto¯ (Constitutional Progressive Party; hereafter, Kaishinto¯) in the spring of 1882. The two parties proved to be quite different. O<sup>¯</sup> kuma’s group was strongly influenced by English constitutional thought and practice. The Jiyu¯to¯ was more strongly influenced by the language and enthusiasm of the French Revolution. Nakae Cho¯min, one of its intellectual lights, was trained in French legal and political thought, having begun as a Tosa student in Nagasaki (where he also met Sakamoto Ryo¯ma) and continued his study of French in Edo. He served as interpreter to French minister Le´on Roches before succeeding in having himself attached to the Iwakura embassy as a student, and returned three years later to set up his own academy in Tokyo. Appointed to the staff of the Genro¯in, he soon left government service out of discontent with the leisurely progress on a constitution. He was the translator of the French Legal Code and, more famously, of Rousseau’s Social Contract. Together with the young court noble Saionji Kinmochi (who had also studied in Paris) he launched the Asian Liberal Press (Toyo¯ jiyu¯ shinbun), a newspaper that was almost immediately banned, and thereafter, as a member of Itagaki’s Jiyu¯to¯, became its most influential publicist. The Jiyu¯to¯ was headed by Itagaki, and much of its leadership was made up of former shizoku. Sake brewers and rural notables made up a good deal of its membership. Nakae Cho¯min was prominent, together with Ueki Emori, another Tosa intellectual who became Itagaki’s brain trust and also prepared his own version of a constitution. The Jiyu¯to¯ was thus by no means made up of country bumpkins and unruly samurai, as its urban opponents often claimed. The Kaishinto¯, in contrast, drew many more urban interests to its cause. Much of its leadership, while no less shizoku in origin, could be traced to Fukuzawa Yukichi’s Keio¯ academy, and it also had strong support among publishers and newspapermen. The government, not to be outdone, thought it useful to fund its own counter with the Teiseito¯ (Imperial Party), and Nichinichi newspaper, but their influence and circulation were small by comparison with that of the opposition. The gulf between the party men was often personal as well as ideological. Ozaki Yukio’s memoirs tell of an incident during the period the Jiyu¯to¯ and Kaishinto¯ were trying to work together to best the government. A joint dinner meeting was well attended, though violence was in the air. It came to a head in a row between Numa Morikazu of the Kaishinto¯ and Hoshi To¯ru of the Jiyu¯to¯. Both were trained in Western studies, law, and language; Hoshi had studied in England, and Numa, better born, had served both the bakufu and new government before leaving service to enter journalism. On this occasion Numa drank too much and started baiting Hoshi by calling him a country bumpkin. Hoshi, no less lubricated and long contemptuous of Numa, ordered his entourage of toughs to douse the lights, after which they belabored Numa with brass candlesticks. “Hoshi,” Ozaki writes, “had every intention of beating Numa to death and throwing him out of one of the upper windows into the Sumida River. Fortunately the police arrived in time to rescue Numa from the brink of death.”<sup>14</sup> Government leaders could be more discreet and had their own opportunities for intimidation, but it is not hard to see why they distrusted and monitored these advocates of freedom and people’s rights carefully. It is nonetheless astonishing to see that within fifteen years of the Tokugawa fall, and at a time when there were no functioning parliaments outside of Europe and the United States, the dispute in Japan was not over whether there should be a constitution but over who should draw one up and what it should contain. Indeed that conviction extended well beyond the men and movements that have been described. The struggle of former samurai leaders with their recent colleagues was only part of the story, for there was a far more widespread and pervasive search for new governmental forms abroad in the land. In 1968 a Japanese historian leading a field trip with his students in a search for Meiji documents came upon a long-abandoned storehouse that provided material for a fresh look at the Freedom and People’s Rights (jiyu¯-minken) Movement. Itsukaichi, on the western edge of the Tokyo plain, is today a rather remote mountain village. One hundred years ago it would have been a journey of at least a day from the then borders of Tokyo. The walls of the deteriorating storehouse yielded a rich trove of materials that indicate the intensity with which the villagers followed and tried to participate in the national debate. There was a petition urging the establishment of a parliament at the earliest possible minute, the draft of a 204-article constitution, and several hundred books and copies of books relating to national affairs. There were memoranda and by-laws for the discussion group that had debated these subjects, and copies of the unequal treaties Japan was struggling to revise: evidence, in other words, of a lively and articulate political consciousness in remote mountain villages. “The men who drafted that constitution,” Irokawa Daikichi, whose party discovered the documents, points out, were “hitherto unknown to history, were without exception family men: farmers, merchants, and school teachers—in other words—‘commoners’ with deep ties to the life of the people.”<sup>15</sup> The condescension with which most shizoku—and many historians who were limited to their accounts and records—regarded ordinary Japanese of the early 1880s was thus misplaced. A modern consciousness was advancing steadily among responsible members of rural communities in Japan. The impact of the West provided the catalyst for that movement, but in its essence it included a reformulation of older and earlier moral and political traditions of benevolence and fairness. Nor, it proved, was the village of Itsukaichi unique in this; further investigation revealed the existence of more than sixty associations like that of Itsukaichi in the greater Tokyo countryside alone, and local historians (among whom Japanese high school history teachers play a leading role) can be expected to continue to look for and find more such treasure troves of documents. As the spotlight narrows to Itsukaichi itself, the cast of characters proves extremely interesting. The schoolteacher, who was also the center of the discussion group and whose hand drafted the constitution in question, was a young man who called himself Chiba Takusaburo¯. Born into the lower fringe of samurai status in the northern domain of Sendai, he began as a student of medicine under the tutelage of a well-known advocate of opening the country, a man who in addition to studies in Chinese prose and poetry had knowledge of Dutch medicine and a smattering of information about artillery that he had gained from Sakuma Sho¯zan. O<sup>¯</sup> tsuki Gentaku had advocated alliance with Russia to ward off the Anglo-American threat and helped negotiate the alliance of northeastern domains that resisted the “imperial” armies at the time of the Restoration. As a youth, Chiba had taken part in that war, and as a loser and in fear of prosecution he went underground and began a quest for spiritual and personal guidance in a time of chaotic change. His first stop was a discipleship with a learned student of medicine who had served the shogun, but the arrest of his teacher soon drove him elsewhere. Next he took up the study of nativist kokugaku, but its ties to the early Meiji state made this an unlikely home for long. Next came a short period of study with a Pure Land Buddhist priest—just about the time, it will be remembered, that Buddhism was under intense attack. This too failed to meet the young man’s crisis, and he next turned to Orthodox Christianity, which he came to know through association with a group of disciples of the remarkable Russian pioneer Father Nikolai, who had first arrived in Hokkaido in 1861. Nikolai’s mission found the Sendai area a rich field for converts in the confusion and disorientation that followed the failed war against the Meiji government. In 1872 his new convert followed Father Nikolai to Tokyo, where Soejima Taneomi, then in charge of foreign affairs, had provided government start-up money for the establishment of a school and seminary. Letters from the Iwakura ambassadors had the proper effect, and the bans on Christianity were replaced with tolerance and even welcome for the access missionaries provided to foreign language study. Within a few years, however, Chiba Takusaburo¯ abruptly changed direction to enroll in the academy of Yasui Sokken, an anti-Christian polemicist, Confucian scholar, and poet whose despairing lines caught the mood of a generation’s dislocation. To no purpose: Yasui soon died, and Chiba, once again thrown upon his own resources, found shelter and meaning with a Catholic missionary he assisted in evangelizing tours through the western Tokyo plains and mountains. The personal record Chiba filed in applying for his position in the Itsukaichi school indicates a brief period with a Methodist missionary. He took a position as schoolteacher in the mountain school in 1879, became its head in 1881, and died in Itsukaichi of tuberculosis in 1883. Under his direction the school was clearly a lively place; his successor complained that Chiba had turned it into a branch of the People’s Rights Movement, and Chiba threatened to resign when the prefectural government issued a ban on the political activities of schoolteachers in 1881. This glimpse of the spiritual pilgrimage of a loser—indeed, by most Meiji standards, a failure—is important because it had its parallels in the life histories of hundreds, more likely thousands, of confused, intense young men who embraced foreign teachings and became political activists in a search for meaning and direction.<sup>16</sup> Chiba ended his wanderings in the town of Itsukaichi, an area he had probably come to know during his periods of service to his missionary masters. He was welcomed by a group of local notables who were anxious to better inform themselves and improve their country by helping to form a political discussion group. For Chiba the jiyu¯-minken movement provided an outlet of hope for the regeneration of Japanese politics and society in an age of confusion and decay, and an escape from the increasingly autocratic control of the institutional life of his country by the small clique from Satsuma and Cho¯shu¯. His friends and sponsors were men of some property and standing in the village, literate, astonishingly well read given the materials then available, and fond of registering their opinions in Chinese poetry, which they found more satisfactory than its Japanese counterpart for expressing complex arguments. The thrust of the constitution drafts of groups like that at Itsukaichi is often ambivalent. In the case of Chiba Takusaburo¯’s draft there is a fair amount of ambiguity and a rather naive utopian view of the reciprocity of people and ruler in accordance with the will of Heaven—ideas clearly drawn from traditional thought. Of course Chiba and his counterparts in other societies had none of the advantages of government officials who were able to consult their foreign advisers. Nevertheless there is a rather clear sense of restrictions on imperial sovereignty, grounded in conceptions of morality and justice. One need not see this as revolutionary; it was assumed that the emperor, in his promises of a constitution, shared these ideas, and that the Itsukaichi planners were giving voice to the long-held intentions of the throne. Chiba’s draft is one of a number that have survived. What is clear, then, is that the constitutional movement gathered headway at an astonishing rate of speed. When Itagaki’s Society of Patriots addressed a petition to the government preparatory to the founding of the Jiyu¯to¯ in 1880, they claimed to speak for 100,000 petitioners from twenty-two prefectures. In another instance 23,555 petitioners in nearby Kanagawa Prefecture begged the popular Fukuzawa Yukichi to draft for them a petition calling for a national assembly. As the Matsukata deflation tightened its hold on the country, the People’s Rights Movement began to be associated with rural distress. In several minor incidents government forces suspected political party participation, and in 1884 a force variously estimated as between 5,000 and 10,000 people revolted in the Chichibu district of Saitama Prefecture, near Tokyo. In sharp fighting the rebels briefly had the upper hand over local forces, but after the government moved in more troops they had little difficulty in suppressing a ragtag body armed with hunting rifles, bamboo spears, and wooden cannon. After the roundup of participants 4,000 were found guilty, 300 convicted as felons, and 7 executed. The rebels, who had styled themselves the Debtors’ and Tenants’ Party, were derided as troublemakers and rioters. A study of the 161 participators who can be traced, however, shows that the rebels were broadly representative of the countryside population. Two-thirds were literate. The largest group were in their thirties, with the others spread on both sides of that age level. They were almost all middle- and lower-ranking farmers, though there was also a scattering of landlords and merchants. Contemporary critics seized on the fact that seven were former convicts and gamblers. One can consider this rebellion as a Tokugawa-style uprising that was dealt with in non-Tokugawa ways. People accustomed to the moderation of earlier domain movements, suddenly subjected to the merciless strictness of the new legal and tax structure, protested in the only way they knew. They were also, however, people who had come, however briefly to entertain hopes of a new order, no doubt somewhat messianic and utopian in transmission. This seemed to be promised by the institution of representative government. The jiyu¯-minken movement, which had originated in the discontent of a disestablished samurai elite, spread to lower orders of society and revolutionized for a time ordinary people of the countryside—not only debtors and the poor, but also middlestrata men whose puzzling over the word jiyu¯ had produced expectations of quick and total relief. The mainline Jiyu¯to¯ and Kaishinto¯ leaders wanted no part of this nonsamurai rebellion. Both parties took steps to dissolve their organizations in 1884. Cynicism and despair caused some to give up on large-scale action altogether, while obedience to the emperor’s 1881 rescript announcing that Japan would be given a constitution stilled others. In addition, the parties had fallen into bitter infighting and accusations that brought an end to the optimism and enthusiasm of the day of mass petitions. In July of 1882 Itagaki, recently recovered from the assassination attempt, made it known that he and Goto¯ Sho¯jiro¯ were planning a trip to Europe. His explanation was that foreign observation and study of the comparative merits of political systems should not be left to government figures. Many of his fellow Jiyu¯to¯ leaders opposed this vehemently. The party movement was in full swing. Itagaki was its most popular figure. He had developed the ability to sense the emotions of his audience and stir them, and he seemed to be awakened to the economic and social issues that were animating many Jiyu¯to¯ meetings. Consequently his departure seemed inexplicable. Baba Tatsui, a Tosa follower who became increasingly radical, later blamed the entire downfall of the movement on its leaders; he eventually moved to exile in America, from which he lamented the “election of a leader who was utterly incapable of the management of a political party.” Worse still, rumor had it, correctly as it proved, that the government had played a role in this; Inoue Kaoru, close to Mitsui interests, had arranged for that firm to provide the money to fund the trip. It has never been made clear that Itagaki realized this, but he could certainly have been more curious about the source of his ticket. His defection at this juncture seemed comparable to his brief return to government in 1875 immediately after the original petition for a constitution. Perhaps the heady experience of a central role in the early leadership group, combined with the impressions of imperial solicitude after he had been struck down, combined to make him think it natural that he should receive special treatment at a time when his associates of earlier days were seeking wisdom in Europe. After his return from Europe Itagaki decided that the party had been precipitate in its demands, and lent his prestige to those who proposed closing down the party movement for a time. Itagaki’s motives in this episode remain obscure; he was not corrupt personally, but famously poor at a time when government figures were assembling rich rewards, yet he let his followers down badly. In years to come both he and O<sup>¯</sup> kuma chose cooperation with their former associates over frontal opposition. One suspects that the aura of the throne played an important role in this. Nevertheless the party leaders’ trip to Europe is full of interest. When Itagaki and Goto¯ reached London Japan was represented by the Satsuma leader Mori Arinori, who had returned to government service after a period in a utopian community. Mori had represented Japan in Washington when the Iwakura embassy came through, and in China. Through Mori, Itagaki was able to meet with Herbert Spencer, a system builder whose imposing scheme of social development dazzled most Meiji, indeed most nineteenthcentury, readers. The encounter was not a success. Mori’s report to Tokyo said that “[Itagaki] went into [the meeting] as though approaching the Emperor, but in the actual discussion master and pupil traded places, with the disciple doing all the sermonizing and putting forth his usual empty and unfounded theories. Finally the central idol lost his patience, got up in the middle of the conversation muttering ‘no, no, no’ and took his leave of Itagaki, just like that.”<sup>17</sup> The anecdote is significant, for it reminds us that most observers thought it rash for a country at Japan’s stage of development to even think of constitutional government. Disparities of evolution and development combined to suggest caution. When former President Ulysses S. Grant visited Japan on his world tour in 1879, he too warned government figures against offering, prematurely, liberties they would not be able to take back. Spencer himself had warned of Japanese social fragmentation under rapid modernization, and sent, via Kaneko Kentaro¯, his advice that Japan should keep foreigners at arm’s length except for such trade as was essential. The reason, he explained, was discrepancies of strength; “let one of the more powerful races gain a point d’appui and there will inevitably in course of time grow up an aggressive policy.” As to the other question he had been asked, concerning intermarriage between Japanese and non-Japanese, he was emphatically negative: “It should be positively forbidden . . . It is at root a question of biology. There is abundant proof, alike furnished by the intermarriages of human races and by the interbreeding of animals, that when the varieties mingled diverge beyond a slight degree the result is inevitably a bad one in the long run.” 18 Perhaps it should not be a surprise that Itagaki returned from England chastened in his expectations of early constitutionalism. He accepted, though reluctantly, a title (Count) in the new peerage that was set up in 1884, stipulating only that it not be passed on to his heirs. He served in several cabinets, and grew gradually more conservative. His final position on the franchise was that, in the interest of maintaining social solidarity, it should be extended only to heads of households. Curiously, the same idea had been advanced in confidence by Spencer to Mori Arinori. Clearly, the Itsukaichi villagers had more confidence in their fellow citizens than did this shizoku leader. A number of observations emerge from this brief summary of political competition. The first relates to the virtually universal agreement that there should be a constitution, and hence a representative system, of some sort. This conviction pervaded society from the Itsukaichi villagers to the men who wrote “council chamber” into the Charter Oath. Can it be said that the Tokugawa parcelized jurisdiction, with representation, however tenuous, at the center, contributed to this? It is also true that the powerful nations of the world, as the Iwakura ambassadors discovered, had representative institutions. The central government in Tokyo saw a parliament as a device for deflecting suspicion of its Satsuma-Cho¯shu¯ narrowness, while those not at the center saw it as a way of sharing in that power. Second, one is impressed by the speed with which these convictions spread through Japanese society. At every point they intersected with the Japanese context, to be sure; the power structure saw a constitution as insulating the throne from partisanship, Tosa and Saga dissidents saw it as an avenue back to the influence they had lost, villagers as protection from arbitrary administrators, and tenants as justification for peasant revolt. Few, one can say, approached this with the same concerns, and none with the assumptions that pervade the Philadelphia meetings of the American constitutional convention. Nevertheless the momentum that carried things forward made Itagaki, the original standard bearer, virtually irrelevant by the time of his death. What slowed and then almost stopped that momentum was the codification of the Meiji Constitution. ## 3. Ito¯ Hirobumi and the Meiji Constitution Of all the Meiji leaders Ito¯ Hirobumi (1841–1909), as a farmer’s son, had the most modest parentage. Through adoption into the Ito¯ family and the patronage of Cho¯shu¯ leaders like Kido who recognized his ability, he was from the first a junior member of the leadership group. After the death of O<sup>¯</sup> kubo he emerged as the most talented and many-sided figure of the club. More inclined to collaboration and compromise than O<sup>¯</sup> kubo, he probably enjoyed, more than any other person, the trust of the young emperor. When he was assassinated by a Korean nationalist in 1909 Emperor Meiji’s eulogistic rescript, unlike the more formal pronouncements made for the death of other statesmen, expressed genuine grief. Ito¯ and his lifelong associate Inoue Kaoru were sent to England by Cho¯shu¯ in 1863—Ito¯ had just been promoted to samurai—and rushed back in an unsuccessful attempt to ward off the cannonades at Shimonoseki. Ito¯ was a central member of the Iwakura embassy, able to respond to welcomes with speeches in English. Together with Mori Arinori, then minister to Washington, he showed sufficient independence and confidence to annoy Kido, his senior. Everything prepared for his emergence as a central figure after the death of the original triumvirate of Kido, Saigo¯, and O<sup>¯</sup> kubo. He was the central figure in the ouster of O<sup>¯</sup> kuma from the government in 1881. The year after the emperor’s promise of a parliament, an imperial rescript commanded Ito¯ to head a commission to study the governmental institutions of other countries. Together with Ito¯ Myo¯ji, an able younger bureaucrat from Nagasaki, he left Japan in March 1883 and returned the following August. In Europe he was able to consult with Mori Arinori, now minister to London, and Aoki Shu¯zo¯, minister to Berlin. His principal investigations were carried on in Germany, where he consulted with the scholar Rudolph von Gneist, and Vienna, where Lorenz von Stein gave him a crash course in constitutional theory in a little classroom attached to his house, one in which he later taught other Japanese, including the peer Konoe Atsumaro. These preparations did not take place in a vacuum. The German state was taking form under the direction of Otto von Bismarck, who impressed Ito¯ so much that he was later chided for trying to mimic his mannerisms. Faced with vigorous competition from social democrats and warned by assassination attempts on the newly invested ruling house, Bismarck had devised a series of measures designed to safeguard state prerogatives from popular control. One can imagine that the German scholars, who doubted Japan’s preparedness for constitutional government, would in any case propose caution in extending rights to an Asian people. Ito¯ did not work alone. A leading German scholar, Herman Roesler (1834– 1894), had been recruited to come to Japan as adviser to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1878; by 1881 he was first legal adviser to the government, and he earned such trust from the leadership group that from then to 1893, when he left Japan, there were few major decisions on which his advice was not requested. This was preeminently the case with the constitution. Roesler became special counselor to Inoue Kowashi (1843–1895), a Kumamoto man whose intellectual lineage reached back to Yokoi Sho¯nan. It was this Inoue who had prepared the draft constitution for Iwakura Tomomi in the first round of ideas submitted to the old Genro¯in, and his views on the centrality of the emperor were now of critical importance. The correspondence between Ito¯ and Inoue during Ito¯’s absence from Japan makes it possible to trace the elements that came together in the Meiji Constitution. Another person involved was Kaneko Kentaro¯, a long-lived (1853–1942) Fukuoka man who graduated from Harvard in 1878. These three—Inoue Kowashi, Kaneko Kentaro¯, and Ito¯ Myo¯ji as scribe—worked as Ito¯’s principal assistants, and Roesler’s memoranda and commentaries were vital to the whole. Although a number of constitutional provisions in the final product followed the example of the Prussian constitution of 1850, it should not be concluded that the goal was to create an East Asian Prussia. Roesler was highly critical of Prussian statism. He argued the case for what he called a social monarchy, and wrote that the voting and taxing rights were the central features of a constitutional order. At the same time he was equally opposed to the separation of powers incorporated in Western European and especially English practice, and thought ultimate power should be united in the monarch. Gneist and Stein were also relatively moderate in the German spectrum of constitutional thought, and their vision of a rechtsstaat, or government of laws, was by no means unchallenged by more reactionary contemporaries. Yet they were united on the dangers involved in leaving matters entirely to representatives of the people, and argued that disparities of wealth and irresponsible individualism could combine to create irreparable fissures in the body politic. Roesler’s idea of a “social monarchy” sought to counter both factionalism and autocracy. Ultimately, though, his preference for a simple statement of monarchical primacy lost out to his employers’ insistence on invoking monarchical divinity.<sup>19</sup> Every move that Ito¯ made upon his return to Japan can be seen as the product of his determination to protect the imperial institution from popular radicalism—and, to be sure, the central role he and his colleagues occupied in the power structure. The first step was to formalize a divide between emperor and commoners by the creation of a new peerage. This was announced in a decree of July 1884. Under its terms 11 daimyo and 7 court nobles (kuge) were designated Prince (ko¯shaku) or Duke; 24 daimyo and 9 nobles were named Marquis (shishaku); 73 daimyo, 30 kuge, and the inner core of government leaders became Count or Marquis (ko¯shaku, written with a different Chinese character); 325 daimyo and 91 nobles were named Viscount (shishaku, again with a different character); and 74 daimyo, but no nobles, were named Baron (danshaku). Thus a total of 507 former daimyo joined the 137 court nobles to form the new peerage as kizoku (peers). To be sure there were additional distinctions between the “old” (noble) and “new” (warrior) peers in snobbery and status, and nine court ranks, each of two degrees, of ancient Chinese provenance, provided additional differentiation. Nevertheless the top of the old Tokugawa elite had now been absorbed into the old kuge houses. At the very summit, the Tokugawa were ranked with the illustrious house of Konoe, suitable for imperial consorts and other honors. Princes of the Blood (shinno¯) were above the throng altogether. Many thought it strange to institute a peerage in the age of modernization, but Ito¯ was perfectly frank about the reasons. There was a danger that people might slip into the spirit of republicanism, he wrote; although it might seem contrary to the trend of the times and against people’s sentiments, the peerage provided the opportunity “to take advantage of the fact that the last flow of feudal reverence for the Emperor has not died out.” He was sorry that in coining rank titles it seemed necessary “to bring out the Chinese system,” and invited his associates to come up with alternatives if they could do so. It has to be pointed out that the only function of this new peerage was to people an anticipated House of Peers in the future Diet. The newly appointed peers were not counts or barons of anything in particular, and although modest financial provision was made for them they enjoyed little more than prestige. When that was withdrawn after World War II they disappeared into Japanese society almost without a ripple. Ito¯’s next step was to separate the Emperor from the rather Heian-period Council of State (Dajo¯kan) that had been set up. As it had been worked out the emperor was directly above three ministers (Left, Internal, and Right); there were councillors below them, and special responsibilities were allocated to a lower rank (kyo¯, used today for the English “sir”). There were two problems about this; the councillors had shrunk steadily in number and responsibility was diffuse, and there was no provision for the emperor’s special advisers—elders and court figures. Put differently, the emperor was dangerously close to public responsibility for governing. In place of this came a cabinet system that was announced in December 1885. This move brought Japan into line with the Western countries whose favor it needed for treaty reform, but there were also sound internal reasons for the change. Under the cabinet system the court was protected by separate bureaucracies, that of the Imperial Household and the lord keeper of the privy seal, both safely removed from the realm of politics. Political direction derived from an appointed prime minister, under whom functional ministries took shape. There was some awkwardness about relocating Sanjo¯ Sanetomi. After the death of Iwakura in 1883 he had, as senior noble, been minister of state (dajo¯ daijin). With due negotiation the solution arrived at was to have Sanjo¯ himself propose the change in a memorial prepared for him by Inoue Kowashi, after which a safe berth as lord privy seal combined honor with proximity to the palace. Ito¯ himself emerged in 1885 as Japan’s first prime minister. Around him he collected cabinet ministers evenly divided between Cho¯shu¯ and Satsuma, with one slot each for Tosa (Tani Kanjo¯) and the former bakufu official and diplomat Enomoto Takeaki. Surrounded by men of the caliber of Matsukata, Yamagata, and Mori, to name only three, he was first among equals. From now until 1900 prime minsters came from the Satsuma-Cho¯shu¯ group represented in Ito¯’s first cabinet; they served almost in rotation between Satsuma and Cho¯shu¯, with the exception of a brief interval when Itagaki and O<sup>¯</sup> kuma were permitted to form a (short-lived) cabinet in 1898. Work on the constitution could now be speeded. It proceeded in strict secrecy; Harvard graduate Kaneko Kentaro¯ pointed out, if justification was needed, that the United States Constitution had also been worked out without public input. Once again, the central problem was the way power should be reserved for the emperor. The rescript of 1881 announcing that a parliament would be promulgated had indicated this; “with regard to the limitations upon the Imperial prerogative, and the constitution of the Parliament, We shall decide hereafter and make proclamation in due time.” Easier said than done. Roesler’s drafts and memoranda advocated Western formulations for declarations of monarchical authority, while Ito¯ and the others sought shelter in the greatest possible emphasis on antiquity and divinity. Ito¯ repeatedly said, and wrote, that while Western countries had a bedrock of civic responsibility and conservatism in religion and values, Japan did not. As he put it in presenting the final document to the Privy Council, “In Japan the power of religion is slight, and there is none that could serve as the axis [alternatively pivot, foundation, or cornerstone] of the state. Buddhism, when it flourished, was able to unite people of all classes, but it is today in a state of decline. Shinto¯, though it is based on and perpetuates the teachings of our ancestors, as a religion lacks the power to move the hearts of men. In Japan, it is only the imperial house that can become the axis of the state. It is with this point in mind that we have placed so high a value on imperial authority and endeavored to restrict it as little as possible.”<sup>20</sup> He had come to this conclusion earlier, and writing about it from Europe he expressed his satisfaction with “I can die a happy man.” In April 1888 Ito¯ was able to report to Privy Seal Sanjo¯ that the draft of the constitution and Imperial House law had been completed. Now it was necessary to legitimate it through discussion and imperial ratification. To this end a Privy Council was created later that month. Ito¯ stepped down as prime minister, vacating that spot for Kuroda Kiyotaka of Satsuma, to head the new council, which was the guardian of the new constitution. Discussions began in May and concluded in January 1889. Forty-one regular and three special meetings were held in the presence of the emperor. Woodblock artists capture the solemnity of the council’s work, portraying its members resplendent in uniform and decorations arranged around an enormous council table. The work continued to be secret, and council members were not trusted with copies of the documents under discussion. There were special reasons for this secrecy. In 1886 the political parties, after several years in dissolution, had begun the organization of what was to become their Grand Alliance (Daido¯ Danketsu). The popular pulse was inflamed by an unruly encounter at Nagasaki in which Chinese sailors had rioted against Japanese police in a row that left casualties on both sides. The popular press and mood was also highly critical of the government’s abject (as they saw it) efforts to win foreign favor to speed treaty reform. O<sup>¯</sup> kuma, who had been recalled as foreign minister and whose proposals to improve extraterritoriality seemed inadequate, very nearly lost his life, and did lose a leg, in an assassination attempt. The atmosphere was highly charged, and the party stalwarts would have seized on any governmental slip to increase their hold on public opinion. Discussions began with distribution of Roesler’s opinion of the proposed constitution. More than a month was devoted to the Imperial House law. Only now was succession limited to a male heir, a step in the Europeanization of the throne. After this, in June, Ito¯ introduced discussion of the constitution itself with his explanation of the need to bolster the imperial institution as the fulcrum, or foundation, of government. If they failed to build such a rampart, he warned, “politics will fall into the hands of the uncontrollable masses; and then the government will become powerless, and the country will be ruined. To preserve its existence and to govern the people, the state must not lose the use of the administrative power . . . Because imperial sovereignty is the cornerstone of our constitution, our system is not based on the European ideas in force in some European countries of joint rule of the king and the people. This is the fundamental principle of this draft constitution, and it will become evident in every article.”<sup>21</sup> Debate found Ito¯ defending his draft from others, some no less “modern” and well traveled, who feared that Ito¯ had gone too far in proposing phrases like “with the consent of the Diet”; would not, Mori Arinori asked, this weaken the sovereign power of the throne? Mori argued for a Diet that was merely advisory, but Ito¯ held his ground in defense of the draft; “if we want to estab lish a constitutional government,” he said, “we have to give the right of decision to the Diet. Without the consent of the Diet, budgets or laws cannot be determined. This is the essence of constitutional government.” After vigorous discussion the draft was approved with minor changes. It was then made official by an imperial promulgation on February 11, 1889. The date selected, for the ascension to rule of Jimmu, the sun goddess’s grandson, became a national holiday (National Foundation Day), and conveyed the solemnity with which the occasion was designed as both inauguration and continuation. As in 1868, modernity and change were presented as a renewal of antiquity. Nothing illustrates this in more striking fashion than the mythology that was invoked in the constitution’s opening paragraph: Having, by virtue of the glories of Our Ancestors, ascended the Throne of a lineal succession unbroken for ages eternal; desiring to promote the welfare of, and to give development to the moral and intellectual faculties of Our beloved subjects, the very same that have been favored with the benevolent care and affectionate vigilance of Our Ancestors, and hoping to maintain the prosperity of the State, in concert with Our people and with their support, We hereby promulgate, in pursuance of Our Imperial Rescript [of 1881] a fundamental law of the State, to exhibit the principles, by which We are guided in Our conduct, and to point out to what Our descendants and Our subjects and their descendants are forever to conform. Ito¯’s greatest work had been accomplished. He would serve again and frequently, as prime minister, as designer of the peace after Japan’s victory over China in 1895, as emissary to the courts of Europe (and recipient of an honorary degree from Yale) before losing his life as Resident General in Korea. He probably had the broadest vision of the Meiji leadership group. It is for the constitution that he is best known. His picture, together with the Diet building, appeared on the basic thousand-yen note of post–World War II Japan. ## 4. Yamagata Aritomo and the Imperial Army Yamagata Aritomo (1838–1922) was, after Ito¯, the most important of the Meiji leaders. If Ito¯’s successive posts—from chairing the constitutional preparation committee to prime minister four times to chief of Privy Council to Resident General in Korea—shadowed critical points in the political power structure, Yamagata’s career—commander in Restoration wars, commander of the Konoe Imperial Guard, vice minister, then minister, of the army, chief of the new General Staff, councillor, home minister through much of the 1880s, always concurrently general, and twice prime minister—indicated the locus of power in the state control structure as it took form. In some ways Yamagata’s shadow was longer than Ito¯’s; he outlived him by more than a decade, and left behind a more powerful faction group in the army and the bureaucracy. Cho¯shu¯ domination of the army lasted much longer than Satsuma-Cho¯shu¯ domination of the government. Yet Yamagata and Ito¯ also shared many experiences. Both came from modest beginnings in Cho¯shu¯ —Yamagata from a samurai foot soldier family—and both studied in Yoshida Sho¯in’s village school. Both participated to the full in the excitement and danger of Restoration days. Ito¯’s experience of foreign countries began earlier, but Yamagata lost no time in requesting a foreign tour of inspection and spent six months abroad with Saigo¯ Tsugumichi (brother of Takamori, and a navy leader) immediately after the Tokugawa fall. With this shared background each exercised an influence beyond his specialty; Ito¯ demanded and received full participation in army decisions in the two decades before his death, and Yamagata, though army-centered from the first, left a strong imprint on domestic government and police organization during periods as home minister and later as prime minister. They were very different in person, Ito¯ affable and garrulous and Yamagata stern, private, and silent. They were frequently in disagreement, but their shared background and Cho¯shu¯ interest made cooperation possible. Satsuma-Cho¯shu¯ domination in the army and navy lasted as long as it did in part because of the prestige associated with the role of the two domains in the Restoration. More recently the longevity of Yenan veterans in the People’s Liberation Army of China provides something of a parallel. Historians refer to the Meiji government as a hanbatsu, a “domain clique” of Satsuma and Cho¯shu¯. As with zaibatsu, the economic royalists, the term was one of criticism and reproach. Yet the group was far from monolithic. There were sharp bureaucratic clashes between Satsuma and Cho¯shu¯, and divisions within Cho¯shu¯, over the question of military direction. The group was united, however, by a shared determination to prevent the erosion of what they had achieved by “outside” political partisans. Party politicians frequently called for national unity and decried “selfish” hanbatsu tactics, but the hanbatsu leaders saw their leadership as merited and essential to the imperial cause, and since they largely controlled access to the emperor they seldom lost out. Most countries in the West were restructuring their military at the time the Japanese were building theirs. In Japan, however, the military’s newness was one of its strongest features; European militaries were sometimes charged with being backward or conservative, but “Japan’s new army considered itself to be the embodiment of the spirit of a new age.”<sup>22</sup> At the time the Meiji leaders took over, every country in the West with the possible exception of the United States, which had just demobilized after the Civil War, was rebuilding and rethinking its military system on the basis of the lessons of the wars of Italian and German unification, the American Civil War, and especially the Franco- Prussian War. Industrial development and population growth made for new possibilities in the movement, equipment, and direction of mass armies of citizen-soldiers. It would have been strange if Meiji leaders, themselves so recently samurai, had failed to absorb this lesson on their missions to the West and apply it to their own country. In immediate post-Restoration days many men continued to look to French officers and tactics for guidance. Despite the French defeat at the hands of Prussia, the Meiji government regarded French theory and structure of military as preeminent. Moreover, substantial moves in the direction of French guidance had been begun in late Tokugawa, and it was logical for the regime to order, as it did in 1870, all domains to follow the French model for their land forces and the English model for their navies. Land forces turned to German models in the 1880s. This was largely under the leadership of Yamagata’s principal disciple and future genro¯ Katsura Taro¯ (1847–1913), who spent a total of almost eight years in Germany. In 1878 a separate General Staff headquarters was established; Katsura had followed, and anticipated, German plans for a similar organization. Katsura was also responsible for the invitation to the military theorist Klemens Wilhelm Jakop Meckel to come to Japan. Meckel served as consultant from 1885 to 1888, and among the military his influence was comparable to that of Roesler among the jurists. The fall of Saigo¯ Takamori gave Cho¯shu¯ a commanding lead in army control, but in the navy Satsuma leadership continued strong, though less dominant than Cho¯shu¯’s with the army. The list of seventy-two full generals down to 1926 shows 30 percent from Cho¯shu¯; while of the forty full admirals 44 percent were from Satsuma. In the central bureaucratic and command structure that preponderance was stronger still. No navy builder, however, dominated the scene to the degree that Yamagata did the army during his lifetime. For the navy the model had from the first been British, and it continued to be so. Promising naval officers were sent to England for study and often served ten years or more on English ships, and the bulk of the early navy was ordered from the great English shipyards. For some years the navy resisted pressures to bring its command structure into line with that of the army, but in the late 1880s army and navy general staffs, independent of their respective ministries, were brought under a General Staff; this brought both command structures into line.<sup>23</sup> Yamagata’s opinions played an important role in the conscription act that was issued in 1872. He had commanded the Cho¯shu¯ mixed commonersamurai units in the Restoration warfare and, himself of insignificant status in the samurai hierarchy, was convinced of the merit of peasant soldiers. He also saw conscription as a way of educating future generations in citizenship. Give a boy six years in lower, and six in middle school, he argued, and “in due course the nation will become a great civil and military university.” It required a generation for this goal to be achieved. The first conscription law permitted exemptions for those who could pay and for first sons, and consequently recruited a plebeian and largely illiterate cohort. Moreover those called up were relatively few, since the government could not afford more; on the eve of the Satsuma Rebellion the army numbered only about 33,000 men. At the bureaucratic level a series of experiments and changes slowed, but ultimately improved, efficiency as work on the training of an officer corps began to take shape. In barrack and officer academy the theme constantly invoked was that of loyalty to the emperor. The Imperial Army and Navy were the emperor’s. He himself was moved into military uniform in the 1880s. This represented an enormous change for the long-secluded monarchy, which, in contrast to the European tradition of rulers on horseback, had always been associated with the arts of peace. It followed that Princes of the Blood were also expected to take up military careers, and for some years the offices of chief of staff were designated for members of the ruling family. The tie between ruler and army was seen as the best defense against localism, class antagonism, and disruption, as in 1878, when a rebellion within the imperial guard had to be suppressed. At the same time it was important that the emperor refrain from exercising his power and delegate it to experienced professionals. The “solution,” which gave the high command direct access to the ruler, strengthened the hand of the military in domestic affairs. Ordinances stipulated that the chief of staff should be the emperor’s major adviser, with direct access to him on policy and strategy. The right of “direct command” might not be exercised very often by the sovereign himself, but it prevented interference in decisions affecting the military from the civil government and so gave military advisers a powerful weapon in internal political disputes. With the advent of the political party movement and memories of shizoku insurrections still fresh, Yamagata was explicit in instructions to the military to stay out of politics. In 1882 the emperor transmitted to Yamagata the Imperial Precepts to Soldiers and Sailors, a rescript that had been prepared at his direction. Designed to serve as moral guidance for the modern armed forces, it reminded soldiers and sailors that it was not impetuous bravery that counted, but prudence, self-control, and disciplined loyalty. “Soldiers and Sailors,” it read in part, “We are your supreme Commander-in-Chief. Our relations with you will be most intimate when We rely upon you as Our limbs and you look up to Us as your head.” It went on to discuss at some length loyalty, respect for superiors, valor, faithfulness, righteousness, and simplicity. Values that had become the core of samurai bushido¯ were prescribed for the commoner recruit. Having abolished the samurai class, Japan now needed a nation of samurai. “These five articles should not be disregarded for even a moment by soldiers and sailors. For putting them into practice, the all important thing is sincerity . . . If only the heart be sincere, anything can be accomplished. Moreover these five articles are the ‘Grand Way’ of Heaven and earth and the universal law of humanity, easy to observe and to practice.”<sup>24</sup> The bond between emperor and armed services was symbolized by his uniform and his attendance at military exercises and the graduation ceremonies of the army and navy academies. The military was by no means completely united, however, and men from “outside” domains frequently proved restive under the domination of the mainstream hanbatsu factions. Military expansion and new training institutions increased the supply of officers, and the new men found themselves up against the old guard at every point. General Miura Goro¯, director of the Military Academy and himself from Cho¯shu¯, criticized his seniors repeatedly. “The high-ranking commanders in Japan’s army,” he wrote, “are peculiar to our nation. They were irregular soldiers who fought battles at the time of the Meiji Restoration without any knowledge or experience of modern techniques for commanding troops, unlike the officers of today, who are well-versed in modern strategy and operations.” In the 1880s there were several tests of the ability of the high command to resist the emperor’s wishes while professing to be his “limbs.” Apparently uncomfortable with Cho¯shu¯ dominance, the emperor made clear his desire for a reshuffle of posts following a military reorganization in 1885, and let it be known that he favored higher posts for four outsiders, one of them Miura, who had become estranged from the mainstream faction. The emperor’s suggestion had the support of Ito¯ and Inoue Kaoru, but the issue became entangled with a budget wrangle in which the army was resisting Matsukata cutbacks. Ito¯ and Inoue, powerful as they were, found it necessary to back the high command in order to get its approval for budget restrictions. In the compromises that resulted the four “outsider” generals lost their chance and retired from the army. The emperor’s cautious approaches were thus set aside by his generals, who thought they knew better. Yamagata, however, also responded by moving army leaders into civilian posts, thereby giving himself additional support in other areas. There was more at stake in this than personality and money, for the four outsiders favored a smaller and defensive military force. Katsura Taro¯ and Kawakami So¯roku, deputy chief of the General Staff, prevailed with a joint memorandum that put it starkly: Nations maintain an army for two reasons. First, to defend themselves against enemy attack or to preserve their independence. The armies of most second-class European nations are of this kind. Second, to display the nation’s power, resorting to arms when necessary to execute national policy, as in the case of first-class European powers. Japan’s aim in maintaining armed forces is not that of the second-class nations but that of the first-class powers.<sup>25</sup> In other words, the army was destined for greater things than national defense alone. Yamagata’s importance was not limited to the military. In 1883 he added the responsibilities of the Ministry of Home Affairs to those he held as chief of staff, and in the first cabinet Ito¯ organized in 1885 he continued in that post. Now he turned his attention to organizing institutions of local government and a national police system. It is easy to see why. The People’s Rights Movement was growing in power, and the countryside was resisting the new tax structure imposed by the Matsukata deflation. Nothing seemed more urgent than establishing institutions that could be insulated from and counter expressions of popular discontent. It must be remembered that even Ito¯, in his correspondence, was afraid that radical sentiments were rising. For a soldier like Yamagata, the “enemy” had to be isolated and checked. Time, he thought, was working against the government, and it was important to stabilize things while it could still be done. Yamagata’s approach to structuring local government derived from his military preoccupations; control, order, and uniformity were the goals. Similar concerns and restructuring were going forward in Germany in the 1880s, and Albert Mosse was invited to come to Japan for four years beginning in 1886. Local self-government was an important part of Yamagata’s plans. In his mind, Roger Hackett has written, “conscription and local self-government were clearly related: both represented service to the state; both bound the people to the central government, strengthening unity and contributing to stability.”<sup>26</sup> To this end he advocated and secured the election of lower-echelon officials, while at the same time he ruled out their participation in political parties. City mayors, district heads, and prefectural governors, however, were to be appointed directly or indirectly by the government. These regulations were completed in 1888, and issued as Law No. 1 of the nation. Police matters were no less important. A kempeitai, or gendarmerie, was established in 1881; originally restricted to military concerns with added functions like the censorship of books permitted in barracks, it would exercise increasing power over civil life in the militarist Japan that lay ahead. The larger Meiji police system had initially taken the French system for its model, and the centrality of the Tokyo Metropolitan Police structure retained many of these features. Yamagata, however, turned his attention to the German model more in line with the political and legal models that were being followed in the 1880s. Once again a German adviser was brought in. More important was the emphasis on training institutes that were set up in every prefecture, with instructors chosen from the graduates of a national academy. As in the army, formal training and a sense of professionalism were emphasized. Furthermore the police system, theretofore concentrated at the center, was extended into the countryside. Police posts throughout the country increased from 3,068 in 1885 to 11,357 five years later, and the ubiquitous presence of police boxes in village centers as well as urban intersections dates from these years.<sup>27</sup> Yamagata’s concern with order also produced legislation that extended the power of the police in daily life. In 1886 regulations forbade the petitioning of public officials. Those planning any kind of public meeting had to provide the details, reasons, and names of those attending to the police. More striking still was the Peace Preservation Ordinance of 1887 that was designed to rid Tokyo of its political troublemakers. The home minister now forbade all secret societies and assemblies. He could halt any meeting or assembly, and he received authority to expel from a seven-and-a-half-mile radius of the imperial palace anyone judged likely to create a public disturbance or disrupt public tranquillity. After the order was issued on December 26, 1887, 540 political party members classed as dangerous were expelled in an operation carried out with military precision. Ozaki Yukio, among those banned from the capital, later wrote that he was not to have a police escort again until he was appointed a cabinet minister a decade later. In conversation with his guardians, who were sobered by the prominence of the man they were escorting out of town, he learned that they had instructions to cut him down on the spot if, as it was hoped, he tried to resist. In 1888 Yamagata made a tour of Europe to study other systems of local government at first hand. In 1889 he formed his own cabinet for the first time, serving simultaneously as premier and home minister. Throughout all this he retained his military status and importance. There was a consistency about his work and career and tactics, an emphasis on discipline, but also caution. He and his generation had experienced Japan’s weakness and unpreparedness, and he was determined that no internal foes or foreign adventures would be allowed to threaten the safety and stability of the imperial state. ## 5. Mori Arinori and Meiji Education We have encountered Mori Arinori (1847–1889) at several points in this narrative. As a young Satsuma samurai he was assigned to the study of naval matters and sent to England in 1865. There, while studying chemistry, physics, and mathematics, he became the disciple of a religious teacher named Thomas Lake Harris, the founder of a utopian group called the Brotherhood of the New Life. Mori became a Christian and followed Harris and his community to New York State. When the bakufu fell, Harris convinced Mori that his duty lay with the new Japan, and he returned home to serve in the new government. His command of English made him an ideal minister to Washington, where he was also charged with a study of education. After a special mission to China he was assigned to London, where he introduced Itagaki Taisuke to Herbert Spencer in the Athenaeum.<sup>28</sup> Mori was curious, impressionable, rash, and supremely self-confident. His premature advocacy of the banning of samurai swords cost him his position for a time, he angered conservatives by a suggestion that Japan substitute English for Japanese, he favored equal rights for women in marriage, and he asked Fukuzawa Yukichi to arrange a marriage ceremony with contractual equality. In 1889 light-hearted disrespect for the sun goddess’s shrine at Ise cost him his life at the hands of a true believer. Mori was appointed minister of education in the first cabinet that Ito¯ Hirobumi organized in 1885. Although he was by no means a clan-centered authoritarian, his brief tenure in that post left Japan with its pre–World War II education system: the lower schools rigidly centralized and emperorcentered, the upper reaches less controlled, focused on scholarly inquiry, and struggling for autonomy. The education system Mori inherited had begun with a Fundamental Code of Education in 1872 whose preamble carried the enthusiasm of early Meiji reform in language that combined the respect for education of homilies used in commoner schools in Tokugawa years with denunciation of the old society: Learning is the key to success in life, and no man can afford to neglect it. It is ignorance that leads man astray, makes him destitute, disrupts his family, and in the end destroys his life. Centuries have elapsed since schools were first established, but man has gone astray through misguidance. Because learning was viewed as the exclusive province of the samurai and his superiors, farmers, artisans, merchants, and women have neglected it altogether and do not even know its meaning. Even those few among the samurai and his superiors who did pursue learning were apt to claim it to be for the state, not knowing that it was the very foundation of success in life . . . The Department of Education will soon establish an educational sys tem and will revise the regulations relating thereto from time to time; wherefore there shall, in the future, be no community with an illiterate family, nor a family with an illiterate person . . . Hereafter . . . every man shall, of his own accord, subordinate all other matters to the education of his children.<sup>29</sup> These were ambitious goals, but they would require centralization and money, and neither was as yet at hand. In implementing them the builders of the Meiji education system had three major ingredients: the centralization of a single system for what had been a great variety of regional and local institutions, the replacement of domain schools oriented toward samurai by newly established official schools that fostered and rewarded talent wherever it was found, and the substitution of a single national grid for the discontinuous and unpredictable public and private schools.<sup>30</sup> The Fundamental Code set ambitious goals for what was to be a national system; it envisioned a grid of 8 university districts, each of which would divide into 32 middle school districts, each in turn would have 210 primary schools. Here France provided the model of administrative organization. It is not surprising that resources fell short of achieving these goals and that the decade that followed saw discontinuity in detail, though never in commitment to mass education. The underlying intent was clear: popular education was to be a major goal of state policy. Financial limitations made for attempts at local support and local variety, but within a remarkably short time even mountain villages found schooling centered around village schools. An 1875 survey of the roughly 20,000 primary schools then in use found that 40 percent were housed in Buddhist temples (reminiscent of the old terakoya), 33 percent in private homes (as with the old shijuku), and 18 percent in new buildings. Those structures, built when possible in Western style with elaborate touches like porticoes and towers, were harbingers of modernization and centers of civic life. Their towers housed bells or drums that signaled the hours of the day and served as watchtowers for fires, and the buildings often saw additional service as centers for police and public health functions like vaccinations. Meiji literature conveys numerous tributes to the significance of these imposing buildings, and contemporary Japan has singled out the best of those that survived for immortality on postage stamps. The real story is that of the diffusion of literacy throughout the Japanese population. “For most local officials,” Richard Rubinger writes, “the essence of the new school law boiled down to establishing public elementary schools and increasing attendance in them.”<sup>31</sup> Enrollment grew steadily, though in some areas, slowly, until by 1905 it was virtually universal. Analysis of local data shows a dramatic leveling process. In more “developed” parts of Japan, where a variety of schools already existed, progress was slow, but in more remote and “backward” domains rates of attendance—and hence of literacy—rose dramatically. Male pupils at first outnumbered females, as could be expected, but that distinction too was gradually lost. Nevertheless army figures provide a sobering check. Granted that educated, urban, and affluent sons were a minority among conscripts, an 1892 army survey showed that almost 27 percent of all new army enlistees were still illiterate, while another 34 percent were rated as marginally literate. Even on the eve of World War I, only some 4 percent of conscripts had reached a level beyond middle school.<sup>32</sup> In comparative, world terms Japan was somewhat, though probably not seriously, behind the progress of major Western nations. The exhortation of early Meiji calls to education echoed the language of goals of achievement and self-realization of American and English educators. In lower schools books by the educator Fukuzawa Yukichi were so ubiquitous that the term “Fukuzawa books” acquired a generic ring, while middle school materials gave a prominent place to works like Francis Wayland’s Elements of Moral Science and the study of English. The government established numerous schools for foreign-language instruction, and private educators and missionaries started more. In the 1870s 156 English-language schools were training over 6,000 students. For a decade and more the scene was one of considerable confusion. There was a tug of war between central authorities and communities in which village schools, like that in Itsukaichi, had developed with the support and allegiance of the local elite, and communities resisted and negotiated with the new agents of centralization.<sup>33</sup> Many able young men looked anxiously for guidance and direction in the welter of new cultural influences that were sweeping into Japan. The journalist and historian Tokutomi Soho¯ (1863–1957), for instance, began as one of Captain Janes’s students in Kumamoto, but attended seven schools in as many years, encountering Confucian, English, and Christian principles, and his writings show impressive familiarity with each. In the 1880s Meiji government planners became concerned about content and control. Not a few educational institutions were set up as a result of the People’s Rights Movement; Chiba Takusaburo¯, the author of the “People’s Constitution” drawn up in the mountain village west of Tokyo, it will be remembered, was a former Tokugawa partisan who found employment in a village school. Conservatives like Motoda Eifu, Confucian tutor to the Meiji emperor, deplored such schools as “political discussion groups,” and extended their fears to the general reliance on foreign learning.<sup>34</sup> The Education Ministry, together with most branches of the executive, was devoting impressive proportions of its budget to hiring foreign teachers and sending students abroad. These misgivings began to come to a head just as the Meiji government was rocked by the crisis of 1881, in which O<sup>¯</sup> kuma Shigenobu challenged the Satsuma-Cho¯shu¯ main line through his advocacy of an early constitution and his public criticism of the sale of government-funded developments. Motoda had provided the opening salvo in what he saw as a war for the soul of Japan with an imperial rescript the Emperor Meiji issued in 1879 as “The Great Principles of Education.” “The essence of education, our traditional national aim, and a watchword for all men,” it read, is to make clear the ways of benevolence, justice, loyalty, and filial piety, and to master knowledge and skill and through these to pursue the Way of Man. In recent days, people have been going to extremes. They take unto themselves a foreign civilization whose only values are fact-gathering and techniques, thus violating the rules of good manners and bringing harm to our customary ways . . . For morality, the study of Confucius is the best guide. People should cultivate sincerity and moral conduct, and after that they should turn to the cultivation of the various subjects of learning in accordance with their ability.<sup>35</sup> Even before this, official enthusiasm for foreign language instruction had begun to ebb as more emphasis was placed on ethics and Japanese literature in order to build a nation of soldier-subjects. The polarities of the debate that ensued can be suggested (and perhaps exaggerated) by the view held out by some army leaders who felt that the main business of the schools was to prepare ordinary people to become the emperor’s soldiers. Lt. Col. To¯jo¯ Eikyo¯, father of the prime minister who led Japan into war with the West in 1941, addressed an educational association in 1897 with the ringing assertion that it is vital that you Educators of the People know the educational methods used by the army, which is the main school. It is the duty of the preparatory school to educate the people in such a way that they can be educated easily when they arrive at the main [army] school. You are the mothers who bear the army.<sup>36</sup> Not everyone would have agreed with so stark a military mission for the schools, though everyone did agree that the health of the new state depended upon the development of patriotic participation. At the other extreme was the educator and publicist Fukuzawa Yukichi, who argued the need for an education that would build independence and foster practicality, in contrast to what he considered the impractical and uneconomic moralities of Confucianism and nativism. The enormous popularity of Fukuzawa’s books in private and school use concerned Motoda and other Confucianists. During the 1870s educational policy had been delegated to Tanaka Fujimaro, the author of the Fundamental Code of 1872, and it was the “excesses” of those policies that Motoda deplored. A practical statesmen like Ito¯ Hirobumi was understandably wary of educators like Motoda, who sought to prescribe learning for the country, and leaned toward a more open and varied course, but during the preparation of the constitution he had other and larger concerns on his mind. Ito¯ responded to the rescript Motoda had prepared for the emperor with sharp criticism, and saw to it that Motoda’s post of Confucian tutor to the emperor was abolished. But his victory was short-lived; direction of the Ministry of Education changed to conservative hands; morals were put at the head of the curriculum, and a new directive for elementary school teachers issued in 1881 made it clear that “Loyalty to the Imperial House, love of country, filial piety toward parents, respect for superiors, faith in friends, charity toward inferiors, and respect for oneself constitute the Great Path of human morality.” Translations of Western textbooks on morality were ruled out for use in schools, central control was strengthened, and the new concern with Confucianism led to the appointment of Nishimura Shigeki as head of a Compilation Board of the Ministry of Education. Henceforth Nishimura’s writings on training in morals became the basis for courses on “ethics,” or shu¯shin, that were regarded as the center of the curriculum.<sup>37</sup> Schools were to be walled off from the agitation for political rights that was spreading, and in 1880 an ordinance made it illegal for teachers to attend political meetings or lectures. In this assertion of control financial concerns were also involved. Early plans for education had been premised on support from local taxes, but in the years of the Matsukata deflation local resistance to taxation made it necessary for the central government to increase its share of the funding. With greater central input it was probably inevitable that central direction should increase as well. While Ito¯ was in Germany to study foreign constitutions Mori Arinori, then posted to London, traveled to the Continent to visit him, and the two discovered that they were in basic agreement on the subject of education. Ito¯ had been impressed by the educational thought of his Austrian mentor Lorenz von Stein, and indeed invited him to Japan to direct the Japanese effort. Mori had devoted much of his time in his Washington tour of duty in the early 1870s to study of the American education system, and took advantage of his time in London to familiarize himself with leading educational authorities in the major states of Western Europe. He had retained much of his youthful enthusiasm for a well-rounded educational program that produced strength of body as well as mind. He was also increasingly dismayed by what he regarded as the superficiality of Japan’s early political party movement. Increasingly, he thought it important for Japan to base institutions and practice on its own tradition. (It may not be irrelevant that most of his Western counselors agreed enthusiastically.) Ito¯, having failed to attract the services of von Stein, asked Mori to undertake the direction of Japanese education, and promised him the portfolio of education when he organized his first cabinet in 1885. Mori returned to Japan well read, well informed, and well connected with leading spokesmen for education. Nevertheless he was not in the first instance an educator so much as he was a statesman and an administrator. He was concerned with the role of education in nation building, and with the primacy of state over personal interests. He was also more of a nationalist than he had been before his trip— a common phenomenon among Meiji leaders who returned from the West— and was convinced of the importance of the imperial institution for education in Japan of the future. On this point he was more pragmatist than believer, convinced of the utility and centrality of the institution. What mattered was the state; “the best way,” he insisted, “is to focus on the state alone.” Education was not only for the pupils, but for the “sake of the country.” Continental and English education combined to persuade him that a multitrack system that trained an elite for state service was the path Japan should follow, and Spencerian visions of competition between nations made this essential. “Anyone who is the least bit Japanese,” he said at one point, “must try to advance Japan from the third rank, where she now stands, to the second; and when she achieves the second rank, then to the first; and finally to the foremost position in the entire world.” Nevertheless Mori also retained a belief in the values that his Christian sponsor, Thomas Lake Harris, had espoused in his utopian community. Harris’s emphases on “Discipline, Friendship, and Obedience [to God],” now secularized, became the Mori’s slogan for Japan’s new normal schools. Conservatives who feared Mori’s Western leanings and reputed Christianity did their best to block his appointment to the education post, but Ito¯ was determined and he had his way. “No other education minister in modern Japan,” writes Mori’s biographer, “comes anywhere near Mori in the extent of his personal imprint upon the entire school system.”<sup>38</sup> Shortly after Mori’s investment as minister a group of three ordinances gave the Japanese school system the form it was to retain until the end of World War II. It is appropriate to take these from the top down, beginning with the Imperial University. Tokyo University, as it would become known, had emerged from a congerie of educational institutions that went back to the Tokugawa School of Western Learning, but in attraction and quality it was hard pressed by a number of private schools. First among these were Fukuzawa Yukichi’s Keio¯ and a rival, Waseda, that was established by O<sup>¯</sup> kuma in 1882 after he had been driven out of the government. The graduates of these schools, and of additional private institutions set up for the study of modern law and foreign languages, many by missionaries, played important roles in political agitation, journalism, and private enterprise. Mori distanced the university from such competition by naming it the “Imperial” University. Its graduates qualified for posts in the bureaucracy without having to stand for the examinations that winnowed out competitors from other schools. A second national university was established at Kyoto in 1897, but Tokyo Imperial University, as it now became, stood at the pinnacle of the education system. Its top graduates were honored by the emperor and assured of prestigious careers. Its costs were born entirely by the central government. In makeup the student body was drawn for the most part “in fact if not by statute to the sons of upper- and upper-middle class families (of civil bureaucrats, military officers, landlords, rich farmers, businessmen, and industrialists), except for a very small number of students holding scholarships provided by former feudal lords and other rich people,” as Masamichi Inoki puts it. His study of the Jinji ko¯shin roku (Who’s Who) for 1937 shows that 73.6 percent of the higher civil servants and 49.7 percent of judicial officials were graduates of the Imperial University (or, after the establishment of Kyoto University, “Tokyo Imperial University”).<sup>39</sup> Appointment to bureaucratic office was frequently followed by the opportunity to study abroad. The university’s faculty was in overwhelming measure drawn from its own graduates and frequently interrelated to a startling degree. Section heads were direct imperial appointees, and the university president was usually honored with an imperial appointment to the House of Peers. It should also be noted, however, that Imperial University students were not drawn from the Restoration centers but instead represented a new and national meritocracy that would govern Japan after the passing of the early Meiji generation. Mori’s second major change came in the structure of middle schools. Here too he was instrumental in finalizing a trend toward elitism that had begun before his administration. The original grid of schools laid out in 1872 had proved impractical and beyond the government’s means. As a result a division developed between an elite track, in “Special Higher Schools,” which prepared students for the Imperial University, and ordinary secondary education.<sup>40</sup> The first-named were directly under the supervision of the ministry and financed entirely by the central government, while the ordinary schools were the charge of prefectures in which they were located. Primary education, in Mori’s view, should be devoted to strengthening pupils’ awareness of and support of the state, and it was reasonable to expect patriotic parents to pay the costs. Parents were expected to pay tuition, an innovation first begun by Fukuzawa at Keio¯ in an attempt to escape from the structured gift-giving of earlier days. Any deficit was to be made up by local communities. Until 1900, when attendance at four years of lower school became compulsory but also free for all children, rural communities found education burdensome; in some areas attendance declined during the Matsukata deflation. There remained a desperate need for teachers, and here Mori’s imprint was particularly strong. In the first Meiji decades former samurai and local teachers of many sorts had staffed the schools, but the results were uneven and in some cases unwelcome to the government, with its fear of political involvement. The ordinance of 1880 forbidding teacher and student attendance at political meetings represented one response to this. To counter politicization Mori now provided for a structure of normal schools; one elite institution, situated in Tokyo, trained teachers for provincial normal schools, while in those schools graduates were obligated to serve ten years as teachers after graduation. Admission procedures were tightened; political recommendation—from governor, ward head, or mayor—led to a three-month probationary period. Mori’s imprint included steps that emphasized a distinction between the relative freedom of “scholarship” at higher levels and the uniformity of “instruction” at lower. He was convinced (as were many of his contemporaries in England and America) of the need for physical as well as mental training. Unfortunately he chose to meet this need through the use of army drill masters, who had the additional attraction of coming free of charge. To quote Hall again, this training “was calculated to produce not only a new generation of teachers with a new dispensation of authority but also a whole new disciplinary framework for everyday school life.” In Mori’s mind this seems to have been a way of using the military, but in the military mind it resulted in an atmosphere that stifled freedom of inquiry under regulations that were designed to give teachers and school heads sweeping authority. Ultimately, “the ethos of the parade ground was deliberately extended to the dormitory, refectory, and study hall of the normal school, whence it eventually spread to infect the classrooms of an entire nation.” Consequently “Mori’s normal school policy may be viewed as his most profound and permanent and distinctive legacy to future generations.”<sup>41</sup> Mori’s statist emphasis also influenced his participation in the Privy Council discussions on the draft of the Meiji Constitution. There he fought unsuccessfully against every clause that might in the future strengthen the hand of the Diet. That body, he argued, should be purely consultive and have no power to legislate. Nothing should be allowed to weaken, even by inference, the charismatic aura of the emperor. Ito¯ often had to cut Mori’s flow of rhetoric short. In one of the major ironies of Meiji times Mori was nevertheless assassinated by a fanatic who charged him with disrespect to Shinto and national traditions. The Meiji Constitution was to be promulgated on February 11, 1889. As Mori, resplendent in his official uniform, stood waiting for his carriage, he was suddenly stabbed by a rather seedy youth who had requested, and been denied, an interview to discuss student dissatisfaction. The youth was killed on the spot by Mori’s bodyguard (who was tried and exonerated for possible complicity), but doctors attending the ceremonies were so long in reaching Mori that he did not recover. The young man proved to be carrying a manifesto that charged that “Education Minister Mori Arinori, while visiting the [Ise] shrine, mounted the steps of the sanctuary without removing his shoes, in defiance of the Imperial prohibition, lifted the sacred veil with his walking stick to peer inside, and retired without performing the customary obeisance.” Mori’s opposition to Confucian character building in the schools did not long survive him. On October 3, 1890, Motoda Eifu and his associates had their way with an Imperial Rescript on Education that became the cornerstone of Meiji ideology. Yamagata had become Japan’s third prime minister and agreed that something comparable to the rescript for soldiers and sailors was desirable; the emperor himself informed the new minister of education that since Japanese were “easily led astray and confused by foreign doctrines, it was essential to define the moral basis of the nation for them.”<sup>42</sup> The result was a document that was popularly thought to have been written by the emperor himself. Until 1945 it was distributed to every school in Japan together with the emperor’s likeness so that all could make obeisance to it. Teachers and principals risked their lives to rescue it from burning buildings, and students committed it to memory. In form the document was a compromise; Motoda’s wish that it make explicit reference to Confucius was rejected, but the Confucian relations were enumerated and credited to Japanese tradition. To the modern reader the document seems rather innocuous and platitudinous. Its power derived from the way it was used, and examination of its wording will show how the tone of paternal omniscience and authority could awe those who heard and read it. Know ye, Our subjects: Our Imperial Ancestors have founded Our Empire on a basis broad and everlasting, and have deeply and firmly implanted virtue; Our subjects ever united in loyalty and filial piety have from generation to generation illustrated the beauty thereof. This is the glory of the fundamental character of Our Empire, and herein lies also the source of Our education. Ye, Our subjects, be filial to your parents, affectionate to your brothers and sister; as husbands and wives be harmonious, as friends true; bear yourselves in modesty and moderation; extend your benevolence to all; pursue learning and cultivate arts, and thereby develop intellectual faculties and perfect moral powers; furthermore, advance public good and promote common interests; always respect the Constitution and observe the laws; should emergency arise, offer yourselves courageously to the State; and thus guard and maintain the prosperity of Our Imperial Throne coeval with heaven and earth. So shall ye not only be Our good and faithful subjects, but render illustrious the best traditions of your forefathers. The Way here set forth is indeed the teaching bequeathed by Our Imperial Ancestors, to be observed alike by Their Descendants and the subjects, infallible for all ages and true in all places. It is Our wish to lay it to heart in all reverence, in common with you, Our subjects, that we may all attain to the same virtue.<sup>43</sup> One might conclude, with Hirakawa Sukehiro, that where the Meiji Revolution began with a turn to the West in the Charter Oath’s promise to “seek wisdom throughout the world,” and posited that “just laws of nature” had theretofore not been followed in Japan, the Imperial Rescript on Education brought that process to an end with its assertion that a “national essence,” whose values had been manifested in Japan’s antiquity, should be the foundation for future action and belief.<sup>44</sup> ## 6. Summary: The Meiji Leaders Evaluations of the Meiji leaders have undergone sharp changes over the years. In prewar Japan their role as builders of the imperial state brought praise for their loyalty and wisdom, and their achievements were marked by statues and memorials that kept their memories green. In wartime Japan most of the statues fell victim to the desperate shortage of materials for the war machine, and postwar writing often reversed the judgments of imperial history. Today a half century of peaceful reconstruction permits a more balanced view. Their achievements, and Japan’s, were real, though often built on the sacrifices of ordinary Japanese and at a cost to other Asians. Still, in the face of what the Meiji leaders accomplished it is interesting to reflect on the nature of that leadership. The first thing to note is that, although they specialized, they were also generalists. Yamagata doubled as interior minister, Mori and Ito¯ as diplomats, Itagaki as general, Matsukata as local official. No one of them was essential to the process we have described; the assassin’s dagger or political eclipse cannot be shown to have made a tremendous amount of difference. The Meiji leaders were a disparate group—Yamagata’s dour methodical plans contrasted with Ito¯’s more casual and almost breezy approach—but they were agreed on essentials and pulled together when their collectivity was threatened. These were men whose image of the international world into which their country had been drawn was threatening and almost demonic. They traveled abroad to learn about that West, and returned with first-hand knowledge and impressions. Each of the men whose lives we have followed here, and many more we have not, found it essential to their careers to have been abroad. The foreigners they met on these travels invariably warned them about what they were trying to do; modern institutions had taken centuries to develop in the West, they said, and no oriental country could appropriate them overnight. The Meiji men were out to prove them wrong. At the same time they held tenaciously to national traditions, and no adviser from abroad found his expectations of his own work fulfilled; the Germans expected the peerage to provide a self-perpetuating hereditary elite assisting a powerful sovereign, the Americans an irreversible march toward democratic individualism. It is also clear that the political parcelization of the Tokugawa times in which they came to maturity produced an oversupply of young men steeled by danger and experienced in responsibility. The Satsuma and Cho¯shu¯ group at the helm never allowed anyone to challenge their primacy, but they also never hesitated to reach out and down to qualified outsiders for help at critical points. It is particularly striking to note how often former Tokugawa bureaucrats, men with experience who no longer posed any political threat, were recruited by the new team. The Meiji leaders were pragmatists, and the design of the Meiji state took form as it grew. At every point the historian is impressed by the vigor of debate and the readiness of men to speak their minds. In this respect the Meiji men were rather different from those who followed them, for their successors’ formative years came in structured bureaucracies and they came to the table with a deep consciousness of the importance of the military or political group they represented.<sup>45</sup> No Meiji leader ever wrote or spoke of what had been accomplished without crediting it to the virtues of the sovereign. Mutsuhito was at the center of the plans as they developed; protected from the future politics of the lower house of the Diet by the new peerage, from the cabinet by the powers accorded by the Privy Council, lord privy seal, and imperial household minister, from civilian interference by the direct command he had over the armed services, from Diet squabbles by sweeping grants of land and securities that created immense wealth and independence, from representative institutions by his prerogatives to appoint the cabinet, from popular disorder by the ubiquitous presence of his police, from disloyalty by rescripts that identified his rule with morality and justice, and, no less important, from himself by a protective screen of officials who spoke and acted in his name and saw in him the ultimate justification for their role. Emperor Meiji began his reign as a callow youth whose predilection for ease worried Kido Takayoshi and the others, but grew to manhood as a functioning member of the leadership group. No other Japanese ruler ever experienced such sweeping change. His life began in the shadowy penumbra of a court beyond which the ruler’s voice was never heard, heir to a tradition of civil grace, art, and poetry. He was supposed to move in patterns far removed from the din of politics, one in which structured hierarchies of ancestry and blood suppressed the petty jealousies and xenophobia of a shadow court. Suddenly he was paraded throughout his realm, his aura used to win support when the consensus was most fragile. Heir to the world’s oldest civilian traditions, he found himself clothed in a general’s uniform, photographed with his awkward sword; the calligraphic grace of his poetry, now carried out in privacy, gave way to the sturdy Chinese characters for kokka (“state”) with which his subjects now associated him. He developed a grumpy acquiescence in the essentials for a modern general and king, condescending to have his empress at his side for garden parties he detested for foreign dignitaries. Within the leadership group his preferences gradually became apparent; more with Ito¯ than with Yamagata, more with traditional character-building goals than with the modernism Mori espoused, and more with caution than with adventure. Then, as Meiji institutions took root and prospered, he was credited with their success, and after Japan’s armies defeated first China and then Russia he became the symbol of everything that had been done, his picture in remotest mountain village houses and his sacred edict on the lips of schoolchildren.