# M E I J I C U L T U R E #

Histories of Meiji Japan usually follow a periodization derived from the construction of the modern nation-state. The process of institution building, followed by its implementation in politics, economics, and foreign policy, leads to war, empire, and international recognition at the end of the half century. Meiji culture, in contrast, is much less chronicled, but its study provides a vital dimension of the process of transformation that was going on. Meiji literary history has been well studied. Magisterial studies by Donald Keene and translations by a number of gifted specialists have made its chief monuments accessible to Western readers. Meiji art has been less noted, nor has religion received its due. It would require more space than is available to do justice to these themes, but they loomed so large in the mentality of Meiji contemporaries, and have such compelling interest, that they require discussion here.<sup>1</sup> There are broad congruities between the periodization acceptable for the development of Meiji culture and those for Meiji modernization. They are seldom identical, but both find their wellspring in the flood of Western influence to which Japan had to respond. One can use the metaphor of the Dutch historian Johan Huizinga, who noted that a wave might break at different points along the shore in response to the topography and resistance it encountered, but that it was nevertheless one single tide. And that tide was overwhelming. As Irokawa Daikichi has phrased it, “The influence of European and American civilization on Japan during the 1860s and 1870s was traumatic and disruptive to a degree that is rarely found in the history of cultural intercourse . . . For a time any thought of defending traditional culture was scorned as an idle diversion from the critical need to respond to the urgency that faced the country. What had to be done was to penetrate the enemies’ camp, grasp their weapons of civilization for use against them, and then turn to use them in the national interest.”<sup>2</sup> When put this way the process can seem vengeful and even melodramatic, but it is important to remember the element of national striving that went into the formation of Meiji culture. One finds this dichotomy encapsulized in the two four-character slogans that suffuse the age. Bunmei kaika (civilization and enlightenment) signified the need to grasp the new, but fukoku kyo¯hei (rich country, strong army) pointed to the desired outcome. Although the Restoration was described as a return to the patterns of antiquity, it was soon clear that the international competition in which Japan found itself required the acquisition of the tools of the contemporary, modern world. The question then arose of selecting these, and of locating those elements of tradition that could best converge with them. By the middle and late years of the Meiji period there was a pervasive awareness of the need to develop a culture that would be new, modern, and yet also Japanese. In the process tradition itself had to be defined, selected, and structured. To some degree this has been true for other traditions abruptly challenged by the West. No two resolved them in the same way, but Japan’s experience, as the first in the non-Western world, can offer insights into the larger clash of civilizations. Meiji writers themselves were deeply conscious of their task. In 1902 the novelist Natsume So¯seki noted in his diary that “people say that Japan was awakened thirty years ago, but it was awakened by a fire bell and jumped out of bed. It was not a genuine awakening but a totally confused one. Japan has tried to absorb Western culture in a hurry and as a result has not had time to digest it. Japan must be truly awakened as regards literature, politics, business, and all other areas.”<sup>3</sup> This was the task that Meiji intellectuals, artists, and thinkers set themselves. ## 1. Restore Antiquity! It is necessary to begin with the reminder that many aspects of late Tokugawa culture prepared the way for the Meiji effort. It is also convenient to characterize movements by utilizing the slogans that were used. The first of these, fukko—restore antiquity!—it will be remembered, was the drive to free Japanese culture from its encumbrances of Chinese and Confucian import. The great kokugaku scholars like Kamo no Mabuchi and Motoori Norinaga wrestled with the problem of what it was that was truly, intrinsically Japanese, and they were determined to define and restore what they saw as primitive purity and the honesty of simple, romantic affirmation. The political dimension of this was the ideal of restoration of imperial rule and abandonment of warrior usurpation. In a sense the nativist scholars were already redefining Japanese culture. In art the narrative tradition of the Yamato paintings was to be substituted for the formal Chinese elegance of the Kano¯ school; in ceramics enthusiasm for old styles intensified; and when the Kyoto imperial palace was restored in the 1860s the goal was to restore what had been lost. The fukko movement had other aspects. Emphasis on the native deities and mythology produced a world in which nature was somehow sacred, and the natural was restored as the criterion of the true and the good. Emphasis on Shinto generation (as opposed to creation) brought with it vitalism, acceptance, and also pragmatism; the final stand of nativist thought found Hirata Atsutane prepared to accommodate, and to claim for the Japanese tradition, whatever might be useful from other traditions. Praise of antiquity also brought reminders of Japanese borrowing from the past in that antiquity; the ancestors, many said, might have overdone it with their reliance on the imported culture from the continent, but they had seized on what was useful and practical without hesitation. By the same token, foreign borrowing in nineteenth century could also be justified. Mori Arinori’s debate with the Chinese leader Li Hung-chang in 1876 expressed this perfectly. Li, looking disdainfully at Mori’s Western suit, asked if Mori’s Japanese ancestors had dressed that way. No, Mori had replied, they had adopted Chinese dress, but it was no longer practical; Japan had always taken the best of other civilizations for itself, and it was doing so once more. (He then went on to remind Li that Li’s ancestors had not worn the official robes prescribed by China’s Manchu conqueror either; Japan, by inference, had at least made its own choice.) In practice, as we have seen, the attempt to restore the institutions of antiquity in their entirety and to adopt Shinto theocracy once more was soon rejected by the Meiji leaders. Antiquity could be invoked and put aside. But not entirely, and not at all where the imperial institution was concerned. The ritual and aura of a vanished past was put to work in the task of modernizing the country, as when the promulgation of the Charter Oath in April 1868 was surrounded with the panoply of the past.<sup>4</sup> Historians have usually emphasized the “progressive” elements involved in its promises of “deliberative assemblies” and abandonment of “evils of the past,” but it is equally important to see it as a ritual in which the centrality of the throne was affirmed in a manner laying claim to the power of the legendary first emperor Jimmu. Sanjo¯ Saneomi recited the articles for the young emperor, and the 411 nobles and daimyo present pledged their obedience. The effect was to politicize and engage the throne. In John Breen’s words, “The one-way ritual dialogue was designed to engage the gijo¯ [councillors’] group to the emperor in a new relationship: to pry the daimyo away from their own agendas and obsessions, to dislodge the courtiers from the premodern, conservative court, and to declare themselves as his loyal subjects.” Within the drama, in turn, these events marked the decisive emergence of the early Meiji leaders and signaled their access to power through utilization of the sovereign. In terms of culture, the affirmation of antiquity offered remarkably little resistance to material modernization. With the exception of the ideological supports for the throne and emperorism, antiquity was something of a void into which modernity could be inserted; the “evils” of the recent past, warrior rule and a China-oriented worldview, meanwhile, fitted neither antiquity nor modernity. The vigorous persecution of Buddhism had its roots in the campaign to restore Japanese antiquity, but was comparatively brief. It brought with it a number of popular rebellions as villagers voiced dismay and fear at the proscription of an important part of their life. For thousands of villagers, the action of the government in promoting the “old” deities and reviling the practices to which they were accustomed constituted issues for resistance. In 1873, for instance, a major uprising of 20,000 Popular Faith Buddhists broke out in Echizen on the Japan Sea coast. Leaders denounced government measures for the cutting of topknots and religious reform as covert expressions of Christian subversion. Small wonder that there were objections to measures like those prohibiting observance of the new year, village dancing, and observation of the August Buddhist bon festivals.<sup>5</sup> By decree in 1871 the new government also moved to “liberate” the suppressed class of eta. This brought temporary joy to those affected, but often resulted in vicious protests and riots from their neighbors who felt a loss of status and threat from these new “commoners” (heimin). In addition, the former subcastes now found themselves subject to the full range of civil duties and tax, something from which they had been to a degree sheltered by the semiautonomous governance under which their communities had lived; their new authorities were not likely to take a particularly sympathetic attitude toward them. Nor were villagers the only Japanese affected negatively by the new order. In all samurai-dominated cities a large service class had become dependent upon the warrior class as their employers and customers, but with the end of special privilege and income for the samurai the advantages of urban life quickly disappeared. In Edo-Tokyo alone the population fell from approximately 1.3 million to 600,000 for a time, and the large numbers of rickshaw pullers that characterized the Meiji proletariat constituted a pressing social problem until the end of the century. ## 2. Civilization and Enlightenment! Be a Success! Important as the trappings of antiquity were for political symbolism and ritual, for most young Japanese the modernization of their country along Western lines and personal advancement were stronger motivations. These goals were expressed in two slogans that expressed the reform enthusiasm and optimism of early Meiji: bunmei kaika, civilization and enlightenment, and risshin shusse, be a success! The two were not in any sense contradictory, for Japan was seen, correctly, as a disadvantaged latecomer to the goods of the modern world, in effect a poor boy among the wealthy. Japan had to “achieve its place,” and it could best do so if its citizens achieved theirs. “For the sake of the country” (kuni no tame) was a phrase that was in everyone’s vocabulary, from businessmen to intellectuals and writers. The early Meiji decades were a time of great optimism. Farmers were worried about new patterns of local administration and samurai grumbled about their lot in the new order, but intellectuals shared a determination to remake their society with an idealism that would not reappear until the immediate post–World War II era in 1945. The world seemed to be at its beginning. “We have no history,” a young student protested to Erwin Ba¨lz, the German physician who ministered to the foreign community and the Meiji elite; “our history begins today.” Intellectuals with Western experience or training found themselves in an extraordinarily strategic position. The same was true of foreign advisers and teachers brought in by the government to organize everything from lighthouses to educational institutions. They were housed in Western-style houses constructed especially for them. They were paid handsome salaries.<sup>6</sup> They taught in English, with the result that the first generation of students drank directly from the classics of nineteenth-century England and America and mastered English in a way that would not be true for their successors, who could profit from the flood of translation that followed.<sup>7</sup> History has seldom seen a time when people threw themselves into the tasks of learning and mastery with such intensity. Fukuzawa Yukichi (1835–1901) was of course the major figure in this rush to self-improvement. His study of the West had been widely—one might almost say universally—read in late Tokugawa days, and in early Meiji “Fukuzawa books” became a general term. In 1869 his Introduction to the Countries of the World (Sekai kunizukushi) was arranged in metrical patterns suitable for recitation on the lines of Buddhist catechism for use in schools. The Encouragement of Learning (Gakumon no susume) became the textbook of an age, and in 1875 his Outline of a Theory of Civilization (Bunmeiron no gairyaku) provided a world-historical perspective on the task that faced a Japan that had to advance toward civilization from its present status of “semicivilized.”<sup>8</sup> He was also Japan’s most prominent educator. Keio¯ Specialty School, which he had established in a former daimyo estate in Tokyo at the time of the Restoration, would grow to become Japan’s premier private university. Fukuzawa also broke through the tradition of gift-giving and sponsorship to charge tuition and regularize administration. Not content with this, he established an influential newspaper in which he wrote regularly, inveighing against the evils, as he saw them, of dependence on the government and preaching the necessity of individual responsibility. What was needed, he wrote, was for the Japanese people to be imbued with the “spirit of civilization”; it was that, and not the material trappings of the West, that distinguished the modern world. Nakamura Masanao (Keiu) was another major figure in the drive for civilization and enlightenment. Born in 1832, he received a traditional education in Tokugawa academies and was appointed a Confucian scholar (jusha) before being sent to England to study in 1866. By the time of his return to Japan two years later he had become an enthusiast for Western learning and Christianity. He too began a private school, but soon went on to pursue a career as an educator and government official. Together with Fukuzawa, Mori Arinori, and other “enlightenment” figures, he founded the Meiji Sixth Year Society (Meirokusha), an elite group that met regularly to discuss ways to advance modernization in Japan. Many of the talks given at its meetings were published in its magazine, a journal that was short-lived because its sponsors discontinued it in protest against the government’s press laws of 1875.<sup>9</sup> Nakamura’s most influential contribution, however, was his translation of Samuel Smiles’s Self-Help, which he published as Tales of Men Who Achieved Their Aims in Western Countries (Saikoku risshi hen). It would be difficult to exaggerate the influence and currency of this curious work, for it became the textbook for a generation. Smiles was a “success story” writer, for whom the nineteenth-century gospel of rugged individualism was best represented by the locomotive builder George Stephenson, who encouraged workers to emulate him with the challenge, “Do as I have done: persevere!” Self-Help was one of a trilogy, grouped with Character and Thrift; its chapters represented talks that the author gave to youth and worker groups to help them along the road of success. Its pompous warnings about the dangers of dreaming, romance, and idleness found a responsive echo in a land where samurai duty and merchant thrift were worn like badges of self-respect.<sup>10</sup> And while Smiles’s aim was to activate, his Japanese readers must have sensed some continuity with the calls to frugality with which Tokugawa village preachers had tried to win their hearers. In Meiji Japan, however, Smiles’s homilies also resonated with national goals. What was true for individual workers struggling to achieve their aim in life was even more true for a Japan struggling to make its way in an unfriendly international environment. We have already noted that the early stages of the democratic movement found Tosa samurai organizing themselves as a Self-Help Society, the Risshisha. Enlightenment and self-improvement were efforts which Japanese embraced enthusiastically. At the same time that government leaders were trying to restore the aura of premodern mystery for the throne, intellectuals were prepared to jettison much of tradition, and their efforts went largely uncriticized because they worked for the larger purpose of building the new society. Mori Arinori suggested that it might be wise to abandon the Japanese language itself—for official purposes, at least—and utilize English instead. Fukuzawa proposed with tongue in cheek that it might be a good idea to declare Japan a Christian country; even if only a minority took the new creed seriously, the mere affirmation would impress the West. There were arguments about the feasibility and utility of Japanese as a medium of oral communication. Confucian society was suspicious of verbal agility and prized the written word; could spoken Japanese cut through the layers of education and refinement required for written transmission? Fukuzawa settled this at a Meirokusha meeting by standing on a chair to discuss the proposed expedition to Taiwan. After he finished he asked his neighbor if he had understood what he had said, and on being assured—with some scorn—that he of course had, Fukuzawa pointed out that that settled the question about spoken Japanese as a medium of communication. Fukuzawa in fact went on to become a formidable orator, and lectured regularly in the assembly hall built on the Mita campus of his school. Private academies and schools mushroomed in the early Meiji years. Many were personal, one-man enterprises that closed their doors when the founder died or moved on to other things, but others survived to become private schools and ultimately colleges. Protestant missionaries were important sponsors. The urgency of learning English and learning Western law, sometimes separately and sometimes on the same site, and the restless ambition of Meiji youth determined to make a name for themselves in the new society produced a never-ending supply of eager young students. Most schools were located in Tokyo, the center of the new age, but in one instance a fervent young Christian, Niijima Jo¯ (1843–1890), selected the old capital of Kyoto as the site for what became Do¯shisha University as a direct challenge to the Buddhist establishment of the ancient capital. Niijima himself had managed to get away from Japan in late Tokugawa times to study in America. He was still in the United States when the Iwakura mission arrived in 1872, and his sturdy independence so impressed Kido Takayoshi that he persuaded him to join the group as an interpreter. Upon his return to Japan Niijima and the school he founded became a major force. ## 3. Christianity It will be recalled that it was the Iwakura embassy, which encountered reproach and criticism of Japan’s laws against Christianity, that was responsible for ending the ban on what was considered the “Western” religion in 1873. The early Meiji government had not only refused to release those seized by bakufu authorities in 1865, but it had extended the search in 1870, when almost 3,000 suspected adherents in Urakami were shipped to various parts of Japan for incarceration. Despite the protests of foreign representatives this impasse continued until the Iwakura ambassadors advised their release; in 1873 the prisoners were finally returned to their homes, but over 600 had died in exile. Despite this, there had been significant steps toward the toleration of Christianity by then. Guido Verbeck, a Dutch-American clergyman, arrived at Nagasaki in 1859. Missionary work was still illegal, but it was possible to minister to the needs of the foreign community. James Hepburn, a Princetoneducated doctor and clergyman, arrived at Kanagawa (Yokohama) that same year. Yokohama was next door to the center of bakufu power, but in Nagasaki Verbeck, farther from the center, was able to work with young samurai from Satsuma, Cho¯shu¯, Tosa, and Saga, some of whom went on to become leaders in the future Meiji government. They studied English with him and plied him with questions. After the Restoration it was Verbeck who first suggested the dispatch of an embassy overseas, and the Iwakura mission owed much to his advice. Moreover, Verbeck’s ties with the Dutch Reformed community and Rutgers in New Brunswick, New Jersey, made him a strategic figure in the recruitment of additional teachers. Captain Leroy L. Janes, a Civil War officer, was probably the most important and interesting of those recruited and placed by Verbeck. He owed his invitation to the desire of the domain of Kumamoto to build modern military strength. On his arrival in 1871 Janes was supplied with an impressive Westernstyle house built for him, and put in full charge of his group of young samurai students. Those students were growing up in an era when the received wisdom of their parents’ day seemed mistaken, and their insecurity and determination combined to give Janes, as instructor, an oracular quality. Janes desired that they learn of religion as well as science and mathematics, and affected them powerfully in optional evening sessions at his house. It was not long before a group of thirty-five of his finest students gathered on a small mountain overlooking Kumamoto to affix their names to a document in which they asserted In studying Christianity we have been deeply enlightened and awakened. The more we have studied it, the more filled with enthusiasm and joy we have become. Moreover, we strongly desire that this faith might be proclaimed over the whole Empire in order to dispel the ignorance of the people . . . It is consequently our duty as patriots to arise with enthusiasm, and with no concern for our lives, to make known the fairness and impartiality of this teaching. It is to this goal that we dedicate all our energies, and it is for this purpose that we have gathered here . . . Since at the present time the majority of our people are opposed to Christianity, the lapse from faith of even one of our number not only invites the scorn of the multitude, but frustrates the very purpose for which we are banded together. This group of young men has become known as the “Kumamoto band.” They included some of modern Japan’s most important intellectuals, publicists, and preachers. As the language of the oath to which they subscribed shows, they considered themselves patriots; indeed, Christian samurai, prepared to sacrifice and suffer in order to enlighten their countrymen. Their sense of solidarity—“banded together” in the words of the oath—is also clear, for they had prepared their steps with painstaking care worthy of the forty-seven ro¯nin a century and a half earlier. They were prepared for criticism and persecution, and soon met both. Their fellow students first ostracized them and then debated them, and in many cases their families resorted to house arrest and other pressures to dissuade them from their new faith. But the most stouthearted stood their ground. Kozaki Hiromichi, the future pastor of Tokyo’s largest congregation, wrote that “in proceeding from Confucianism into Christianity” he had “not rejected the one to replace it with the other, but “embraced Christianity because we believed that it fulfills the spirit and real import of Confucianism.”<sup>11</sup> At the same time, the students’ determination to “serve the country” through espousal of their faith, and affirmation of martial valor, contained the possibility, and in fact the development, of a future nationalist orientation. It goes without saying that these developments were unwelcome to the Kumamoto authorities who had wanted a Western, modern military school. The domain dismissed Janes at the end of his appointment in 1876 and closed the school. Janes’s students moved on to Kyoto, where Niijima Jo¯ had established the future Do¯shisha University with the assistance of the American Board of Foreign Missions. Another group of Christian leaders developed in an educational institution far to the north. As was the case in Kumamoto, it was the personal influence of an American teacher that affected student lives at a time when they were most impressionable. “The arts of philosophical defense which might have presented [the traditional Japanese viewpoint] convincingly,” John Howes has written, “were no more equal to the emergency than were the defenses of Tokyo Bay equal to the emergency posed by Perry’s gunboats. Knowledge of the West ultimately bred insecurity about themselves.”<sup>12</sup> Janes was not a “missionary” and in fact soon fell out with the church mission establishment, but as a self-confident Christian layman he was the more influential. This was also true to the north. In 1876 the Japanese government hired William S. Clark, then head of the Massachusetts Agricultural College, to direct studies at a new institution slated to be set up in Sapporo as part of the Development Office (kaitakushi) plan for the development of Hokkaido. It was understood that Clark would stick to his teaching, but no barriers were placed on his private contacts with his students. Clark was in Hokkaido very briefly, and in fact returned to the United States the following year, but during that period he, like Janes in Kumamoto, exercised immense influence over his students. They were soon convinced that the teachings of Christianity were central to Western civilization and hence to Japan’s rebirth. Janes’s students had all been from Kumamoto, but in Sapporo a government program brought able youths from a number of northern domains together. Clark won for himself a place in Japanese legend by reining in his horse as he left the campus and calling to the boys who accompanied him to its gate, “Boys, be ambitious like this old man!”<sup>13</sup> In Japanese memory the final two words were soon forgotten, and the challenge has lived on as inspiration for a generation of modern Japanese who took it to heart. In the Sapporo school there was soon a religious awakening that was speeded by an almost coercive social pressure exercised by the first group of converts. Out of this tumultuous setting came two giants of modern intellectual and religious work, Uchimura Kanzo¯ (1861–1930), founder of the “nonchurch” movement, and Nitobe Inazo¯ (1862–1933), a Quaker educator and internationalist. Both men studied in America. Nitobe returned to serve his government as agronomist in Taiwan before heading the preparatory college for the Imperial University in Tokyo. After World War I, when Japan as a world power joined in the League of Nations, Nitobe served as its under secretary-general.<sup>14</sup> Uchimura provides the most arresting figure among these Christians. First won to Christianity through the pressures of his peers, he immediately sought to persuade his parents, infiltrating the defenses of his father, who was a scholar of Chinese learning, with a biography of St. Paul written in Chinese. Study in the United States in the 1880s brought him face to face with what he had thought of as a promised land. “My idea of the Christian America,” he wrote in his autobiography How I Became a Christian, “was lofty, religious, Puritanic. I dreamed of its templed hills, and rocks that rang with hymns and praises. Hebraisms, I thought, to be the prevailing speech of the American commonality, and cherub and cherubim, hallelujahs and amens, the common language of its streets.” The reality was something else. “Yes,” he went on ruefully, “Hebraisms in one sense at least I found to be a common form of speech of piety. Instead, the words which we have never pronounced without the sense of extreme awe are upon the lips of workmen, carriage-drivers, shoeblacks, and others of more respectable occupations. Every little offense is accompanied by a religious oath of some kind.” Equally startling, he was repeatedly taken for Chinese. “A well-dressed gentleman sharing the same seat with me in a car asked me to have my comb to brush his grizzly beard, and instead of a thank you which we in heathendom consider as appropriate upon such an occasion, he returned the comb saying, ‘Well John, where do you keep your laundry shop?’ ” It is not surprising that, as he writes, his native Japan began to seem newly dear and beautiful in his memory. Uchimura retained and deepened his faith, but he also retained his pride in his nationality. In talks to church and mission groups he felt that his hearers expected him, as he wrote, to look like a “tamed rhinoceros.” Soon nothing short of an independent, Japanese type of worship would satisfy him, and in a spiritual struggle with his Creator he worked out an agreement whereby he would remain a Christian so long as he did not have to become a “professional preacher.” Upon his return to Japan he accepted a teaching post at the preparatory college for the Imperial University for his livelihood, while organizing informal Bible reading and study groups for evenings and weekends. In this Uchimura’s, like Nitobe’s Quaker, activities, found a resonance with the lay Buddhist organizations, or ko¯, familiar to all Japanese. Uchimura was particularly determined to avoid any dependence on foreign church mission boards. Uchimura’s independence was soon put to a different test. When the Imperial Rescript on Education, surrounded by the aura of imperial divinity and calling for an education grounded in Confucian ethics, was read in a school ceremony, Uchimura’s colleagues bowed in recognition of its authority, but he himself hesitated, uncertain whether he could accede to any authority higher than that of his Creator. Later he decided that it would not have been a violation of his faith to bow, but by then his hesitation had become controversial, and he became the object of criticism so harsh that it led to his resignation. Thereafter his was a career as a freelance writer and ethical teacher. Books, articles, and columns poured from his pen. Discussion and study groups he founded became the core of a “nonchurch” (mukyo¯kai) movement that continued to have influence in urban intellectual circles into the midtwentieth century. Exponents of traditional ethics, however, seized upon Uchimura’s case to argue the incompatibility of Christianity with loyalty and patriotism, and soon the Education Ministry lifted the exemptions from military service for students in Christian schools. There was never any doubt about the patriotism of men like Uchimura, whose tomb bears witness to his love for “two J’s,” Jesus and Japan. Under pressures of this sort many Japanese Christian institutions, notably Do¯shisha, struggled to free themselves from the control of foreign mission boards lest they disadvantage their students. A third current of Christian influence emanated from the foreign presence at the port of Yokohama, where the medical missionary Joseph Hepburn had begun work earlier. After the 1880s, however, the most influential Japanese Christians faced steady pressure to demonstrate freedom from foreign direction in order to protect themselves and their students from native xenophobia. It was after the promulgation of the Meiji Constitution, as Japanese nationalism was stirred by successful foreign wars and conservative intellectuals were developing a new ideology of imperial divinity and national superiority, that these issues began to come to a head. Since Christians advocated spiritual autonomy and freedom of conscience, they were an important stimulant in Meiji intellectual life, with leading roles in social reform and political change. In the 1880s the tide of enthusiasm for Christianity ran strong, and newspapers frequently carried the names of prominent political and social leaders who had received baptism, but a decade later the tide was running in the opposite direction. Meiji Christianity was predominantly urban and Protestant, although there was also an Orthodox community in eastern Japan as the result of the work of a remarkable Russian, Father Nikolai (Dmitrievich Kasatkin, 1836– 1912), who reached Hakodate in Hokkaido in 1861,<sup>15</sup> and Catholic missionaries were active in many rural districts. The Protestant leaders were predominantly former samurai, educated, able, and articulate. Their early successes also related to the international setting in which Japan found itself, for the United States, England, and Germany seemed predominant. Verbeck’s proposal for an Iwakura mission itinerary, for instance, did not include any Catholic countries, but on that point he was ignored. Christians played important roles in social reform and in the early socialist movement. For a time Christian leaders were confident and jubilant. “Old Japan is defeated,” Niijima wrote; “new Japan has won its victory. The old Asiatic system is silently passing away, and the new European ideas so recently transplanted there are growing vigorously and luxuriantly . . . [Japan] has shaken off her old robe. She is ready to adopt something better . . . Her leading minds will no longer bear with the old form of despotic feudalism, nor be contented with the worn-out doctrines of Asiatic morals and religions.”<sup>16</sup> His optimism was premature. In the late 1880s a growing tide of conservatism began to check and then reverse these trends. The government’s failure to achieve treaty reform led to bitterness and disillusion. The excesses of fashionable Westernization produced inevitable countercurrents of national affirmation. Completion of the network of institutional devices to reify the imperial aura made it desirable and often necessary to compromise with the state and its supporters. By the 1890s newspapers sometimes noted the names of men who had left the Christian church. Buddhist leaders too regained their voice and drew comfort from the Darwinian thought that challenged creationism. By the time of world religious conferences around the turn of the century Japanese Buddhists, who had been maligned by Shinto enthusiasts a few decades earlier, appeared as representatives of the national tradition. The dangers and indignities of the early Meiji persecution had been put behind them, and for all practical purposes ceased to exist.<sup>17</sup> Under such conditions the determination and ability of Christian leaders like those from the Kumamoto and Sapporo groups to maintain the essentials of their belief stands as striking evidence of the problems involved in balancing individual autonomy and affirmation of universalism in the particularist society of imperial Japan. ## 4. Politics and Culture A conviction that political life would change was an important part of the optimism of the early Meiji years. The government leaders intended the Charter Oath’s language about “deliberative assemblies” to reassure their fellow members of the elite, and planned to build on the aura of the throne to maintain public order, but many of their countrymen hoped for a different kind of political order. In recent years scholars have assembled eight stout volumes of petitions and proposals for change in every aspect of Japanese society. The early Meiji scene was far more dynamic, and local leaders were far more outspoken and independent, than they were to be after the central government had established its sway.<sup>18</sup> The degrees of local autonomy permitted by the fractionalized administration of feudal rule had helped develop confidence and courage. In the decade beginning in 1871 alone 130 petitions were submitted to the government demanding some form of popular representation, and we have seen how enthusiasm for such ideas led to a snowballing of expectations in the Freedom and People’s Rights Movement. This enthusiasm had its cultural expression. The local elite was well schooled in traditional learning and versification in Chinese (kanshi), and many among them chose to register their sentiments in lengthy, thoughtful poems. In the 1880s it was common to form associations for composing poetry; recognized masters could support themselves by charging for corrections made to efforts submitted by village leaders in the countryside. As was to be expected, Fukuzawa Yukichi, as the leading “modernizer,” was often urged to play a leading role in the expression of political hope. He was asked by 23,555 residents in nine counties of what is today Kanagawa Prefecture to draft their petition for a representative assembly. When the government, in 1881, issued the emperor’s promise that a constitution would be ready at the end of the decade, and the nascent political parties found it wise to disband in 1884 and 1885, the yearning of Japanese for political change and liberalization produced a remarkable outpouring of fiction, much of it by ambitious young politicians who took as their model English political novelists like Edward Bulwer-Lytton and Benjamin Disraeli. Many such tales were placed incongruously in ancient Greece or the more recent West, but they shared the theme of noble and ambitious youths determined to make their way in the world of politics by courageous espousal of liberalism. These works appeared in a literary setting in which translations from Western literature, from Self-Help to Shakespeare to Robinson Crusoe, were immensely popular.<sup>19</sup> The political novels were for the most part written in a complex mixture of Sino-Japanese vocabulary that was appropriate to their romantic and frequently bombastic style. Probably the best-known of these works, Kajin no kigu (Strange encounters with elegant females), by a young Aizu samurai who graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and returned to Japan in 1884, begins with its hero in Philadelphia musing on the significance of the Liberty Bell; there he encounters the daughter of a Spanish struggler for constitutional government and an Irish beauty whose father died as a political prisoner. Soon a Chinese butler, not to be outdone, turns out to be a rebel against Manchu tyranny. The book is in essence a catalogue of democratic movements and resistance to oppression. Significantly, it adds to this a promise of a democratized Japan leading modernization in Asia; “Korea will send envoys and the Luchu [Ryukyu] Islands will submit to your governance. Then will the occasion arise for doing great things in the Far East.” The book was immensely popular. In Sansom’s words, “it is said that there was not a remote mountain village in Japan in which some young man had not a copy in his pocket, and the Chinese verses that so freely stud its pages were recited everywhere with great relish.”<sup>20</sup> One reason that themes of individual achievement and ambition were so popular in Meiji Japan was that in a rapidly developing society and economy, one in which a structure of status had not yet developed, they often had a resonance in real life. Two brothers from the Kyushu domain of Kumamoto may serve as examples. Tokutomi Roka (Kenjiro¯, 1868–1927) was a novelist who sprang to fame with the publication of Omoide no ki (Things remembered)<sup>21</sup> in 1901 after appearing serially in a newspaper for twelve months. Clearly modeled on David Copperfield, the work sees the struggles of the early Meiji decades through a nostalgic regret for the generosity and decency of precapitalist Japanese society. The hero’s background matches that of the Tokutomi brothers, whose father was a country samurai. His father is poorly equipped for the competition of the modern society. After his early death, the hero, still a schoolboy, falls in with village ne’er-do-wells from whom he is rescued by the rigor and courage of his mother, who threatens him with suicide at his father’s tomb unless he resolves to restore the family status and honor. “Thousands of young men in the first decade of the century,” Tokutomi’s translator writes, “found it easy to identify themselves with him, not merely for his endurance and cheerful energy, but because of more specifically Japanese elements in his story: the ambition to restore the independence and honor of the fallen House of Kikuchi as a filial duty to his widowed mother, the intoxication with Western literature and Western ideals of freedom, and the passionate patriotism and longing to modernize and ‘improve’ Japan, crystallizing in the romantic vision of a Utopia to be ushered in with the establishment of representative government.” The author achieved relatively little of this for himself, for he was dominated most of his life by his far more prominent and successful elder brother. Tokutomi Soho¯ (Iichiro¯, 1863–1957) was one of the youngest members of Captain Janes’s students to join the Kumamoto band. After the Kumamoto school was closed he enrolled at Do¯shisha, but left before graduation to return to Kumamoto, where he founded a private school. He worked to instill in his students the ideals of liberty and individualism. Years later a student described the excitement of that school: On the one hand white-bearded Kisui, Iichiro¯’s old father, would be seated on a shabby floor-mat lecturing on Spencer’s Principles of Ethics; on the other our Iichiro¯-san was getting more and more exited talking about the French Revolution. As his lecture reached its climax, the students would involuntarily break into wild approval, jump up and dance around, swing their swords and strike the pillars. all students were required to join a Speech Club, and this posed problems for the writer: I was really taken aback by their eloquence . . . But I, a self-defined advocate of freedom and people’s rights, was put to shame by the knowledge of these speakers, who went on and on lauding Robespierre and Danton, quoting Washington and Cromwell, and arguing about Cobden and Bright with confident enthusiasm.<sup>22</sup> In 1885 Tokutomi published The Future Japan, a book in which he expounded his Spencerian views of the future for his country. He saw a future in which military might would be replaced by mercantile, and envisioned a central role for Japan in that future. “Japan,” he predicted, will become a pier on the Pacific, the great metropolis of the Orient and emporium for international trade. The smoke coiling up from thousands of chimneys will obscure the sun. Ship masts will be as numerous as trees in a forest. The sound of drills, levers, and hammers will be orchestrated with the echoes of steam engines, and the sound of the horses and vehicles will be heard as a roll of thunder on a fine day. How delightful it will be!<sup>23</sup> This cheerful view of future environmental degradation hit a responsive chord with Meiji readers, and the book catapulted Tokutomi into prominence. In 1887 he established the Minyu¯sha Press and produced the periodical “The Nation’s Friend” (Kokumin no tomo), Japan’s first modern periodical, and followed that with the newspaper Kokumin (The Nation) in 1890. It would be pleasant to record his consistent advocacy of the ideals of his youth, but Japan’s fate in international affairs intervened. At the end of the Sino-Japanese War the forced retrocession of the Chinese peninsula of Liaotung made him rethink his hostility to his government. He became an intimate of the future prime minister General Katsura Taro¯, and grew very close to the political establishment. When the author of these pages interviewed him in 1951 he had been purged from public activities by the Allied Occupation of Japan because of his enthusiastic support of World War II as head of National Writers Union. His literary skills, which were formidable, were reflected in some of the language of Japan’s declaration of war. By then he had given his editorial talents to the authorized biographies of many of the leaders of modern Japan, and he had written a multivolume history of Tokugawa Japan which remains of importance and value to students today. Tokutomi’s press, the Minyu¯sha, attracted young, optimistic, and Western-oriented writers and intellectuals. In the latter half of the 1880s it began to be challenged by the Seikyo¯sha, a press that warned of excessive Western orientation and argued the virtues and importance of Japan and Japanism. Its organs were magazines called “Japan” and “Japan and the Japanese” (Nihon, Nihon to Nihonjin). Tokutomi and his group argued for the need of reform in society to foster individualism and end the worst aspects of family tyranny, and pointed with alarm to the increasing regimentation of education. The Seikyo¯sha writers, in contrast, stressed the importance of retaining a clear sense of traditional values in filial piety and loyalty and warned of the moral disintegration of a society that did not retain its prime values. The Imperial Rescript on Education, issued at the inception of constitutional government in 1890, put the state squarely on the side of conservatism and tradition in its affirmation of filiality and loyalty as “the glory of the fundamental character of Our Empire,” and placed the full weight of the imperial house in the balance. With the encouragement of the Ministry of Education the philosopher Inoue Tetsujiro¯, who had studied in Germany, began to write commentaries on the rescript and morality. It was also Inoue who led the attack on Uchimura Kanzo¯ when he failed to bow in reverence at the first public reading of the Rescript on Education. The government’s success in securing treaty reform and defeating China in 1895 provided powerful advantages for the Seikyo¯sha cause.<sup>24</sup> During the 1890s a controversy over the nature of the new Civil Code further roiled these waters. An early version was attacked as weakening the bonds of family loyalty that, it was argued, were preliminary to imperial loyalty; when a final version was issued in 1898 it was clear that the samurai family system with its strong paternal powers had emerged as the model for all Japanese. The Minyu¯sha was never stilled, but as already noted Tokutomi himself veered into a strongly nationalist position after the Sino-Japanese War to become a stalwart of support instead of independent critic of his government. What we have seen, in public policy, private lives, and the larger climate of opinion, all reinforces Huizinga’s metaphor of wave with which this chapter began. In the first stages of response to the flood of Western thought, ideals, and models there was an urgent program to refashion and transform thought and opinion. The government, determined to activate the nation, was adventurous in its encouragement of rapid change. And then, on second thought, it seemed that the ocean swell might become a tidal wave that ought to be resisted, lest it wash old Japan away. The basic program of fukoku kyo¯hei, wealth and strength, suggested the need to draw some lines and preserve what could be kept. The Western world, on closer examination, was by no means entirely benign or uni-directional. And so the pendulum of change swung back. Japan would be forever changed, but still Japan. ## 5. The State and Culture The state was an important player in Meiji culture. It based its legitimacy on the imperial house, and to that effect nurtured the fukko movement with its aura of ritual and mystery. But it also stood to profit from, and indeed helped sponsor, the bunmei kaika, civilization and enlightenment, movement for internal rationalization and modernization and for external approval. The reform bureaucrats showed a pressing desire to regiment, classify, centralize, and ultimately to control. The abolition of the domains and the assumption of samurai obligations led, as we have seen, to inventories of samurai, weapons, and resources. Domains were divided into three categories by size, their inhabitants registered, and productive capacity and resources became the subject of careful surveys. This was also true of the arts. In 1874 all musicians, dancers, and actors were registered and divided into three grades by income. Heads of all schools of music, crafts, and the arts were to report to the authorities. Private schools were inventoried as a prelude to abolishing them in favor of state-run schools. Temples and shrines were classified and inventoried. Society was gradually leveled out, and the arts, newly categorized and inventoried, were judged for their utility to the modern state and frowned on if they seemed irrelevant or inappropriate to its purposes. It will be useful to consider several categories more closely. ## language and transcription Official interference may have been relatively slight in the development of a standard language, but it did play a role. In the early years there were numerous expressions of doubt about the efficiency of retaining the use of Chinese characters in transcription. Already in Tokugawa days, scholars of Dutch learning had praised the practicality of the Western alphabet. In early Meiji Maejima Hisoka was prepared to go a step farther, and called for the abandonment of “inconvenient ideographs imported by our ancestors as part of their indiscriminate importing of the culture of China.” In 1875 Nishi Amane,<sup>25</sup> an important Tokugawa and Meiji bureaucrat-intellectual, argued for the abolition of Chinese characters in an article written for Meiroku zasshi. He predicted a future in which “even children will be able to read the writing of men, even the ignorant will be able to record their opinions . . . All things of Europe will be entirely ours . . . we can boast to the world that it is the beauty of our people’s character thus to follow the good. This will leave them dumbstruck.” Some years later, Mori Arinori went so far as to suggest the adoption of English as Japan’s national language. The median path, of course, was to retain Japanese, but to simplify its transcription and utilize the colloquial instead of the stiff Sino-Japanese (kanbun) in which Tokugawa youth had been schooled. In Meiji terms, this was to be a middle path between the elegant and the vulgar, and its development and finalization required the better part of four decades. Writers sometimes visited music and story halls to ascertain what was comprehensible to ordinary citizens, and a short-hand transcription (sokki) utilized by, among others, the police to monitor political meetings, played its part.<sup>26</sup> It required decades to work out the final solution. The novelist Futabatei Shimmei wrote two versions of his classic novel Ukigumo (Floating clouds)<sup>27</sup> between 1887 and 1889, the second in more “modern” and colloquial style. Thereafter, as compulsory education in the state-run schools took over, the educational system standardized transcription and vocabulary. ## music The distinction between “elegant” and “vulgar” was particularly sharp in music. A government that was, on the one hand, determined to orchestrate a return to the proper “rites and music” of antiquity also had to make allowance for the possibility of utilizing music to mobilize its people and especially their children. The Meiji government did its best to organize and tidy up the lively setting of late Tokugawa entertainment. Izawa Shu¯ji, who played a major role in the reform of music, was very clear on the fact that much of Edo popular culture was part of the “evil customs” of the past that the Charter Oath proposed to end. “The popular music of Japan,” he wrote, has, neglected by the educated, remained for many centuries in the hands of the lowest and most ignorant classes of society. It did not advance moral or physical culture, and it was altogether immoral in tone . . . it damages the prestige of the country.<sup>28</sup> Consequently entertainers and those who patronized them were subjected to moralizing from the Meiji Victorians. Schools of dancers, musicians, and actors were classified and registered. “Martial songs” (heikyoku), which had enjoyed bakufu protection, went down with its patrons and the leading master ended his days as a masseur. Consistency, however, eludes all governments; many popular Satsuma and Cho¯shu¯ songs, sung to the accompaniment of a stringed biwa, now came into vogue with the new bureaucrats from western Japan. Much of this music had been considered rather country-bumpkin by sophisticated Edo samurai, who occasionally referred to their sponsors condescendingly as imo-zamurai “potato[-eating] samurai.” At other points music that had been restricted to the old elite received a new lease on life and became more widely diffused. Music of the no¯ theater seemed endangered for a time, but Iwakura Tomomi returned from his embassy with the idea that it might become a Japanese-style opera. He invited the young emperor to a concert at his residence, and soon many of the new aristocrats followed his lead. Commoners, previously excluded, were now permitted to cultivate no¯ as well. The ancient court music, gagaku, gained, though at the cost of a measure of codification and stultification of its repertory. Gagaku musicians, as favorites of the court, were able to wield a good deal of influence from their sanctuary within the Imperial Household, and even gained power over early bands and Western music. Western music entered Japan in the form of martial strains. The band that celebrated the success of the English squadron that shelled and burned Kagoshima in 1863 seems to have made as strong an impression on those who heard it on shore as had the ships’ guns. As Satsuma officials turned to modernize their military structure, they requested an English bandmaster at Yokohama to instruct Satsuma militiamen. By 1871, after the Satsuma victory in the Restoration warfare, they formed the core of a national military band. Six years later the Englishman was replaced by a German who orchestrated and harmonized verses of loyalty from the ancient Kokinshu¯ poetry anthology to produce the Kimi ga yo, a solemn ode to imperial rule that came to serve as the national anthem. Military songs and marches had become popular during the Restoration military campaigns. As public schools developed, school songs soon adapted the melodies of Stephen Collins Foster, as with Tobe tobe tonbi sora (Fly, little falcon, high in the sky!), a tune in Japanese mode that was a version of “Way, down upon the Swanee River.” 29 The Ministry of Education turned to music as part of the public school curriculum as early as 1871. Izawa Shu¯ ji was sent to the United States in 1875. There he met the Boston educator Luther W. Mason, and urged his appointment to reform Japanese popular music. Mason, he wrote, had done wonders with the Boston school system since his arrival from Cincinnati; when he arrived The people were not familiar with the benefits of music . . . in some schools classical music prevailed, in others vulgar, and bad street songs were used . . . [Mason had] invented an original system in formulating the best music and songs, old and new, of the countries of Europe and assimilated them with those existing in the United States, thus establishing good music in schools, or in short nationalizing it.<sup>30</sup> This was exactly what Meiji bureaucrats wanted done. Mason came in 1880 and stayed for two productive years. In books prepared under his direction about half the songs were foreign in origin. Western melodies were fitted with Japanese words; for others gagaku or koto melodies were utilized. Education authorities, however, insisted on some additions, like the “Song of the [Five Confucian] Relationships,” to the first book. By 1891 the Education Ministry guidelines made it clear that “setting the beauty of music apart, the cultivation of moral character is to be made the fundamental principle.” In this Japan did not differ greatly from the United States and other nineteenth-century countries, for in the Victorian age the thrust of public education was highly normative and moralistic. In France, for instance, the Third Republic had a Ministry of Fine Arts and Public Education that was justified by the argument that works of art could provide the entire population with a common vision of a productive and self-ordered life. ## art The Meiji government’s program in art had a substantial Tokugawa background on which it could build. The Dutch had done little or nothing to introduce Western music, but their influence in art had become increasingly important in the nineteenth century. What impressed Japanese artists like Shiba Ko¯kan was the accuracy and practicality of the pictures he saw in Dutch books; compared with that, he wrote, traditional Chinese and Japanese painting seemed child’s play. The need to prepare fortifications against possible invasion brought the government to employ artists to sketch sites and trajectories. The Tokugawa Institute for Barbarian (and later, Western) Learning included instruction in painting as a utilitarian discipline, related to map making and descriptive drawing. The Meiji government carried this a step further. Its program was directed by a Cho¯shu¯ samurai who had been sent to England to study together with Ito¯ and Inoue. After a seven-year stay, Yamao Yo¯zo¯ (1837–1917) returned as a graduate of Anderson College, a technical school in Glasgow. Entrusted with responsibility for a new Ko¯bu Daigakko¯, or technological school, he recruited a fellow graduate of Anderson, Henry Dyer. Together they built an institute modeled on that of the Zurich Polytechnical Institute. The Ko¯bu Daigakko¯ had six faculties, one of which was architecture. A technical art school was added in 1878 with divisions for painting and sculpture. Its key instructors were from Italy; Antonio Fontanesi in painting, Vincenzo Ragusa in sculpture, and Giovanni Cappellati in architecture. Between 1873 and 1885 it employed a total of 47 foreign teachers, a significant proportion of the 500-odd foreign employees hired by the government in those years. Students were from all parts of Japan, with admission slots doled out according to the category (large, middle, small) assigned their domain in the first Meiji years. This scrupulous concern for equity should not go unnoticed. The Meiji leaders were careful to keep central control in their own hands, but their concern for representative participation in all aspects of building the new institutions was not unrelated to their agreement on the need for a representative assembly. The Ko¯bu Daigakko¯ was regarded as a vital part of the program that O<sup>¯</sup> kuma Shigenobu’s Department of Public Works had launched for the development of railways, mining, iron foundries, lighthouses, telegraphs, and shipbuilding. Government planners may have been preoccupied with practicality, but the teachers and their students inevitably had their own interests. Fontanesi’s rather moody canvases used somber pigments and his forms were often indistinct, and his students followed his lead. As we have seen, the pace of Westernization had begun to arouse nativist reactions by the 1880s, and charges of disloyalty we have noted in other areas began to repeat themselves in art. In 1881 a leading Western-style painter, Kawakami To¯gai, was accused of passing rumors and selling maps to foreigners—a striking evocation of the Siebold case of the 1820s. In an act that can be considered symptomatic of the larger conservative shift of the tide, Kawakami committed suicide. In other fields, however, experimentation continued. In architecture the buildings of the English architect Josiah Conder, notably the Rokumeikan social center of 1883, became monuments of the decade.<sup>31</sup> Foreigners played a major role in the development of early Meiji culture, but it is important to remember that they were under Japanese, usually government, control. Left to their own devices they would have implanted their own ideas of an exotic Orient; Saracenic themes and evocations of temples and pagodas in architecture, kimonos at court. But in most cases the Japanese would have none of this and wanted to have their Westernization be honest. Ito¯ rebuffed the suggestion of the German expert on court protocol that the imperial family remain in Japanese dress, and the art critic Okakura Tenshim (Kakuzo¯) warned his son that he should never appear before Westerners in kimono unless his English was flawless. Government committees turned down more Western plans for buildings than they approved, on grounds that they were too “oriental.” Before long Japanese specialists, graduates of the new institutions, were prepared to carry on without foreign help. Then, as Japan gained international stature after its successful wars against China and Russia in 1895 and 1905, a new taste for imperial magnificence developed. In 1908 the Akasaka Palace was built to house the crown prince and Western visitors of state. It was a granite evocation of Versailles. At the end of the Meiji period Tokyo Central Station, a giant red brick structure completed in 1914, was often erroneously compared to the Amsterdam station. In fact the differences are more important than the surface similarities, for while Amsterdam’s opens to the central business area and port as a symbol of its merchant life, Tokyo’s was placed on a bias with the palace, and its elaborate central waiting room served the emperor rather than the city.<sup>32</sup> Western employees and visitors often deplored what they considered excesses of Westernization and pleaded for retention of the native tradition. The prime instance of this is in the work of Ernest Fenollosa (1853–1908), a Harvard graduate who came to Japan in 1878 to teach philosophy. Once there he became an enthusiast of traditional Japanese art and deplored what he regarded as excesses in the program of modernization. He thought it wrong to teach drawing with pencils instead of brushes, and did his best to help artists who were still painting in the traditional style. Together with his student and colleague Okakura Tenshin (Kakuzo¯, 1862–1913), he founded an art school and association. He returned to direct the East Asian program of the Boston Museum of Fine Arts in 1890, and continued his crusade in several influential books. Fenollosa has been credited with a major role in “saving” traditional art. Important as he was, the attributions are probably overgenerous, and reflect political currents as much as cultural. Fenollosa personally amassed a large collection of traditional art which he sold to collectors and museums, and his writings were welcomed by Japanese conservatives who found it convenient to use a foreign voice.<sup>33</sup> But the Japanese art tradition was never in danger of extinction. Japanese collectors and aesthetes like the Mitsui executive Masuda Takashi had seen to it that the government was already declaring major works national treasures and banning their export. The posthumous repute of Fenollosa illustrates the convenience of being able to cite an articulate foreigner in support of trends already under way. In post–World War II times Japanese often mistakenly ascribed the salvation of Kyoto from bombing to the Harvard art historian Langdon Warner. Similarly, the management consultant W. Edwards Deming was credited with transforming Japanese management thinking, although industrial management had long been attuned to Western developments. After the confusion of the 1880s Japanese artists went on to develop in several directions, each rather neatly separated from the others and moving in relative isolation. A neo-traditional art known as Nihonga (Japanese painting) pursued traditional themes but did so in a new dimension, and the annual expositions mounted in evocation of the Paris concours attracted the attention and effort of a notable group of artists. Because of the conservatism of art historians who, like Fenollosa, deprecated deviation from the classical canons of the Kano¯ school, these paintings have only recently begun to be fully appreciated.<sup>34</sup> Meanwhile a parallel school of Western painting, working in oils, took its models directly from Europe and developed a lively tradition of its own, one that is also only now beginning to receive serious attention.<sup>35</sup> ## literature It is in literature that we would expect to find the most articulate and sensitive record of the struggle for new cultural forms, and it is no accident that this area has received the most attention from Western scholars.<sup>36</sup> Here limitations of space make it impossible to do more than provide a cursory introduction. By late Tokugawa times the cultural achievements of the Genroku age lay far behind. Growing literacy and urbanization had created an impressive market for popular entertainment, but it was for the most part pitched to the lowest common denominator of taste and quality. Kabuki plays dealt increasingly with figures of evil and perversion, and may have helped account for the preoccupation with practices like tatooing. Popular tales like Hizakurige (translated as “Shanks Mare” ) followed the adventures of two rascals along Japan’s major highway. Overall, fiction seemed to have reached a low ebb. It was certainly scorned by Japanese of taste and breeding. Consequently, although Japan’s early experiments with modernity provided opportunities for humorists and storytellers, it came as something of a surprise to Meiji Japanese to discover that in the West the novel had become a major form of social and psychological commentary. The political novels that have been mentioned owed a good deal to the example of Disraeli and Bulwer-Lytton. Increasing familiarity with other European traditions brought the Russian novel to the attention of writers, particularly through the work of Futabatei Shimmei, whose Ukigumo has been described as Japan’s first modern novel. The great works of the Meiji period, however, novels which have spoken to all twentieth-century Japanese, came at its close in the early decades of the twentieth century. They are associated with the names of Natsume So¯seki (1867–1916), Mori O<sup>¯</sup> gai (1862–1922), and Shimazaki To¯son (1872– 1943). Each left behind a distinguished body of work, and each struggled conscientiously with the problems of creating a new culture. So¯seki was born the son of a commoner Edo municipal official. An unwanted child, he was passed off to another couple and then returned, and grew up thinking that his parents were his grandparents—a misperception that they, somewhat embarrassed by this last-born child, did nothing to correct. Nevertheless he was able to follow the main path to success by graduation from the preparatory school of the Imperial University, which he entered in 1884, and the university itself. He was well schooled in English, something that was essential for his generation in a day before translations were widely available. He had some thought of becoming an architect, despite the warning of a brother that “there was no glory in being an architect in such a poor country as Japan, where there would never arise the opportunity of building a great monument of the order of St. Paul’s.”<sup>37</sup> After graduating from the university in 1893 So¯seki was appointed to a post in English at Tokyo Normal College. Soon he showed his indifference to the anticipated “road to success” by accepting an offer from a high school in the town of Matsuyama. Next he moved to the Special Higher School in Kumamoto. Then, in 1900, the government sent him to England for two years of study. So¯seki went without introductions or preparation and had to live on a meager stipend. He had nothing to do with the better-funded Japanese community of diplomats and merchants, and lived a reclusive and deeply unhappy life in London. Upon his return to Japan he was obliged under the terms of his contract to accept a post in literature at the Imperial University, where he succeeded to the position Lafcadio Hearn had made famous.<sup>38</sup> To the consternation of his friends, So¯seki resigned as soon as he could. He accepted employment with the newspaper Asahi under contract to write a novel a year to appear serially in its pages. This casual disregard for the accepted values and goals of Meiji society marked So¯seki as a nonconformist. He had also begun to show signs of a nervous breakdown during his stay in London. He was contemptuous of Japanese jingoists, but also scornful of people who accepted the dominance of Western culture slavishly. “It would be a pity,” he wrote in 1905, “to lose one’s own and one’s country’s special characteristics through too much adoration of the West . . . Writers must imitate literary techniques simply to develop those qualities peculiar to ourselves.” So¯seki abandoned his academic post in English literature to write Japanese literature, and he developed a personal, and by extension national, idiom. To some extent, as critics have written, he was writing “for the sake of the country,” but he was also scornful of the wave of self-satisfaction and nationalism that swept Japan after its successful wars in which everything was attributed to unique qualities of Japanese spirit. “Do we go to the toilet or wash our faces for our country?” he asked in one talk, and in another, “My Individualism,” he argued that “as long as Japan is not in such a state that it is likely to collapse at any moment or meet the misery of destruction, it is not necessary to run around shouting ‘Nationalism! Nationalism!’ ” In the novels of his mature years So¯seki’s characters are depicted with remarkably realistic psychological insight. They suffer from a compelling loneliness and a usually futile struggle against egotism; they are people living in times of rapid social and moral change. By So¯seki’s time the problems of transcription had been sufficiently solved to permit the emergence of a supple prose free of the florid and often bombastic turns of phrase of earlier prose, and the language he and his peers utilized reads well as modern Japanese. Kokoro (The heart) is probably So¯seki’s most compelling book, and it is widely known thanks to Edwin McClellan’s sensitive translation. It is placed at the juncture of Meiji and twentieth-century Japan, and centers on problems of loneliness and isolation. Its central event is the death of the Emperor Meiji in July 1912. At the moment that cannon announced the funeral rites, General Nogi Maresuke, whose victory at Port Arthur had cost so many thousands of lives, followed the emperor in the medieval samurai tradition of junshi, partly to atone for having lost his regimental banner flag in the Satsuma Rebellion decades before, and more particularly to call his countrymen back to a code of morality that seemed to be waning. His wife in turn followed her mate in death. On learning of this, So¯seki’s protagonist, Sensei, also commits suicide, leaving a long letter of explanation for a young friend which makes up the core of the book. The slender volume is in one sense an elegy for an age that has past. “I felt as though the spirit of the Meiji era had begun with the Emperor and had ended with him,” Sensei writes his young friend; “I was overcome with the feeling that I and the others, who had been brought up in that era, were now left behind to live as anachronisms . . . Perhaps you will not understand clearly why I am about to die, no more than I can fully understand why General Nogi killed himself. You and I belong to different eras, and so we think differently. There is nothing we can do to bridge the gap between us.”<sup>39</sup> It is impossible to read this without feeling, as McClellan has put it, that these men were “very much children of Meiji. They were uprooted people, intellectually and socially; and as novelists their major concern was to depict the conditions of those who had to pay a price for having been born in a time of great change.” Mori O<sup>¯</sup> gai’s trajectory of life was quite different. He was educated as an army medical officer and had four years of study in Wilhelmine Germany. He returned conversant with current literary criticism, which he introduced through a number of journals. He was party to debates about the modernization of Japanese culture, and ultimately came to agree that “the adoption of an alien culture was to set up stresses and threatened to leave a spiritual vacuum.” That vacuum became one of O<sup>¯</sup> gai’s major preoccupations in later life. He set himself the problem, as Bowring puts it, of deciding “to what extent could the importation of Western culture and thought continue before it caused a fatal break with the past.”<sup>40</sup> O<sup>¯</sup> gai too was a nonconformist in his relations with military superiors, but he nevertheless had a distinguished career in army and public health and medicine. He managed to balance science with an equally important role in literary circles. As with So¯seki’s Sensei in Kokoro, however, the startling news of General Nogi’s seppuku in order to follow the Meiji emperor in death brought O<sup>¯</sup> gai to reconsider his writing and indeed Japanese history. There followed a series of graphically naturalist historical tales, scrupulously researched, dealing with incidents of violence in Japanese history.<sup>41</sup> O<sup>¯</sup> gai is one of modern Japan’s most respected intellectuals and writers. As a novelist, however, his rigid and almost academic concern with accuracy has probably made him less important than Shimazaki To¯son. If So¯seki stands out for the psychological depth of his depiction of loneliness and egotism and O<sup>¯</sup> gai for his historical works, To¯son’s contribution was closer to the Japanese tradition in its concern with self. Much of his work, in fact, prefigures the popular twentieth-century form of the “I novel,” in which authors have laid bare their struggles and uncertainties. To¯son’s best-known work, however, is probably the novel Before the Dawn (Yoake mae),<sup>42</sup> a semiautobiographical account of the changes and tragedies that overcome a simple-minded and rather naive believer in the teachings of late Tokugawa kokugaku. We have alluded to its principal figure, Hanzo¯, at many points in the Restoration narrative above. To¯son himself was the son of just such a station chief, whose fortunes and standing declined with the disestablishment of the great Nakasendo¯ highway of Tokugawa days, and the work that emerged was one that combined grandeur with tragedy. ## ideology and history Meiji ideology developed throughout the era in a zigzag pattern that engaged the efforts of private scholars and thinkers as much as it did the concern of government bureaucrats. In the field of history, particularly in the treatment of Japan’s antiquity, however, the influence of the state was marked.<sup>43</sup> The whirlwind pace of political and institutional innovation in the Meiji period had an important impact on the historical consciousness of the Japanese. History had always been one of the principal branches of letters in the Confucian tradition, and Tokugawa scholars made important contributions to historical writing.<sup>44</sup> With the growth of respect for facts and evidence under the influence of scholars like Ogyu¯ Sorai, standards became more rigorous. Writers like Arai Hakuseki had developed a periodization that accounted for and justified the primacy of warrior rule, and in so doing treated the flaws of dominance by earlier emperors and courtiers with a dispassionate detachment. Confucian rationalism found further support in European knowledge transmitted by the Dutch. By late Tokugawa times writers like the Osaka merchant-scholar Yamagata Banto¯ (1748–1821) were able to refute as nonsense the attempts by Motoori Norinaga and other nativist scholars to give new life to the ancient Shinto mythology about the sun goddess and the founding of Japan. There was a great deal of continuity between the work of the best Tokugawa Confucians and the development of modern historical writing in Meiji. This is seen most clearly in the work of the historian Shigeno Yasutsugu (1827– 1910). Shigeno was born the son of a country samurai in Satsuma, where his ability won him a rapid rise in status and honor. He was an instructor in the domain samurai school at sixteen, and went on to teach Chinese poetry and prose at the bakufu’s Sho¯heiko¯ academy at twenty-five. After the Satsuma victory in the Meiji Restoration he came to head the Historiographical Bureau, lectured before the Meiji emperor, and became known as the finest scholar of Chinese learning and evidential research in the Ogyu¯ Sorai tradition. Shigeno was emphatic on the desirability of fostering closer relations with China, and advocated sending students to China for long periods of study. He also argued that it was a necessity of learning to speak and read Chinese as Chinese did, and deplored Japanese use of grammatical markers as semitranslation attempts in traditional kanbun reading.<sup>45</sup> But Shigeno was also impressed by the techniques of Western history. After an English diplomat, August H. Mounsey, published a history of the Satsuma Rebellion in 1879, Shigeno noted that its approach seemed to be quite different from the East Asian tradition of annalistic records. He and his colleagues in the Historiographical Bureau had been gathering documentary sources on that event, but he noted that Mounsey’s book did more: “Unlike Japanese and Chinese histories which confine themselves to factual statements,” he wrote, “Western histories inquire into causes and consider effect, [and] provide detailed accounts of their subjects and vivid pictures of conditions of the time with which they are concerned. There can be no doubt that their form and method embody many points of value to us.”<sup>46</sup> In 1888 the Imperial University established a Department of Japanese History, and the two leading figures in the Historiographical Bureau became professors. Along with Shigeno there was Kume Kunitake, the Confucian scholar who had served as annalist of the Iwakura embassy to the West of 1871–1873. Both of them set out to free Japanese history from the myths that dominated the treatment of antiquity, and before long a number of traditional attributions and figures became suspect. In 1890 Shigeno gave a lecture in which he refuted long-current belief in the existence of a Kojima Takanori, long hailed as a loyalist stalwart in the fourteenth-century wars in which opposing warlords supported rival (Northern and Southern) imperial courts. Shortly afterward he did the same for Kusunoki Masashige, long venerated as a paragon of imperial loyalty. All this attracted a good deal of attention, and Shigeno became known as “Dr. Obliteration.”<sup>47</sup> To the Chinese school of evidential research which Shigeno represented there was added the authority of Western, Germanic historical science. In 1887 Ludwig Riess, a student of the great Leopold von Ranke, was invited to come to Japan as professor in the newly established department of history. Riess, who was Jewish and unable to secure a chair in a German university, was at the Imperial University until 1902. In addition to teaching world history he played a major role in the development of historical science as an academic discipline in Japan.<sup>48</sup> The German influence supplemented the Japanese zeal for the compilation of sources, and it was the move of the Historiographical Bureau to the Imperial University that launched academic history with Shigeno and Kume as historians. The Ranke influence had an additional byproduct. Working from the European example, Ranke was convinced that foreign relations were central to the creation of the modern state. Despite the contrast offered by Tokugawa Japan’s relative seclusion, it could be argued that Japan’s emergence as a modern state was the result of the nineteenthcentury opening, and as a result an ambitious plan to collect documents relevant to foreign relations was soon under way. The Meiji surge of Western influence and optimism for a new day of “civilization and enlightenment” thus carried the Confucian zeal for evidence and reason a step further. Popular writers like Fukuzawa and Taguchi Ukichi, the author of a history of Japanese development, did their best to fit Japan into a larger multinational perspective. At the same time, however, the architects of fukoku kyo¯hei were reaching back to earlier beliefs in their efforts to construct a strong state by utilizing and augmenting the aura of imperial power and divinity. So long as scholars and intellectuals were writing for one another and speeding the modernization that was necessary for Japan’s international repute there was no problem, but once the new institutional structure was in place and commoners were educated participants in a growing and increasingly open society, “history,” writ large, would become a matter for public debate. This debate took some time to develop, and in a sense it had been anticipated by the appearance of conservative and nationalistic journals in the late 1880s, but it came into the open only in the 1890s. By then the constitution was in place, and the Imperial Rescript on Education had committed the state to a normative role in customs and morals. Private and semiprivate philosophers and educators were beginning to lay out what were supposed to be the “right” positions and beliefs that their fellow citizens should hold. Japan was also at the threshold of the nationalist self-satisfaction that would accompany its victories in wars against its Asian and European competitors. In 1892 Kume Kunitake published an article entitled “Shinto Is an Outdated Custom of Heaven Worship” in the principal academic historical journal. It was soon republished in a popular historical journal, Shikai. “By itself,” Kume argued, “Shinto cannot meet modern needs and must be stripped of its useless elements like a tree shedding its dead branches and leaves.”<sup>49</sup> The problem was, however, that the builders of the modern state, far from considering Shinto “useless,” had decided that it was essential to their task. Many conservatives and Shintoists were outraged by Kume’s public disavowal of the historic link between the imperial family, the sun goddess, and the Ise shrine. Kume was soon under vigorous press criticism; his cause was not helped by the Shikai editor, Taguchi Ukichi, who relished controversy. Before long Shinto partisans were demonstrating in front of Kume’s house, and self-styled experts barged in to interrogate him. They debated with him for five hours, and they were little mollified by Kume’s explanation that he had wanted to demonstrate the common origin and nature of all primitive religions. In the end Kume decided to retract or at least modify his position “pending further study.” His retraction appeared in the press, but the harm had been done. His opponents complained to the Imperial Household Ministry and the Ministry of Education, which dismissed him from his teaching post. Kume was able to move to Waseda, the private institution founded by his fellow Saga clansman O<sup>¯</sup> kuma Shigenobu. The curriculum vitae he submitted with his application for appointment at Waseda provides laconic evidence of the swift change in his fortunes: 1889 February 23 Promoted to First Grade official. February 27 Awarded Fifth Order of Merit. Awarded Order of the Sacred Treasure. 1892 February 29 Awarded Junior Fifth [Court] Rank. March 4 Ordered to resign position. March 30 Resigned as ordered.<sup>50</sup> Kume continued to teach and write, but his tie with the governmentsponsored Historiographical Bureau was at an end. The scribe of the Iwakura embassy, sent to the West to “seek wisdom throughout the world” two decades earlier, thus fell victim to charges that he had shown sacrilegious disregard of Japan’s mythic past. The 1997 study by John Brownlee points out that Kume was silent about his dismissal. In 1903, when he was invited to contribute a chapter on Shinto by O<sup>¯</sup> kuma for the collection Fifty Years of New Japan, he was considerably more circumspect and respectful. Even when the government, in 1925, decided to censor parts of an earlier book in which he had discussed early accounts of imperial misadventures to illustrate the shortcomings of premodern history, he remained silent. Part of this can probably be ascribed to the increasing conservatism that came with age, but more to a patriotic acceptance of the need to support official ideology and the emperor. What is more surprising is the fact that none of Kume’s colleagues in the Historiographical Bureau or at the Imperial University chose to say a word in his defense. This may be because of long-lingering disputes between schools of interpretation of the national myths, or because of fear of personal involvement. Shigeno too was sidelined for a time, though never dismissed. This silence on the part of people who knew better probably had its origins in an unspoken agreement that the interests of the state should come first, and that while specialists ought to be able to carry on their work in seminars and professional journals, the larger public should be protected from possible confusion and doubt. As that larger public became more literate and capable of participating in the debates, censorship became more appealing an option. A book by Kume acceptable in 1887 could require censorship in a few decades later.<sup>51</sup> The most effective controls, however, were social and internal. Before the 1930s the Japanese state required few coercive tactics because elements within the Japanese society and conscience did its work for it. Elite professionals preferred to remain silent while Shinto fundamentalists monitored debate, so long as their silence worked to preserve their freedom within the walls of the academy. Before long the Historiographical Bureau resumed its work of collecting and classifying documents but not controversies. In Brownlee’s words, “the brief era of Dr. Obliteration and his killer colleagues passed. The Age of the Gods and the early Emperors got a reprieve from scholarly execution.”<sup>52</sup> In 1911, at the end of the Meiji period, the government involved itself even more directly in the interpretation of history by telling specialists what they could write in textbooks. The issue was that of the Northern and Southern courts in the fourteenth century. Remarkably, during that same period there were also rival papacies in Rome and Avignon. In Japan the debate over which of the imperial lines should be considered legitimate had deep roots in social and ideological change, and those require comment first. Meiji Japan had, in every sense, “arrived.” Two wars had found its arms victorious. The government had seen to it that the emperor received the credit. During the Sino-Japanese War of 1894–95 he moved, together with the Imperial Diet, to Hiroshima, the headquarters for the military effort, so that he could be credited with an active role of command despite the fact that he personally showed little enthusiasm for that war and declined to report it to the putative ancestral spirits at the Ise shrine. In 1900 Japan had strengthened its image of modernity by playing a major role in the relief of the missions at Peking from Chinese “Boxer” fanatics. In contrast to the looting by other elements of the allied force, Japanese troops behaved in exemplary fashion. The Anglo-Japanese Alliance provided a partnership with the world’s greatest naval power. But it was particularly the stoic heroism of the farm boys who marched to their death at Port Arthur in the Russo-Japanese War that won the attention of the Western world. The contrast with the performance of British forces in the Boer War a few years earlier produced the “Learn from Japan” movement in Britain. Once again the aura of the Meiji emperor profited from success and sacrifice. In Japan the senior generation exulted in this fresh evidence of the importance of Japanese spirit (tamashii), and it is not surprising that the memoirs of many Meiji figures provide striking evidence of this self-satisfaction. Former liberals and doubters also came aboard. One exception was provided by the Christian leader Uchimura Kanzo¯, who had, as we have noted, declined to bow before the Imperial Rescript on Education. Disillusioned by the land grab that had followed the victory over China, in a war he had originally characterized as “righteous,” Uchimura had become a pacifist and opposed the war with Russia. Not so his generation. Tokutomi Soho¯ had cemented his ties with Prime Minister General Katsura, and his Kokumin newspaper trumpeted the need for victory. In article after article Tokutomi called on his countrymen to accept the sacrifices necessary to maintain Japan’s status as a Great Power. The Quaker Nitobe Inazo¯, Uchimura’s old friend from Sapporo days, had published Bushido¯, which explained and praised the warrior cult, in 1899. The book came into its own by the time of the war with Russia, was translated in many languages, and was so congenial to President Theodore Roosevelt that he ordered copies for all his children. “What won the battles on the Yalu, in Korea, and Manchuria,” Nitobe was persuaded, “were the ghosts of our fathers, guiding our hands and beating in our hearts. They are not dead, those ghosts, the spirits of our warlike ancestors.” Nitobe saw bushido¯ as a counter to the materialism and utilitarianism of modernity; “the seeds of the Kingdom, as vouched for and apprehended by the Japanese mind, blossomed in Bushido.” He saw it dying, however, and hoped for its replacement by Christianity, but he was sure that while “Bushido as an independent code of ethics may vanish, . . . its power will not perish from the earth; its schools of martial prowess or civil honor may be demolished, but its light and its glory will long survive their ruins.”<sup>53</sup> Most Japanese shared in this satisfaction, and even Uchimura wrote that he could not refrain from sneaking into a closet to utter a few banzais. Nevertheless the enormous costs of the war, and the need for ever larger levies to support more divisions and more battleships after its conclusion, heightened strains that would in any case have accompanied industrialization and urbanization. It was possible to cheer the victories and venerate the emperor while objecting to the failure of the government and bureaucracy to spread the benefits of victory more widely. The mobilization of support for the war with Russia, and the lantern processions that were organized, contained potential for politics as well. There were countless marches through Japan’s great cities; hundreds such received police permits, and thousands more, avowedly nonpolitical, did not. All this could lead to demands for social instead of psychological reward once the guns were stilled. There were a number of major riots in Tokyo between 1905 and 1918. The first and greatest of these, the Hibiya riots, were in protest against the Portsmouth Treaty of Peace that concluded the war with Russia. Rioters, as we have noted, felt that Japan had been shortchanged in failing to get an indemnity to cover the crushing burden of debt the country had incurred, blamed this on the government, and wreaked havoc on the city, destroying 70 percent of the police boxes in Tokyo. Violence in Kobe and Yokohama followed.<sup>54</sup> Later riots focused on a rise in streetcar fares, opposed a tax increase, demanded a stronger China policy, opposed the government’s resistance to majority opinion in the Imperial Diet, protested profiteering in naval construction, and demanded universal manhood suffrage. Then, in 1918, spiraling prices for rice led to riots in which 178 people were arrested in Tokyo alone. The causes of these disturbances thus varied, but they added up to discontent and bitterness in the growing cities, and that alarmed conservative Japanese. Governing cabinets, led by nonpoliticians selected by the aging survivors of the Meiji leadership group, usually showed themselves slow-moving and often maladroit in their response to such expressions of discontent. In 1908, for instance, protests against a tax increase were answered by a Local Improvement Movement that was designed to help reform village life. The Home Ministry set out to rationalize and centralize the administration of village Shinto shrines, thereby alienating supporters of rural autonomy. Credit unions were set up, and Young Men’s Associations were supposed to offer “spiritual guidance.” Not to be outdone, the army established a nationwide organization of former soldiers, the Imperial Military Reserve Association, as one sponsor put it, “to protect the kokutai [national polity] and keep evil and materialistic foreign ideas from flowing into Japan.” This had the capability in some cases of threatening established village hierarchies by pitting valorous veterans against wealthy landlords, but it was meant to firm up village structure with a focus on imperial service.<sup>55</sup> The capstone of the campaign, however, was an imperial exhortation to thrift and diligence. “All classes of Our people” were told to act in unison, to be faithful to their callings, frugal in the management of their households, submissive to the dictates of conscience and calls of duty, frank and sincere in their manners; they should abide by simplicity and avoid ostentation, and inure themselves to arduous toil without yielding to any degree of indulgence. These sentiments would have sounded familiar to the Tokugawa period villagers who listened to popular preachers like Hosoi Heishu¯, but those villagers had not been asked to give their lives in war. Certainly nothing could be further from the language of the 1868 Charter Oath, which had pledged that “the common people, no less than the civil and military officials, shall each be allowed to pursue his own calling so that there may be no discontent.” But there was discontent, and there were good reasons for it. Too exclusive a focus on government and urban modernity risked overlooking the disparities that were developing in the course of Meiji social change. Opportunities for urban investment attracted the capital of many rural landlords just as education and employment attracted their sons. In the process many villages became less “healthy,” to use the government’s term, and social cohesion was weaker. Novelists working within the new pattern of realism provided graphic descriptions of rural poverty and misery; Nagatsuka Takashi’s The Soil, published in 1910, stands as an important ethnographic document. Its portrait of rural life rather repulsed Natsume So¯seki, whose introduction for a 1912 publication noted dryly, The characters in The Soil are the poorest of farmers. They have no education, no dignity. Their lives are like those of maggots hatched out of the soil . . . [the author] portrays every detail of their almost beastly, impoverished lives.<sup>56</sup> In northeastern Japan hardship was made worse by disastrous crop years. In 1905 unusually cold weather made for the smallest harvests since the famines of the 1780s and 1830s, the Tenmei and Tenpo¯ years that witnessed so many peasant insurrections. “In Miyagi Prefecture the crop registered only twenty percent of a normal year’s production, and as a result approximately 280,000 of the people in the prefecture became destitute.”<sup>57</sup> In afflicted areas loss of land and employment, vagabondage, and a desperate search for sustenance at the lower levels of drudgery in mines and among the urban proletariat changed the face of rural life. It is not difficult to find expressions of deep concern for the direction Japanese society seemed to be taking. Kitamura To¯koku was a talented poet and essayist, active in the Freedom and People’s Rights Movement and a convert to Christianity. He too struggled with the themes of individualism and authority, only to take his own life in 1892. He was depressed by shortcomings in the Meiji dream. “On the surface,” he wrote in 1891, Meiji civilization manifests truly immeasurable progress, but do the majority of the people enjoy it? Go and carefully examine the actual condition of each house. On a cold day, when it is snowing, how many households contain families with rosy cheeks sitting by a warm fire? It is impossible to count the number of young girls without color in their cheeks and young boys without books who wander about the roadside . . . Although society seems outwardly splendid and gradually approaches grandeur, on the other hand we see conditions of gradual deterioration, weakness due to illness, and destitution . . . Nothing is more disastrous to a country than having its poor despised more and more while the rich become more and more arrogant and extravagant.<sup>58</sup> The vast majority of Japanese accepted their society stoically; and many, of course, were in fact better off or had hopes for improvement. The memoirs of the novelist Yoshikawa Eiji (1892–1962), who grew up in grinding poverty in a household cursed by the inability of his (ex-samurai) father to make his way in Meiji commerce, show how it seemed to a child: While preserving intact in their domestic lives these customs reminiscent, in their austerity and traditionalism, of the samurai style of life, people were at the same time ashamed of appearing poor to the outside world. In a sense, people in those days never thought to trace the causes of poverty to politics or the social system; poverty was a personal trait, and there was a strong tendency to discriminate against the poor as, by definition, inferior human beings. Thus families were scared to death of going under. Even if you were in real trouble, you tried to hide it and keep up appearances . . . In those days when welfare systems were unknown, it was quite possible for a whole family to starve to death without their neighbors realizing it. It is also true that my parents were the kind of people who, finding themselves in that dire condition, were incapable of devising any way to save themselves.<sup>59</sup> But there were some who did protest. A small socialist movement in which Christians played an important role got under way. An early study group was formed in 1898, and in 1901 a Social Democratic Party was formed, though it was quickly banned by the police. Ko¯toku Shu¯sui (1868–1911), whose life span was almost exactly that of the Meiji period, was a young partisan of the Freedom and People’s Rights Movement who became active in these study groups. In 1901 he published an attack on imperialism, which he labeled the “specter of the 20th century,” and a book on the essence of socialism. As war with Russia neared he joined with the Christian leader Uchimura Kanzo¯ in advocating pacifism in the columns of a liberal newspaper until it abandoned its opposition to the war. Ko¯toku then joined with others to found a weekly, Heimin shinbun (The Commoners’ Press). It too was banned, but not before it had published the first Japanese translation of Karl Marx’s Communist Manifesto. After a brief imprisonment, Ko¯toku left for a six-month stay in San Francisco. There he experienced the earthquake of 1906, something that strengthened his views on the possibility of society without a government. He returned to Japan convinced that it was futile to try to work for social justice through existing institutions, and began to advocate a general strike and direct action. His insistence on this speeded the break-up of a socialist party that had formed once more in 1907. Ko¯toku now became the acknowledged leader of the radical left, and was on the fringes of a group, which included his common-law wife, that prepared a plot on the life of the Meiji emperor. The police arrested him with the other members of the group in 1910. The “High Treason Trial” that followed was conducted in secret and its records have never been made public. In 1911 Ko¯toku and eleven others of the group were hanged. This became a shattering event for many liberal intellectuals. The novelist Tokutomi Roka delivered a famous lecture at the First Special Higher School in which he told his young hearers that one should not fear the rebel. One should not be afraid of becoming a rebel himself. To do something new has always been called rebellion . . . What is to be feared is the death of the spirit. To believe only what one is taught to believe, to say only what one is told to say, to do only what one is asked to do, to find security in life by existing formally like a doll poured from a model, to lose completely the idea of self-confidence in one’s independence and the belief in self-improvement—this is the death of the spirit. To live is to rebel.<sup>60</sup> This was the voice of the early Meiji period, but it had become anachronistic in the conformity of the late Meiji days. Most intellectuals seem to have seen the incident as proof of the impracticability of individual opposition to the state. It confirmed them in what was probably their inclination: withdrawal, retreat, or indifference to political issues. For historians and writers of textbooks the High Treason Trial had other and unanticipated reverberations. Uniform textbooks had come to play a role in intellectual homogenization. In 1903, after a series of scandals involving bribery in the adoption of privately prepared books, the Ministry of Education introduced a series of national textbooks. A course in ethics (shu¯shin) was central to this system; it stressed civil virtues of loyalty and patriotism, and portrayed Japan’s as a “family-state” in which the myriad family hierarchies reached up to and were crowned by the imperial family, which in turn had its links to the mythic gods. History, geography, and language received definitive treatment in this pattern. The books were revised in 1910, after the annexation of Korea; in 1918, after World War I; in 1933, after the establishment of the puppet state of Manchukuo; and in 1941, on the eve of World War II. Except for the edition of 1918, each of these revisions tended to strengthen the nationalist content of the textbooks. Description of other societies and accounts of distinguished non-Japanese diminished, to be replaced by increasing emphasis on Japan, its heroes and its beneficial social order. In 1911, at the time of the High Treason Trial, a relatively obscure period of Japanese history suddenly became the center of intense controversy. Shortly after the Russo-Japanese war patriotic organizations among schoolteachers had begun to campaign for a uniform and orthodox treatment of the years between 1336 and 1392, the period of the Southern and Northern Courts in which rival emperors held forth in Kyoto and in Yoshino. In January 1911, one of the major Tokyo dailies raised the alarm that the 1910 textbooks left it unclear which governance was legitimate and which was not, despite the fact that the government supposedly favored the claims of the Southern, or Yoshino, line. Politicians and public intellectuals soon joined the fray. The Ko¯toku anarchists, some argued, showed the dangers of education in a factoriented, valueless history. It was after all a cardinal point of Japanese belief that there could not be two suns in the sky or two sovereigns in the land, and yet the textbook suggested that this had not been the case during this period of rival courts. Before long the matter was taken up by the cabinet, which was nearly unseated by the dispute. Prime Minister General Katsura, who probably did not find the issue one of compelling interest, later wrote that nothing had given him as much difficulty. The upshot of the uproar was a Ministry of Education decision that the period in question should be termed the era of the Southern Court to make it clear that the Northern Court had lacked legitimacy. The course dealing with the problem at Tokyo Imperial University was relabeled “The Yoshino Court Era.” Ministers and warriors of the Southern Court, especially Kusunoki Masashige, whose very existence had been threatened by Professor Shigeno, were lionized in print and sculpture. One of the authors of the offending 1910 textbook was suspended from his post for two years, and many other leading authorities were publicly criticized for having placed facts ahead of public morality. For the most part, Japan’s historians remained silent, and distinguished, as Brownlee puts it, between education (kyo¯iku), under which the people of Japan were to be taught useful and inspiring fictions appropriate to a sacerdotal state, and scholarship (gakumon).<sup>61</sup> Meiji culture thus had its contradictions: on the one hand there was the urgency of a program of modernization that took the West as its model, and on the other was the commitment to adapt Japan’s oldest myths to modern uses in order to bolster the authority of the emperor—and, of course, those who stood at his elbow. When the two were in conflict, the authority and legitimacy of the state took precedence, for in the minds of officialdom, professors at the Imperial University were cultural officials. But there are other things about the Meiji drive to create a new culture that deserve mention. In trying to create and define the new culture Meiji Japanese were also creating and defining tradition. T. S. Eliot has written that “what happens when a new work of art is created is something that happens simultaneously to all the works of art that preceded it,” and this is no less true of institutions and of letters. The institutions and rites of rule were in large part re-created to serve new purposes. In the case of gagaku court music, what had in origin often been improvisational and entertaining became solemn and awe-inspiring, and in many ways “tradition” itself was declared finalized. In order to depart from, or to emphasize, tradition it became necessary to define what it was that Japan had been. The models of warrior rule and culture had been rejected, but what was to replace them? This process was most apparent on the part of men of letters, some of whom were the most articulate and interesting of their generation. So¯seki and O<sup>¯</sup> gai were determined to build a new literary tradition that would be worthy of comparison with that of the West and would win Western respect. They succeeded in this, but in their mind it was clear that the old tradition could not play this role. What, then, were to be the most important and enduring monuments of the past? What was to be the literary canon? It may be that their task was lightened because eighteenth-century nativist scholars like Motoori Norinaga had anticipated some of these questions in trying to set the Japanese tradition off from that of China. Motoori, however, was intent on purification and “return,” and not on building the new. Building the new meant locking off the old. Add the fact that the Meiji men lived in the Victorian age, and were in fact Victorians themselves. Their concern with what the West would respect and understand strengthened this, and they blended Victorian and Confucian standards of propriety. To some degree questions of this sort have plagued every developing society in modern times. Japan’s experience, as perhaps the first of the “latecomers” to wrestle with these problems, thus has lessons of profound interest for these themes. The half century of determined effort made for an additional periodization in which “Meiji” as definitive change became standard in writing and thought. By the second decade of the twentieth century the consciousness of Meiji as a turning point was universal, and not limited to writers who articulated it. Two monuments stand as symbols of this consciousness. The first is the Heian Shrine in Kyoto, a copy of an eighth-century Chinese-style administrative building, that was built in 1895 to mark the eleven-hundred-year anniversary of the designation of Kyoto as capital, and dedicated to the Emperor Kammu in whose reign that took place. The second is the Meiji Shrine in Tokyo, built in 1920 with the labor of more than 100,000 volunteers. Its wide and graveled path leads through majestic trees to an imposing Shinto torii and on to a simple purification font and traditional shrine. Nearby a pictorial gallery contains giant murals in Western style that depict the principal events of Meiji times. The shrine is a symbol of the worship of Emperor Meiji, whose memorabilia, including the taxidermists’ preservation of his faithful steed, dominate the scene. In this setting one can appreciate Natsume So¯seki’s selection of the emperor’s death and the selfimmolation of General Nogi, the last samurai, as symbols for the end of an era. Yet the shrine also points to the future, for it is most crowded during New Year holidays when families bring their children, usually dressed in colorful kimonos, to worship at the font.