# TAISHO<sup>¯</sup> CULTURE AND SOCIETY The Taisho¯ era lasted a bare fifteen years before the emperor’s death in 1926, and as an era it has little of the cogency of Meiji that preceded or of the militarist era that followed it. Despite this the sense of newness and change that accompanied the movement toward parliamentary democracy was palpable. “Taisho¯ Democracy” remains a symbolic designation for new currents of cosmopolitanism, discontent, and reform that found expression in the years during and after World War I. All contemporary Japanese were conscious of those changes. Some welcomed and others feared them. But no one could be unaware that there was a new climate of change. The sense of liberation that followed the desperate urgency of the rush to build a modern state was widespread. With the growth of higher education, industry, and urban population a new society began to take shape, with new divisions and differentiation within government, business, and gender. ## 1. Education and Change The new Japan was far better educated and more literate than the old. By 1898 attendance rates for the four years of compulsory education had reached 69 percent, and by the end of Meiji it was virtually universal. In 1907 compulsory education was extended to six years. A network of girls’ and vocational schools prepared young people for useful jobs in the new society. At higher levels specialty (senmon) schools, many of which had begun as foreign language schools, mushroomed, especially in Tokyo. The most distinctive and important unit in the education system was to be found in the eight Special Higher Schools (ko¯- to¯gakko¯) which functioned as the preparatory level for the imperial university. Of these the First, the most important, popularly known as “Ichiko¯,” was in Tokyo. Like so much in prewar Japanese education, this system came out of the work of Mori Arinori as minister of education in the 1880s. The schools’ students ranged from grade-grubbing careerists to dandified playboys. The schools placed great emphasis on Western languages and learning, and for many years the teaching in those subjects was quite unpredictable and erratic in quality. A good deal of the teaching was done by foreigners, some of them poorly qualified for their task. Many of the Meiji elite, themselves the products of domain and private academies, worried about the future of their country if it had to be left to a generation without sound training in values. Mori’s solution for this had been to work out a two-track system. Ordinary five-year high schools, open to those who could afford them, would provide schooling to produce useful citizens able to help build the new state. The Special Higher Schools, on the other hand, were designed to provide a broad humanistic and general education in two (soon extended to three) years, to prepare students for university training. The object was to develop a Japanese counterpart to the American undergraduate college, but the result was more centralized and hierarchic, frankly designed to produce an elite capable of leading the country to its goals of loyalty, wealth, and strength. Structure and purpose would replace the anarchy that had prevailed before, with a system which would nurture a responsible elite for leadership in government and society.<sup>1</sup> Among the educators who pioneered in planning these schools there were some who had deep personal experience of education in other countries. Orita Hikoichi, who directed the Kyoto Third Higher School, was the first Japanese to graduate from Princeton, from which he returned full of admiration for the mix of moral, intellectual, and physical training that had been worked out there by President James McCosh. Nitobe Inazo¯, who headed Ichiko¯ in Tokyo for seven years, had degrees from Johns Hopkins and from Halle in Germany. But the mix of values and ritual that characterized the Special Higher Schools was uniquely Japanese. In the closing decades of the Meiji period the ethos of domain samurai schools, at least as the students understood that code, produced a distinctive environment and student culture, boisterous in rowdy masculinity, suspicious of guidance, intolerant of outside interference, and tyrannical in suppression of privatism and individual exceptionalism. It also promoted intense bonding that resulted in lifelong friendships. Students were usually contemptuous of the capitalist materialism in the society around them. “From our vantage atop Muko¯ga Hill,” went the Ichiko¯ song, “we stalwarts of the five dormitories, Our ambitions soaring to the sky, Gaze down upon a vulgar world, which is addicted to the dreams of ordinary life.”<sup>2</sup> Dormitories were usually “self-governing” and autonomous, and the campus was closed to outsiders. School administrators were remarkably tolerant of adolescent exuberance and assertiveness; demonstrations and riots to protest disciplinary measures were common, and teachers and even school heads might be targets of criticism in student convocations. On one occasion Nitobe, charged with cheapening his school by writing essays on morality for popular outlets, turned the tables on his critics by reading a prepared statement of resignation as headmaster; this shocked the students and brought them around to beg him not to submit it. Dormitories were famously unclean, and so were the students who lived in them. Clattering about on high wooden clogs, they were shaggy and unkempt, latter-day invocations of Edo otokodate and Restoration shishi. “Have you seen,” Nitobe asked in Bushido¯, many a young man with unkempt hair, dressed in shabbiest garb, carrying in his hand a large cane or a book, stalking about the streets with an air of utter indifference to mundane things? He is the student to whom the earth is too small and the heavens are not high enough. He has his own theories of the universe and of life. He dwells in castles of air and feeds on ethereal words of wisdom. In his eyes beams the fire of ambition; his mind is athirst for knowledge. Penury is only a stimulus to him to drive him onward; worldly goods are in his sight shackles to his character. He is the repository of loyalty and patriotism. He is the self-imposed guardian of national honour. With all his virtues and his faults, he is the last fragment of Bushido¯.<sup>3</sup> Nitobe’s picture of a lonely seeker for the grail should not be allowed to obscure other aspects of student life. The Special Higher Schools produced a bonding process that was enforced by ritual, sometimes brutal when applied to nonconformists. Sport club heads and dormitory chiefs were campus leaders. Institutionalized riots (“storms,” as they were called) pitted half-naked participants against one another. Homosexuality might be tolerated,<sup>4</sup> but evidence of dalliance with women could bring the perpetrator a “clenched-fist” ritualized thrashing from student leaders, conducted by candlelight on the playing fields in the middle of a silent circle of observers.<sup>5</sup> With the passage of time the more brutal aspects of this code were moderated, especially during Nitobe’s years as headmaster at Ichiko¯ (1906–1913), and new space was found for interior and intellectual life. “By 1910,” Donald Roden observes, “the debates [about the essence of the school experience] had subsided and the importance of culture and the inner self to the uniqueness of the higher school was widely acknowledged.”<sup>6</sup> The curriculum had always focused on foreign languages, often devoting a third or more of class time to them. Now literature and study clubs, frequently with their own informal journal or pamphlet-magazine, flourished, and student essays and poetry reflected and helped form the Taisho¯ intellectual scene. Elitism was in no sense weakened, but status and prestige were now accessible to brains as well as bullies. Taisho¯ writers explored the reaches of the inner self, and student readers eagerly followed their example. Twentieth-century radicalism also entered the campus gates, and provided, in German philosophy and Marxist theory, more sophisticated weapons than samurai asceticism for criticism of bourgeois materialism. What resulted was not a simple East–West or tradition–modern dichotomy, but something at once Japanese and international in origin. What stood out was the compulsive interest in philosophy. The writer Akutagawa Ryu¯nosuke remarked that Ichiko¯ students were “more philosophical than Kant,” and observers familiar with the student song that satirized their own preoccupation with “Dekansho¯” (for Descartes, Kant, and Schopenhauer) might have been led to agree. Through all this a commitment to the production of an elite continued. Student numbers grew rapidly in the interwar years. After the expansion of 1918 the number of Special Higher Schools, theretofore numbered one to eight, quadrupled as new institutions were set up. The new schools, established in and named for provincial towns throughout Japan, were relatively isolated from the great metropolitan centers. They did their best to carry on the traditions of their older rivals, but they could never match their fame. If anything, the inflation in the number of new schools increased the prestige of the old. Ratings of school and university mattered in careers, and competition was intense. Each Special Higher School graduate was, in theory, guaranteed admission to an imperial university. As the student population grew, more universities were needed to fill this need. The Imperial University in Tokyo was chartered in 1886, again on Mori’s watch, out of a consolidation of institutions founded earlier. As the first created, and closest to the capital city, it was the pinnacle of the education system. Its initial mission was to transmit foreign learning and train government officials. An analysis of Japan’s basic Who’s Who, the Jinji ko¯shin roku, shows that the majority of the Meiji elite had not attended a university, but that among those who had the majority were graduates of the Imperial University. For the next generation of bureaucrats, however, university education was a must. Kyoto Imperial University was established in 1897, and subsequently institutions were established at Sendai (1907), Fukuoka (1910), Sapporo (1918), Seoul (1924), Taipei (1928), Osaka (1931), and Nagoya (1939). In that process the prestige of the older imperial universities, and especially of Tokyo Imperial University, rose. All professors had the status of government officials, and consequently had to be sensitive to the direction and funding provided by the Ministry of Education. Despite this many faculties, especially those of law, established a certain autonomy from state control. Once ideas and teaching reached beyond the campus gate to influence the broader public, however, there was less tolerance and freedom; education officials, and especially self-styled private monitors of orthodoxy, sometimes brought pressure to bear that could lead to resignation or dismissal. Nevertheless this was quite unusual, and the principal cases stand as landmarks in the construction—or destruction—of Japan’s civil society. In response to such incidents, faculties, which were in any case frequently divided, tended to place institution above individual, and hew the line rather than imperil the larger university.<sup>7</sup> As with the Special Higher Schools, the proliferation of imperial universities enhanced rather than diminished the stature of the first and most powerful, the Imperial University, which now became Tokyo Imperial University. Its faculty members were instrumental in the formation and leadership of other imperial universities. The university also provided the avenue for employment of government officials and bureaucrats. Major ministries were staffed to an astonishing degree by Tokyo Imperial University graduates. In addition, the university gained from the fact that Tokyo, as the capital, drew the country’s finest writers and most discriminating readers. Japan was becoming an increasingly centripetal society. The years of World War I also brought a major expansion of education opportunities in private institutions. In 1918 the University Law liberalized the criteria for university charters and made it possible for many of the specialty schools to gain university status. By 1930 Japan had thirty universities which enrolled approximately 40,000 students and produced 15,000 graduates a year.<sup>8</sup> Formal education counted much more than it had in the Meiji period, when regional origin or personal recommendation could often suffice to secure employment in official or civil society. Now that was no longer the case. Indeed, one of the consequences of this expansion was that even a degree from a first-line school might no longer guarantee a good job; graduates from newer and lesser schools were particularly hard-pressed to find employment. Japanese society in general and government in particular were gradually falling into the hands of a new kind of elite, more open to talent though by no means indifferent to favoritism. The imperial universities thus constituted a clear hierarchy of power and prestige, one directly related to the order of their establishment and location. They were state-founded and metropolitan-centered, designed from the first to serve the state as well as society. Tokyo and Kyoto each had seven different faculties. They were organized on the German pattern of chairs, each with a professor with a retinue of assistants who did much of the teaching. Collectively, the student bodies of these two universities constituted as much as onethird of Japan’s entire student body. It was the Law Faculty of Tokyo Imperial University that gave the institution its particular cachet, and its graduates constituted the principal pool of talent for government officials. The result was a curious mix of meritocracy and ascription. Admission was open to all and governed by examination, but once the gates of opportunity had been entered they became gates of privilege. The graduates’ rise, particularly in government, was determined largely by the label of the school attended. Consequently what remained, in some sense, unchanged from earlier times, was “the conviction throughout the great part of society that certain people were destined to stand out above others and that this natural elite should lead society.”<sup>9</sup> ## 2. The Law Faculty of Tokyo Imperial University All this gave professors in the Tokyo Imperial University Faculty of Law an extraordinary position and importance. They were well funded, and virtually certain of extended periods of study abroad. They stood at the crossroads of education and government, for their best students manned the most important ministries. They were public as well as academic leaders, consulted by government bureau chiefs—often their former students—to serve on study commissions. They were sought out by publishers to give leadership and tone to debates on issues of the day. On retirement, still in the prime of life, they were eagerly sought out by leading private universities to teach and continued their careers another decade or more. In Taisho¯ years three men stood out. The first of these was the constitutional scholar Minobe Tatsukichi (1873–1949). Minobe, who had studied in Germany, developed an interpretation of the Meiji Constitution in which the emperor was an organ of the state. This view became dominant during the thirty-two years Minobe taught at the Imperial University; he was widely honored, the books in which he laid out his views became standard texts, and Minobe was appointed to a seat in the House of Peers. As we shall see, Minobe’s views were sharply contested by others who held for imperial autocracy. He was to fall victim to right-wing hysteria, but during most of the interwar period stood as a symbol of Taisho¯ Democracy.<sup>10</sup> Yoshino Sakuzo¯ (1878–1933) was a far more visible figure and emerged as the chief theorist and exponent of what became known as Taisho¯ Democracy. Yoshino became a Christian during his student days at the Second (Sendai) Higher School. Together with the Christian socialist Abe Iso¯, he was an active member of the Tokyo congregation of Ebina Danjo¯ of the early Meiji “Kumamoto band.” After graduating from the Law Faculty he accepted a teaching position in China during the brief presidency of Yu¨an Shih-k’ai and developed a warm interest in the revolutionary movement of Sun Yat-sen. He returned to a post at Tokyo Imperial University, was sent to Europe and America for several years of additional study, and came back to his post in 1914 convinced that Japan needed political reform to equip it for the new world order that he saw emerging. Christianity was an important element in Yoshino’s conviction of the importance of morality in political leadership and citizenship. He was also influenced by his study of Hegel. The moral order he worked toward was grounded in his belief in the goodness of man. He believed that the Meiji leaders, however important their contribution, had, in their rush to build the modern state, created a narrow nationalism. What was needed now was a more universal goal, and that could be attained through education and greater popular participation. Yoshino did not concern himself with what he considered the myths of Christianity, and he also looked beyond the imperial myths of Japan and assumed that they too would be outgrown in time. What was needed was leadership by men of character and quality.<sup>11</sup> Yoshino did not limit his teaching to his classes. He lectured widely in a university extension movement and became particularly known for thoughtful articles in popular liberal monthlies. In these he argued the need to make government more responsive to the people by a larger franchise, better protection for individual rights, and a stronger representative assembly. He also thought it important to limit the powers of the House of Peers and eliminate or curb the Privy Council. He was central to the organization of liberal student groups, and became their hero when he withstood the attack of ultrarightist ideologues in public debate. He also participated in the formation of the Social Mass Party (Shakai Minshuto¯) in 1926. His scholarly achievements were equally impressive. He was a leading figure in projects to preserve and publish historical sources on the early Meiji period. That area had drawn mostly official, and therefore partisan, attention, but little systematic scholarship. Yoshino was, in short, an exemplar of the qualities he sought in Japanese leaders: moral commitment, lofty goals, and personal courage. An advocate of democracy in imperial Japan had first of all to face the fact of imperial sovereignty as it was proclaimed in the Meiji Constitution. For Yoshino personally this was not a problem; at one point, as Peter Duus writes, he suggested that the imperial institution would some day be stripped of its magical aura the way primitive conceptions of Jehovah had been. He himself regarded the emperor as a human and civil monarch. At the same time, he felt that his readers and students might not as yet be ready for this. The standard translation for “democracy,” Minshu shugi, conveyed the idea of popular sovereignty. Yoshino preferred the translation minponshugi, literally “people centered,” or “people based.” Popular sovereignty, he wrote, was “inappropriate to a country like ours, which from the beginning has been monarchical.” In contrast minpon, the term he preferred, could apply to steps to make monarchical rule more people centered. (It also had Confucian overtones, although Yoshino did not stress or discuss these.) At present, Yoshino felt, the elder statesmen and bureaucrats seemed to regard the people as a problem, and tried to manage rather than lead them. Prosperity brought by the world war had produced a new plutocracy, and Japan now seemed to have a new privileged class, whose interests were unfairly protected by law. “In recent times,” he wrote, “capitalists have gained strength and with their huge financial power are finally on the point of wrongfully trampling upon the public interest.” Japan’s politicians, for their part, were responsive to these interest groups and did not inspire much confidence either. He was scathing in his criticism: “The frequent occurrence of corrupt behavior among legislators is probably a peculiarity of Japan.” The problems Japan faced were moral and personal, but they could be met by increased participation and a better sense of responsibility. “Most of the civilized countries of the world,” he pointed out in 1916, “have seen fit to adopt universal manhood suffrage.” Only Russia and Japan, in fact, lagged behind. Yoshino’s basic optimism about human nature led him to believe that once this reform was achieved, education and responsibility would hold out hope for a better future. He also realized, however, that it would require more years for Japan to make that move. In fact, as we have seen, it required nine years for universal manhood suffrage to be enacted.<sup>12</sup> Yoshino himself practiced what he preached. He resigned his university post to write for the Asahi Shinbun, and when that paper ran into problems of censorship he returned to work with students as a lecturer. His writings illustrate some of the limitations of what was possible in his day. They are not free of contradiction,<sup>13</sup> but they represent one of the most thoughtful attempts to carry further the political reforms that had begun with the Meiji Constitution. Yoshino was a charismatic figure and the principal intellectual and academic sponsor of the Shinjinkai (New Man Society) that was formed at Tokyo Imperial University in 1918. This grew out of informal meetings that Yoshino had with students interested in the campaign for universal manhood suffrage. The Shinjinkai was the product of rising student concern with social problems and international affairs. The ferment of the first decade of the Taisho¯ era included the capitalist boom of the war years followed by the rice riots of 1918, the collapse of empire in China and in central Europe, rising interest in anarchism and communist materialism brought to focus by the Russian Revolution, and the lofty rhetoric of Wilsonian internationalism. Yoshino met informally with groups of particularly able students to discuss these matters. This in turn led students from different campuses to meet; those at Tokyo and Kyoto imperial universities, and their counterparts at leading private institutions like Waseda, where Yoshino’s friend Abe Iso¯ had a student following. At the Special Higher Schools debating clubs and social science study clubs took up the task. On every hand there was a consciousness of change in the air, enough of it to lead people to break out of their parochial units and reach out to their counterparts. The first stage of this, as Henry Smith shows,<sup>14</sup> was romantic, idealistic, and quite unfocused. The handful of students who organized the New Man Society in December of 1918 proposed to “advance the new trend towards the liberation of mankind” and further the “movement for the rational reform of contemporary Japan.” They committed themselves to work for universal (manhood) suffrage, but as part of a broader dedication to “the people.” The task they set themselves was one of educating and ultimately leading those people, but the first steps required recruiting more students like themselves. During its ten years of activity the Shinjinkai never claimed more than three hundred members, but, centered as it was in the Tokyo Imperial University Faculty of Law, it was an impressive and influential group. Its ranks were made up of alumni as well as student members. The son of Miyazaki To¯ten, Sun Yat-sen’s leading Japanese disciple, was a leader, and it is not surprising to find the organization taking stands that were critical of Japanese foreign and colonial policy. Akamatsu Katsumaro, who had won his spurs leading student strikes, was there. In future years both he and Miyazaki would be influential leaders in the socialist movement. From Waseda University came student disciples of Abe Iso¯.<sup>15</sup> As Japan entered the 1920s liberal and radical students had no lack of complaints. The depression that followed the war years tightened job opportunities. Worker strikes mirrored social discontent. The massive environmental degradation caused by Ashio copper mine effluent, which poisoned rivers and threatened the livelihood of hundreds of thousands of farm families, produced governmental controls that were not enforced, and ultimately the entire flood basin was condemned. The problem and the protests had begun as early as 1877, but it festered almost a century until 1974, when a class action suit was successful.<sup>16</sup> There was grinding poverty in industrial cities, some of it the target of Christian socialists like Kagawa Toyohiko. Worst of all, the Diet was temporizing regarding the issue of universal manhood suffrage. There were also antimilitarist movements. A national organization of students that was formed in 1923 took as one of its targets an army program to introduce military training in high schools in order to provide employment for officers rendered redundant by budget cuts. Large-scale student protests proved unsuccessful, but they succeeded in working up enthusiasm. Conservatives, of course, found it deplorable that students should heckle and disrupt, as they did, speeches by the army minister. They were even more alarmed by indications of student interest in the fledgling communist movement. The Japan Communist Party was formed in 1922. It was dissolved in 1924 as its leader, Yamakawa Hitoshi, concluded that the situation called for education and preparation for mass organization rather than plotting by a small elite.<sup>17</sup> The party was reconstituted in 1925, but in that year the apparatus of state suppression had been strengthened by the Peace Preservation Law. Consequently its activities were necessarily limited to conspiratorial work by a small and dedicated minority. This time leadership came from a group of intellectuals led by Fukumoto Kazuo. Radical students found this challenge stimulating, but it also brought their organization under official suspicion. For some time the government was remarkably tolerant of student-organized disorder (as it would be again in postwar days), but in March 1928 the great police sweeps carried out by the Tanaka government brought an end to student agitation and to the Shinjinkai itself. From the first, right-wing enthusiasts did their best to combat what they defined as radicalism. The two persuasions were mutually reinforcing. The formation of Shinjinkai grew in part out of student enthusiasm for Yoshino’s response to a challenge by an organization (the Ro¯ninkai, or Ro¯nin Society) that was sponsored by the right-wing Amur (Black Dragon) Society. Left-wing student activity found an echo in right-wing student groups. These too could be found in the corridors of the Tokyo University’s Faculty of Law. Their faculty hero and sponsor was Uesugi Shinkichi (1878–1929), a leading critic of Yoshino and especially Minobe Tatsukichi. Uesugi’s early path was remarkably similar to that of the men he criticized. He too began as a Christian, won the favor and attention of his mentors at Tokyo Imperial University, and was appointed to its faculty. In early works his positions on imperial power and the emperor’s relation to the state were not unlike those of Minobe. In 1906, however, Uesugi was sent to Germany for study, and there he encountered the statecraft teachings of Georg Jellinek. He returned to Japan a firm advocate of an imperial sovereignty that knew no limit, and altered his constitutional interpretation and teaching sharply as a result. Before long he was taking public issue with his colleague Professor Minobe’s stand that the emperor was an organ of the state. When the Ministry of Education invited Minobe to address a convention of middle school teachers, Uesugi was aghast that theories developed for academic discussion should be spread among teachers responsible for instructing the young, and with apparent bureaucratic endorsement at that. The Katsura cabinet, it may be recalled, was already struggling with demands for greater orthodoxy in teaching about the Northern and Southern courts, and now it had to confront a new problem concerning the role of teachers and learning: Uesugi charged that Minobe had no business accepting the invitation to speak, and that by accepting and speaking as he had he was crossing the line between academics and politics. The Uesugi-Minobe debate served to polarize opinion on the issue and politicized what had, until then, been an academic discussion of constitutional interpretation into a debate about ideology. Uesugi became a favorite of the right, and toward the end of his life he was receiving respectful attention from military leaders. His adamant advocacy of imperial power prepared the way for the assault on Minobe and his books by militarists a few years later. Uesugi was no more partial to Yoshino Sakuzo¯’s youthful Shinjinkai admirers. He encouraged conservative students to form a “Seven Lives” Society dedicated to the fourteenth-century warrior Kusunoki, who was said to have vowed to sacrifice his life seven times for the imperial cause. These enthusiasts did their best to disrupt meetings and inform on liberal and left-wing student groups. The Meiji historian Shigeno Yasutsugu had dismissed the Kusunoki story as unfounded myth-making, but now that the ideology of the emperorcentered family-state was in place that sort of (in Shigeno’s case) Confucian rationality was no longer welcome. Uesugi was by no means alone in his stance. He was popular with many students—some said because his grades were lenient—and he was not averse to mobilizing support on and off his campus to enforce his points. One such occasion was the case of Professor Morito Tatsuo, who published articles on the anarchist thinker Peter Kropotkin. In 1920 the authorities filed charges against Morito. The first verdict was in his favor, but higher education bureaucrats, cheered on by a student faction responsive to Uesugi, reversed the verdict and secured a three-month jail sentence for Morito, who was also dismissed from his position. Shinjinkai members protested, but to no effect. Uesugi also had numerous off-campus admirers. One such, Minoda Mineki, himself a graduate of the Tokyo Imperial University Faculty of Law, taught at Keio¯ University for some years before turning his full attention to the politics of orthodoxy. Officious monitoring of this sort mattered. Government bureaucrats preferred to avoid controversy, but when the issue was forced on them by public criticism and picked up by the press they felt their hand was forced. These paragraphs have dealt with major figures in the academic firmament. There were of course other and estimable members of the Faculty of Law. An American banker named Hepburn endowed a chair of American constitutional law that was held provisionally by Nitobe while its future occupant, Takagi Yasaka (1889–1984), prepared himself by study in the United States. Takagi, like Yoshino a Christian, was a man of unfailing integrity who refused to bend with the wind of public controversy. But on the fringes of academe things could be quite unpredictable. Some academics hardly deserved the name of educator or intellectual. One student’s description of the head of the Department of Colonial Economics at Japan University (a private university), remembered him as a xenophobic rabble rouser. “He’d say in class, ‘I’ve been to Shanghai, where signs say ‘Dogs and Yellow People: No entry!’ . . . He’d ask us, ‘What are you going to do to knock down this structure?’ He had studied in America and he was a professor of current events, but he devoted himself to rousing speeches like this.”<sup>18</sup> ## 3. Taisho¯ Youth: From “Civilization” to “Culture” New Man Society liberals and Seven Lives Society rightists may have been preoccupied with social reform and ideology, but many more students, particularly in the Special Higher Schools, were focused on problems of identity and personal development. In Meiji times young men occupied themselves with success, for themselves and for their new country; kuni no tame, “for the sake of the country,” was, as we have noted, an amuletic phrase that accompanied almost every act. In the interwar years this wore thin. The nation-state had been built, Japan had taken its place among the powers, and people began to think about the structure and justice of society. Meiji youth had been brought up on Fukuzawa’s theory of civilization, in which societies were arranged in hierarchic order by degree of “civilization”; the challenge was to climb another rung on that ladder of development. Japan had done this. Now what began to matter was “culture,” being rather than doing, and feeling rather than achieving. The sense of collective national crisis was replaced by a sense of individual and existential crisis. Introspection and doubt replaced the formulaic invocation of the previous generation. Veterans of the Meiji struggle, no longer young, looked on this change with distaste and disdain. Tokutomi Soho¯, whose Youth of the New Japan had electrified its readers in the 1880s, deplored the change. Taisho¯ youth, he wrote, were self-indulgent, soft, and lacked character and purpose.<sup>19</sup> The undergraduate years of the future elite in the Special Higher Schools provide a tableau on which this is seen most clearly. It is in adolescent years that questions of identity and purpose become most pressing, and it is then that signals are most informative for what lies behind and what points to the future. Sakamoto Ryo¯ma’s age cohort awoke to a rage at foreign penetration of Japan and indignation at the inability of its leaders and institutions to respond. In the next cohort, Tokutomi Soho¯ resolved to duplicate the deeds of the West while Miyazaki To¯ten vowed to undo Western control by assisting in what he called the salvation of Asia. The early Taisho¯ cohort looked within instead of looking outside itself. Japanese had become aware of what were known as “anguished youth” since 1903, the year a promising and well-connected First Higher School student named Fujimura Misao threw himself over the Kegon waterfall at Nikko, leaving, carved into a tree trunk, a “Meditation on the Precipice” that testified to his existential anxiety. Suicide was not uncommon in Japan, but the story of Fujimura was first-page news, and the words of his poem became a legacy to students who celebrated it in song, wept over it, and, in some cases took his act as a model for themselves. It is the more noteworthy that the incident caught so much attention just when Japan was gearing up for the war with Russia and manly courage was the order of the day. There were more than the usual reasons for student distress, but the prevalence of concern with identity and purpose indicates that the Meiji cult of effort and success was losing its attraction for young men.<sup>20</sup> That the new atmosphere of the Higher Schools centered around the study of philosophy and identity says something about student culture. Two of the books most avidly read by students were highly personal ruminations on life and purpose. Abe Jiro¯’s Santaro¯’s Diary and Kurata Hyakuzo¯’s Setting Out with Love and Understanding enjoyed tremendous popularity for many years, and they tell a great deal about the young men who read them so compulsively. Both books were close to stream-of-consciousness reflections on life, and both were studded with the names and ideas of Western, usually German, writers. Abe’s Santaro¯ broods “at his desk for hours while his ‘inner voice’ berates him for worldly thoughts.” Kurata’s book was a highly personal collection of short essays that discussed his inner struggles and changing philosophical perceptions. These books, published in 1914 and 1917 respectively, provide a window on student life and concerns. The ready reference to men and ideas in such books, and the authors’ confidence that these would resonate with their readers, provide testimony, if more is needed, to the cosmopolitanism of the interwar years.<sup>21</sup> (The students’ grandparents, to be sure, had grown up with books equally pretentious with references to classical Chinese literature.) By the Taisho¯ years Japanese had ready access to inexpensive editions of translations of virtually all of the major works of European philosophy. The publisher Iwanami Shigeo (1881–1946), himself a graduate of Tokyo Imperial University’s Faculty of Philosophy, began with a used bookstore and won the friendship of Natsume So¯seki. So¯seki’s Kokoro was the first large-scale success of the publishing house he founded, and from there he went on to publish major works of philosophy before carving out for himself a new market in paperback editions of major works. The logo of the house he founded, Millet’s Sower, symbolized its role in the diffusion of current Western thought. Many did not have to rely on translations, but studied Western thought first hand. For those on the elite track in university, government, or business, a period of study abroad was financed by their employer. Hundreds of Japanese, perhaps over one thousand, were sent to study in the West, most of them to Germany, in the interwar years. Cosmopolitan internationalism was everyone’s goal. Nitobe Inazo¯ devoted his life to becoming a “bridge across the Pacific,” and major academics did their best to bridge the worlds of Eastern and Western philosophy. First-hand familiarity with Western thought was also available at home. Professor Raphael Koeber (1848–1923), who taught philosophy at Tokyo Imperial University from 1893 to 1914 and remained in Japan until his death, was immensely influential as a representative of German idealist philosophy, and he is memorialized in the writings of many leading men of letters. The most impressive product of this philosophical inquiry is to be found in the life and work of Nishida Kitaro¯ (1870–1945), modern Japan’s most influential philosopher. His Study of the Good, published in 1911, was so popular despite its formidable difficulty that it was often ranked with the works by Abe and Kurata described above as “must” reading for students. Nishida’s career shows that Special Higher School culture could produce lifelong intellectual friendships as well as boisterous bonding. He attended the Fourth Higher School in the Japan Sea city of Kanazawa, where his classmates, an unusually gifted group, included Suzuki Daisetsu (1870–1966), a man who would introduce Zen Buddhism to the Western world.<sup>22</sup> Nishida left school abruptly before graduation, probably because of a disagreement with new administrators from Satsuma sent out by the Ministry of Education, but sustained the entrance examinations for Tokyo Imperial University nonetheless. There he found himself placed in a “special” track because of his failure to have graduated from a Special Higher School, and barred from access to the library or other study facilities. His problems continued when he searched for a post after the completion of his studies. Despite this he persevered and immersed himself in his reading. Professor Koeber encouraged him to master classical and European languages in order to engage Western thinkers directly. While unemployed after graduating, Nishida studied Zen and began work on an individual outlook, emphasizing experience, that bridged much of what he had read with what he had gained from Zen discipline. After teaching at the Fourth Higher School for a decade, he was able to secure a post at Kyoto Imperial University through the enthusiastic recommendation of a former teacher. At Kyoto Nishida made his career, and gathered around himself a group of like-minded colleagues who became known as the “Kyoto school” of philosophy. In later years many criticized this group, with its emphasis on experience, will, and national distinctiveness, as having provided intellectual support for idealistic and romantic nationalism. It is true, as Isaiah Berlin has pointed out, that neo-Kantian thought, through its emphasis on the inner realm of spirit and the autonomy of conscience, created possibilities that were exploited by later and lesser men in arguments for an incarnate national spirit,<sup>23</sup> but it would be an exaggeration to credit these philosophers with a causal role in the tragedy that lay ahead. The cultural kaleidoscope of Weimar Germany presented additional attractions for Japanese studying abroad. Murayama Tomoyoshi (1901–1977), who went to Germany to study Christian theology and philosophy, turned instead to avant-garde art as a result of what he encountered there. He returned to Japan and espoused a “constructionist” art, leading a group that styled itself MAVO. The MAVO members were contemptuous of academic art and the establishment that supported it. They found in the chaos of postearthquake Tokyo conditions somewhat comparable, they thought, to those of postwar Europe, and worked to construct a new and revolutionary culture. Abstract decorations on the ugly barracks built for the homeless provided one target, and trendy cafe´s another. MAVO members cultivated eccentricity in dress and appearance as a form of freedom. Disillusioned with politics, they were deeply alienated from the state and the bourgeois culture around them. As a movement MAVO was short-lived, but it had considerable influence on graphic design. Murayama went on to work for reform of the theater and dance. The group and movement were provocatively “modern” in life-style and affirmation of freedom of the body. It was a time when the erotic and the grotesque were also becoming faddish in literature, and all this combined to startle conservative contemporaries.<sup>24</sup> The most compelling basis for cultural and philosophical criticism in Taisho¯ Japan, however, was that provided by Marxism. Marx’s writings had been introduced earlier—Ko¯toku Shu¯sui’s Heimin shinbun had published a translation of the Communist Manifesto before the Russo-Japanese War—but in the depression years, when politics seemed corrupt, capitalists greedy, and government stodgy and repressive, it had a new resonance. Intellectually, Marxism held out an integrated view of what was wrong and, through its institutional support from the communist movement, a program of action. From fastidious idealists who scorned the materialism they saw around them to philosophy students who had encountered Hegel, the all-encompassing alternative offered by Marxism was attractive and often overpowering. We have noted that the Shinjinkai students were increasingly drawn to it in the mid-1920s, and that it was precisely in those years that the government turned to new legislation and institutions to combat “dangerous thoughts.” It is not an overstatement to say that the main trends of social science analysis became predominantly Marxist in the 1920s. Student leftists, a Ministry of Education survey found, were predominantly of good background, the majority of them “modest,” “decent,” “sober,” and “diligent”; what was worrisome was that they were of exactly the quality that should have been on the ladder of success through careers in government, business, and academe. Meiji socialists had been moralists, many of them Christians, who objected to the injustices of early capitalism and looked to a socialist order as the promise of twentieth-century improvement. The new generation of Marxist intellectual leftists, many of them the recipients of government grants for graduate study in Europe, often returned to their universities to take up positions in economics or political science, and became pillars of the academic establishment.<sup>25</sup> Some figures caught in this vortex of the new and foreign turned instead to study to preserve a set of values they saw disintegrating around them. The ethnographer Yanagita Kunio (1875–1962) was the founder of folklore studies in Japan. Yanagita’s varied career—government official, newspaper writer, poet—centered in ceaseless travels in which he recorded the beliefs and life patterns of ordinary people. He tried to collect and systematize tales and customs that would explain Japan’s distinctive national character. In over 100 books and 1,000 articles, he showed a love for particular detail in a timeless pattern that he felt was being destroyed by the uniformity imposed by the centralizing government he had once served.<sup>26</sup> A quite different approach was taken by the Kyoto Imperial University professor of philosophy Kuki Shu¯zo¯ (1888–1941). After a lengthy period of study in Europe, he returned to reappraise Japanese tradition and taste. Following in the tradition of several Meiji figures who had tried to distinguish Japanese culture and sense of beauty as intrinsically different from—and superior to—that of the West, Kuki focused on a moment in the Tenpo¯ era of the nineteenth century as exhibiting, in its culture and chic, the essence of what was truly Japanese. In an extraordinarily influential essay, “Iki no ko¯zo¯” (The structure of taste), he built an argument for cultural exclusionism and social distinction that became and remained influential for many years. Remarkably enough, the taste (iki) Kuki lauded was that of the well-to-do townsman of the great cities and especially Edo. Nitobe, in the work he wrote to further foreign understanding of Japan, had centered on the samurai ethic, but Kuki, an aristocrat writing for his own people, preferred to concentrate on the townsman whose fastidious taste in dalliance and food seemed to offer such a contrast to the capitalists of his day. Both were, of course, exercises in nostalgia.<sup>27</sup> ## 4. Women The air of liberation among members of the urban middle class in the years around World War I included a women’s movement. It is not surprising that such a movement developed in Japan. Japanese women faced greater obstacles in their struggle for equality than did their counterparts in most developed countries, but it is noteworthy that a movement for woman suffrage was under way as early as 1918 at a time when only Sweden, New Zealand, Australia, and the United Kingdom had given women the vote. Future feminist leaders naturally expected to share some of the benefits men were gaining from increases in the suffrage, but not many crumbs fell from that table. Fundamental reform, in fact, was not to come until the years after World War II, when the Meiji Civil Code was abandoned. That code had been based on the samurai family ideal, and it emphasized patriarchal authority and perpetuation of the household (ie) line. Inheritance was by primogeniture, the wife had no share in her husband’s property (although hers became his), and she had no legal rights over her children. To be sure, the Meiji wife, like the samurai wife, was in practice usually more important than this would indicate; she was central in her children’s lives and normally managed the family finances, but she enjoyed little security. The philosopher Nishida Kitaro¯, for instance, recorded glumly in his diary (in German) his distress when his father sent his daughterin-law, Nishida’s wife, packing. With industrialization the number of women who joined the work force rose steadily. Since most women workers did so on contract in the textile mills, however, they were not likely to have the background or opportunity to express themselves. Many more women in remote villages and depressed areas worked along with, and as hard as, their men in coarse and heavy labor, but they too did not provide promising material for a feminist movement. At the same time, however, women became increasingly important in the modern sector, with jobs like telephone operators, ticket collectors, and clerks. The feminist effort can probably be dated from 1911, the year Hiratsuka Raicho¯ (1886–1971) launched a movement with its journal, called “Blue Stocking” in evocation of a contemporaneous group in Great Britain. “I am a new woman,” its manifesto began. “It is my daily desire to become a true new woman. What is truly and forever new is the sun. I am the sun.” In the years that followed “new women” often startled their contemporaries by kicking over the traces of decorum. Hiratsuka first came to public attention with plans for a double suicide with a novelist. He later changed his mind and wrote a novel about their affair. “Byakuren” (White Lotus) was the pen name of a daughter of the nobility, a famous beauty and poetess, who freed herself from a loveless marriage with a Kyushu coal magnate by eloping with Miyazaki Ryu¯suke, Shinjinkai leader and son of Sun Yat-sen’s old friend Miyazaki To¯- ten. Given the number of upper-class women locked into unhappy marriages, it is probably remarkable that there were not more such escapes. Before long the Blue Stocking movement lost its momentum, but other organizations continued the campaign for women’s rights. In 1920 a New Woman’s Association was announced. Two years later changes in the 1900 Peace Police Law made it possible for women, who had previously been forbidden from engaging in any sort of politics, to begin to attend political meetings. Publishers now responded to the opportunity with women’s magazines, and it became possible to launch a campaign for women’s suffrage. The lead in this was taken by Ichikawa Fusae (1893–1981), who was prompted to enter the women’s movement by witnessing her father’s cruel treatment of her mother. Ichikawa was a true pioneer, and entered employment as the first female reporter for a Nagoya newspaper. In 1918 she moved to Tokyo, where she met Hiratsuka Raicho¯. In 1921 she left for two and a half years of study in the United States. On her return she founded the Women’s Suffrage League, which remained in existence until 1940, when wartime restrictions made further efforts impossible. Women’s suffrage had to wait until it was mandated by the Allied Occupation of Japan, and shortly afterward Ichikawa ran successfully for the Diet.<sup>28</sup> Although prewar suffrage efforts proved unsuccessful, it is worth noting that the ill-fated Hamaguchi Minseito¯ cabinet prepared a Women’s Civil Rights Bill that would have extended the franchise to women in elections for city, town, and village officials. The women’s movement should thus be seen as one part of the larger Taisho¯ period expression of change and liberation. In 1919 Kaizo¯ (Reconstruction), a general interest liberal monthly, expressed in its name and content the spirit of the age. Its management arranged lecture tours of Japan for Albert Einstein and Margaret Sanger, the latter at the urging of Ishimoto (later Kato¯) Shizue, who had become an admirer of Sanger and a proponent of birth control for Japanese women. This, however, was directly contrary to government policy, and bureaucrats did all they conveniently could to block Sanger’s tour. They finally relented and allowed her ashore on condition that she not discuss birth control in her public lectures. This in turn provided excellent publicity for the tour, which attracted immense attention. ## 5. Labor The urban labor force grew rapidly during the interwar years. Lives were increasingly centered around the routines of school and factory. Employers looked for ways to encourage stability and order in their labor force, and workers struggled for better remuneration and better conditions of work. The particularities of Japanese development give this effort great interest for comparative study as well as for Japanese history. The problems Japanese workers faced in the interwar years were real enough. The galloping inflation that accompanied the boom years of World War I helped ignite the rice riots of 1918, and the steps the government took— permitting the import of rice from Taiwan and Korea—in turn brought problems for the countryside, where landlord-tenant disputes increased in number. Industrialists were not convinced that there was a real labor problem, however, and found it easier to speak grandly of Japan’s “beautiful customs” (bifu¯) of kindly paternalism in the land of the “family state.” Legislation and administrative snooping, they argued, could only sour the familial intimacy that made the workshop such a pleasant place for their employees. Government officials knew better, however, and carried out surveys that revealed the extent of exploitation. They were also aware that Japan had to take into account the existence of new interwar institutions like the International Labor Organization (ILO). Japan was now a world power and recognized as such in the League of Nations. Who was to represent Japanese labor? It has sometimes been thought that the “permanent employment” and “seniority pay” systems that contributed to stable labor relations in post– World War II Japan were products of the Japanese cultural tradition; status relationships and (fictive) familial relations, it seemed, might have bridged the transition from traditional to modern society. In the Tokugawa period economic and political relationships had usually been expressed in familial terms, and the “parent” was expected to do the right thing by his inferiors, in exchange for their loyalty. This interpretation no longer suffices. Japan’s contemporary labor relations may well have proved congruent with some cultural assumptions and preferences, but on examination it is clear that they were worked out after a good deal of experimentation in a setting marked by contention and dispute.<sup>30</sup> One must first of all note the high concentration of Japan’s urban labor force, which might have been expected to encourage organization. Japan’s population grew from some 44 million in 1900 to 56 million in 1920. The urban growth that followed World War I was concentrated in and near the great port cities along the Pacific coast. There were good reasons for the fact that these cities led in foreign trade. The unequal treaties had limited that trade to those centers when they were “treaty ports,” and by the time those provisions had been outgrown at the turn of the century internal shipping routes, communications, and port facilities operated to maintain and increase the importance of those cities.<sup>31</sup> Kobe and Yokohama were new port cities adjacent to the great metropolitan centers of Osaka and Tokyo. The urban sprawls that resulted made them the first to be served by modern public transportation and suburban railroads that carried urban waste to fertilize the paddies, suburban commuters to their jobs, and shoppers to their stores. By the end of the interwar years the great plains around Tokyo and Osaka were becoming among the most congested in the world. It was a process that accelerated during the rapid economic growth of the post–World War II years. Today the Tokyo plain, with some 35 million inhabitants, contains more Japanese than the entire country did at the time of the Meiji Restoration. Most urban workers came from villages where, as younger sons, they had little future. The countryside was already fully settled by the eighteenth century; indeed, restrictions on movement between domains in Tokugawa times resulted in overcrowding that frequently forced farmers to develop unproductive upland areas or hack out tiny paddies that climbed the hillsides. Even in fertile valleys, however, younger sons were disadvantaged. The Meiji Civil Code supported primogeniture, and it was natural for younger sons to head for the cities in search of work. Eldest sons would normally remain in place near the ancestral tombs. In boom times the move to the cities threatened to become a flood. In recessions workers frequently returned to the temporary security of the village, but many stayed to work at minimal wages for artisans or managed to start small enterprises, hanging on until the economic climate changed. Small and marginal producers were to be found in towns of any size, but they were particularly numerous in and around large cities as suppliers to larger firms. There were important differences between “labor” in small firms and in large, capital-intensive firms, many of which were established in connection with the government’s program for “wealth and strength.” Those dockyards, arsenals, and heavy industries were unprofitable for many years and required taxpayer support in subsidy or orders. After Japan caught its stride and expanded its markets, however, private entrepreneurs rushed to share the profits. The Russo-Japanese War marked a first stage in this transition, but it was the boom of World War I that made the real difference. Things were different with light industry for consumer goods. The early Meiji government had experimented with government enterprises but not for long, and thereafter production for the home market was entirely in private hands. Firms varied greatly in size, though most were small, and they were less closely tied to population centers. For many years textiles were at the core of this private economy. The two structures had different labor needs. Textile workers included country women and girls recruited by contractors who scoured the countryside. They were frequently unscrupulous and devious in their methods and promises. The workers lived under spartan conditions, and their hardships were legendary.<sup>32</sup> Since they were under contract for a limited period of time and had little opportunity to socialize, much less organize, however, these workers made poor material for would-be labor organizers; their discontent was more usually shown by flight than fight. Government officials concerned with public health and welfare were aware of labor conditions, and the surveys they authorized provide a baseline for labor reform. In 1903, a comprehensive survey of factory workers, Shoko¯ jijo¯ (Conditions among factory workers), detailed practices and abuses. In time this led to a Factory Law, enacted in 1911, that set safety standards for factories that employed twelve or more workers. Under its provisions workers were to be at least twelve years old, and the workday for women and boys under fifteen was not to exceed twelve hours. These restrictions might be seen as moderate, but the vocal opposition of industrialists delayed implementation of the law for another five years. Larger factories with significance for national defense presented a different problem. Here the need was for training in the use of imported technology and maintaining a reasonably stable labor force. The Meiji government had inherited a number of arsenals and shipyards from its Tokugawa and daimyo predecessors, and the most successful of these were taken over by the new government or government-related industrialists. The shipyards and arsenals that are the focus of Andrew Gordon’s study typically began by hiring Western technicians who left after training their successors.<sup>33</sup> Ordinary workers were usually recruited by labor bosses who, styled oyakata (parent) by those they recruited, stood between the enterprise and its workers. The problem for the enterprise was to get these men to shift their loyalty from the workers they recruited to the firm, perhaps as foremen. The novelist Yoshikawa Eiji, whose ex-samurai father’s incompetence brought the family to destitution, recalled his boyhood experience when he was able to get a job at the Yokohama Dock Works to provide some income for his long-suffering mother: When I turned up at the Dock Company with his letter of recommendation I found to my surprise that I was given no examination; all they did was ask me how old I was. Mr. Naito had warned me not to give my real age, seventeen, the minimum age set by the company for dockhands being nineteen, so I said I was nineteen. I was immediately sent to join the sundry parts section. Of all the sections into which the workers were divided— the others included electrical, mechanical and metal divisions—ours ranked the lowest, the miscellaneous tasks assigned to it requiring physical fitness primarily and no skill to speak of. ## Yoshikawa’s section had a sort of foreman: There were more than a hundred workers in our section, divided into six teams of seventeen or eighteen men each, the purpose presumably being to encourage competition. Each team had a leader and assistant leader. First thing in the morning, the leader would go to the foreman’s office and come back with assignments for the day: to paint the ship in such and such a dock, for example, or to go out on a launch to a foreign vessel moored offshore and ready it for docking.<sup>34</sup> As Yoshikawa describes it, his work was always gritty, often extremely dangerous, and poorly paid; yet a kind of camaraderie developed within the section. Its members were as likely to squander their meager pay in self-indulgence as they were to use it to support the families who waited anxiously for their return. Their sense of loyalty, much less obligation, to Yokohama Dock was understandably minimal. It was not long before technological developments made the kind of arrangement described above obsolete. Rationalization in patterns of production replaced the rather chaotic picture Yoshikawa describes, but it also broke up the camaraderie, if only of shared misery, that was part of worker morale. Factory workers in the Meiji period, as Thomas Smith notes, were considered extremely low class and enjoyed little respect. A worker’s letter to a newspaper in 1913 deplored the fact that “because our countrymen despise us, we try to avoid their contempt by dressing outside the plant gate as merchants or students. If all of us were to walk down the street at the same time in work clothes, people would be astonished not only by our numbers but also by our good behavior.”<sup>35</sup> Within the enterprise there were also likely to be very sharp distinctions of status and respect. The novelist Matsumoto Seicho¯ gave up his job at the great Asahi newspaper for the army, and later wrote that army life was a revelation to me. It turned out just as they told me when I arrived there: “Here social position, wealth, and age count for nothing. Everyone is on absolutely the same level.” The equality I found among the new recruits gave me a curious sense that life was worthwhile. At Asahi I was not just a cog in a wheel but a cog of no value . . . At the newspaper my very existence was not recognized. Here I counted. Discovery of a human condition not present in the factory enlivened me in a strange way.<sup>36</sup> Armies are not on the whole known for an absence of status distinctions, and Matsumoto’s discovery that it was more egalitarian than his workplace speaks volumes about that workplace. In late Meiji and early Taisho¯ years workers in Japan’s largest industrial enterprises began to demand more respect, more consideration, and more money. Factory workers made up a significant proportion of the urban demonstrations and protests that have been mentioned. They were beginning to demand that they be considered part of the kokumin, “the people,” a new, inclusive, and value-laden term.<sup>37</sup> Early Japanese labor fraternities did not develop along craft lines as they had in the West, probably because the political fragmentation of Tokugawa Japan had inhibited the development of more than local guilds. When unions did make their appearance they tended to be enterprise-specific. In the years before World War I there were a total of seventy-five disputes at heavy industrial plants, but none of these involved unions. Nevertheless, thoughtful industrialists and early labor leaders realized the desirability of having some sort of overarching organization that would contribute to labor peace. The Yu¯aikai, “Friendship Society,” that was organized in 1912 represented such an effort. It began with moral and ameliorative goals. Its platform called for mutual aid through friendship and cooperation, the improvement of character, furthering of knowledge, development of skills, and cooperation in the interest of improving workers’ status. Small wonder, one might think, that sympathetic capitalists like Shibusawa Ei’ichi supported it. Yu¯aikai members grew from a few thousand at the outset to 30,000 in 1918. World War I sharpened labor expectations and discontent. Inflation kept real wages low even though enterprises were extremely profitable. More private entrepreneurs entered the field of heavy industry; the labor force grew in size and its choices also widened. In 1917 alone the Friendship Society was involved in seventy labor-management disputes, almost as many as Japan had experienced in the years since the Restoration. Under these circumstances both government and business turned hostile, and many Yu¯aikai branches were forced to close. In 1921 the Yu¯aikai changed its name to General Federation of Labor (So¯do¯mei), but its stand remained moderate. In time it became the conservative wing of the labor movement. In its early years, however, its success in organizing workers subjected it to constant pressure from the police. Law enforcement agencies had a potent weapon at their disposal, for Article 17 of the 1900 Peace Police Law, which had been enacted in the aftermath of labor disputes during the Sino-Japanese War, made it a punishable offense to incite others to join unions, engage in collective bargaining, or strike. This provision was not repealed until 1926, though its implementation went through many phases as its provisions became increasingly archaic. Nevertheless it constituted a formidable threat to labor organizers. In 1921 the postwar depression idled shipyard workers at the Kawasaki and Mitsubishi shipyards and produced the largest labor dispute Japan was to experience until after World War II. So¯do¯mei organizers led some 35,000 workers through the streets of Kobe in a massive demonstration to demand the right to organize and bargain collectively. They also announced plans to seize the plants and control production; at this the government sent soldiers to reinforce the police. Owners, for their part, sent in strikebreakers prepared to do battle. Several hundred arrests, and at least one death, resulted from the suppression that put an end to the strike after a month and a half of struggle. The strike failed, but it had important results. Firms previously tolerant of labor organizations became more hostile to them, and many labor leaders began to doubt the possibility of peaceful protest. A small group of anarcho-syndicalists lost all confidence in proposed reforms like universal manhood suffrage and concluded that it would be necessary to overthrow the entire system. The Japan Communist Party, as has been mentioned, was formed in 1922, and although it was broken up by police the following year some of its members, previously engaged with the Yu¯aikai and So¯do¯mei, carried on to pursue more radical solutions. The strike thus hardened positions on both sides. O<sup>¯</sup> sugi Sakae, a leading anarchist, was brutally killed while in police custody immediately after the earthquake in 1923, and at least ten others were murdered in December 1923 by police and army men who took the law into their own hands and became, in effect, vigilantes.<sup>38</sup> Management and police did their best to stifle labor organization, but help now came from government bureaucrats.<sup>39</sup> The concerns of officials in the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce had been shown in the surveys of labor conditions, and their first conclusions had been reflected in the Factory Law of 1911. In addition private reformers, among them many Japanese Christian socialists, had long argued the need for government laws to protect workers. The evidence and scale of worker discontent in large firms prompted a new examination of labor-management relations by government bureaucrats. Japanese academics and officials had been aware of measures taken in Europe, particularly in Wilhelmine Germany, to deal with the “social problem,” and they were eager to forestall conflicts that they felt were sure to come.<sup>40</sup> After World War I Europe had additional examples of social policy to offer as the Labor Party grew in England, while in Russia the Bolshevik revolution of 1918 added urgency to measures to head off radicalism. This coincided with the emergence of a new cohort of officials in Japan. The Satsuma-Cho¯shu¯ generation was giving way to a new university-educated group, many of whom had direct experience of the West as part of the flood of students who went abroad. This inevitably had a strong impact in a country where government planners mattered, and its influence was particularly direct in the Ministry of Home Affairs, which took over responsibility for these matters from Agriculture and Commerce and established a Social Bureau in 1922. The implementation of government policy was affected by bureaucratic competition for jurisdiction. The Social Bureau of the Home Ministry thought in terms of reforms, while the Justice Ministry, with its control over the police, was more likely to use strong-arm tactics. In addition the question of which side would prevail, the Social Bureau with its carrot of reform and suffrage, or the Justice Ministry with its stick of police repression, was affected by the larger political struggle involved in the movement toward political party government. In the 1920s Japan was coming close to a two-party system of politics with the balance of power held by splinter and independent groups within the Imperial Diet. The main strength, as will be remembered, was divided between two groups whose roots were to be found in the Freedom and People’s Rights Movement of the 1880s. The core of the Jiyu¯to¯ had found its home in the Seiyu¯kai, and a good deal of the original Kaishinto¯ had been absorbed by (Katsura’s) Do¯shikai, whose name changed to Kaishinto¯ and finally, in 1927, to Minseito¯. These were not so much “parties” as they were combinations of politicians. Independent-minded men with safe constituencies moved frequently. Ozaki Yukio, beginning as an O<sup>¯</sup> kuma follower, moved in and out of the Seiyu¯kai before becoming a confirmed independent and head, for a time, of his own “Enlightenment” faction. Inukai Tsuyoshi, no less an O<sup>¯</sup> kuma follower at the beginning of the parliamentary movement, ended years of independence by moving into the Seiyu¯kai. There were no real issues of ideology or philosophy involved, except how best to force the political establishment to accept the idea of political party cabinets. Both main groupings were “bourgeois,” imperial, and imperialistic. Nevertheless there were differences of emphasis that divided them, and Sheldon Garon’s study has shown that it made a difference who held power. The Seiyu¯kai constituency was more predominantly rural, and it maintained that support by programs of public works, but its upper echelons were oriented toward heavy industry, strong foreign policy, and strong armed services. The mainstream of the Kaishinto¯ /Minseito¯, however, was more likely to be urban and commercial in its support and emphasis. Periods of Seiyu¯kai rule, with Takahashi Korekiyo in charge of finances, tended to see an expansive, growth-oriented economic policy, while the opposition Minseito¯ preached fiscal responsibility and worried about getting and staying in balance with international trading partners. The ascendancy of particular officials and agencies could be affected by which party held the reins of power, and issues and differences were particularly clear with respect to labor problems. Garon documents those differences, and finds Kenseikai/Minseito¯ leaders voicing outrage at the repressive tactics pursued by the Tanaka Seiyu¯kai cabinet, and articulating a more liberal alternative with significantly greater respect for civil rights and labor. The alternative to such liberal moves, they argued, would encourage the very radicalism that the opposition was intent on rooting out. Yet it would be a mistake to carry this distinction too far, for the Peace Preservation Law of 1925 came during the cabinet headed by the Kenseikai’s Kato¯ Takaaki. The Seiyu¯kai mainstream was hostile, and the Kenseikai/Minseito¯ partial, to labor legislation. As parties alternated in power the pendulum swung to some degree between the obsession of the Justice Ministry with repression and the willingness of the opposition leaders to back the views of the more enlightened bureaucrats of the Ministry of Home Affairs’ Social Bureau. In the Kato¯ coalition cabinet the post of Home Affairs was in the hands of Wakatsuki Reijiro¯, a former bureaucrat who instructed the Social Bureau to prepare a bill on labor relations. The bureau’s draft was toned down in the cabinet, where Seiyu¯kai members objected to many of its provisions. Prime Minister Kato¯’s death catapulted Wakatsuki into the premiership just as the legislation was being prepared for submission to the Diet. There, the Seiyu¯kai, which had now seceded from the coalition and gone into opposition, resisted forcefully. The government then sought the help of splinter and independent groups, only to fall victim to the bank crisis of 1927 that has been discussed. At this point Wakatsuki was succeeded by General Tanaka and a Seiyu¯kai cabinet, and that had little comfort for advocates of labor legislation. Tanaka called for elections in February of 1928. They were, as we have noted, the first to be conducted under provisions of universal manhood suffrage, and in the aftermath of the results—a draw with the opposition that left control with splinter parties—Tanaka staged the great police raids in March. The prospects for the recognition of labor’s rights to organize were now dismal, and instead the Justice Ministry prepared the revisions that strengthened the Peace Preservation Law of 1925, and then went on to fund a major increase in police surveillance with the Special Higher (“Thought control”) Police. Opposition spokesmen berated the government’s clumsy attempt to suppress dissent, and warned that only participatory democracy could be effective in preventing the spread of radicalism. Despite the opposition’s efforts, the harm done to labor—and tenant—organizations and their leaders was real and lasting. The principal organizations were destroyed and with them the Labor-Farmer Party, which had gained 190,000 votes in the previous month’s general election. But as we have seen Tanaka’s days too were numbered. His failure to retain the confidence of the young Emperor Hirohito by violating his promise to prosecute any army officers guilty of the death of the Manchurian warlord Chang Tso-lin resulted in his resignation. The field was once again ready for new efforts to institute labor legislation by a new Minseito¯ government led by Hamaguchi Osachi. Hamaguchi’s team was prepared for reform on several fronts. The Social Bureau chief Yoshida Shigeru (who should not be confused with the diplomat and postwar prime minister of the same name) again prepared a labor relations bill. The provisions of the proposal would have given unions more legal protection than that provided by any previously proposed legislation. Their specialists prepared proposals for an agricultural tenancy reform law to strengthen cultivators’ rights. Plans were ready to introduce legislation extending the vote to women in local government. When the cabinet came into office Shidehara Kiju¯ro¯ returned to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Japan extended formal recognition to the nationalist government of Chiang Kaishek against which Tanaka had intervened. There were areas of friction: the Chinese refused to agree to the appointment as Japanese minister of a diplomat who had been involved in the negotiation of the Twenty-one Demands, and the Seiyu¯kai nationalists wanted to make an issue of this. Worse conflicts lay ahead. Japan reluctantly accepted the conclusions of the London Naval Conference; Hamaguchi overrode objections, and himself took the Navy Ministry chair during its incumbent’s absence. There followed a fight over ratification of the treaty. Hamaguchi, charged with violating the emperor’s “supreme command,” was fatally wounded by a rightist assassin. There were other disasters. Finance Minister Inoue Junnosuke, a fiscal conservative, insisted on returning Japan to the gold standard on the eve of the world depression that virtually destroyed the international market for silk, with disastrous consequences for Japan’s agricultural sector. When the proposed labor legislation was introduced in the Imperial Diet it faced sharp opposition, and Shidehara had to take over its defense from the dying Hamaguchi. Next Shidehara, as foreign minister, inherited the storm brought by the Kwantung Army’s precipitation of the Manchurian Incident. The labor bill was soon sacrificed to the larger crisis. The labor movement failed in most of its objectives. Police and private violence struck down some of its most effective leaders and silenced more. Legislation prepared by relatively liberal bureaucrats gave way to more authoritarian state leadership during the war years that lay ahead. Nevertheless, the movement’s strength and promise and its stand between submission and radicalism gave substance to the quiet transformation that the growth of industrialism brought to interwar Japan. ## 6. Changes in the Village Change came more slowly to the Japanese countryside, but the interwar years nevertheless saw impressive changes in rural society. The basic causes were the same: people were tired of being told their sacrifices were for the sake of the country, they were tired of seeing those more privileged than themselves gain at their expense, and they were sufficiently educated and literate to realize that other people, in other areas, were demanding more justice. In addition, their rent—a share of the crop—might be sold at great profit by their landlord. Japan was still overwhelmingly rural after the Russo-Japanese War; rapid as urban growth had been, the vast majority of Japanese lived in hamlets and villages. There was widespread agreement that the spiritual and social health of the country depended upon the stability of the countryside. Agriculture was ultimately the basis, and this view, codified as no¯hon shugi, “agriculture as the basis,” harked back to physiocratic Confucian thought. Some antimodernists deplored the fact that Japan was forsaking its roots for the false glitter of the West, but everybody thought of a healthy countryside as the real bulwark against the corrupting influences of the city. Unfortunately that countryside was far from healthy, and most of its inhabitants had shared poorly in the benefits of modernity. By the years after World War I about 40 percent of all agricultural land was tenant farmed. This percentage fluctuated over time, but it remained relatively stable until the reforms that followed World War II. Rent averaged about 50 percent of the yield and was paid in kind; the tenant was obliged to carry it to the landlord’s storage granary. Tenants were also expected to be of service to the landlord in a variety of ways when help was needed. The relationship was supposedly paternal, expressed in the landlord’s status of oyakata (parent), a term encountered earlier with reference to labor contractors, but it could often signify submission rather than affection. The tenant had no security of tenure, and he risked his landlord’s displeasure at his peril. Nevertheless the tenant-landlord relationship was one of considerable variety. Landlords might be absentee. This category could range from schoolteachers or other expatriates from the village who were reluctant to part with the family holdings, to professional money lenders who did their best to add to their holdings and who managed their lands through agents or representatives. More landlords were resident in the village. These in turn ranged from a handful of truly large landowners—the biggest were along the Japan Sea coast— who contacted their tenants through a senior tenant-lieutenant who in turn lived better than the others. Here the relations were hierarchic and structured. An ordinary tenant would no more presume to enter his landlord’s main gate than a low-ranking samurai would have tried to use his lord’s. Things were run in a businesslike manner. Several old landlord residences near Kanazawa, transformed into museums, permit the visitor to see the mounds of account books, chits, and receipts for rent received. The great majority of landlords, however, were owner-tenants, farmers whose holdings were so small that they found it profitable to rent additional land. Sometimes these plots, owned and rented, could be very small indeed; they testify to the narrow margin of solvency for most agriculturalists. Tenancy arrangements were typically oral, and left the tenant with no security in the event the landlord chose to exploit or evict him. Where contracts were drawn up, their language gave eloquent evidence of the tenant’s weakness. In one the tenants asked that “in years of bad harvest through natural causes you will on inspection of the crop, make such reduction in rent as seems to you fit. In the case, however, of a fall in yields resulting from my own management and affecting myself alone, I undertake to ask for no reduction in rent . . . I undertake to raise no single word of complaint should you, as your convenience makes necessary, decide to terminate my tenancy.”<sup>41</sup> By the end of the Meiji period several aspects of modern society had come to affect rural social structure. One was education. The landlord’s son sat in the same schoolroom as the tenant’s, and if he was a dullard and the tenant’s son promising, that awareness could not fail to enter into later attitudes. Another was the military. The Imperial Reservists organization whose branches blanketed the country could also make a difference, as the display of valor in battle by a tenant could come into play in status relationships in the reserves. The years of World War I helped bring these problems to the fore. The inflation of food prices profited the landlord, who could keep his storehouse full until the price went up, but not the tenant, who paid his rent in rice and could not afford to wait for a market to dispose of whatever he did not need for himself. The 1918 rice riots, it will be remembered, began in fishing villages on the Japan Sea coast and quickly spread to other parts of Japan. Tenant-landlord disputes became common in the interwar years. Villagers knew that they were not participating in the prosperity; their rent remained as it was, while the landlord’s profits rose steeply along with the wartime inflation. Figures for the growth of tenant disputes show a startling rise. In 1917 there were 173 tenant unions. In 1923, after the boom times of the war years had given way to depression, there were 1,530, and in 1927 they numbered 4,582 with a membership of 365,322. In those years the movement was concentrated in central Japan, the area most influenced by urbanism, education, and best served by progressive leadership. Leadership in most unions, Ann Waswo notes,<sup>42</sup> came from the ranks of upwardly mobile and profit-oriented tenants, but the membership was provided by small, economically distressed tenants. Nineteen seventeen marked a significant stage in tenant protest. The harvest that year was below normal, and tenants asked for appropriate reductions in rent. In Aichi Prefecture, not far from Nagoya, a dispute involving 800 tenants and some 70 landlords began with requests for rent reduction and gradually spread to issues of labor for paddy maintenance and drainage, and security of tenure. Extensive mediation found the courts and local police involved. As the dispute escalated, a Kyoto University professor provided leadership in legal action designed to secure permanent tenure for tenants. When the date for the hearing approached so many tenants demonstrated that the authorities thought it best to postpone the meeting. A full settlement was not worked out until 1923, and then through the intervention of the Nagoya magistrate.<sup>43</sup> Disputes of this sort, which grew during the war years, showed how fragile the fabric of consensus had become in the countryside. Landlords, in self-defense, formed their own unions, and bureaucrats worried about the prospects of radicalism. Dore notes that intellectuals played a significant role in stimulating the organization of tenants. The surge of liberal and left-wing thought that has been discussed encouraged it, and international trends reinforced it. The International Labor Organization passed resolutions upholding the right of tenants to bargain collectively. The fledgling Japan Communist Party advocated expropriation of the landlords. The JCP was soon outlawed, but Christian socialists, among them Kagawa Toyohiko (1888–1960), who had become famous through his work in the slums of Kobe, also advocated socialization of land as a long-range objective. As was the case with labor, government bureaucrats understood the problem and tried to work out a tenancy law, but their efforts ran afoul of landlord representatives and lobbyists in the Imperial Diet. Politicians from both major parties were involved with this, but on the whole it was the Seiyu¯kai that had the stronger ties to rural notables, and in the election campaign of 1928 it was the Minseito¯ candidates who argued the need for a tenant relations law. There was thus a ferment in the air; in Waswo’s words, “Tenants were clearly and in many cases consciously in revolt against the institutions and etiquette of status inequality.”<sup>44</sup> Despite this the tenant movement began to fade in the late 1920s. The great majority of tenant unions were organized at the hamlet level. It was much more difficult to build a union encompassing the entire administrative village, and to go beyond that was more unlikely still. Strong government repression might have produced such a result, but although the state monitored and discouraged tenant unions in many ways it did not resort to strongarm tactics. That treatment was reserved for leftist organizers, particularly in the great round-up of 1928. In addition some efforts were made to head off greater conflict. In 1924 a Tenancy Conciliation Law established formal machinery for handling disputes, and legislation passed in 1926 provided lowinterest loans to enable qualified tenant farmers to buy land. The government also revised an earlier Industrial Cooperative Law to provide machinery for cooperative action of the sort many tenant unions had advocated. Tenant and worker power might have been more effective if there had been more cooperation between the two. The Labor-Farmer Party that formed in 1926 tried to bring this about, but in spite of the best efforts of its leaders most agriculturalists had little stomach for a class struggle, as they saw no resemblance between their lives and those of urban laborers. In any case, the Tanaka government’s proscription of the Labor-Farmer Party in 1928 put that possibility to rest. The impact of the world depression on Japanese agriculture brought a change in the distribution and frequency of tenant disputes. The surge of tenant unions, coming as it did in Japan’s most developed areas, seems to have reflected a state of rising expectations. In contrast, in the late 1920s those expectations were replaced by a desperate attempt to ward off disaster. Tenant disputes now multiplied in less developed, peripheral areas in Japan, while in the central prefectures there was a slow decline. The impact of the Great Depression, however, was felt throughout the country. With the collapse of the international silk market prices for silk cocoons fell by 47 percent in one year. The price of rice also fell sharply. Using 1926 as an index of 100, rural income declined to 33 in 1931, and it recovered only to 44 by 1934. Amid general agreement that there was a “crisis of the villages,” government relief measures increased. The shortages that developed during the years of crisis that began with the Manchurian Incident of 1931 brought relative prosperity for farmers. As Japan became more isolated the government increased its control over the distribution of what was now a limited supply of food. Landlords’ control over their lands and produce gave way to government directives to deliver rice to newly established cooperatives. Landlords became relatively separated from their holdings and they were no longer as free to dictate terms. Small farmers and tenants, their pockets somewhat heavier for the money sent home by conscript sons, found themselves in a stronger position for the first time in modern Japanese history. The country was thus ready for the land reform mandated by the Allied Occupation after World War II. ## 7. Urban Culture During the interwar years Japan developed a new popular, or mass, culture. The great cities of Osaka and Edo had earlier enjoyed a vibrant popular culture in Tokugawa times, one increasingly fashioned by and for commoner townsmen. It was their taste and fastidious expertise in leisure activities that Kuki Shu¯zo¯ held up as an ideal in his “Structure of Taste.” The Meiji march to modernity had little space for this, and the combination of nation building and Japanese Victorian standards made frivolity and consumption seem wrong. We have noted that after the Restoration city populations actually declined for a time, as the unproductive samurai consumers lost their incomes. By the time of the Russo-Japanese War, however, a new pattern of urban life had developed; city populations grew rapidly, but the newcomers were workers who moved from the countryside. The new generation of consumers was far more plebeian than the fastidious dandies of Tokugawa times, but they were also far more numerous. What they needed was not the nearprofessional appreciation of pleasures available to the man of leisure, but relief from the rigors and boredom of labor in office and factory. Far less selfsufficient than the relatives they had left behind in the countryside, they needed clothing, food, and diversion that they could afford. Prostitution was widespread; the costly pleasures of the talented geisha were reserved for the wealthy and the powerful, but endless chatter with bar girls and cafe´ hostesses over beer occupied many more. Beer, it should be added, was to some extent a product of Japan’s seizure of German holdings in China; the brewers and equipment came to Japan. There was, as contemporaries termed it, a “massification” (taishu¯ka) of culture, consumption, and taste. This process was set in motion in late Meiji days. It advanced with the prosperity of the years of World War I, and it accelerated after the great earthquake. The products of technology and industrialization began to shape the lives of ordinary people. Photography, recordings, and movies became accessible to ordinary people. Newspapers grew as the rotary press of late Meiji developed into rotogravure, color, and offset printing. The Asahi Graph first appeared in 1923. Despite the ubiquity of state control, the new mediums offered a lively and relatively free rein for the growth of commerce and entertainment. The great earthquake of September 1, 1923, marked a significant divide in this process. The disorientation and destruction it caused offered a free field to MAVO constructionists and other radicals, but not for long. Reconstruction was swift under the direction of Goto¯ Shinpei (1857–1929), one of the most important bureaucrats of the twentieth century.<sup>45</sup> Major avenues cut through the rubble of once-intimate streets, and ambitious plans for reconstruction were being drawn up while the city was being rebuilt in only slightly less haphazard fashion. The old merchant quarters, the “Low City” (shitamachi), were particularly devastated, and the center of urban life moved closer to what had been the “High City.” After the earthquake Tokyo residents lived in a quite different environment. Pre-earthquake Tokyo was dotted with islands of green that remained from the gardens of daimyo estates. It was much smaller than it would become; the interior rail commuter (Yamate) circle described the arc of settlement. Shibuya and Shinjuku, now the vortex of commuter lines, were still relatively rural and occasional paddies and truck gardens retained touches of rural life. Postearthquake Tokyo was a quite different city. The moats that had provided transport and evening entertainment gave way to road, rail, and subway. Green space became rare, and it would disappear almost entirely in the aftermath of the destruction of the city a second time in 1945. The Ginza, named for the silver guild in Edo years, became the showplace of the city. The central, Nihonbashi area was dominated by the great banks that took their place as temples of the new capitalism. From Kyo¯bashi to Shinbashi department stores, trendy shops, and cafe´s lined the main and side streets. The first subway to be built brought customers and workers from Shibuya to Ginza in fifteen minutes. A consumer culture for ever larger urban masses took shape. Those masses were now almost fully literate, for by 1930 almost 90 percent of adult Japanese had at least the six years of elementary education behind them. There was an immense outpouring of print to catch their attention. Newspapers achieved mass circulation. Between 1918 and 1932 the number of journals registered under the Newspaper Law rose from 3,123 to 11,118, and the circulation of the great metropolitan daily the Osaka Mainichi, long the leader, climbed from 260,000 in 1912 to 670,000 in 1921 and 1,500,000 in 1930.<sup>46</sup> Newspapers also changed in character. In Meiji the newspaper was often a one-man or one-group effort to espouse a cause. With vastly more money involved newspapers now became a branch of big business, with boards, editors, and platoons of reporters. Entrance into the major dailies for college graduates was by examination; at first there were few takers, but by the late 1920s applicants outnumbered openings by a factor of fifty or more. With large sums of money involved the major dailies could ill afford suspension by the police, and since they knew how broadly press directives could be interpreted they tended to adopt a cautious stand on national affairs. The result was a certain uniformity, one that characterized the Japanese press in the less repressive days of the latter part of the twentieth century as well. Even so, the interwar press took up the cudgels for popular reforms like universal manhood suffrage, and it was much less circumspect than it would become in the 1930s, when militarism and imperialism provided popular rallying points. Interwar publications included hundreds of magazines addressed to special audiences. Serious readers found in monthlies like Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron (Central Review) a range of materials, from Yoshino Sakuzo¯’s thoughtful expositions of democracy to discussions of contemporary policy and politics to serialized novels. Kaizo¯ (Reconstruction) was bolder and sufficiently more critical to bring it to the attention of censors in the 1930s. Fujin Ko¯ron (Women’s Review) and Shufu no tomo (The Housewife’s Friend) reached large audiences. Noma Seiji (1878–1938) was founder of the Ko¯dansha Publishing Company. It took its name from traditional tellers of historical tales—who were fast disappearing—and began with historical narratives that established its finances. Before long the firm was one of Japan’s largest. “Ko¯dansha culture,” as it became known, was mass culture. The house was (and remains) particularly sensitive to the existence of special interests and markets, and its success gave it a commanding position in providing materials for popular reading. If the Iwanami publishing company provided inexpensive editions of important books, Ko¯dansha provided material of every description. In both cases success was built on small inexpensive paperbound volumes, a tactic soon copied by other houses. Japan thus took long steps toward becoming a consumer society. New products like Shiseido cosmetics and Lion toothpaste were advertised in the press and available on the shelves. Department stores, however, became the symbol, indeed the temple, of the new era of mass consumption. In the Meiji era the large stores followed the Edo tradition of specializing in dry goods. Gradually their offerings grew in variety, and by the 1920s new multistoried buildings along the Ginza offered so great a display of domestic and imported goods that they were objects of pilgrimage and family entertainment. Amusement areas and often small zoos to entertain the children were on the roof, restaurants and art galleries found their place below, while basement delicatessen and specialty food shops catered to urbanites in search of snacks or attractively packaged gifts. For a time the wealthy could arrange to have salespersons come to their homes or, if they came to the store themselves, had respectful clerks bring them items while they sat in comfort on rice straw mats. As the store displays grew in splendor, however, and the inventory was spread out for all to see, customers had to come to the goods. For years entrance was in the traditional manner, with store slippers provided in exchange for customers’ shoes, which they found neatly arranged on their departure. After the earthquake it was the department stores that led in permitting customers to keep their shoes on. Wood and marble replaced rice straw mats, and the masses could enter freely.<sup>47</sup> Urban pleasures multiplied and diversified. In 1913 Kobayashi Ichizo¯, a politician and talented producer, introduced an all-girl revue at Takarazuka, then a resort town near Osaka, as an attraction for his development. The Takarazuka revue grew to develop its own school for talent and enjoyed a popularity that survived World War II and reconstruction. It billed its stars as “beauties in male dress” and became famous for spectacularly staged musicals and revues. These were at once international (as in “Mon Paris,” a journey through quaintly oriental countries of Asia to Paris), and parochial, with a subtext of Japanese modernity and empire. The organization grew to add a Tokyo theater in 1934. So great was its success that a rival group, the So¯chiku Girls Opera Company, was formed in 1922. Takarazuka featured singing and So¯chiku dancing, but both staged sumptuous productions, some of which might have several hundred girls on stage, on the scale of Hollywood extravaganzas. These drew large audiences, and they were particularly popular with throngs of youthful female patrons in addition to a middle-class clientele. Kabuki and No¯ were all male, and Takarazuka, with an official motto of “clean, proper, and beautiful,” struck a shrewd note of middle-class propriety.<sup>48</sup> As the city and its population grew, a new scale of commercial development appeared. Private railroads knit suburban areas together, developing residential districts and carrying their occupants to places of employment and shopping in the metropolis. Their terminals were stops along the central commuter circle, the Yamate line, and at those stations department stores owned by the developers became new palaces of consumption. What was true of Tokyo was also the case with Japan’s other large cities; Kobe, Osaka, and Nagoya become hubs for private railroad lines that brought the countryside ever closer to the city. Of Tsutsumi Yasujiro¯, perhaps the largest and most successful developer of modern Japan, a recent study notes that he “was much affected by the rise of Taisho¯ democracy during 1912–1926 . . . He foresaw a huge increase in the number of middle-class consumers and invested in tertiary-sector businesses in the 1920s to cater to them: railways, suburban housing and mountain resort s.”<sup>49</sup> Cafe´s blossomed everywhere and served as recreation, drinking, and meeting places. Edward Seidensticker notes that the number of drinking spots doubled along the Ginza during the 1920s. The cafe´s were, Gennifer Weisenfeld notes, fashionable. They had a slightly decadent air about them, not unrelated to the ready attention of the waitresses, but they were a new way of telegraphing culture.<sup>50</sup> Popular authors frequented them, described them, and used them as settings for their stories. Amid this kaleidoscopic change there was also growing nostalgia for what had been lost. In the Meiji ethos there was little space for Edo and its culture, but now there was sufficient distance to permit it to take on a rosy hue. Sometimes there was a linkage to more recent history. The vogue for tales of nihilistic swordsmen who struck down men they encountered were, one author suggests, a by-product of the crushing in the High Treason Trial of Ko¯toku and the anarchists.<sup>51</sup> Forerunners of the Meiji Freedom and People’s Rights Movement were lionized. A play about the Tosa loyalists Takechi Zuisan and Sakamoto Ryo¯ma was so well received that it traveled to all parts of Japan. “No one,” Tsurumi Shunsuke suggests, “did more for the cause of Taisho¯ Democracy than this fictitious hero of the Edo period.” Films, which entered Japan in late Meiji years, became enormously popular. More often than not they focused on loyal samurai. The description of Restoration politics was no longer a simple morality tale; there were heroes on both sides, and in depictions of the violence Tokugawa adherents frequently held their own. The great leaders of the Meiji period were gone, and their immediate successors, the cautious old men who dominated the Privy Council and House of Peers, had little claim on popular affection. Ironically, although these films, many with a consistent antiestablishment message, could be shown during Japan’s war years, they were banished by the Allied Occupation as dangerously militarist. Mass culture included cartoonists and comic strips. The Asahi Graph first appeared in 1923 with versions of popular American comics, but others soon drew on the brilliant graphic traditions of Hokusai and other Japanese artists. Major cartoonists like Okamoto Ippei (1886–1948) recorded for the masses important cultural events like the visits of Albert Einstein and Margaret Sanger. Future consumers of what became a burgeoning comic industry had their training in the portable picture shows narrated for neighborhood children on street corners and in empty lots by storytellers who appeared on bicycles each day. This tradition survived World War II, though not for very long. Mention has already been made of the role of Yanagita Kunio, the father of folklore studies, who collected, classified, and preserved the customs of the past still living in the present. Other ethnographers were determined to record the present for what it might show about the future. These scholars, who took the city as their text, were fascinated by the interplay of the classes, genders, artisans, and white-collar workers who thronged the streets and amusement centers of Tokyo. They studied and recorded, as one student puts it, the “rupture in social relationships through discourse preoccupied with mores and customs and in the process exhibited a profound awareness of the ongoing construction of a new culture shared by all, but at the same time differentiated by gender and class.”<sup>52</sup> Still others, no less aware of the importance of ordinary people and objects, reached back to save aspects of everyday life that were being lost in a mass-production industrial society. The folkcraft movement, led by Yanagi Muneyoshi (So¯etsu, 1889–1961), was one more expression of the awareness that society and culture were changing irrevocably. Yanagi began as an art historian and member of a literary group known as the White Birch Society. In 1916 he traveled to Korea and fell under the spell of the beauty of ceramics produced by and for ordinary people. Some of the best of these pieces had long had the attention of Japanese tea masters and the potters who produced wares for them. Yanagi sought to restore dignity and appreciation for the beauty inherent in simple implements used in daily life in traditional Japan. He rallied to his cause two of Japan’s greatest contemporary potters, Hamada Sho¯ji (1894–1978) and Kawai Kanjiro¯ (1890–1966). Together these men, with those they attracted, brought about a new awareness of the artistic and, as they saw it, spiritual importance of a tradition that was in danger of being lost to the products of modern mass production. A folkcraft museum in Tokyo, housed in a simple but sturdy country building, became the symbol of their efforts. Earthenware produced in country kilns for daily use took on new dignity, and the blue-and-white ceramics from Saga that had once flooded the Tokugawa market became collectors’ pieces. The leaders of the folkcraft movement were men of courage as well as taste. Yanagi founded a museum in Seoul and espoused the cause of Korean independence. Hamada attached importance to the textiles and designs of Okinawa and encouraged the use of its dialect at a time when Japan’s militarist leaders were making strenuous efforts for full Japanization. In these cases admiration of simple products of the past was related to distress for the forced centralization and homogenization of twentieth century Japan. ## 8. The Interwar Years The years between the wars exhibited a remarkable pluralism in politics and thought. The rapid course of industrialization, spurred by the Russo-Japanese War and climaxing during the years of World War I, brought to focus changes initiated by the Meiji reforms. Those changes had as their goal the creation of a Japan able to hold its own with the Great Powers and a Japan dominant in Northeast Asia. The forces they unleashed, however, brought dislocation in every part of Japanese society. Women began to tire of the “good wife, wise mother” role to which they had been assigned. A labor movement began to challenge the undisputed dominance of the members of the Industrial Club, and a tenant movement gave evidence of dislocations in village life. The diffusion of education brought with it ready access to outside thought, and modern transportation brought premodern Japan to the new industrial centers and cities. Urbanization brought with it a new mass culture. Japan had become a land of far greater social variety than before. It was more open to the world than it had been. The products and tensions of the modern world had rendered it more internationalist and cosmopolitan. But because more and more of Western literature and thought was available in translation, and Japan’s academic and cultural institutions had developed their own structure and mechanisms, Japan’s intellectuals were in some ways more parochial than their Meiji predecessors, who had had to meet the West on its own terms and not in Japanese translation. Japan’s picture of the world, so clear and graded in Meiji times, also became less distinct and more complex. Japan was now one of the Great Powers, but the clarity of the model it had held up for emulation gave way to a multiplicity of images. The imperialist goal that had energized developed states in the nineteenth century gave way to talk of self-determination and cooperation. In China, in Russia, in Austria-Hungary, in Germany, and in Turkey monarchy was replaced by republicanism, and Japan—the struggling youth of the imagery of the 1880s—found itself an uncertain and rather fearful senior. Within Japan the political consensus of the Meiji period, long moderated by the founding fathers of the modern state, was also giving way. The Meiji state structure had divided responsibility by reserving it—ostensibly to the emperor—to separate institutions charged with responsibility for military, diplomatic, and political affairs. The original genro¯ had been able to coordinate the institutions this created; their collegial tactics made it work, but their successors had not been bonded by youthful struggle in the same way. Katsura’s disastrous attempt to work behind the imperial screen was the signal that a new day was at hand and that new actors or instrumentalities were required. Economic difficulty imported from abroad and foreign policy crisis generated from within warped this growth to produce a decade of instability.