# THE YOSHIDA YEARS Between 1946 and 1953 Yoshida Shigeru (1878–1967) organized five cabinets, more than any other political leader in modern Japan. With the exception of a period in 1947–48, he occupied the post of prime minister during a time of wrenching political and social change. While in power he was frequently reviled as a bumbling relic of the past and quite unable to understand current trends, and his retirement was welcomed by political commentators. Subsequently it became clear that his ideas and his successors, the “Yoshida students,” had put their stamp on a half century of postwar Japan; by the time of his death he was already being hailed as the grand old man of postsurrender Japan. During his years in power Yoshida seemed a crusty and stubborn man totally lacking in the arts of public relations that modern politics require. He never quite belonged to the political establishment, and for many years his status was that of an adopted son. He was born the son of a Tosa leader of the Freedom and People’s Rights Movement, Takeuchi Tsuna. Adopted by a wealthy merchant family, he soon developed a taste for the life he now inherited and rode his horse through Meiji Tokyo to attend classes at Tokyo Imperial University. Upon graduation he stood for the Foreign Ministry examinations and emerged one of a cohort of five. Marriage to a daughter of Makino Nobuaki (Shinken, 1861–1949) brought second-hand status in the inner circles of Japan’s elite. Makino, son of the Meiji leader O<sup>¯</sup> kubo Toshimichi, had accompanied the Iwakura mission in early 1871, remained to study in Philadelphia, and returned to Japan after his father’s assassination to take up a distinguished career in education (minister of education under Saionji), diplomacy (several ambassadorial posts, delegate to the Paris Peace Conference, and foreign minister under Yamamoto), and the palace (minister of the imperial household and, after 1925, lord privy seal). Yoshida’s record in diplomacy was uneven; he seems to have done a poor job of making arrangements for Saionji and Makino at the Paris Peace Conference. He served in a number of posts in China and attended Prime Minister General Tanaka’s Far East Conference in 1927; his own preferences for Japanese China policy centered around support for conservative, pro-Japanese warlords who were swept away by the Nationalist revolution. The post that most affected Yoshida’s outlook on world affairs was that of ambassador to the Court of St. James, a role in which he made some rather maladroit efforts to secure English understanding of Japan’s early advances in the 1930s. Hirota Ko¯ki wanted Yoshida as his minister of foreign affairs after the rebellion in 1936, but he was overruled by men who objected to Yoshida’s relationship to Count Makino. During the last year of the war Yoshida had cooperated with Konoe’s efforts to bring the fighting to an end, a position that won him temporary confinement by investigators for the military police. Clearly this increased his acceptability for office in the postsurrender days. He emerged as minister of foreign affairs in the postsurrender cabinet of Prince Higashikuni Naruhiko, a prince of the blood who had been called out of obscurity to serve as prime minister in order to utilize the prestige of the imperial house to secure approval of the surrender; Yoshida retained that post under the successor cabinet of Shidehara Kiju¯ro¯. Years later Yoshida described how he was summoned from O<sup>¯</sup> iso, some thirty miles west of Tokyo, early in the Occupation to take up his post. As his driver was maneuvering between the potholes on the way to Tokyo the car was suddenly halted by several American soldiers. Yoshida and his driver feared the worst, but were relieved to have the soldiers explain politely that they had lost their way and wondered whether they could have a lift. Once seated in the car, they pressed chewing gum, chocolate, and cigarettes on the startled Japanese. Later Yoshida wrote that “the incident surprised and pleased us, feelings that were probably shared by the majority of Japanese on their initial contact with the men of the Occupation forces.” It must have suggested that the Occupation would be well-meaning; in effect, that it could be managed. Indeed, it would soon work to his advantage. Later, when he was appointed prime minister, Yoshida is said to have opened his first cabinet meeting by pointing out that there was such a thing as losing a war but winning the peace. One can take that as the unstated goal of his statecraft. It was not an easy task. It involved work with the General Headquarters of the Supreme Commander, Allied Powers (SCAP), where reformers in the Government Section headed by General Courtney Whitney saw it as their mission and opportunity to rid Japan of the incubus of its militarist past and remove all vestiges of “feudalism.” The presence of this power provided tempting opportunities for Japanese to inform on and complain about their government and leaders, directly or through American reporters who were eager for a story and quick to relay anything negative about presurrender Japan. SCAP itself was dubious about the capacity of members of Japan’s senior generation to lead in new paths, and looked for evidence of popular support and political vitality. Yoshida met this problem by dealing as much as possible directly with Generals MacArthur and Whitney and did his best to keep himself inaccessible to lesser figures. He seemed in the process to command more authority than he had in actuality; gradually, as the intensity of SCAP supervision weakened, appearance became reality. In the spring of 1946 SCAP ordered general elections, the first in which women were accorded the vote. The reborn Jiyu¯to¯ (Liberal) party, which laid claim to the lineage and tradition of Itagaki Taisuke’s call for representative government in 1874, emerged victorious. Its leader was the veteran Seiyu¯kai parliamentarian Hatoyama Ichiro¯. Hatoyama, unfortunately, had a mixed record in prewar years and one that the press insistently called attention to, and in May he was honored by a special SCAP directive ordering that he be purged from holding public office. As chief cabinet secretary under General Tanaka he bore partial responsibility for the violation of civil rights involved in the revision of the Peace Preservation Law and in the great police roundups of 1928, and as minister of education from 1931 to 1934 he had authorized the dismissal of suspected leftists and engineered the dismissal of Kyoto University professor Takigawa Yukitoki. With Hatoyama unavailable, the Liberal Party turned to Yoshida as replacement. His Tosa origins, his association with prewar moderates, and his efforts to end the war all promised an acceptable candidacy. Up to this point, in other words, Yoshida’s emergence was marked by accident and good luck. Tosa combined with Satsuma in the Makino connection; diplomacy combined with rustication during the years of extremism; and his eligibility was enhanced by having been targeted by the military in the closing days of the war. Very little of the above would prepare one for the emergence of a crafty manager who guided Japan through reconstruction to the San Francisco Treaty of Peace under which Japan regained its sovereignty in 1952. Yoshida’s story is necessarily interwoven with the story of the MacArthur Occupation. Each contributed to the other’s success. The impact of the surrender and Occupation was decisive in restructuring the pattern of Japanese social, political, and economic life. With the advantage of hindsight that a half century now provides, however, it is appropriate to speak of these affairs from the Japanese rather than from the American viewpoint, so that the MacArthur years become the Yoshida years. ## 1. The Social Context of Postsurrender Japan Nevertheless, the Yoshida years were also the MacArthur years. Defeated Japan was a society in a process of rapid change. The austerity of wartime effort continued with even more critical shortages of food, fuel, and shelter for urban Japanese, though for those who could manage it, a new hedonism and selfindulgence began to give indications of what lay ahead. Amid urban ruins and in underground tunnels leading to train and subway stations tiny bars opened to serve commuters. American servicemen gradually had a range of entertainment from giant beer halls to greasy nightclubs. Capital and material resources were strained and scarce, but efforts were prodigious. Anxious to please the occupiers and also protect Japanese women, authorities recruited female entertainers only to have American headquarters forbid entry to servicemen; it was some time before fraternization with “indigenous personnel,” as American authorities termed all Japanese, became common. Despite initial misgivings on both sides, hostility soon gave way to curiosity, tolerance, and usually friendship. Urban black markets, so long provisioned from country farms, awoke to new possibilities of canned goods, tobacco, and packaged foods frequently siphoned from the shelves of United States army service centers and post exchanges. SCAP was by no means a single entity. Its Government Section, headed by General Whitney, was staffed by enthusiastic reformers, many of New Deal or even leftist persuasion, who saw themselves as liberators and felt it their mission to make Japan over in the American image. The G-2, or Intelligence Section, headed by General Charles A. Willoughby, was as much concerned with stability as with reform, and was particularly intent on monitoring the Communists and leftists who were released from confinement in the early months by order of SCAP. SCAP overall was intent on disbanding the Japanese military, but G-2 was not slow to compile files of former officers in case new struggles lay ahead. The Economic and Scientific Section, charged with management of the economy, was concerned with production and industrial peace as well as with reform of the monopolistic structure of big business under zaibatsu leadership. Its section chiefs, in their eagerness to get things moving once more, resisted decentralization they saw as inefficient and counterproductive. Yet the section also included a Labor Division, which worked with Japanese reform bureaucrats to implement a Trade Union Law that gave workers the right to bargain collectively and to strike a mere three months after the start of the Occupation. The Labor Relations Adjustment and Labor Standards laws followed a few months later.<sup>1</sup> Civil Information and Education was concerned with ideology, reproaching Japan for its militarist past, and emphasized the importance of the new democracy. There was no sector of Japanese life that failed to attract the attention of one or another section of MacArthur’s headquarters. In all, SCAP came to number, with dependents, some 35,000 individuals. Like the military forces, who gradually numbered about 80,000 men, housing and provisions were born by the Japanese government. Initially American aid in foodstuffs was provided to prevent famine in the postsurrender days, but as matters stabilized, the costs of occupation came to constitute almost one-third of the Japanese government budget. Those costs were not negotiable. General MacArthur ruled over this often contentious scene. His word was final, but he was too wise an administrator to try to micro-manage his section chiefs. Canny Japanese like Yoshida could sense the tensions in this structure and did their best to turn it to their advantage. Yoshida later wrote in his memoirs that the military men in SCAP, as opposed to the civilians, were reasonable and approachable. The military men, from MacArthur on down, were realists, while the idealists were more troublesome. Yoshida himself, as first minister, did his best to restrict his contacts to meetings with the Supreme Commander. Each man had a somewhat cautious and watchful attitude toward the other, but each realized the other’s importance to his own success.<sup>2</sup> At no time did SCAP try to invalidate or delegitimize the Japanese government. At the outset SCAP instructions were addressed to the “Imperial Japanese Government” despite the fact that its empire was no longer in being. The Japanese government, for its part, coped with this awkward division of authority by establishing a Liaison Office for dealing with the Occupation authorities. For those who served in it some command of English and of American and Anglo-Saxon values and mores was essential, and in a context in which there was no diplomacy it was natural for the Liaison Office to become staffed by former Foreign Ministry officials. On assuming the post of prime minister Yoshida initially set up shop in the Foreign Ministry. It is tempting to cite as precedent the office of buke denso through which the imperial court communicated with the bakufu in Tokugawa times, but while the Edo period court was essentially powerless the postsurrender “Imperial Japanese Government” continued to hold the administrative reins to a modernized and complex society. SCAP directives altered Japanese practice in many respects. The first of these was the enfranchisement of women. The 1947 Constitution specified equality of sexes, and the formulations of the Civil Code put an end to the (samurai-style) pattern of family or house control (ie) that the Meiji government had enacted. A special division of SCAP, headed by a woman, took the liberation of Japanese women as its task. Still others concerned themselves with the democratization of education. In the first months of the Occupation school officials strove to demilitarize their textbooks, often by crude and hasty measures like blacking out pictures of war ships and tanks, but soon a national education council was considering broader measures of institutional reform and curriculum. The Special Higher Schools of imperial Japan became undergraduate colleges in a new system modeled on that of the United States. Prefectural universities would play the role of American state universities, undergraduate education would begin with broad training in the liberal arts, and the elitism of the imperial universities would give way to more egalitarian organization. All this required far greater resources than were available, and for many years the new structure was more hope than reality. The new institutions sometimes found themselves housed in former army barracks, and disparities of staff, libraries, and resources between these schools and older and more prestigious universities (like Tokyo, which now became the University of Tokyo), when added to traditional paths of elitist preference in entry into the bureaucracy, served to emphasize the distance between them rather than to lessen it. In education, as in many other areas, conservatives, eager to please new masters, often followed instructions blindly rather than arguing the merits of aspects of what was undergoing change. An American Education Mission that came to Japan advocated sweeping changes in approach and urged substitution of the “heroes of peace” for those of war.<sup>3</sup> Gradually, as travel abroad became possible for Japanese educators, first-hand acquaintance with the diversity of American education, public and private, served to enrich the debate in Japan upon their return. No sector of Japanese society responded more enthusiastically to the challenge of building a new Japan than that of education. It was not long before new textbooks and journals were berating the excesses of the prewar state with such vigor that conservative officials in the Ministry of Education began to take alarm. The debate this engendered has yet to run its course. The abandonment of the sacred aura that surrounded the throne had repercussions throughout educational and political life. With the emperor’s disavowal of divinity of January 1, 1946, and SCAP directives forbidding state support for Shinto, the structure of ideology established in the Meiji years lost its core. The surrender cabinet had called on the nation to prostrate itself in penitence for having failed the sovereign, but newspaper readers were soon treated to a famous photograph showing MacArthur in an open-necked shirt towering over a nervous emperor in formal dress. Yet the Occupation felt its need of imperial support, and before long SCAP officials suggested that Hirohito, awkward in manner and fedora in hand, begin to make public appearances designed to encourage his people in difficult days—and incidentally shore up his own image. These trips were at first ridiculed by foreign reporters, but before long became so popular that SCAP officials who had initially suggested them became fearful that they would threaten the Supreme Commander’s aura and began to criticize them as wasteful. The emperor himself, however, gradually learned how to interact with ordinary Japanese and gamely asked standardized questions. MacArthur himself, it should be noted, never made the slightest attempt to ingratiate himself with the Japanese public. He maintained a stern and duty-oriented exterior and an inflexible routine. New Year’s Day produced hortatory messages to the Japanese people that functioned somewhat like imperial rescripts in presurrender days. Daily his limousine swept from the American embassy residence to his offices in the Dai Ichi Insurance Building across the moat from the imperial palace. He traveled to Korea for the inauguration of Syngman Rhee as first president of the Republic of Korea, and the arrival of an unusually distinguished guest (Chief of Staff Dwight D. Eisenhower) brought him to the airport, but for the rest he maintained his routine. American visitors were received at his office and sometimes entertained at dinner in the embassy residence, but the number of Japanese he encountered was minimal. To this day the Dai Ichi Insurance Company maintains the general’s office suite—silent and empty rooms—as a reminder of those days. It must also be remembered that MacArthur’s autonomy was seldom challenged. In Washington the Far Eastern Commission, which represented all the Pacific War allies, could propose but not dispose, and in Tokyo the Allied Council for Japan, with British Commonwealth, Soviet Union, Nationalist China, and American membership, could observe, but not obstruct. SCAP, alert to possible Soviet objections, walled off Soviet representatives in Tokyo and preempted Soviet suggestions in Washington. United States concern was focused on the reconstruction of Western Europe, and occasional visits from exhausted Washington emissaries who struggled with jet-lag while listening to well-rehearsed briefings offered little challenge to SCAP priorities and procedures. ## 2. Reform and Reconstruction The setting within which postwar politics were played out included points at which Japanese and Allied plans converged, others where SCAP proposals initially shocked, but ultimately served, Japanese interests, and still others at which Japanese obstruction combined with American opposition to bring SCAP proposals to a halt. The first is exemplified by the program of land reform, the second by the Constitution of 1947, and the third by the program of industrial deconcentration. It has already been noted that in the interwar years a lively tenant movement struggled for better terms and rights of tenancy. The turn to militarism in the 1930s doomed administrative efforts for the reform of tenant rights, but years of wartime shortages produced conditions that had the effect of weakening landlord control of agriculture. Rents were brought to the offices of local cooperatives instead of being delivered into the landlords’ hands. This brought with it a certain leveling of the share of the crop that tenants delivered. Tenant sons conscripted for military service often sent part of their pay home, and however modest, that too helped tenant economy and confidence. Toward the end of the war the breakdown of the rationing system in the face of poor crop yields caused by inadequately fertilized paddies forced almost all Japanese to scour the countryside for food, and a thriving black market provided further opportunities for tenant incomes. Although thinking about land reform may have changed, however, conditions of ownership had not. One-third of Japan’s 6 million farm families owned 90 percent of the land; holdings were fragmented and pitifully small; tenants spent an inordinate amount of time walking from plot to plot. Japanese bureaucrats of the Agriculture and Home ministries had long waited for the opportunity to address this issue. In December 1945 the Diet approved a modest version of land reform, but SCAP ruled it inadequate on grounds that it favored resident landlords and permitted holdings that were too large. American interest in the issue had developed relatively late; the Initial Post-Surrender program made no mention of land reform out of fear of seeming to encourage collectivization in a setting of social chaos, but before long officials in SCAP saw the program as essential to the suppression of militaristic agrarianism. What followed saw an unusual degree of cooperation from the Allied Council for Japan, where the British Commonwealth representatives, SCAP specialists, and Japanese reform bureaucrats proposed changes. Under proposals that were to became law in October 1946, the Japanese government purchased land at preinflation prices. Local commissions with tenant, landlord, and owner-farmer representation set prices and selected eligible buyers. Resident landlords were limited to holdings that averaged two and a half acres in Japan’s most crowded and productive areas, but appropriate provisions were made for areas farther from metropolitan markets. Strict regulations guaranteed tenants written contracts. Rent was to be paid in cash so that tenants would profit from higher prices, and it was not to exceed one-quarter of the yield. The percentage of owner-cultivated paddy land increased from 55.7 in 1947 to 88.9 in 1949.<sup>4</sup> This was a stupendous feat of social engineering, easily comparable to the allocation of land to farmers under the seventh-century reforms of the early imperial state, the agricultural programs worked out by progressive daimyo in the seventeenth century, and the grant of certificates of ownership by the early Meiji government. Unlike the earlier programs, however, its goals were those of equity, and not of control; like them, however, it created a solid rural base for postwar politics. Before very long, the Occupation considered the program its greatest social accomplishment. The Yoshida government initially expressed fears of extremism and injustice to landlord interests, but then came to realize that a stable countryside created an almost invulnerable electoral base. Rural revolutionary protest had been forestalled, and tenant protests came to an end. In the years that followed the countryside, increasingly affluent, came to provide a vast internal market for urban manufactures. The cooperation of reformist bureaucrats, many from the old Social Bureau of the Home Ministry, was also important in helping liberal SCAP officials who were determined to establish the rights of labor to organize. Labor leadership was strengthened by the numbers of Socialists and Communists, imprisoned during much of the last decade, who were released as part of SCAP efforts to protect civil liberties, but even without this the pace of labor organization, a movement that had been stopped by the militarism of the 1930s, was due to return in a new and stronger form. The fire raids and resulting destruction of Japan’s industrial plant combined with shortages of food and of urban housing to create a dynamic and almost explosive discontent. New legislation quickly endorsed worker desires, and by 1950 nearly 56 percent of industrial workers were organized into labor unions which enrolled more than 6 million workers. Sheldon Garon has shown that these developments were by no means the exclusive product of American labor reformers in SCAP, but owed much to the efforts of bureaucrats who had long sought reforms, albeit less sweeping.<sup>5</sup> The issue is not without its importance. In area after area the heroic narrative has it that reforms thundered down from the Olympus of the Dai Ichi Building, but it is clear that the implementation of complex social engineering required the full cooperation of Japanese officials. The Constitution of 1947 might seem an exception to this theme of cooperation. We have already seen how it was rushed to completion by a small team in General Whitney’s Government Section. For guidelines they had only a handwritten note, probably from General MacArthur, that has since been lost, specifying quite generally that the emperor was to rule by consent of the people, that war should be abolished and Japan should rely on “higher ideals which are now stirring the world,” and that the “feudal system of Japan will cease.” The peerage would be abolished, and budgetary affairs arranged “after the British system .”<sup>6</sup> What began as a “model” for Japanese emulation became a draft the Japanese were obliged to accept in principle; General Whitney later recounted with pride how his assurance to Yoshida that he was “enjoying your atomic sunshine” during an outdoor reception at which cabinet members were huddling some distance away helped convince Japanese conservatives to accept the trial draft. The document that emerged was the product of ten days of work carried on in utmost secrecy by some twenty-five persons from the Government Section who were charged by General Whitney to be a “constitutional convention.” None were constitutional lawyers. One, a recent Vassar graduate and the only woman involved, concentrated her efforts on the formulation and inclusion of a women’s equal rights clause.<sup>7</sup> The reason for the Government Section’s haste was the knowledge that arrangements were being finalized for Soviet representation in the Far Eastern Commission; it seemed important to forestall possible interference. The same argument was useful in negotiating with the Japanese. By the end of February 1946 group members had cobbled together a document that met their needs. It opened with a ringing affirmation of human rights with echoes of the Gettysburg Address and, as we have noted, began with the definition of the emperor as the “symbol” of the unity of the nation who derived his powers from the sovereign people. The provision for women’s rights was one of thirty-eight that were guaranteed and not “subject to law” as had been true of all rights in the Meiji Constitution. These rights extended to “minimum standards of wholesome and cultured living.” The new House of Representatives was far more powerful than its prewar counterpart, and the prime minister, who had to be a member, was elected by its vote. Constituencies were flexible. Yoshida stood for election to the House of Representatives from his father’s old base of Tosa for many years, making brief appearances during election campaigns. The executive process was clearly defined for the first time in modern Japanese history. Other changes specified that prefectural governors and local officials should be elected rather than appointed. Article 9, the renunciation of war as a national policy or sovereign right, has already been discussed. The constitution’s origins were foreign, but so were many of the provisions incorporated in the Meiji Constitution. The 1947 Constitution’s idealistic language set standards that Japan would not reach for many years, but the powerful autocrat set forth in the Meiji Constitution was equally unfamiliar to Japanese of that day. The Yoshida government accepted the document, albeit reluctantly, for it was made aware that the maintenance of the imperial throne might very well hinge on its decision. The emperor added his approval in meetings with his ministers. Japanese arguments brought changes, some of them important, in Diet discussions of the draft; what had been a unicameral Diet, for instance, became a bicameral institution, with a House of Councillors, elected from national as well as local constituencies, replacing the peers, who were disestablished. Other changes seemed minor, but became significant later. The definition of “Japanese people,” kokumin, came in time to discriminate against Japan-born Koreans and Taiwanese. Yet the principal thrust of the document remained unchanged. Loose interpretation of Article 9 permitted the establishment of Self-Defense Forces, but invocation of its language stood in the way of full-bodied commitment to collective security. When cautious steps toward establishment of a peace-keeping force became necessary in the 1990s, the operation was hedged about with such severe restrictions on the use of force that Japanese diplomacy was hard put to defend its nature. Nevertheless the “Peace Constitution,” as it came to be called, became so popular that even conservative Japanese have so far resisted arguments that the language of Article 9 should be modified to permit Japan a larger role in world affairs, while liberal sentiment has opposed revision out of fear of even a partial restitution of prewar controls. The entire Meiji Civil Code with its samurai-patriarchal family structure required rewriting to bring it into conformity with the constitution’s assertions of equality of individuals and sexes; marriage was now to be based on mutual consent. When the constitution came up for discussion in the Diet, members had to be reassured that its provisions, particularly those pertaining to the throne, did not represent a violation of kokutai. One might have expected a short life for a document drawn up under such conditions. Conservatives grumbled that its language, colloquial instead of classical, was imprecise as well as inelegant. In places its language betrayed translation from the prior English. Its guaranty that “no censorship shall be maintained, nor shall the secrecy of any means of communication be violated” (Article 22) was in glaring contrast to the fact that SCAP agencies were vigilantly censoring communications for possible threats to the security of Occupation forces. The soaring idealism of Article 9’s renunciation of war was soon at variance with the arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union, and not a few Americans deplored it as inappropriate to the times. The constitution does not lack critics. It is asserted by some that it was designed by MacArthur to save Emperor Hirohito and utilized by Yoshida to keep Japan out of cold war politics.<sup>8</sup> Japan’s ruling conservatives have frequently been unenthusiastic about its references to the emperor, while the opposition left has championed its provisions. Nevertheless the Peace Constitution became firmly rooted in popular political attitudes and even affection in Japan. Far from having a short life, it is now one of the world’s oldest and most durable constitutions, standing virtually unchallenged a half century after its adoption by the Diet—which, at Occupation urging, adopted it as an amendment to the Meiji Constitution in order to give it the stamp of continuity and legitimacy. “Realists” who regarded Article 9’s renunciation of war as utopian came to see the advantages of that provision in resisting United States desires for greater reciprocity in defense arrangements. One must regard the 1947 Constitution as an astonishing success; like the Meiji Constitution, it proved capable, under a certain latitude of interpretation and implementation, of embracing a surprising variety of governmental positions. One might cite it as one more example of Japanese pragmatism in converting necessity to opportunity. In economic reform the picture was more complicated. American planners began with ideas for sweeping relocation of much of Japan’s industrial plant to countries that had suffered from Japanese aggression. Early missions, among them one headed by the Truman friend and oil executive Edwin Pauley, proposed drastic reductions in steel capacity, elimination of all aircraft capacity, and sharp reductions of other strategic materials. Unsure which firms were to be targeted, Japanese management delayed plans for resumption of production. Meanwhile, as the Japanese economy idled it became more difficult to decide what industrial capacity to take as reparations and where to send it; the countries of Southeast Asia, still struggling for independence, lacked the industrial base, while China was falling into civil war. Before long Japanese reluctance to, in effect, deindustrialize was rousing the backing of United States planners who argued that Japan could not rely indefinitely on United States aid and that its economy needed to be reinvigorated. From the first, however, Occupation officials spoke of the zaibatsu conglomerates as Japan’s great war potential, and in extended flourishes of rhetoric MacArthur himself responded to critics of SCAP’s plans for industrial deconcentration by denouncing the great firms. Japan’s system of “private property,” he asserted, “permitted ten family groups comprising only fifty-six families to control directly or indirectly every phase of slavery of the remainder of the Japanese people, permitted higher standards of life only through sufferance, and in a search of further plunder abroad furnished the tools for the military to embark upon its ill-fated venture into world conquest.”<sup>9</sup> Reformers in the Economic and Scientific Section thus drew up plans for sweeping change. The first step, which involved the separation of the zaibatsu families from the network of enterprises each group controlled, was simple enough. Further steps of economic deconcentration were far more difficult and challenging. Early plans called for dismantling industrial groups into their constituent parts and breaking up as many as 1,200 firms. A Holding Company Liquidation Commission was charged with the custody and resale of their stock shares, which were to be made available to public sale, and laws controlling monopoly were to prevent reconstitution of the commercial empires. Japanese government bureaus whose expertise was essential to this were markedly unenthusiastic, and in the dismal economic climate of postwar Japan purchasers of stocks were more likely to be profiteers than productive capitalists. To this was added sharp criticism from the United States. Newsweek magazine devoted an entire issue to a scathing assessment of the program, a criticism drawn up by a lawyer who had practiced in prewar Tokyo, charging that New Dealers and radicals in SCAP were riding roughshod over personal property rights. The matter served as a catalyst for the formation of a Council on Japan, headed by former ambassador Joseph E. Grew, to urge caution.<sup>10</sup> Most important of all was the intervention of the State Department in the person of the head of the Policy Planning Staff, George F. Kennan, who traveled to Tokyo in 1948. Kennan was at first given the polite brush-off MacArthur reserved for visitors from Washington, but he succeeded in penetrating SCAP defenses for serious talks about the role of Japan and to question the wisdom of programs that sought to eliminate, as he saw it, tried for untried forces. Indeed, he later reflected, the policies pursued by “General MacArthur’s headquarters, on cursory examination, seemed to be such that if they had been devised for the specific purpose of rendering Japanese society vulnerable to Communist political pressure and paving the way for a Communist takeover, they could scarcely have been other than what they were.”<sup>11</sup> Kennan’s observations confirmed his fears. Japan was substantially defenseless; the more than 80,000 American troops were of limited combined vitality. Japan itself was totally disarmed. The Occupation weighed heavily on the Japanese economy and consumed one-third of the annual budget for the support of its 35,000 civilians and the troops. Three-quarters of a million Japanese with administrative experience were on the sidelines because of the purge. It seemed high time to change priorities from reform to reconstruction. In his talks with MacArthur, whom he described as a formidable proconsul, Kennan found the general aware of these concerns, but also hesitant to change course for fear of incurring opposition. Kennan argued that the aims of the Potsdam Declaration, which were limited, had been achieved, and suggested that MacArthur could change course while terming the Occupation a success. This provided the bridge for MacArthur’s retreat; he could affirm that the Occupation’s policies had been successful and then relax the schedule for deconcentration he had earlier asserted was necessary to the struggle against Japan’s “feudal forces.” Plans for the deconcentration of some 1,200 firms were reduced to include only 325, and in the end only 28 were broken up. The giant trading firms associated with the Mitsubishi and Mitsui conglomerates were among them, but more of the firms targeted were electric power companies than manufacturers. The zaibatsu pattern of concentration, however, did not reappear. A spate of antimonopoly measures created new opportunity for outside forces, and the enforced retirement of wartime economic leaders under the terms of purge programs created an interval of opportunity for imaginative entrepreneurs. Great postwar firms like Toyota, Honda, and Sony were not affiliated with the prewar conglomerates. When enterprises were reconstituted it was in the form of networks of firms centering around one of the great banks, and such groupings became known as keiretsu.<sup>12</sup> These few paragraphs illustrate the way in which the interplay of Occupation goals and Japanese response affected the course of social and economic change. In land and labor reform the cooperation of Japanese bureaucrats brought permanent change to the economy. In constitutional revision the initial reluctance of Japanese conservatives gave way to the grudging, and then grateful, realization that the changes were ones they could live with and that they enabled them to survive Diet challenges from the opposition Socialists. At every point the elimination of the institutional power of the prewar military brought breathing space for the development of new forces. Where initial goals were impractical and alarmed Japanese, as in the program of deconcentration, those fears found support in American economic and governmental circles and combined to blunt, indeed reverse, the process of reform. As the “opposite course,” as Japanese critics called it, turned to programs of reconstruction and production, SCAP New Dealers began to feel themselves isolated, and most returned to the United States. The GHQ that remained in Tokyo gradually became routinized, more inclined to congratulate itself on past achievements than to call for new crusades. Any discussion of the social context of postsurrender Japan must make mention of the turbulent and sometimes chaotic climate in which the new liberation was received. There was enthusiasm among American staffers, who saw themselves as liberators and warmed to the welcome accorded them by relieved Japanese who had feared retribution and rancor. On the part of Japanese liberals and especially academics, now free to speak their mind in denunciation of the old order, there was also, after the initial danger of famine had passed, an extraordinary flowering of debate and discussion. New magazines and pamphlets discussed the new and better society that should be built, and discussion clubs, seminars, and lectures drew attention that was astonishing in view of the hardships of housing, food, and transportation. Radicals released from prison and, in the case of Nozaka Sanzo¯, returned from flight and exile in China were uniquely fitted to provide effervescence and leadership in this setting. They cheered the lifting of restrictions on their activity, cheered MacArthur in the streets, and swiftly seized leadership of the union movement. Management was for the most part silent, unsure of its fate or that of its holdings. Strikes and demonstrations designed to show the superfluity of lackluster industrial leadership, as when unions seized facilities to speed production, contributed to labor confidence. Some of the denunciation of the recent past represented flattery to please the conquerors, and some of the literal acceptance of the new order on the part of the left represented opportunism, but overall there was a genuine and heartening efflorescence of hope. Commuters struggling to keep their feet on crowded trains read serious monthlies on their way to work; most Japanese thought they were building a new society that would be more just than the old had been. Although there has been much talk about the “reverse course” of Occupation policy, it was also clear, well before the Kennan mission, that SCAP, for all its determination to reform, was by no means prepared to allow Japanese leftists to set the pace for change. When a nationwide general strike was called for February 1, 1947, General MacArthur ruled it out “with the greatest reluctance,” explaining that under the conditions that prevailed a stoppage of utilities and of transport would cripple and derail whatever economic activity there was. A strike, led by a small minority of the Japanese people, he announced, “might well plunge the masses into disaster.” This pronouncement astonished and dismayed labor leaders, who saw it as betrayal, and reassured the conservative and middle classes. Japanese historians, quick to assign a periodization to events, usually cite this prohibition as the beginning of a “reverse course” in American Occupation policy, though they would probably do better to reserve that designation for the abandonment of plans for industrial deconcentration. A general strike in 1947 might well have led to social disorganization and disorder in the cities, but it is difficult to argue that it would have been in furtherance of the announced aims of democratization. Political leadership in a time of such extraordinary change required a realistic acceptance of restraints imposed by the Occupation and maintenance of a certain degree of independence. Yoshida managed this. He did not toady to the American overlord, but he was too wise to resist publicly. He cannot have been impressed by the campaign that SCAP’s Civil Information section waged to convince the Japanese of the moral depravity of their government’s recent actions, and indeed later provided his calligraphy for a stele commemorating the executed leaders as “Seven Patriots.” On the other hand he had had personal experience of the militarists’ irrationality, wanted no part of that for the future Japan, and used this to delay steps toward rearmament that would have slowed economic growth. He himself was convinced that the Japanese people, far from being warlike and aggressive, were peacefully inclined and that it was the period of militarism that was the aberration. Japan’s true course, he argued, had been to align itself with Great Britain in the Meiji period, and in the future it should certainly ally with the United States. To do so was to return to the course that had worked so well in earlier days. Yoshida, as has been noted, divided SCAP headquarters into groups of “idealists” and “realists” and made clear that his preference lay with the latter and not with the reformers of the Government Section. He tried, on the whole successfully, to limit his contacts with SCAP to the Supreme Commander himself. In SCAP headquarters the “idealists” of the Government Section had their doubts about the stocky, brusque, and stubborn man they had to work with, but when they tried to replace him with a rival they found themselves outmaneuvered. The substitute candidate, no more prepared to do American bidding than Yoshida, declined to stand for election, and resigned instead. As American policy focused increasingly on reconstruction Yoshida had fewer doubts about it, although he retained strong objections to the purge. In the eyes of the Americans, meanwhile, the old-fashioned Anglophile seemed able to deliver support when it mattered most. As a result there was a certain symbiosis in the MacArthur-Yoshida relationship, one that leads Richard Finn to describe them as “winners in peace.”<sup>13</sup> ## 3. Planning for Recovery The Japanese economy was in dire straits after the surrender. Inflation, which had been reined in to a certain extent by wartime controls, surged. The wholesale price index in 1946 was 16 times, and five years later 240 times, what it had been in the period between 1934 and 1936. Social and economic chaos typical of defeated countries contributed to this. There was a sudden flood of currency from government bonds that were losing their value. There were dark rumors that the armed services had released large supplies of bank notes they had hoarded, and that individuals who had access to raw materials they had assembled for the military turned those into personal fortunes. Meanwhile urban dwellers, their housing destroyed or badly damaged, had desperate need for every kind of product denied them by the blockade of the country and the destruction of war. Shortage of chemical fertilizers made for poor crops; the seas were overfished and the hills overcut; mines lay idle without the slave labor that had kept them going during the years of war. The government levied new taxes, including one on wartime profits, regulated banks, and decreed limits on prices, but in the slackening of discipline that accompanied defeat these measures could only be palliatives. What was needed was a return of productivity. This was slow in coming, even more so in Japan than in Europe, and the level of the gross national product (GNP), which had sunk to one-half of the 1934–1936 level, did not return to that figure until 1953.<sup>14</sup> This setting provided the background for the emergence of economic planners, some of whom who had carried out, and in some cases been punished for, studies of Japan’s potential for war. They now faced the challenge of developing plans to revive the economy, and out of their work came the beginnings of a national industrial policy. Prime Minister Yoshida himself was convinced that state-led planning was inappropriate for a capitalist society, but the emergency Japan faced in the early postsurrender years provided an opportunity for others who had thought about these matters for many years. Arisawa Hiromi has already been mentioned. He was thoroughly schooled in Marxist economic theories, and his period of study in interwar Germany had familiarized him with the work of the “total war” theorists. On his return to Japan he had participated in a study of Japan’s resources that convinced him of the futility of its war efforts.<sup>15</sup> When the study was repressed he worked inconspicuously with the scholars in Prince Konoe’s Sho¯wa Research Association, ghostwriting pieces that appeared under others’ names. He was caught up in the red-baiters’ “professors’ group” in 1941 and dismissed from his post at Tokyo Imperial University, but with the return of peace he emerged as a leading figure in what now became the University of Tokyo. Together with a labor economist (Nakayama Ichiro¯) and two theorists of economic growth (Shimomura Osamu and O<sup>¯</sup> kita Saburo¯, an engineer turned economist) Arisawa became a principal architect of Japan’s economic recovery. Each of these men went on to careers of extraordinary distinction in later days; under the ministry of Miki Kiyoshi, O<sup>¯</sup> kita served as foreign minister, and Arisawa, Nakayama, and Shimomura all appeared on the imperial honors list as recipients of the Order of the Rising Sun, First Class, with Star and Ribbon, the highest honor the Japanese state can bestow. In further recognition of the importance of their role Arisawa, Nakayama and Shimomura were sometimes referred to as a new gosanke, as the three great Tokugawa cadet houses of Kii, Owari, and Mito had been called.<sup>16</sup> Economic planning was essential in the context of postsurrender Japan. On the one hand the giant zaibatsu conglomerates, which had bent to conform with state leadership during the war years, were being broken up into their constituent parts and were unavailable for a leading role. Occupation authorities, on the other hand, were in a position to centralize more in the process of reforming the old order, and their approval or at least tolerance was necessary to any large-scale activity that might be planned. The bureaucracy, essential to the implementation of Occupation decrees, stood almost unchallenged at the center of public life. Control of foreign exchange, which was at a premium, and allocation of material resources combined to make it possible and indeed necessary to shape the direction of the economy and maximize the return that might be expected from investment of the labor, capital, and resources at hand. The origins of the thoughtful planning that followed can be found in a study group that began to meet before the arrival of the Americans. When defeat was imminent the Greater East Asia Ministry, which had been designed to take over Asian matters previously handled by the Foreign Ministry, was dismantled. Some of its most able men were transferred to the ministry’s Research Bureau for Postwar Problems. Its members trudged through the ruins of Tokyo to meet in the badly damaged headquarters building of the South Manchurian Railroad, a remarkably ugly structure at the heart of Tokyo’s Toranomon intersection that was later taken over by SCAP for its own office needs. In the closing days of the war, ministry after ministry ordered the destruction of its files, and the Tokyo sky was black with the smoke sent up by burning paper. “This was a very stupid thing to do,” O<sup>¯</sup> kita Saburo¯, one of the principal organizers of the study group, later recalled; “the documents being burned in courtyards and other places included mobilization documents, production capacity surveys and many basic economic materials, many of which would help our work in planning the postwar economy. But at the time people were shocked at losing the war and afraid of the occupation forces, who were a completely unknown quantity.” O<sup>¯</sup> kita made it his business to go from courtyard to courtyard to try to salvage what remained from the smoldering piles of documents, and secretly smuggled them home. “One day, when engaged on such work, I ran into Inaba Hidezo¯ and discovered he had come on the same mission as myself. During that time Inaba systematically collected those documents which were not burnt and used them to start the Research Institute of the National Economy.”<sup>17</sup> From such modest beginnings did planning for the postwar economy grow. In the desperate shortage of goods of those days lunch for meetings was made possible by a few donations of yen that enabled secretaries to scrounge for black market food. Despite all this, enthusiasm ran high; Japan had to begin again, and time was short. Goto¯ Yo¯nosuke later recalled that thanks to the splendid briefings the meetings became more and more successful; a Foreign Ministry history noted that the report issued by the group, which gradually mobilized nearly all of Japan’s economic experts, “engaged in discussion with all the elan of the patriots (shishi) of the Meiji Restoration.” The group’s report, which was completed in March 1946 and distributed in 10,000 copies, was a document that looked far beyond the rubble of the present to consider Japan’s future place in the world economy. O<sup>¯</sup> kita provides a few sentences of its introduction that suggest how astute he and the others who drafted it were. In considering Japan’s future basic economic policies, we must rise above our immediate environment and proceed from a broad global and developmental standpoint. First we must discern the course of the progress of human society, its present state and future trends, and second, understand the nature of the world environment in which Japan now stands and in which it will stand in the future. With such an appreciation of the general environment, we must analyze the traditional and uniquely Japanese features of society and economy, as well as the new conditions we face in the postwar period. On the basis of this synthesis of the universal and the particular, our true course should be set in a constructive and positive spirit.<sup>18</sup> There is no defeatism in these lines. One is struck by the fact that these economists, with so little to work with, saw themselves as successors to the Meiji Restoration activists. O<sup>¯</sup> kita notes that Saeki Kiichi, a prominent postwar planner, read the report “on his return from Manchuria and later realized that he found in it the inspiration to think of the future direction of his life.” The first problem the planners faced was that of possible reparations. The Potsdam Declaration had assured the Japanese that Japan would be permitted “such industries as will sustain her economy,” but the level at which it should be sustained depended very much on the target date selected and the policies followed. The Pauley Commission of November 1945 advocated a Draconian course that would substantially have returned Japanese to their rice paddies, but it was not long before the “international environment” on which the planners kept their eyes intervened to raise questions of United States economic support, the feasibility of moving industrial equipment to less advanced economies, and the looming threat of the cold war with its priorities for Japanese stability and cooperation. Once a return to the standards of the period of 1930–1934 was set as a reasonable goal, the planners could point to the contradictions in the Pauley proposals. They proceeded methodically with calculations of per capita commodity consumption in those years and adjusted the totals to make allowance for Japan’s population rise, newly augmented by 6 million Japanese repatriated from abroad. When Yoshida first became prime minister in May 1946 he invited the economic planners to lunch with him each week, and noted that he found their talk more interesting than that at cabinet meetings. It was at one of these sessions that Arisawa Hiromi argued the importance of setting priorities in economic recovery. The overall level of production was so low, he pointed out, that it was impossible to work on all fronts simultaneously. At the time industrial energy came from coal, and in the depleted and often dangerous coal mines, where during the war years so much labor had been forced from prisoners of war and Koreans, production was particularly low. It did not help that Yoshida, in a New Year’s radio address in 1947, castigated the miners as “insubordinate,” thereby helping to bring on the threatened general strike on February 1 that was forbidden by GHQ. Shortly afterward, during a brief interlude of government led by members of the Socialist Party, the economist Wada Hiro¯ was named to head the Economic Stabilization Board, and the now famous Priority Production Program went into effect. Coal was needed for steel, and steel was needed to improve the mine shafts and rails, and that would make possible more coal. GHQ cooperated by permitting the import of a limited amount of crude oil to reinforce the energy base. Now came a series of studies and reports, some inspired by the publications of England’s Labor government. O<sup>¯</sup> kita, Arisawa, Inaba, and other economists, using the Economic Stabilization Board as their base, accumulated more and more documentation for key sectors of the economy to target. One should not exaggerate the speed or degree of success achieved in these early months; real wages rose little, and the newly turbulent labor movement raised fears for social instability among conservatives. Intensification of the cold war encouraged the criticism of SCAP reforms by American Japan hands that has been described. The program of economic deconcentration was cut back and brought to a close long before its original goals were reached, as Washington’s concerns for Japan’s stability and self-sufficiency rose. “It is clear,” United States secretary of the army Kenneth Royall stated in 1948, “that Japan cannot support itself as a nation of shopkeepers and craftsmen and small artisans any more than it can exist as an agricultural nation.” From then on American policy and Japanese hopes coincided more and more. In the process the Japanese left, in politics, universities, and labor, began to decry the fact that policy was oriented more toward production than consumption, and that a “reverse course” had changed the thrust of American policy. Many of the original reform leaders in GHQ, among them Colonel Charles Kades of the Government Section, who had headed Whitney’s “constitutional convention,” resigned their posts. The men who took their place were more likely to be sympathetic with reconstruction. The change in Occupation attitudes toward Japan is difficult to quantify, but important to remember. By the late 1940s the former enemy had in many ways become the new prote´ge´.<sup>19</sup> Officials of the GHQ Economic Section had established a revolving fund to get foreign trade moving once more. Examination of the message files at the MacArthur Library in Norfolk, Virginia, leads to the astonishing realization that SCAP was doubling as an international trading company; telegrams discuss the optimum mixture of cotton and synthetic in textiles with an eye to customs duty, and others direct the import of materials unavailable in Japan from many corners of the world. The dictates of early Occupation years had been replaced by joint consultation and cooperation. The Japanese planners, in other words, had a favorable environment in which to work. But basic differences remained. Some Japanese leaders, like Ishibashi Tanzan, favored expansionist policies that seemed reckless to American authorities, and the ready accessibility of Japanese firms to investment loans from the newly established Reconstruction Finance Bank seemed to be speeding an inflation. To meet this the United States dispatched a mission headed by the Detroit banker Joseph M. Dodge, in 1949. Dodge had served in a similar capacity in Germany. He was a no-nonsense fiscal conservative, and his recommendations, which became known as the “Dodge line,” were that the Japanese government develop a consolidated and balanced national budget, close down the Reconstruction Finance Bank, reduce government intervention in matters of subsidies and price controls, and establish an exchange rate of 360 yen to the dollar. The economic slowdown this produced made life difficult for the labor movement. The Dodge measures were politically unpalatable; they led to unemployment and social distress that was reflected in the Japan Communist Party gains in the elections of 1949, in which it scored a historic high of almost 10 percent of the Diet seats. There were those who compared the Dodge measures to the “Matsukata deflation” of the 1880s. At the same time, the new policies were designed to prepare a base from which Japan could attain self-sufficiency through increased foreign trade, and the new exchange rate was instituted in order to guarantee the competitiveness of Japanese products. This rate obtained throughout the years of growth and came to an end only in 1970, when the administration of President Richard M. Nixon ended the set rate and allowed the yen to seek its true value. With consumption temporarily, at least, reined in by deflation, and export productivity bolstered by a favorable exchange rate, the setting in which economic planners worked was a favorable one. Even so there would have been very great hardship and instability in Japan if it had not been for the Korean War, which broke out in June of 1950. Japan quickly became the workshop of the United Nations campaign to defend the Republic of Korea, and an enormous infusion of foreign exchange helped to fund the Dodge reforms. ## 4. Politics and the Road to San Francisco In postwar Japan the old political groupings which were thought of as liberal found themselves reclassified as conservatives. In the 1920s and 1930s there had been the beginning of a left-wing opposition, and the so-called proletarian parties with their labor and farm constituencies had begun to garner appreciable votes in general elections. Government suppression combined with national support for Japan’s wars to reduce their appeal and remove them from the political scene. After Japan’s surrender Occupation directives for civil liberty brought Socialist and Communist leaders back into the open, and a discredited government and economic hardship offered opportunities for rapid growth of a left-wing opposition. Because the land reform stabilized the countryside, what had been labor-farmer coalitions were now overwhelmingly labor- and urban-centered. In this new climate of opinion the prewar liberals and moderates became postwar conservatives. During the seven years of the Occupation Japanese conservatives profited from the approval of GHQ and the general popularity of Occupation measures to build a comfortably dominating position. Neither of these elements was a consistent plus, however; initially SCAP measures seemed certain to destabilize the conservatives and to favor the special opposition, but that likelihood lessened as Washington directives focused on Japan’s role within a larger international structure. The land reform also left conservatives with a secure base in an electorate that was still predominantly agrarian. The course of politics was nevertheless uncertain and reflected in frequent cabinet change (see chart). It would be tedious to detail the reasons for each of these shifts. Higashikuni and Shidehara were appointed under the prewar system, at the recommendation of Privy Seal Kido Ko¯ichi, who was shortly tried and imprisoned after the Tokyo tribunal rendered its verdict. After his first cabinet, Yoshida came in under the new constitution with its specification that the prime minister be elected by the Lower House of the Diet. Thereafter general elections determined the makeup of the Lower House and the leading party elected its head as prime minister, in contrast to prewar days when elections had as often been plebiscites staged by a new cabinet to strengthen its position. Nevertheless, although there was great hope for a new era of democratic rule and voter turnout was high, it would be wrong to conclude that the election process was particularly interesting or inspiring. Ultimate power seemed to lie with SCAP. Prewar politicians returned to run for election. The House of Councillors came to include nationally prominent figures and women, but the political process changed relatively little. The chief difference, perhaps, was the sudden disappearance of the Japanese military and the failure of nationalist rhetoric and symbols to win support. SCAP, indeed, forbade display of the Japanese flag for some time and it remained controversial until the end of the century, when Diet action firmly established it as the national symbol. Yoshida, as we have seen, originally became prime minister as surrogate for Hatoyama Ichiro¯, who received a personal purge thunderbolt from GHQ; he retained his post after Hatoyama became eligible once more, but ultimately gave way to him shortly after Japan regained its sovereignty. Officials in SCAP were not enthusiastic about Yoshida, especially at the first; they only tolerated him initially and tried to maneuver him out of office later, but without success. It can be concluded that although all postsurrender Japanese governments had to retain the confidence of the United States, the direct influence of SCAP, dominant at first, waned as the seven years of Occupation went on. For the first two years it was SCAP that drove Japanese politics. The new constitution, land reform, civil rights, and labor directives fulfilled and indeed rather exceeded the goals of prewar liberals like Ozaki Yukio. Japanese leftists, however, had hoped for more and assumed optimistically that SCAP was on their side. Conservatives also feared as much. Political prisoners who were released under the civil rights directives were told that their release was made possible by the direct intervention of General MacArthur. Communist leaders who had kept their integrity and refused to recant emerged as popular heroes of urban workers, and quickly assumed an important place in the burgeoning labor movement. In “production control” protests management representatives were barred from factories while worker-organized committees took over. In 1946 close to a million unionized workers participated in 1,260 industrial disputes, many of them involving such tactics. <table><tr><td rowspan="3">1</td><td colspan="2">Cabinets during the Allied Occupation</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>(Prince) Higashikuni Naruhiko</td><td>Aug.-Oct. 1945</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Shidehara Kijūrō</td><td>Oct. 1945-Apr. 1946</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Yoshida Shigeru (1st cabinet)</td><td>May 1946–May 1947</td></tr><tr><td>Katayama Tetsu (Socialist)</td><td></td><td>May 1947-Mar. 1948</td></tr><tr><td>Ashida Hitoshi</td><td></td><td>Mar.-Oct. 1948</td></tr><tr><td>Yoshida Shigeru (2nd)</td><td></td><td>Oct. 1948–Feb. 1949</td></tr><tr><td>Yoshida Shigeru (3rd)</td><td></td><td>Feb. 1949-Oct. 1952</td></tr><tr><td>Yoshida Shigeru (4th)</td><td></td><td>Oct. 1952–May 1953</td></tr><tr><td>Yoshida Shigeru (5th)</td><td></td><td>May 1953-Dec. 1954</td></tr></table> That labor had overplayed its hand and misread the Occupation’s intent became clear when MacArthur banned the general strike announced by transportation workers for February 1, 1947. Subsequently the Japanese government was able to deny public servants (who included railroad workers, the largest single union) the right to strike. Thereafter “slowdowns” might try commuters’ patience, but total cessation of transport was ruled out. As the possibility of malnutrition and famine declined and the economy began to show signs of life again, demonstrations became fewer and the conservative cause revived. The land reform had created a solid agricultural base for conservative political power, and the pressing need for food guaranteed farmers a market for their product. Rural revolution had been forestalled, but that was less the case with urban workers. Industrial wages began a slow recovery, but it was not until the end of Occupation in 1952 that they returned, in real terms, to prewar levels. In a sense all politics during the Occupation years were a prelude to the recovery of sovereignty, however, and the story of the road to the San Francisco Peace Conference shifts the setting beyond Japan. As early as 1947, Japan specialists in the Department of State had begun work on the outlines of a peace treaty that would bring the Occupation to an end. Their thinking, however, was still that of postsurrender days: Kuomintang China was expected to be the United States’ principal ally in Asia, and the problem was to restrain Japan while granting it sovereignty. Japan should be monitored to keep it disarmed, they thought, but for the rest a gradual return to sovereignty could be worked out. General MacArthur seemed supportive of this; he was not without hope for the Republican nomination for president in 1948—until he suffered a crushing setback in the Wisconsin primary of that year—and was prepared to return to national acclaim as a hero of peace as well as war. The rising intensity of the cold war put an end to these plans. It became clear that the Communist cause would prevail in China. Pentagon planners were dismayed by the prospect of losing forward bases in Japan, and State Department realists feared for the stability of East Asian politics if a totally disarmed Japan was left to fend for itself. It was in this context that George F. Kennan came to Tokyo for talks with General MacArthur to urge restraint in the still incomplete program of industrial deconcentration and that Secretary of the Army Royall warned of the impossibility of Japan’s retreating from its development as an industrial nation. Henceforth American policy was linked to the revival of the Japanese economy and vigilant in its concern for Communist activities in Japan. This in turn was naturally congenial to Japanese conservatives. United States labor unions, strongly anti-Communist, sent delegations and financial support for what were presumed (wrongly, in some cases) to be conservative Japanese unions. All this helped the conservative cause in Japan. It also helped the cause of industry and economic planners for industrial growth. Production was seen as requisite for future independence, and production was, for the present, more important than consumption. With time, benefits would inevitably extend throughout society. Delay in gratification of commodity needs would mean increased benefits in the future.<sup>20</sup> This was also the thrust of economic changes introduced by the “Dodge line” with its emphases on deflation and rationalization. As the 1940s drew to a close, SCAP became increasingly concerned with possible Communist infiltration of the left, and the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 heightened that alarm. Within SCAP the balance of power shifted; the New Dealers were fewer and less influential, while General Willoughby’s Intelligence (G-2) Section became more powerful. A “red purge” now targeted Communists and suspected Communists in government posts from education to politics, and laws that had been used against the right in the early Occupation years were directed against the left instead. Japanese conservatives understandably took heart at these developments, and Communist strength in the Diet, which had approached 10 percent after the 1949 elections, virtually disappeared together with the Japan Communist Party leaders, who once again went underground. Thanks in good measure to these pressures from trends outside Japan, then, it seemed to many that SCAP concerns shifted from reform to recovery and from preoccupation with right-wing activities to concern for Communist subversion. SCAP authorities, to be sure, argued that foreign-inspired radicals should not be allowed to interfere with the country’s new-found freedoms, but for the most part Japanese reactions to these shifts were predictable. Most Japanese felt unthreatened by world politics, secure in the presence of the American military, and convinced from recent experience that participation in international politics was totally unprofitable. Japan had tried and failed to take a leading role.<sup>21</sup> Japan was surrounded by satisfied powers who had defeated it, and in the event of emergency its security would be provided by the United States. The average citizen was concerned with improving the conditions of life, and some of the shifts of American policy seemed dangerously reminiscent of trends in earlier days they had so recently been warned against. Intellectuals and Socialist leaders deplored the changes and developed a lively fear that political reforms of democratization might also be in danger of reversal. It did not help that a number of conservatives began to talk about revisions in the constitution that would permit the return of some kind of military structure and redefinition of the position of the emperor. The net result was a curious shift in which the left, highly critical of United States policy, championed the Peace Constitution as its own, while the conservatives, beneficiaries of the new political order, put their trust in American support. There are grounds for crediting the imperial house and Emperor Hirohito with a role in preparations for a treaty of peace. During the Occupation years Hirohito met with General MacArthur eleven times. No American interpreters were present, and the record of the conversations has never been released. Fragments of the talks did slip out, on one occasion from an interpreter who was promptly dismissed. The nervous and apprehensive Hirohito who first called on MacArthur at the outset of the Occupation gained in confidence as it became clear that the imperial institution would be maintained, and he seems to have become an astute spokesman for the Japanese conservative establishment. From the few scraps of discussion that became known, one finds him expressing fear that Japanese labor, without the experience and responsibility that American labor has gained over the years, may adopt irresponsible positions—presumably toward wages and toward security. More to the point with regard to Japan’s position, he expresses apprehension about an disarmed Japan in world politics, and seems only partly assuaged by MacArthur’s grandiose assurance that he would defend Japan as if it were California. Most striking, the emperor suggests that the United States might want to retain custody of Okinawa after a peace treaty as a base for its military forces, while granting Japan’s residual sovereignty over the island. This proposal (which was in fact followed) did not endear the emperor to the residents of Okinawa; it was the only prefecture never visited by Hirohito, although plans for such a visit were being prepared at the time of his death in 1989. Some suggest that these conversations provided a unique transmission belt for the exchange of information and concern at the very highest level, and one scholar goes so far as to describe them as a new and updated form of “double diplomacy,” in which the emperor could outflank even Prime Minister Yoshida.<sup>22</sup> In this manner plans for the return of sovereignty to Japan—on the condition that the United States retain bases in Japan and full control of Okinawa— began to take form. The Korean War had moved from near-defeat to nearvictory, only to have Chinese intervention reverse the tide once more. MacArthur was replaced by General Matthew B. Ridgway in the spring of 1951; the Occupation was becoming an anachronism, and Japan was growing restive. Washington planners insisted, however, that Japan make preparations for its own security. President Truman appointed John Foster Dulles as special ambassador to work out arrangements for a treaty of peace in order to secure Republican congressional support. MacArthur, on his way home from Tokyo after his recall for open disagreement on Korean War policy, and Dulles, bound for Japan, were able to confer by radio as their planes crossed the Pacific in opposite directions. Dulles’s goal was a Japan allied with the United States and able to participate in its own defense, but Yoshida, unwilling to underwrite American needs and burden Japan’s economy, maintained—outwardly and politically—a reluctance to bypass Article 9 of the constitution. In the negotiations that followed Yoshida showed himself a somewhat devious but skillful protagonist. He resisted proposals for a formal military, and when he did agree that Japan would in due time establish forces for its own defense he did so in a letter that became public only decades later. Now and later he argued the political cost of antagonizing the Socialist opposition to rearmament, although there are indications that he encouraged that opposition to strengthen his hand. What emerged was compromise. Japan established a Police Reserve to take over some of the security role formerly played by United States forces now engaged in Korea, and that body in time became the Self-Defense Forces. The United States retained its right to maintain bases in Japan and kept full administrative control over Okinawa. Preparations now began for a formal treaty, prepared in bilateral talks with other allies. Since the Soviet Union could be expected to oppose any arrangements that left American forces in Japan, it was necessary to avoid the risk of debate at the upcoming conference. The Soviet Union did in fact send representatives to San Francisco, but they were outmaneuvered by Secretary of State Dean Acheson, who ruled them out of order at every turn. All this was in decided contrast to traditional patterns of peacemaking at Paris or Vienna. The San Francisco Conference convened in September 1951. Prime Minister Yoshida journeyed to San Francisco to sign the document that restored sovereignty to Japan. Under the terms of the treaty Japan recognized the independence of Korea and renounced all claims to Taiwan, the Pescadores, the Kurils, South Sakhalin, and the Pacific islands it had held in trust since World War I. The Soviet Union was not a signatory, however, and the Kuril issue remained moot, especially as Japan contended that the southernmost islands had never been administered as part of the Kuril (Chishima) chain. Disagreement over ownership of the southernmost islands has stood in the way of a peace treaty with the Soviet Union (and now Russia) into the twenty-first century, although an agreement ending the state of war between the two countries was signed in 1956. Okinawa also remained in limbo, under American rule, and it was not returned to Japan until 1972. The treaty recognized Japan’s right to enter into arrangements for collective security and noted the United Nations’ recognition of an “inherent right of individual or collective self-defense.” That right—in actuality an obligation—was promptly exercised by the execution of a Security Treaty with the United States. Under its terms American forces would remain in Japan until Japan could “assume responsibility for its own defense.” Japan agreed not to grant similar rights to any third power without American approval, and meanwhile United States assistance in defensive armament, technology, and training would prepare for the day when Japan would be prepared to defend itself. Since Japanese public opinion was then, and would remain for some time, unalterably opposed to remilitarization, it seemed unlikely that that would be very soon. Japan was also obliged to follow the American lead on the issue of a divided China. Arguing that it was essential to Senate ratification of the treaty, Dulles extracted from a reluctant Yoshida the assurance that Japan would recognize the Republic of China on Taiwan, rather than the People’s Republic at Beijing, as the legitimate government of China. The Treaty of Peace thus left Japan with sovereignty restored, but with limited options for setting its own course in world politics. American insistence on the arrangements of security, given the fact that war still raged against Chinese and North Korean armies in Korea, was natural; Japanese conservatives, doubtful of the feasibility of Japan’s unilateral renunciation of force, welcomed an agreement that provided Japan with a “nuclear umbrella.” Intellectuals by and large were critical, and their ambivalence on Japan’s being drawn into policies not of its own choosing was also understandable. The arrangement set the stage for decades of negotiation in which the Americans asked for a greater contribution to mutual security from Japan, and decades of controversy within Japan about the desirability and cost of the Security Treaty. ## 5. The San Francisco System Japan had regained its sovereignty and now reentered the international order after a prolonged period of relative isolation, but it did so under very unusual circumstances. In Meiji times the price of full sovereignty after the abolition of the unequal treaties had been the admission of foreigners to unrestricted residence throughout Japan. A half century later the price proved to be virtually unrestricted use of Japanese territory by the United States. Nevertheless the gains, from the point of view of Yoshida’s conservative government, were greater than the drawbacks. The scale and pace of Japanese rearmament remained a Japanese decision. While holding this to the minimum for many years, Japan placed first priority on economic recovery and growth, confident that its defense needs against any eventuality were being met at modest cost. Japan reopened to foreign trade, but on its own terms. A favorable exchange rate made its manufactures competitive, and the strong tie with the United States opened the world’s largest market to Japan. American manufacturers, confident that they had a long lead, were generous and even careless in providing technology for Japan’s new industries. The San Francisco system did, to be sure, cut Japan off from mainland China, and it was some time before South Korea, Taiwan, and the newly independent states of Southeast Asia could become promising markets. After the Korean armistice was worked out in 1953 East Asia was, however, stable, and Japanese recovery worked to speed economic development throughout maritime East Asia. Moreover the resources and markets of Southeast Asia and Australia were now available and no longer bound to imperial preferences. United States policy continued to favor the integration of Japan into the world trading order, and United States backing helped Japan win membership in the several regional trading systems that were established. In a sense, with an open field for the import of raw materials and access to foreign markets, Japan seemed to have achieved its chief war aims in defeat. There were of course Japanese who deplored the fact that the peace was partial, since it did not include the Soviet Union and mainland China, and who protested that the commitment to Taiwan would cut Japan off from the People’s Republic. Yoshida himself was confident that the future would take care of these problems, and that Japan had returned to its proper historic past by allying itself with the world’s strongest power. The arrangement enabled Japan to concentrate on economic growth and work toward a resolution of Article 9 in the Peace Constitution by separating “self-defense” from “war potential.” For decades after Yoshida left office these priorities were maintained by graduates of what columnists called the “Yoshida academy,” followers who shared his objectives. As these policies began to succeed, Yoshida’s popularity, which was not high when he retired from office, began to grow, and with it his confidence. In his memoirs he was caustic in his dismissal of the many intellectuals who deplored Japan’s continued seeming subservience to the United States, and contrasted these attitudes to the late Meiji period when the Anglo-Japanese Alliance was negotiated. At that time, he pointed out, Great Britain was at the height of its power and mistress of the seven seas, while Japan was an insignificant island nation in the Far East which had only just begun its rise from obscurity. The difference in international significance and power potential between the two countries was far greater than the differences which exist between Japan and the United States today. Yet the Anglo-Japanese Alliance was welcomed by Government and people alike and no one viewed that document as meaning that Japan was truckling to British imperialism or in danger of becoming a glorified British colony. When I recall this historical fact, and then recall the way in which our so-called “progressive” intellectuals speak of Japan as little better than an American colony and the “orphan of Asia” and so forth, it makes me wonder if these critics belong to the same race of people who only fifty years ago had acted with such determination and judgment, and without any trace of what can only be termed a colonial sense of inferiority.<sup>23</sup> In retrospect it is hard to fault Yoshida’s estimate of the San Francisco system. The United States presence stabilized East Asia; the People’s Republic of China was engulfed in the giant paroxysms of the Mao era and offered few possibilities, and Japan’s enforced separation stabilized Japanese politics. Japan relied on the United States for its security, rearmed slowly and warily, and, thanks to the American presence, gradually managed to regain the trust of trading partners in maritime East Asia. The American tie, providing access to resources, technology, and markets, enabled Japan to regain its feet, resume economic growth, and become the locomotive of growth throughout maritime East Asia.<sup>24</sup> ## 6. Intellectuals and the Yoshida Structure Admiration for Yoshida was far from unanimous, and as already noted, at the time of his retirement he was often portrayed as a political bumbler totally out of touch with most Japanese. The partial peace and security arrangement produced deep rifts in Japanese opinion, and these reached crisis proportions at the time of the renewal of the Security Treaty in 1960. Opposition to Ampo, the shorthand term for the pact, stirred a student generation and its mentors. The intellectual divisions of the 1950s were as deep as the class conflicts of the postsurrender years, and it will not do to dismiss the “progressive intellectuals” as contemptuously as Yoshida did. The amuletic terms of the postwar era were “peace,” “democracy,” and “culture.” Japan had vowed to reorient itself as a “nation of culture,” and in that task intellectuals, “men of culture” (bunkajin), played the central role. Austere, often self-righteous, poorly rewarded and yet sought out by the press, they were, some have commented, new and self-conscious successors to samurai moralists of an earlier day.<sup>25</sup> The manner of Japan’s recovery in the 1950s created divisions that dominated life into the 1960s. By the time Yoshida wrote his memoirs the great paroxysm of 1960 had passed, but few would have expected it to subside so suddenly. The most vocal and respected intellectuals of the day were usually ambivalent about the peace and security treaties, but in longer retrospect theirs was an uneasiness that began with the shift in Occupation priorities in 1948. Nothing better illustrates this than the manner of dissemination of information to a publisher who went on to organize the most influential group of late-Occupation leaders. The publishing house of Iwanami launched as its postwar flagship the monthly Sekai (The World), which soon became a hugely popular platform for progressive intellectuals. The Occupation, it will be recalled, maintained censorship of periodicals in order to monitor the revival of militarism. In September 1949, the Sekai editor made one of his obligatory visits to the censorship division of the Civil Information and Education Section to secure clearance for his next issue. Such trips may have been galling at times, but they could also provide access to documents from beyond the seas. On this occasion the editor was given the text of a recent UNESCO statement drawn up by social scientists entitled “Factors That Make for War,” with the suggestion that he might want to publish it. When he did so a few months later, it served as inspiration for the formation of a Peace Problems Discussion Group (Heiwa Mondai Danwakai) that all but dominated discussion—and also symbolize confusion—in a Japan still more or less isolated from world currents. The organization’s founders concluded, from the fact that one of the eight scholars who had drafted the UNESCO statement, a relatively obscure Hungarian savant, was from the Soviet bloc, that this was a quiet signal that Soviet authorities favored peaceful coexistence, and this encouraged them to work for unarmed neutrality. They argued that a treaty that committed Japan to cold war partisanship was worse than none, and that it would be in violation of the new constitution as well.<sup>26</sup> The intellectuals who went on from this to set the terms of debate had a major role in public opinion. The press, almost unanimously critical of the conservative government, eagerly sought their views, and they, wretchedly paid and cut off from the new commercialism that was developing around them, had to live by their pens. But there was a more profound impulse stirring them, and that was the determination to atone for their silence during the years of militarism and war. During those years many intellectuals and writers had been co-opted by the state, while those who declined to do so had retreated into silence. We have noted that the absence of a public dialogue on the road Japan was following, when it was still possible, is one of the striking features of the 1930s. Intellectuals were determined not to make the same error a second time. Marxist analysis, its prestige raised by its proscription during the war, dominated social science writing. The conservative heroes of the past were silenced or banished. Professor Hiraizumi Kiyoshi, whose “imperial history” had been so influential, ended his career in a minor post. Some, who had been co-opted by the military, were the more vehement in their support for the new democracy and peace. Generational differences strengthened this. In the early discussions of the Peace Problems Discussion Group intellectuals of many stripes participated, but it was not long before deep divisions between “old liberals” and “new progressives” surfaced. With the exit of the old right and the military, prewar liberalism became postwar conservatism. The prewar generation of liberals did not, in any case, reproduce itself. The Taisho¯ generation suffered disproportionate losses as a result of the war, and it was poorly prepared to face the vehemence of the new progressives. The left too was ideologically divided by degrees of tolerance of communism, but it was firmly united in its determination to be heard in its opposition to what it saw as Japan’s new pro-American conservatism. In a sense it marked a new, antistate intelligentsia. For these people Yoshida’s disapproval was a badge of distinction, and they returned his scorn with their own. A final element involved was confessional: the new intellectuals were as one in deploring Japan’s role in China. It might be possible to see the Pacific War as motivated by resistance to Western imperialism and thereby ultimately progressive, but the China War, against a peaceful neighbor, had been one of inexcusable aggression. This penitence had a corollary of respect and often admiration for the revolution in progress in China, and heightened disapproval of policies that threatened to cut Japan off from the mainland. Throughout the 1950s a romantic and wistful yearning characterized much commentary about China, and even when stories of the extremism of class warfare or Chinese moves into Tibet and against India broke through, major figures like the Sinologist Takeuchi Yoshimi thought it incumbent upon Japan to look away; Japan, in view of its own behavior, was in no position to criticize China. The 1950s also brought a number of issues on which it could plausibly be argued that the new arrangements for security spelled an end to Japan’s priorities of peace and democracy. After Yoshida gave way to his old rival Hatoyama Ichiro¯ in 1954, conservatives began serious study of the constitution with an eye to its revision. The Police Reserve that had been established at American urging became the Self-Defense Forces, with land, sea, and air divisions. Genda Minoru, the architect of the attack on Pearl Harbor, reemerged to organize the new air component. In several well-publicized events American military bases brought on public debate, as when a Japanese national was killed while scavenging on an artillery range. The roar of American jet fighters over nearby schools and residences helped make the change to independence seem illusory. Contention came to center around the United States–Japan Security Treaty that had been signed within hours of the signing of the Treaty of Peace. In its original form the treaty began with the recognition that Japan, which was disarmed, did not have the “effective means to exercise its inherent right of self-defense,” and that this brought danger to Japan because “irresponsible militarism has not yet been driven from the world.” Therefore Japan asked that a Security Treaty come into force simultaneously with the Treaty of Peace, “as a provisional arrangement for its defense,” and asked that “the United States of America should maintain armed forces of its own in and about Japan so as to deter armed attack.” The United States agreed but in the expectation, however, that Japan would itself increasingly assume responsibility for its own defense against direct and indirect aggression but “always avoiding any armament which could be an offensive threat or serve other than to promote peace and security in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.” Accordingly Japan would grant, and the United States accept, the right “to dispose United States land, air and sea forces in and about Japan.” These forces could be used “to contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security in the Far East,” and could, if the Japanese government so requested, be used “to put down large-scale internal riots and disturbances in Japan caused through instigation or intervention by an outside power or powers.” The treaty did not provide for reciprocity: the United States was free to use its forces for the purposes of Japan’s internal security and to maintain security in the Far East without prior consultation, while Japan would continue to defray the costs of American protection. Opponents denounced it as a new form of unequal treaty. Actually it was unequal in another sense, since America promised to defend Japan, but Japan, with nothing to reciprocate, was not bound to defend the United States. In 1957, after the death of Ishibashi Tanzan two months after becoming prime minister, government leadership passed to Kishi Nobusuke, once a member of the cabinet of General To¯jo¯ and subsequently interrogated, though never indicted and tried, as a “Class A” war criminal. The Security Treaty would be up for renewal in 1960, and the Kishi cabinet proposed changes that would provide for more reciprocity and consultation. Critical intellectuals were little mollified by those changes, however, and felt Kishi a poor candidate for peace or democracy. They distrusted him and dismissed the improvements in the pact as cosmetic, and called for its abolition instead of accepting its revised version. The Kishi government was determined to gain Diet approval for the renewal of the Security Treaty in time for a planned visit to Japan by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1960. That visit, however, originally planned in the relaxation of cold war tensions that was associated with the Soviet government of Nikita Khrushchev and scheduled to include a visit to Moscow, changed in imagery as a result of the U-2 spy plane incident that instead heightened suspicion. In the Japanese Diet the Socialist opposition, determined to block approval of the Security Treaty renewal, tried to block the entrance of the House of Representatives Speaker. The government, too, resorted to force by calling in police to clear the entrance to the chamber. In response to this, the opposition boycotted the proceedings, and the government rammed approval through the Diet in the dead of night with no opposition members present. It now seemed clear to many Japanese that both peace and democracy were endangered. Tokyo was rocked by gigantic demonstrations protesting the Kishi government’s actions. President Eisenhower’s press secretary, who arrived to plan his visit, was prevented from making his way from the airport into Tokyo. The Eisenhower visit was canceled.<sup>27</sup> Kishi prevailed, but at high cost: he himself was attacked and gravely wounded by a right-wing assailant. Later, another right-wing fanatic murdered the Japan Socialist Party’s leader, Asanuma Inejiro¯, on television while he was addressing a rally. These events tarnished the image of representative democracy in Japan and caused many to fear for its future. It was not yet two decades since Japan had tasted the ashes of war and defeat, and the wreckage of lives and of cities could still be seen. While it would be an exaggeration to credit the turbulence of the demonstrations to the intellectuals’ dismay alone, there can be no question that the protests were the product of a climate of opinion that had developed by their doubts and suspicions, fanned by the government’s maladroit response to the Diet obstruction and diffused and championed by press organs that were virtually unanimous in their denunciation of the government’s policy and tactics. Clearly the events of 1960 have to be seen in the context of fears of a revival of militarism and war, suppression of dissent, and return of right-wing terrorism. Beginning with May Day demonstrations in 1952, at the dawn of Japan’s renewed independence, Socialist-led labor unions had provided the manpower for protests that frequently rocked Japan’s major cities, especially Tokyo, and labor’s contribution to the Security Treaty protests was important. What justified treating these events in the context of intellectuals’ anger and dismay, however, is that the preponderance of demonstrators came from campuses within the metropolitan area and that they were frequently led by their instructors. Battalions were arrayed by school banners, and the only fatality of the riots was that of a woman student. But it has to be added that there was also a festive, ludic, sense about the protests, which in some psychological sense related them to the festivals of an earlier, agrarian society. In commenting on these events many intellectuals drew the conclusion that the demonstrations marked something new and important in the process of democratization in Japan, and argued that for almost the first time a force for real change was boiling up from below and not responding to urgings from above; a revolutionary consciousness, they thought, was beginning to emerge in a society that had previously accepted, rather than initiated, change. One might suggest that the only previous instance of this consciousness had come in the days of the Freedom and People’s Rights Movement of the 1880s. With the enactment of the Meiji Constitution that spirit had been coopted and diverted to goals of national, imperial power. In the 1960s the surge of participatory enthusiasm was once again diverted, into goals of economic growth and personal consumption. For suddenly, and remarkably, the fears that brought on the demonstration subsided. Talk of doubling the national income replaced fears of losing the new-found democracy and peace. International affairs regained some kind of equilibrium. Growth stabilized Japan, and a resurgent Japanese economy seemed to stabilize maritime East Asia. A new cabinet headed by Yoshida’s outstanding “disciple” Ikeda Hayato (1899–1965) substituted a “low posture” pose for Kishi’s autocratic tactics. Japan gradually rejoined international society, signing a round of treaties with Southeast Asian nations and, in 1965, the Republic of Korea; the Self-Defense Forces, far from becoming a threat, had some difficulty in recruiting, and the goals set for the economy—including doubling the GNP in ten years—were soon exceeded. Intellectuals and their students traveled more, read more, and translated more. The fevered atmosphere of the 1950s was gradually replaced by one that was more varied and even relaxed. ## 7. Postwar Culture In Tokugawa Japan the sword and the brush had been parallel skills, and the Buke shohatto, the Code for the Military Houses, for two centuries instructed samurai to cultivate the arts of peace as well as those of war. In the nineteenth century the modern state put first emphasis on gathering the instruments of power, and bun, “culture,” had to take second place to arms; the emperor, so long the arbiter of the courtly arts of poetry and painting, now appeared at military reviews in uniform. In postwar Japan what had been parallel became opposite: a nation relieved to find it had survived turned its back on the arts of war and embraced the more enthusiastically those of culture. Peace, democracy, and culture were the trinity of the new age, and by January of 1946 schoolchildren were striving to emulate the crown prince’s New Year calligraphic instruction to “build a nation of culture” in their copybooks. That goal, however amorphous and indistinct, was a welcome change from the now empty rhetoric of war and domination, and once the immediate problems of physical needs had been met, the Japanese threw themselves into the task with enthusiasm. Journals of opinion that had been forced to accept “voluntary liquidation” by the authorities’ refusal to give them newsprint reappeared as if by magic, and venerable favorites were soon challenged by numerous new voices that struggled to be heard and read. Japanese later recalled the exhilaration and excitement of a time when there were openings to ideas put forth by new writers in new formats. “There was something akin to a creative outburst in the post-war years, when, in the midst of destruction and hunger, magazines were founded or re-established in great numbers and book production was resumed, giving the ‘post-war generation’ a platform for their works.”<sup>28</sup> The writers Kawabata Yasunari (1899–1972) and Tanizaki Jun’ichiro¯ (1886–1965), whose quiet nostalgia for an earlier day had resulted in their being silenced during the war, returned to the forefront. (Their major works have had the attention of a group of gifted translators, and are mentioned here by the titles under which they have become known to Western readers.) Tanizaki’s Makioka Sisters, whose publication had been suppressed during the war, appeared to universal praise and quickly achieved the status of a modern classic. So too with Kawabata’s Snow Country (1948).<sup>29</sup> Both Tanizaki and Kawabata went on to explore problems of age and declining sexual powers in works that harked back to the sensualist school through which they had become known in prewar days. Personal experience of war figured importantly in the work of O<sup>¯</sup> oka Shohei (1909–1989), whose autobiography provides the setting for his fiction.<sup>30</sup> Dazai Osamu’s The Setting Sun (1947), written from the depths of postwar despair and moral degeneration, also won great popularity. Mishima Yukio (1925–1970) was a brilliant stylist who lost sight of the distinction between art and reality. He became disenchanted with the postwar ethos and sought to re-create the ultranationalist ideal in fiction and in life, organizing a small private army and idealizing the young officers of the 1936 revolution. In 1970, having finished a tetralogy he felt completed his work, he scripted a carefully staged but hopeless putsch at a Self-Defense Forces center before disemboweling himself with a seppuku he thought would rival that of General Nogi in 1912. The response was one of astonishment.<sup>31</sup> There was also a flood of writings by women, not a few who serialized in the new periodicals founded for women’s interests. Ariyoshi Sawako (1931– 1984) and others wrote of the hardships the old patriarchal society imposed on women. Women writers were nothing new, as seen in the enormously popular Meiji figure Yosano Akiko (to say nothing of the author of the Tale of Genji), but the new literary cohort wrote self-consciously as, and often, for, women, aware that they were creating a new genre. Mishima’s espousal of old-style nationalism was decidedly at odds with the views of the younger generation of writers and their readers. O<sup>¯</sup> e Kanzaburo¯ (b. 1935) sprang to fame in the 1950s as an active exponent of liberal and progressive causes facing his generation, and became known (as in A Personal Matter) for his depiction of an antihero whose frustration in society finds an outlet in aggressive sexuality. There was also a great deal of writing about the atomic bomb, although it could not be published for some years because of Occupation censorship. O<sup>¯</sup> e affiliated himself with this in his documentary Hiroshima Notes in 1965. The best known of this category is Ibuse Masuji’s Black Rain, which has been the basis of several films. Still other writers, many of them women, engaged contemporary social problems like the mercury pollution at Minamata in Kyushu. Japanese literature had been deeply influenced by Western literature and thought since the Meiji period, and that influence strengthened with the sensualist and modernist influence on writers like Tanizaki and Kawabata in prewar times. In postwar days, however, that influence in a sense became stronger once more, with frequent asides referring to Western thinkers and writers. What was new was the fact that, with the growth of interest in Japan, major works found quick and often successful outlets in translation. While still a fraction of the compulsive coverage of European and American writing available to Japanese readers in translation, this brought Japanese writers attention they had never received before. In 1968 Kawabata was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature, an honor previously extended to only one Asian writer (Tagore). It was known that Mishima longed (in vain) for that honor, but it came to his critic O<sup>¯</sup> e Kenzaburo¯ in 1994. Japanese literature seemed to be becoming a part of world literature. Japanese attached great importance to these recognitions of Japanese talent, as indications that the “nation of culture” was in fact at hand. On a different level, the selection of Tokyo as the site for the 1964 Olympics brought immense satisfaction. Another aspect of postwar Japanese culture was the remarkable flowering of new religions. Over 3,000 claim a total enrollment of between 30 and 40 million believers. Of these 15 are major forces, with millions of followers. So¯ka Gakkai (“value-creating organization”) alone claims 12 million adherents. It maintains a university and has spawned a political party. Several maintain international networks and accumulate immense wealth devoted to massive headquarter buildings (Reiyu¯kai) and impressive art museums (MOA, Miho). New religions are not an exclusively postwar phenomenon. Three important cults, Tenrikyo¯, Kurozumikyo¯, and Konkokyo¯, developed in late Tokugawa decades, each the product of the founder’s revelations after experiencing a severe illness.<sup>32</sup> They developed in prosperous agricultural areas of central and western Japan. Under state pressure they tended to accept Shinto mythology and formulations and gradually came to resemble Shinto sects, though their autonomy brought official displeasure and, in several cases, proscription. In the early twentieth century another group of new religions sprang up, including the powerful Reiyu¯kai and So¯ka Gakkai.<sup>33</sup> This time the origins were Buddhist, though a third, Seicho¯ no ie, was more syncretic and preached the unity of all religions. After Japan’s surrender, with State Shinto proscribed, a constitution that specified the freedom of religion, and institutional Buddhism disadvantaged by collaboration with the state and massive social change and disorientation, new religions, especially those that had been frowned on by the authorities, came into their own. Their doctrines, while varied, tend to coalesce around the search for harmony and emphasize the core values of Japanese rural civilization like loyalty and sincerity. As economic development resulted in the migration of millions of Japanese from the countryside to urban workplaces, the new religions came to provide a sense of stability and association for their believers. Belief in faith healing is also common. In general the new religions are nonpolitical and conservative; the major exception is the So¯ka Gakkai’s Ko¯meito¯ (Clean Government Party), which was established in 1964. Though it professed to reject traditional politics, by century’s end it was in a coalition government with the Liberal Democratic Party and represented in the cabinet. The new religions have developed extensive proselytizing programs and organized their followers into associations that provide meaning and belonging in Japan’s changing society. They appeal to a membership that is, by and large, cut off from the more usual sources of prestige and recognition in Japanese society. Followers tend to be found in small enterprises and shops rather than in large firms, and many are women; indeed, from the beginning many founders have been women. “The provision of such alternative prestige structures is unquestionably one of the main reasons for the appeal of the new religions to women, whose opportunities for advancement in secular society remain limited.”<sup>34</sup> In postwar Japan the sudden flood of new religions thus came as a response, both traditional and yet in its dimensions unexpected, to new provisions of religious freedom and new needs for social integration. Unfortunately the welter of new trends and religions did not always make for social cohesion. In 1995 Japan—and the world—suddenly became aware of a cult that called itself Aum Shinrikyo¯, phrases from Hindu esoteric practice, organized around a half-blind guru named Asahara who was credited with mystic powers. What astonished the nation was the realization that Asahara’s followers included intelligent young scientists and graduates who, disaffected by the requirements for success in Japan’s increasingly technological society, blindly followed the instructions of their seer to manufacture poisonous sarin gas and use it to produce death on Tokyo’s crowded subway system. The death of twelve victims and the illness of thousands more brought some to question the scrupulous respect police had shown for laws forbidding interference with organizations incorporated as religions. It was in film that postwar Japanese culture reached its greatest heights. The Japanese film industry had long been popular, but until the wartime insistence on themes of patriotism, patience, and valor its standard production had been focused on samurai battles in a national approximation of Hollywood westerns.<sup>35</sup> After the surrender SCAP officials frowned on such themes as militaristic, but with the lifting of Occupation controls in 1952 there was a remarkable outpouring of distinguished films by masterly directors whose work placed Japan at the forefront of world film. It is impossible here to do justice to the variety and quality of this work. Three directors—Mizoguchi Kenji, Ozu Yasujiro¯, and Kurosawa Akira— received international fame, but it is essential to point to the role of Kurosawa Akira (1920–1998). Kurosawa began as an artist, and throughout his life his careful sketches show his sense of the way composition could be used for dramatic effect. His first film, released in 1943, drew criticism for its failure to conform with the requirements of wartime mobilization—but it was immensely popular. In Kurosawa’s work there is a central theme of truth versus illusion. Whether set in the grim reality of postsurrender Tokyo or in Japan’s past, his films begin with the illusion and then, later, go on to explore the reality. Rashomon (1950), placed in medieval Japan and Kurosawa’s first film to win international acclaim, is the account of a rape and murder as seen by a bandit, the victim, her husband’s ghost, and an observer, with no clear identification of which account is correct. Clearly, each is correct to the one who has lived with his or her illusion. Kurosawa’s producer argued that the film could not succeed, but after it did he was so willing to claim credit for it that the director later wrote that he thought himself back in the film itself. Rashomon has added a word to the world’s vocabulary as a symbol of ambiguity and self-deception. Here and later Kurosawa worked with the actor Mifune Toshiro¯, whose stern visage and skillful movement are indelibly linked with viewers’ memories of the films. Kurosawa received the applause of Hollywood directors, who made versions of his Seven Samurai, Rashomon, and Yojimbo and adapted many other of his ideas and devices. He drew his material from a wide variety of sources— Western literature from Gorky to Shakespeare, Japanese folk tales, and Hollywood westerns. He was most active during the great age of Japanese cinema, making seventeen films between 1948 and 1965. On his death he was hailed by the New York Times, which devoted a full-page obituary to him, as a man who “personified Japanese movies to most of the world and who grew into one of the handful of truly important directors that the cinema has produced.” In retrospect the record of the Yoshida years gives force to his comment in that early cabinet meeting about losing a war but winning the peace. But that peace, in contrast to the war, was won without the conquest of an enemy. Japan and the United States had fought a war, the one losing, the other winning, but in the peace each gained an ally in the other.