# FURTHER READING Until the end of World War II serious study of the history of Japan was seldom undertaken in the Western world, and the few hardy pioneers who did so received little or no institutional support. The Pacific War, as the Japanese term it, changed that; governments and military authorities sponsored programs in Japanese language study, and after the war was over a number of products of such programs set about to develop Japanese history as a field of study and establish it as an academic discipline and regular field in schools of historical study. It requires little space to say what was available in English at the outset. The three volumes of History of Japan by James Murdoch, published in London by Kegan Paul, Trench Trubner and Co. in 1925, took the story through the Tokugawa period but concentrated its attention on “the Century of Early Foreign Intercourse (1542–1651),” its middle and best volume. This emphasis on Western contact foreshadows a great deal of writing by Westerners, and if accepted uncritically could lead to a distorted view, as though the arrivals of St. Francis Xavier, Commodore Perry, and General MacArthur constituted in each case the appearance of a deus ex machina, with supporting roles for Will Adams, Townsend Harris, and W. Edwards Deming—on which everything would hinge. Murdoch taught Latin and Greek in Japan, and had among his students Natsume So¯seki, who had difficulty in distinguishing between his Scotch brogue and Greek; he presented old-fashioned political history with old-fashioned judgments rendered pontifically and provided, as George Sansom later wrote, a view of Japan “as seen through spectacles made in Aberdeen about 1880.” What gave the work its value was the collaboration of Isoh Yamagata, whose diligence in scouring historical records Murdoch announced as his own. Very different in quality was George B. Sansom’s classic Japan: A Short Cultural History, published in London by the Cresset Press in 1932. Sansom, an English diplomat, was commercial attache´. Fluent in Japanese, he tapped Japanese secondary scholarship as well as providing his own insights into art and culture, a field of which Murdoch was totally ignorant, and produced a work of enduring value. It was a time, he once wrote me, when diplomats were not harassed by the close observation made possible by modern communications; he was seldom expected to appear at his office before noon, and indeed wrote much of the manuscript while floating in a sampan on Lake Chu¯zenji above Nikko. The unhurried elegance of his prose reflects those times. He too ended with the Tokugawa period, but said relatively little about the “foreign intercourse” that was Murdoch’s emphasis. In postwar years he was to teach at Columbia University and made good this lacuna in The Western World and Japan (New York: Knopf, 1951), a thoughtful study of the Westernization of the Meiji period, and, after his retirement, a three-volume History of Japan (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1958–1963), which he reined in at the end of the Tokugawa period. Postwar scholars had two other monuments against which to measure what they built. Ruth Benedict’s The Chrysanthemum and the Sword: Patterns of Japanese Culture (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1946) was the product of a study of Japanese national character undertaken in the United States’ Office of War Information to see whether Japan was likely to surrender or whether its leaders would force their countrymen into a final suicidal stand against superior American firepower. Benedict was an anthropologist and a student of Native Americans of the Southwest. She knew no Japanese—though some of her assistants did—but she did know how to look for patterns of culture that would provide clues to future action. Unable to consult contemporary Japanese, however, she studied Japanese Americans, pioneers of a flow that had been stopped in the early-twentieth-century restrictions on immigration, and inevitably called forth an old-fashioned, nineteenth-century ideal type. Much of postwar American social science, and not a little Japanese scholarship, would test and deepen the analysis of Benedict’s pioneering work. One more, and quite different, work was E. Herbert Norman’s Japan’s Emergence as a Modern State (New York: Institute of Pacific Relations, 1940), the work of a young Canadian diplomat born in Japan of missionary parents. The book’s subtitle, Political and Economic Problems of the Meiji Period, indicated that his focus was on the problems or flaws in Japan’s modern transformation that brought on Japanese militarism and expansionism. His work drew heavily on the secondary scholarship of Japanese Marxists who sought the “contradictions” in Japan’s structure during the early 1930s, and his skillful summary and pointed argument set the standard against which most postwar scholarship would measure itself. In the half century since then the scene has changed beyond recognition. Sansom and Norman remain important figures, but the scene is far richer and its products much more diverse. To begin with, Japanese scholarship, which Western specialists ignore at their peril, has been liberated from the cocoon of emperor-centered piety and Ministry of Education– imposed orthodoxy to pursue theory and facts wherever they may lead. In the first postwar decades that scholarship was produced in an intellectual climate that was overwhelmingly Marxist; most prewar writing was condemned as pusillanimous and political history replaced by “scientific” materialism that sought the roots of superstructures described by conventional history. Gradually that focus broadened and changed. Greater affluence brought freedom from the urgency to publish and permitted time for reflection and research, the socialist ideal waned with the travails of socialism overseas, and Japanese society and institutions, however imperfect, proved once more to have redeeming characteristics. Now the way was open for the production of magnificent reference works of quality and scope. Some had their origins in prewar projects, but economic disasters of war and defeat left some incomplete, while political conformity, as in an eleven-volume biographical dictionary in which all dates were calculated from the mythical accession to rule of the emperor Jimmu in 660 b.c., seriously compromised their utility. Today historians are blessed with a Dictionary of National History (Kokushi jiten), 15 massive volumes (Tokyo: Yoshikawa, 1973–1998), a model work enlisting the talents of hundreds of scholars, whose entries add references, complete with fine maps and charts. In the 1960s a “history boom” saw Japanese publishers produce multivolume national histories by leading academic historians who proved wonderfully skilled at readable and popular expositions of the state of their field. Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, to name only one of three houses, enlisted the services of major scholars to issue a twenty-eight-volume History of Japan that sold in such large numbers that a paperback series followed the cloth. One step farther came with a series of academic monographs; the great house of Iwanamai, which has been mentioned in these pages, produced three series of “Lectures on Japanese History” (Iwanami Ko¯za Nihon rekishi) that reflect every shift and facet of historical convention. English-language readers have also benefited from this age of compilation. Kodansha Publishers issued a nine-volume Encyclopedia of Japan in 1983 that was reduced in length to two packed volumes ten years later, in which most Western, and many Japanese, authorities contributed often extensive essays on virtually any topic the reader might want to investigate. Different in organization, but equally compelling in quality, is the Cambridge Encyclopedia of Japan (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), whose editors (Richard Bowring and Peter Kornicki) have assembled highly respected peers to provide chronological treatment under the headings of Geography, History, Literature, Religion, Society, and the like. Also valuable are three stout volumes published by Kodansha for the International Society for Cultural Information, Biographical Dictionary of Japanese History (Sei’ichi Iwao, ed., and Burton Watson, trans., 1978), Biographical Dictionary of Japanese Literature (Sen’ichi Hisamatsu, ed., 1976), and Biographical Dictionary of Japanese Art (Yutaka Tazawa, ed., 1981). Yet another sweeping survey is provided in the Cultural Atlas of Japan (Oxford: Phaidon, 1988), a lavishly illustrated book in which Martin Collcutt, Isao Kumakura, and Marius Jansen offer surveys of early, Tokugawa, and modern Japanese history and culture. Readers who want to examine particular aspects of Japan’s early modern and modern history may not find their needs fully satisfied by these works, but they will be ill-advised indeed if they neglect to consult and sample them. Most recently, a fresh survey of writings on Japanese history—by periods—that goes on to discuss developments in writings on history, art, religion, anthropology, law, and politics, each essay from the pen of a major figure, can be found in Helen Hardacre, ed., The Postwar Development of Japanese Studies in the United States (Leiden, Boston, and Cologne: Brill, 1998). For translations of primary sources one begins with an irreplaceable work edited by Ryusaku Tsunoda, Wm. Theodore de Bary, and Donald Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition (New York: Columbia University Press, 1958). This work, from which liberal use has been made in selections and quotations for this book, provides a rich sampling of excerpts from basic sources relating to thought, religion, and cultural history generally. At this writing it is in process of revision and augmentation for a two-volume edition. There is now an impressive library of translations from Japanese literature, for a generation of specialists have made it their first concern to introduce and annotate works of quality and importance. Two major research and publishing projects that required the collaborative efforts of a large number of scholars next require mention. The first is the product of the Conference on Modern Japan, an organization created within the Association for Asian Studies, attempting to bring together social science and comparative viewpoints for the consideration of Japan’s modern transformation. The products of this enterprise defined to a large extent the field of Japanese studies, and although their emphasis on modernization fell out of favor in the 1970s and 1980s the volumes remain important for concerns of intellectual history, political and economic development, and cultural and social change. Published by Princeton University Press, the titles in the series Studies in the Modernization of Japan are Changing Japanese Attitudes toward Modernization (Marius B. Jansen, ed., 1965), The State and Economic Enterprise in Japan (William W. Lockwood, ed., 1965), Aspects of Social Change in Modern Japan (R. P. Dore, ed., 1967), Political Development in Modern Japan (Robert E. Ward, ed., 1968), Tradition and Modernization in Japanese Culture (Donald H. Shively, ed., 1971), and Dilemmas of Growth in Prewar Japan ( James W. Morley, ed., 1971). The second of these collaborative enterprises spanned two decades and enlisted senior scholars in Japan and in the West to provide the most complete and authoritative survey of Japanese history ever undertaken in the West. The Cambridge History of Japan, 6 vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988–1999), effectively places the study of Japanese history on a new level, and readers of this volume will have noted my reliance on its monographic chapters at many points. In chronological order of coverage its volumes treat Ancient Japan (Delmer M. Brown, ed., 1993), Heian Japan (Donald H. Shively, ed., 1999), Medieval Japan (Kozo Yamamura, ed., 1990), Early Modern Japan (John W. Hall, ed., 1991), The Nineteenth Century (Marius B. Jansen, ed., 1989), and The Twentieth Century (Peter Duus, ed., 1988). The editors of the Cambridge History, which will hereafter be referred to as CHJ, felt it necessary to leave cultural history, especially that of art and literature, to other works, and instead concentrated their attention on political, institutional, economic, international, and social developments in Japanese history, but in those areas they have compiled a record whose scope and quality is not likely to be surpassed. If to these works one adds the quality of periodical coverage provided by the Journal of Japanese Studies (Seattle, University of Washington, 1974–present, hereafter JJS), Monumenta Nipponica (Tokyo, Sophia University, hereafter MN), the Journal of Asian Studies (Ann Arbor, Mich., Association for Asian Studies, hereafter JAS), and Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan (hereafter TASJ), one can follow the transformation of the field of Japanese history from its cloistered beginning as Japanology, a branch of Oriental Studies, to a robust present in which it is represented in every major institution of learning. ## Sengoku Unifiers and Tokugawa Establishment Conrad Totman, Early Modern Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), provides a work of erudition and scope that contributes to the understanding of every aspect of Tokugawa times. Asao Naohiro, “The Sixteenth Century Unification,” in CHJ, vol. 4, lays out the terrain. The age of the unifiers is treated with color and care by the essays brought together in Japan before Tokugawa, ed. John Whitney Hall, Nagahara Keiji, and Kozo Yamamura (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981), and Warlords, Artists, and Commoners, ed. George Elison and Bradwell L. Smith (Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii, 1981). Nobunaga has not yet been given close study in the West, but Hideyoshi has fared better. George Elison (who later writes under the name Jurges Elisonas) is the author of a splendid essay, “Hideyoshi the Bountiful Provider” in the volume just mentioned, and Mary Elizabeth Berry’s Hideyoshi (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982) provides a highly readable and richly documented account of that extraordinary man’s life. Adriana Boscaro gives a first-hand look in Letters of Hideyoshi: The Private Correspondence of Toyotomi Hideyoshi (Tokyo: Sophia University, 1975). Alternately boastful, greedy, generous, and lethal (as when he tells young Hideyori to have four men who have displeased him tied up and promises that “when I arrive I shall beat them to death; don’t let them free”—hardly Lord Chesterton’s tone with his son!), they provide an extraordinary feel for an exciting and violent age. Sengoku Japan, as seen by intrepid European travelers and missionaries, provides the background for the fascinating excerpts of contemporary correspondence assembled by Michael Cooper, S.J., in They Came to Japan: An Anthology of European Reports on Japan, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1965). The Tokugawa political order is discussed by Conrad Totman in Politics in the Tokugawa Bakufu, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967), who provides a convenient periodization of changes as personal rule gave way to the bureaucratic. It has not gone without criticism, implicitly in Harold Bolitho’s Treasures among Men: The Fudai Daimyo in Tokugawa Japan (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1974) and in review exchanges between the two. For many years the standard work on the Tokugawa system was that of Matsudaira Taro¯, Edo jidai seido no kenkyu¯ (Studies in the institutions of the Edo period) (Tokyo: Buke Seido Kenkyukai, 1919), but it has been overtaken by the exhaustive research with which Fujino Tamotsu, in Bakuhan taisei shi no kenkyu¯ (Studies in the bakuhan system), rev. ed. (Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan, 1975) and other works, catalogued and analyzed changes in tenure made by successive shoguns. The charts used above have their ultimate origin in Professor Fujino’s pages. The han represented the limits of political activity and consciousness for most samurai, however, and provides the best point of departure for the way national developments impinged on localities. Kanai Madoka’s Hansei (The han system) (Tokyo: Shibundo, 1962) lays out the structure with great clarity, and Harold Bolitho, in Chapter 6, “The han,” in CHJ, vol. 4, and in Treasures among Men, provides engrossing detail. The classic study of the interrelationships between national and regional trends, however, remains John W. Hall’s Government and Local Power in Japan, to : A Study Based on Bizen Province (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966). Early in his career Hall stumbled upon the records of Bizen (Okayama) Province, one of the few such repositories to survive natural and man-made disasters, and his fascination with their richness and bureaucratic routine never left him. He returned to them for several chapters in Studies in the Institutional History of Early Modern Japan, a collection of essays which he edited with Marius Jansen which was published by Princeton University Press in 1968. Hall’s study of the national through the local was one of a number of such efforts, albeit his was the most ambitious. Study of the institutions of Satsuma produced translations and commentary by Torao Haraguchi, Robert K. Sakai, Mitsugu Sakihara, Kazuko Yamada, and Masato Matsui in The Status System and Social Organization of Satsuma (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1975), in which Sakai’s long introduction provided splendid detail on that domain. Philip C. Brown, in Central Authority and Local Autonomy in the Formation of Early Modern Japan: The Case of Kaga Domain (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1993) extended this to the Japan Sea domain of Kanazawa, a locality already chronicled by James L. McClain in Kanazawa: A Seventeenth-Century Japanese Castle Town (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1982). Background chapters of several studies that approach the Meiji Restoration through the examination of regional dynamics, notably Albert M. Craig, Cho¯shu¯ in the Meiji Restoration (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1961), Marius B. Jansen, Sakamoto Ryo¯ma and the Meiji Restoration (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961) for the domain of Tosa, and James C. Baxter, The Meiji Unification through the Lens of Ishikawa Prefecture (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994), for Kanazawa, help fill out the story. Charles L. Yates’s Saigo¯ Takamori: The Man behind the Myth (London: Kegan Paul, 1996) begins with its subject’s Satsuma setting, though with much less detail than was true of the Princeton University dissertation from which it is drawn. Most recently Luke S. Roberts, in Mercantilism in a Japanese Domain: The Merchant Origins of Economic Nationalism in th-Century Tosa (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), has provided an authoritative and challenging thesis based on the domain of Tosa. ## The International Setting The arrival of the Portuguese at Tanegashima in the 1540s and the century of European activity that came to an end with the edicts of the 1640s has drawn the attention of many historians; it was an era when Westerners and Western products affected Japanese political developments, and Western sources provide unusual access to sixteenth-century Japan. Dictionaries compiled by missionaries have value for the study of the spoken vernacular of that day, as do the products of the Jesuit mission press in Nagasaki. James Murdoch began his History with the middle volume on the century of foreign intercourse, and while he was quite unsympathetic to the Catholic cause he made extensive use of its sources. Much better coverage, however, is provided by C. R. Boxer in The Christian Century in Japan, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1951), a book soundly based and richly flavored by first-hand accounts. The selection of Western, largely Iberian, reports on Japan arranged by topic of Michael Cooper, S.J., They Came to Japan: An Anthology of European Reports on Japan, – is a rich resource, as is the same author’s Rodrigues the Interpreter: An Early Jesuit in Japan and China (New York: Weatherhill, 1974), a work of intellectual and artistic elegance. In Deus Destroyed: The Image of Christianity in Early Modern Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1973), George Elison provides a splendidly documented account of the rise and extirpation of Christianity before proceeding to the translation of four pamphlets issued to refute missionary teachings, the first of which is by Fabian Fucan, an apostate Japanese Jesuit, and provides Elison’s title. The same author (now Jurgis Elisonas) examines the political effects of the mission movement in “Christianity and the Daimyo,” chapter 7 of CHJ, vol. 4. The participation of the English East India Company in early Tokugawa days is given magisterial coverage in Derek Massarella’s A World Elsewhere: Europe’s Encounter with Japan in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990). The Diary of Richard Cocks, the EIC’s principal agent in Japan from 1615 to 1622, was published in two volumes in Tokyo in 1899 and provides a first-hand account. Ronald Toby’s State and Diplomacy in Early Modern Japan: Asia in the Development of the Tokugawa Bakufu (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984) marked an important advance in interpreting the foreign relations of the early bakufu. He earlier signaled this in “Reopening the Question of sakoku: Diplomacy in the Legitimation of the Tokugawa Bakufu,” JJS (1977). Tokugawa relations with Korea have been illumined by the work of Tashiro Kazui of Keio University, “Foreign Relations during the Edo Period: Sakoku Reexamined” (JJS, 1982), and numerous works in Japanese, of which the central work is Kinsei Ni-Cho¯ tsu¯ko¯ bo¯ekishi no kenkyu¯ (Studies in trade and contact between Japan and Korea in the early modern period) (Tokyo: Sobunsha, 1981). Korean missions to Japan have been studied by Yi Won-sik, Cho¯sen tsu¯shinshi no kenkyu¯ (Kyoto: Shibunkaku Shuppan, 1997). The study of Tokugawa relations with China have been the life work of O<sup>¯</sup> ba Osamu, whose works follow the import of books (Edo jidai ni okeru To¯sen mochiwatarisho no kenkyu¯; Kyoto: Kansai Daigaku Shuppanbu, 1967), cultural contacts (Edo jidai ni okeru Chu¯goku bunka juyo¯ no kenkyu¯; Kyoto: Dohosha, 1984), and a delightfully anecdotal Edo jidai no Ni-Chu¯ hiwa (Secret tales of Edo period Sino-Japanese relations) (Tokyo: Toho Shoten, 1980). I have drawn frequently on his work in China in the Tokugawa World (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992). The Nagasaki system of trade receives impressive documentation in Robert Leroy Innes, “The Door Ajar: Japan’s Foreign Trade in the Seventeenth Century” (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan, 1980). The system has been the focus of numerous works by scholars in Japan, of which I have found Nakamura Tadashi, Kinsei Nagasaki bo¯ekishi no kenkyu¯ (Studies in Nagasaki trade in the early modern era) (Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan, 1988), particularly helpful. The Dutch contact is treated by Grant Goodman, Japan: The Dutch Experience (London: Athlone, 1986) and C. R. Boxer, Jan Compagnie in Japan: – (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1950), whose focus is, however, more on the Dutch influence than on the Dutch role. Mention should be made of a magnificent bilingual volume of illustrations of life at the Dutch station issued by the city of Nagasaki, Deshima: Its Pictorial Heritage (Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, 1987). In 2000 the Japan-Netherlands Institute issued identical volumes in Dutch, Japanese, and English edited by Leonard Blusse´, W. Remmelink, and Ivo Smits, Bridging the Divide: Years, the Netherlands–Japan (Tokyo: Hotei Pub.; Ede: Teleac/not). Kanai Madoka, Taigai ko¯sho¯shi no kenkyu¯ (Studies in foreign relations) (Yokohama: Yurindo, 1988), provides an abundance of data on Deshima missions to Edo. The daily reports kept by the Deshima chief factor and files in the Hague archives constitute a resource so vast that it has discouraged investigation by most scholars. In recent years, however, L. Blusse´ and W. G. J. Remmelink of Leiden University, working with the cooperation of the Japan-Netherlands Institute, have made available the marginal summaries that scribes provided to ease access to the archives, and these offer fascinating details of and insights into life at Deshima and on the journey to Edo (during which a parallel diary was kept by the second-in-command). To date there is one hardcover volume, Deshima Diaries: Marginalia, – , ed. Paul van der Velde and Rudolf Bachofner (Tokyo: Japan-Netherlands Institute, 1992), and a series entitled The Deshima Dagregisters: Their Original Tables of Contents in ten volumes beginning in 1680 and currently extending through vol. X, for the years – and edited by Cynthia Valle´ and L. Blusse´, which appeared in 1997. Mention must also be made of an engaging account of a Japanese woman stranded in Java by the shogunal decrees, L. Blusse´’s Strange Company: Chinese Settlers, Mestizo Women, and the Dutch in VOC Batavia (Dordrecht: Foris Publications, 1986). The classic account of life in Deshima and the chief factor’s trips to Edo remains The History of Japan by Engelbert Kaempfer in the English translation by J. C. Scheuchzer, first published in 1728 and republished in 1906 in three volumes in Scotland. The famous last chapter, “An Inquiry, whether it be conducive for the good of the Japanese Empire, to keep it shut up, as it now is, and not to suffer its inhabitants to have any commerce with foreign nations, either at home or abroad,” marked, as I mention in the text, the opening shot in the debate over sakoku (closed country) policy that has never quite ended. Kaempfer, surprisingly, thought it was for the best that things remain as they were, and he was also not greatly troubled by the persecution of Christians. Some explanation of this emerges in an interesting set of essays edited by Beatrice M. Bodart-Bailey and Derek Massarella, The Furthest Goal: Engelbert Kaempfer’s Encounter with Tokugawa Japan (London: Curzon, 1955), in which we learn that Kaempfer’s native Lemgo in Westphalia burned a record thirty-eight people as witches, one a clergyman uncle who had inveighed against the practice from his pulpit. Contributions trace the history of the manuscript, identify (through VOC archives) the young Japanese who was Kaempfer’s informant, and Kaempfer’s description of the Kyoto emperor. Beatrice Bodart-Bailey, author of several studies relating to Kaempfer, has made a modern and full translation: Kaempfer’s Japan: Tokugawa Culture Observed, ed., trans., and annot. Beatrice M. Bodart-Bailey (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 1999). ## Status A good place to begin is Daily Life in Traditional Japan by C. J. Dunn (London: B. T. Batsford, 1969), an engaging and attractively produced little book that discusses and presents illustrations depicting each of the four traditional status groups. David Howell’s forthcoming Geographics of Japanese Identity: Polity, Status, and Civilization in the Nineteenth Century is an important contribution; in this and other works its author includes discussion of Ainu identity, an issue not always treated. John W. Hall’s essay in the opening (1974) issue of JJS, “Rule by Status in Tokugawa Japan,” was an early reflection of the concern of Japanese scholarship with mibunsei. The outpouring of studies and discussion in Japan in recent years is suggested by the invaluable volume edited by Asao Naohiro, Mibun to kakushiki (Status and rank), vol. 7 in Nihon no kinsei ( Japan’s early modern) (Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, 1992), a collection of illuminating essays on aspects of the status system. The Japanese court is best treated in Herschel Webb’s The Imperial Institution in the Tokugawa Period (New York: Columbia University Press, 1968). Samurai ranks and divisions differed from domain to domain, and are invariably discussed in the prefectural and domain-centered studies listed above. For soundly based and discerning studies of the countryside and village life nothing surpasses, or indeed comes up to, Thomas C. Smith’s The Agrarian Origins of Modern Japan (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1959), supplemented by later essays on the seventeenth-century village and land tax reprinted in Hall and Jansen, Studies in the Institutional History of Early Modern Japan, and also in Smith’s Native Sources for Industrialization in Japan, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), a collection of ten articles, all of them important. Village demographics are treated in the same author’s Nagahara: Family Framing and Population in a Japanese Village, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1977). Demographics (usually based on the temple registers compiled to monitor Christianity) have been the special province of a group of economists led by Hayami Akira, long of Keio University, and while their work is reflected in every discussion of population and economic growth no single translation has yet emerged. The significance of population study for the consideration of larger problems of economic history can be seen in the excellent work by Susan B. Hanley and Kozo Yamamura, Economic and Demographic Change in Preindustrial Japan, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977). Urban developments will receive fuller attention below, but the study of Gary P. Leupp, Servants, Shophands, and Laborers in the Cities of Tokugawa Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992), marks a great advance in this area. ## Urbanization and Communications Gilbert Rozman, Urban Networks in Ch’ing China and Tokugawa Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973), provides a great deal of information about Edo in the course of his comparison of that city with Peking. John W. Hall, “The Castle Town and Japan’s Urban Modernization,” in Hall and Jansen, Studies in the Institutional History of Early Modern Japan, marked an important contribution, as did Rozman’s “Castle Towns in Transition,” in Rozman and Jansen, eds., Japan in Transition: From Tokugawa to Meiji (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986). Edo and Paris: Urban Life and the State in the Early Modern Era, a conference volume edited by James L. McClain, John M. Merriman, and Ugawa Kaoru (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1994), has a rich supply of essays on Edo governance and social organization. Henry D. Smith II, whose essay on comparing Edo publishing with that of Paris is in that volume, is also the author of “Edo and London: Comparative Conceptions of the City” in Albert M. Craig, ed., Japan: A Comparative View (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979). Jinnai Hidenobu, Tokyo: A Spatial Anthropology, trans. Kimiko Nishimura (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995), provides a fascinating “reading” of the modern city from its early modern perspective. As one would expect, the literature on Edo and castle towns in Japanese is enormous. Some feeling for its richness can be gained from Yoshida Nobuyuki, ed., Toshi no jidai (The era of cities), which is the seventh volume in the magisterial enterprise under the direction of Asao Naohiro, Nihon no kinsei (Japan’s early modern). The study of Tokugawa communications has been enriched by the work of Constantine Nomikos Vaporis, Breaking Barriers: Travel and the State in Early Modern Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994). Vaporis is also the author of several studies that center on communication between Tosa and Edo and has in preparation a study of the system of alternate attendance. The early work of Toshio G. Tsukahira, Feudal Control in Tokugawa Japan: The Sankin-ko¯tai System (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1966), remains the standard study. I have profited from, and quoted extensively, the account of the Dutch representative Dirk de Graeff van Polsbroek, Journaal – : Belevenissen van een Nederlands diplomaat om het negentiende eeuwse Japan (Assen/Maastricht: Vangorcum, 1987), whose journey from Nagasaki to Edo followed by a century and a half the famous account provided by Kaempfer in volume 3 of his History. ## Education and Literacy Since its appearance in 1965 R. P. Dore’s Education in Tokugawa Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press) has been the standard work and one against which others can be measured. Richard Rubinger’s Private Academies of Tokugawa Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982) adds important material on the many sorts of shijuku that existed throughout the land. A useful discussion of commoner schools that makes clear that they were less “parish” or “temple” centered than one would suppose can be found in Brian W. Platt, “School, Community and State in Nineteenth Century Japan” (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Illinois, 1998). Some interesting comparisons with educational developments in England are provided in Lawrence Stone and Marius B. Jansen, “Education and Modernization in Japan and England,” Comparative Studies in Society and History, 9, 2 (January 1967). For the development of publishing one should consult Henry D. Smith II’s comparison with developments in Paris in McClain, Merriman, and Ugawa ed., Edo and Paris, and Donald H. Shively’s discussion of popular culture in CHJ, vol. 4. Peter Kornicki, The Book in Japan: A Cultural History from the Beginnings to the Nineteenth Century (Leiden: Brill, 1998), traces the development of the book. ## Intellectual Concerns The selections and commentary in Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, furnish an admirable guide to Tokugawa thought, with particular strength on Confucianism and kokugaku. W. J. Boot, The Adoption and Adaptation of Neo-Confucianism in Japan: The Role of Fujiwara Seika and Hayashi Razan (Leiden, 1992), shows that Hayashi Razan was far less important than that individual would have had his readers believe. Early Tokugawa thought and ideology, with particular focus on Yamazaki Ansai, is treated in Herman Oom’s Tokugawa Ideology: Early Constructs, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985). Tetsuo Najita’s “History and Nature in Eighteenth Century Thought” in CHJ, vol. 4, is a good place to begin consideration of this voluminous literature. The same author’s Visions of Virtue in Tokugawa Japan (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987) and Japanese Thought in the Tokugawa Period, ed. with Irwin Schiner (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978), and other works too numerous to list here add important dimensions. Among individual Tokugawa scholars Ogyu¯ Sorai has probably attracted the most attention, for reasons that are apparent from his treatment in the text. A seminal study is that of Maruyama Masao, Nihon seiji shiso¯shi kenkyu¯ (1952), translated by Mikiso Hane as Studies in the Intellectual History of Tokugawa Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974). Sorai’s life is discussed by Olof Lidin in The Life of Ogyu¯ Sorai, a Tokugawa Confucian Philosopher, Scandinavian Institute of Asian Studies Monograph Series (Lund: Studentlitt., 1973). Translations of several works are available, but J. R. McEwan’s The Political Writings of Ogyu¯ Sorai (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962), with long excerpts from proposals Sorai offered to Yoshimune, is most useful for the social scientist. Arai Hakuseki is studied by Kate Wildman Nakai in Shogunal Politics: Arai Hakuseki and the Premises of Tokugawa Rule (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1988), and two major works have been translated by Joyce Ackroyd: Told Round a Brushwood Fire: The Autobiography of Arai Hakuseki (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979) and Lessons from History: Arai Hakuseki’s Tokushi Yoron (St. Lucia: University of Queensland Press, 1982). Other discussions and translations of individual scholars include Joseph John Spae’s Ito¯ Jinsai: A Philosopher, Educator, and Sinologist of the Tokugawa Period (Peking: Catholic University of Peking, 1948), Yoshikawa Ko¯jiro¯’s invaluable Jinsai, Sorai, Norinaga: Three Classical Philologists of Tokugawa Japan (Tokyo: To¯ho¯ Gakkai, 1983), and Mary Evelyn Tucker, Moral and Spiritual Cultivation in Japanese Confucianism: The Life and Thought of Kaibara Ekken ( – ). It will be seen that the literature is vast. An additional title that should be mentioned indicates more of its promise: Peter Nosco, ed., Confucianism and Tokugawa Culture (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984). The relationship between China-oriented Confucian scholars and their sense of nationality is also an important area of study. I have discussed aspects of this in China in the Tokugawa World (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992), and in intellectual history the terrain has been mapped by Kate Wildman Nakai, “The Naturalization of Confucianism in Tokugawa Japan: The Problem of Sinocentrism,” in Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 40 ( June 1980). A focus on intellectuals can, however, lead to the conclusion that Edo Japan was more “Confucian” than it was in fact. These cautions are well shown in Martin Collcutt’s “The Legacy of Confucianism in Japan,” in Gilbert Rozman, ed., The East Asian Region: Confucian Heritage and Its Modern Adaptation (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991). The Mito School, a synthesis of Confucian and nativist concerns, receives treatment in two studies of the nineteenth-century scholar Aizawa Seishisai, J. Victor Koschmann, The Mito Ideology (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987), and Bob T. Wakabayashi, Anti-Foreignism and Western Learning in Early Modern Japan: The New Theses of (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986). Kokugaku and early Shinto are more of a problem because of their amorphous nature. One of the few accessible studies of the great nativist scholars is that of Shigeru Matsumoto, Motoori Norinaga (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1970). Harry Harootunian, in Things Seen and Unseen: Discourse and Ideology in Tokugawa Nativism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), and, more accessibly, in “Late Tokugawa Culture and Thought,” in vol. 5 of CHJ, relates kokugaku to many aspects of commoner culture and belief. Kuroda Toshio, “Shinto in the History of Japanese Religion,” JJS, 7, 1 (1981), provides a splendid survey of the problem, and the early sections of Helen Hardacre’s Shinto and the State, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989) add further detail. The network of circuit preachers, oshi, who supported popular religions and above all the Ise shrine, is discussed by Takano Toshihiko in “Ido suru mibun: shinshoku to hyakusho¯ no aida” (The itinerant status: between priest and farmer) in Asao, Nihon no kinsei ( Japan’s early modern), vol. 7, Mibun to kakushiki. Pilgrimages are the subject of an article by Winston Davis, “Pilgrimage and World Renewal: A Study of Religion and Social Values in Japan,” republished in his Japanese Religion and Society: Paradigms of Structure and Change (Albany: State University of New York, 1992). For Dutch studies the pertinent references in “The International Setting,” above, apply, especially Goodman’s Japan: The Dutch Experience. I have surveyed some problems of interpretation in “Rangaku and Westernization,” Modern Asian Studies, 18, 4 (October 1984) and in Japan and Its World: Two Centuries of Change (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980). Donald Keene’s The Japanese Discovery of Europe (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1969) is an engaging discussion of the “Dutch” scholar Honda Toshiaki. One discussion of the impact on art is that of Timon Screech, The Western Scientific Gaze and Popular Imagery in Later Edo Japan (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996). Tadashi Yoshida, “The rangaku of Shizuki Tadao” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1974), gives an insight into the difficulties translators faced. Shizuki, it may be remembered, was also the translator whose rendering of Kaempfer’s “closed country” as sakoku left its mark on future histories. ## Crisis and Response The “consensus” view of Japanese society has problems dealing with the clear evidence of conflict. A good place to begin is Tetsuo Najita and Victor Koschmann, eds., Conflict in Modern Japanese History: The Neglected Tradition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982). For many years the only source in English on peasant protests was Hugh Borton, “Peasant Uprisings in Japan of the Tokugawa Period,” TASJ, 2nd ser., 16 (May 1938), a study based principally on the work of Kokusho¯ Iwao. In postwar years, especially in the 1970s and 1980s, there has been an outpouring of studies, and much of this literature on Tokugawa peasant protests is surveyed by Conrad Totman in “Tokugawa Peasants: Win, Lose, or Draw?”, MN 41, 4 (1986): 457–476. James W. White, Ikki: Social Conflict and Political Protest in Early Modern Japan (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1995) structures the field in impressive detail, classifying and analyzing the statistics compiled by Aoki Ko¯ji and other Japanese scholars. Anne Walthall has added to her Social Protest and Popular Culture in Eighteenth-Century Japan (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1986) a splendid anthology of peasant narratives in Peasant Uprisings in Japan: A Critical Anthology of Peasant Histories (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991). Stephen Vlastos, Peasant Protests and Uprisings in Tokugawa Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986), gives a skillful account and analysis of discontent in a sericulture region, and Herbert Bix, Peasant Protest in Japan, – (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986) maintains a consistent interpretation throughout a longer period of time. William W. Kelley, Deference and Defiance in Nineteenth-Century Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985) gives a splendid account of the campaign samurai and commoners in Sho¯nai waged to thwart bakufu plans to transfer their daimyo in the early nineteenth century. Selc¸uk Esenbel, Even the Gods Rebel: The Peasants of Takaino and the Nakano Uprising in Japan (Ann Arbor, Mich.: Association for Asian Studies, 1998) provides a fascinating study at the turn of the Tokugawa-Meiji change that tells a great deal about both the early modern and the modern state. And, while the literature in Japanese is too vast to attempt to summarize, mention should be made of an engaging study by Yokoyama Toshio, Hyakusho¯ ikki no gimin densho¯ (Peasant rebellion traditions of righteous martyrs) (Tokyo: Kyoikusha, 1977), that arranges, analyzes, and discusses such narratives. ## The Opening The literature surrounding issues raised by Japan’s encounter with the nineteenth-century West is so extensive that I can mention only the items I find most useful. On the American side the official account is contained in Francis Hawks, Narrative of the Expedition of an American Squadron to the China Seas and Japan, 2 vols., pub. by order of the government of the United States (Washington, D.C., 1856). Samuel Eliot Morison’s “Old Bruin”: Commodore Matthew Calbraith Perry (Boston: Little, Brown, 1967) gives a good account in his treatment of Perry’s biography, and Perry’s own account has been edited by Roger Pineau in The Japan Expedition of – : The Personal Journal of Commodore Matthew C. Perry (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1968). Peter Booth Wiley, in Yankees in the Land of the Gods: Commodore Perry and the Opening of Japan (New York: Viking, 1990), has worked with Japanese historians to round out the story. The matter of the white flags that Perry used as device to intimidate the Japanese is the subject of a recent study by Miwa Kimitada, Kakusareta Perii no “shirohata” (Perry’s hidden “white flags”) (Tokyo: Sophia University Press, 1999). It has long been noted that General MacArthur took many of his leads from reading about Perry, though he of course had no need for white flags. Townsend Harris’s role, and difficulties, were if anything greater. The Complete Journal of Townsend Harris, ed. Mario Cosenza (Rutland and Tokyo: Tuttle, 1959), is an essential account, but, since Harris was a difficult man, it is wise to add the account of his Dutch interpreter Henry Heusken, Japan Journal, – (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1964), and Oliver Statler’s Shimoda Story (New York: Random House, 1969). The Russian role has its classical treatment in George Alexander Lensen, The Russian Push toward Japan: Russo-Japanese Relations, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1959), and Russia’s Japan Expedition of – (Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 1955). John J. Stephan’s The Kuril Islands: Russo-Japanese Frontier in the Pacific (Oxford: Clarendon, 1974) focuses on the dispute over the Northern Islands, but gives an excellent summary of early relations. The northern approach is complicated by the very unusual pattern of Japanese control and expansion in Hokkaido. David Howell discusses this in Capitalism from Within: Economy, Society and the State in a Japanese Fishery (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995). Brett L. Walker, Marsumae Domain and the Conquest of Ainu Lands: Ecology and Commerce in Tokugawa Expansion (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999), is based on a 1997 University of Oregon dissertation. The British role is the subject of W. G. Beasley’s standard Great Britain and the Opening of Japan (London: Luzac, 1951), while the Dutch role is covered in the richly documented account by J. A. van der Chijs, Neerlands Streven tot Openstelling van Japan (Amsterdam: Frederik Muller, 1867). But of course it is the Japanese side of the story that is the most interesting and important. W. G. Beasley’s treatment in CHJ, vol. 5, provides a skillful summary, and it is especially his Select Documents on Japanese Foreign Policy, – (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1955) that is the standard source. A rich assortment of contemporary memorials and memoranda is introduced by an extensive discussion of issues and problems in a work that will not need to be done again. ## The Meiji Restoration Because the Restoration is the central event in Japan’s modern history an enormous amount of writing has been devoted to it, and it is not possible to do more than sketch the contours of the field. Volume 5 of CHJ, The Nineteenth Century, is a good place to begin, with particular attention to the contributions by Bolitho, Harootunian, Beasley, Hirakawa, and Jansen. W. G. Beasley’s The Meiji Restoration (Stanford University Press, 1972) is the standard survey. Problems of interpretation are the focus of George M. Wilson, Patriots and Redeemers in Japan: Motives in the Meiji Restoration (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992). An extremely important book is that of Conrad Totman, The Fall of the Tokugawa Bakufu, – (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1980). While other accounts tend to center on the future winners in Kyoto and Cho¯shu¯, Totman’s focus is on problems, actions, and actors of the Edo bakufu; his discussion of sources is also invaluable. H. D. Harootunian, Toward Restoration (University of California Press, 1970), provides a challenging and lively account of Restoration era men whose thought impelled their contemporaries to action. The first serious study of this in English was that of E. Herbert Norman, Japan’s Emergence as a Modern State, which relied on Japanese Marxist scholarship of the 1930s and provided a vivid and compelling account centered on social change in Cho¯shu¯. Albert M. Craig, Cho¯shu¯ in the Meiji Restoration (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1961), questioned the factual basis for Norman’s evaluation of “lower samurai,” but Thomas M. Huber, in The Revolutionary Origins of Modern Japan (University of Chicago Press, 1981), centered his attention on Yoshida Sho¯in and his disciples to emphasize the elements of social revolution. Satsuma politics have been less chronicled, probably because they lacked colorful turnovers. Robert K. Sakai’s “Shimazu Nariakira and the Emergence of National Leadership in Satsuma,” in Albert Craig and Donald Shively, eds., Personality in Japanese History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1970) and Charles L. Yates’s Saigo¯ Takamori: The Man behind the Myth indicate the riches of the terrain. I have taken the Tosa setting as background for my study Sakamoto Ryo¯ma and the Meiji Restoration (Princeton University Press, 1961). Saga still lacks a study in a Western language, though Franklyn Odo’s dissertation on the institutional structure of the Saga domain (Princeton University, 1975) provides a good structural study of that domain. While there has been an understandable preoccupation with domains that “moved” the Restoration, it is no less important to ask why other large and powerful domains did not take part, and James G. Baxter’s The Meiji Unification through the Lens of Ishikawa Prefecture does just that for Kaga, the largest non-Tokugawa domain of them all. As Westerners and Japanese came to know more about each other the impact of the opening and of travel became steadily larger. Haga To¯ru’s Taikun no shisetsu: Bakumatsu Nihonjin no seiyo¯ taiken (The shogun’s missions: the experience of late Tokugawa Japanese in the West) (Tokyo, 1968) provides a compelling account in remarkably brief compass. The famous Autobiography of Fukuzawa Yukichi is probably the best individual account by a Japanese traveler. In larger context, however, the most remarkable experience of the West was that gained by the Iwakura embassy, which included almost half of the top leadership of early Meiji Japan, and visited the United States and Europe in 1871– 1873. The embassy’s scribe was Kume Kunitake, and his account, a five volume Tokumei zenken taishi Bei-O<sup>¯</sup> kairan jikki (A true account of the observations of the ambassadors plenipotentiary of America and Europe), first published in 1878, is the subject of Marlene J. Mayo’s “The Western Education of Kume Kunitake,” MN, 38, 1 (1973). Since then interest in the embassy and in Kume’s account has grown steadily. Tanaka Akira and Takada Seiji have edited a splendid volume, [Bei-O<sup>¯</sup> kairan jikki] no gakusaiteki kenkyu¯ (International studies of the Bei-O<sup>¯</sup> Kairan jikki) (Sapporo: Hokkaido University Library, 1993), and we have adapted map 5, showing the route taken by the ambassadors, from this work. Plans for publication in English translation of the entire Kume account are far advanced. Among Western observers of mid-nineteenth-century Japan the account by Sir Ernest Satow, A Diplomat in Japan (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1921), is by far the richest, written by a man who was himself a participant in the years in which he served as Harry Parkes’s interpreter. And nongovernmental Westerners played their role, as can be seen in the revealing F. G. Notehelfer, ed., Japan through American Eyes (Princeton University Press, 1992), the journal of Francis Hall, an American freelance journalist and settler at Yokohama from 1859 to 1866. ## Meiji Japan It is well to begin at the end. Carol Gluck’s Japan’s Modern Myths: Ideology in the Late Meiji Period (Princeton University Press, 1985) gives a richly documented and carefully argued account of the construction of twentieth-century ideology. The turn to Meiji is treated from a number of angles in Marius B. Jansen and Gilbert N. Rozman, ed., Japan in Transition from Tokugawa to Meiji (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986). The political process that ended with unification is the subject of Michio Umegaki’s After the Restoration: The Beginning of Japan’s Modern State (New York: New York University Press, 1988). The first decade is also treated through the study of its leaders, notably the three-volume Diary of Kido Takayoshi, translated by Sidney D. Brown and Akiko Hirota, and published by the University of Tokyo Press between 1983 and 1986. Masakazu Iwata, O<sup>¯</sup> kubo Toshimichi: The Bismarck of Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1964), and Charles L. Yates’s Saigo¯ Takamori: The Man behind the Myth, cited earlier, complete biographical coverage of the three principal leaders of the first decade. The creation of the army is the subject of Roger F. Hackett’s Yamagata Aritomo in the Rise of Modern Japan, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971). A splendidly documented discussion of the evolution of the Imperial Precepts to Soldiers and Sailors is now at hand in Umetani Noboru, Gunjin chokuron seiritsushi: Tenno¯sei kokkakan no seiritsu (Tokyo: Seishi shuppan, 2000). Yoshitake Oka, in Five Political Leaders of Modern Japan, trans. Andrew Fraser and Patricia Murray (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1986), gives brief sketches of the lives and personalities of Ito¯, O<sup>¯</sup> kubo, Hara, Inukai, and Saionji. The “civilization and enlightenment” (bunmei kaika) movement cannot be treated without study of the life of Fukuzawa Yukichi. His autobiography, translated by Eiichi Kiyooka, is available in several editions, and his Outline of a Theory of Civilization, trans. David A. Dilworth and G. Cameron Hurst (Tokyo: Sophia University Press, 1973), can be supplemented by translations of other works, notably An Encouragement of Learning, trans. David A. Dilworth and Umeyo Hirano (Tokyo: Sophia University, 1969). Carmen Blacker’s The Japanese Enlightenment: A Study of the Writings of Fukuzawa Yukichi (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1964), and Albert M. Craig, “Fukuzawa Yukichi: The Philosophical Foundations of Meiji Nationalism,” in Robert E. Ward, ed., Political Development in Modern Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968), are essential studies of this thinker, and Albert Craig has in preparation a longer study. The “Meiji Six Society” of which Fukuzawa was the center can be followed in the translation by William R. Braisted, Meiroku Zasshi: Journal of the Japanese Enlightenment (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1976). Mori Arinori, who was an important member of this group, is the subject of Ivan Parker Hall, Mori Arinori (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1973), and Nishi Amane, another stalwart who went on to be a Meiji bureaucrat, is studied in Thomas R. H. Havens, Nishi Amane and Modern Japanese Thought (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1970). The problem of reconciling scientific history with the requirements of the state ideology was first brought home to me by Haga To¯ru’s discussion of Kume Kunitake in “Meiji shoki ichi chishikijin no seiyo¯ taiken” (An early Meiji intellectual’s experience of the West) in a set of essays published to honor Professor Shimada Keinji in 1961; more detail has been provided by Margaret Mehl, “Scholarship and Ideology in Conflict: The Kume Affair, 1892,” in Monumenta Nipponica, 48, 3 (Winter 1993). The larger issue received compelling treatment in John S. Brownlee, Japanese Historians and the National Myths, – : The Age of the Gods and Emperor Jimmu (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1997). The linkage between Ogyu¯ Sorai scholarship and the iconoclastic stance taken by Shigeno Yasutsugu toward national myths is discussed by Tao De-min, “The Influence of Sorai in Meiji Japan: Shigeno Yasutsugu as an Advocate of ‘Practical Sinology,’ ” in Nihon Kangaku shiso¯shi ronko¯ (Essays on the history of Japanese Sinology) (Suita City: Kansai Daigaku Shuppanbu, 1999), a volume of essays in Chinese, Japanese, and (in this case) English. Foreign advisers and Japanese overseas study are the subject of H. J. Jones, Live Machines: Hired Foreigners and Meiji Japan (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1980) and Ardath W. Burks, ed., The Modernizers: Overseas Students, Foreign Employees, and Meiji Japan (Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 1985). A study that focuses on the importance of foreign experience or training is Bernard S. Silberman, Ministers of Modernization: Elite Mobility in the Meiji Restoration, – (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1964). The path to success, immortalized in the slogan risshin shusse (be a success!), is well treated in Earl H. Kinmonth, The Self-Made Man in Meiji Japanese Thought: From Samurai to Salary Man (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981). Religion first received structured treatment in Kishimoto Hideo ed., Japanese Religion in the Meiji Era, trans. John Howes (Tokyo: O<sup>¯</sup> bunsha, 1956). James Edward Ketelaar, Of Heretics and Martyrs in Meiji Japan: Buddhism and Its Persecution (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990). The modern Protestant Christian movement can be followed at Kumamoto, one of its points of entry, in F. G. Notehelfer, American Samurai: Captain L. L. Janes and Japan, and Irwin Scheiner’s thoughtful Christian Converts and Social Protest in Meiji Japan (University of California Press, 1970). The only book-length treatment of the Sapporo disciples of Dr. Clark is John Howes, ed., Nitobe Inazo¯: Japan’s Bridge across the Pacific (Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 1995). Tokutomi Soho¯, one of the graduates of Janes’s Kumamoto academy, is the subject of John D. Pierson, Tokutomi Soho¯ ( – ): A Journalist for Modern Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980), and his most important Meiji book, The Future Japan, has been translated by Vinh Sinh (Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 1989), who is also the author of Tokutomi Soho¯ ( – ): The Later Career (Toronto: University of Toronto/York University Centre on Modern East Asia, 1986). Tokutomi also figures frequently in the important study by Kenneth B. Pyle, The New Generation in Meiji Japan: Problems of Cultural Identity, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1969). Meiji politics were one of the first areas of inquiry, and W. W. McLaren’s old A Political History of Japan during the Meiji Era, – (London: Allen and Unwin, 1916) is still useful, though less so than the long-standard work by Robert A. Scalapino, Democracy and the Party Movement in Prewar Japan: The Failure of the First Attempt (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1953). Nobutaka Ike, Beginnings of Political Democracy in Japan (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1960), is particularly useful for its consideration of Ueki Emori and Nakae Cho¯min, two Jiyu¯to¯ theorists. One can also examine the participation of nonsamurai in the 1880s, notably in Irokawa Daikichi’s The Culture of the Meiji Period, ed. M. B. Jansen (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), and Roger W. Bowen, Rebellion and Democracy in Meiji Japan: A Study of Commoners in the Popular Rights Movement (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980). It is, however, simplistic to see the Meiji Constitution as something “wrung from the hands of a reluctant oligarchy,” although its founders did indeed take great care to make sure that things would not get away from them. George M. Beckmann’s The Making of the Meiji Constitution (Lawrence: University of Kansas, 1957) is particularly useful for its attention to the initial drafts proposed by government leaders, and Joseph Pittau, S.J., Political Thought in Early Meiji Japan, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967) gives a careful account of the drafting of that document. Johannes Siems, S.J., Hermann Roesler and the Making of the Meiji Constitution (Tokyo: Sophia University, 1966), adds that important adviser’s commentaries. R. H. P. Mason Japan’s First General Election, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969) adds wonderful detail on how things actually worked. The inauguration and experience of government under the new charter is illumined by George Akita in Foundations of Constitutional Government in Modern Japan, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967), and the decade after 1900 is treated in Tetsuo Najita, Hara Kei in the Politics of Compromise, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967), who provides an illuminating picture of how things worked in the “mature” constitutional government of late Meiji years. The role and power of the Imperial Household Ministry are the subject of David A. Titus, Palace and Politics in Prewar Japan (Columbia University Press, 1974). The economic changes of the Meiji period are limned by Kazushi Ohkawa and Henry Rosovsky in “A Century of Japanese Economic Growth,” in Lockwood, The State and Economic Enterprise in Japan, and at greater length in the same two authors’ Japanese Economic Growth: Trend Acceleration in the Twentieth Century (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1973). Lockwood’s The Economic Development of Japan: Growth and Structural Change, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1955), however, stands as the study that opened the field of Japanese economic history, and remains important. Thomas C. Smith’s Political Change and Industrial Development in Japan: Government Enterprise, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1955) is essential for the question of zaibatsu origins, and William D. Wray’s Mitsubishi and the N.Y.K. Line, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1984) details the birth of the modern shipping giant. Johannes Hirschmeier, S.V.D., The Origins of Entrepreneurship in Meiji Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1964) is full of interest for its studies of individual businessmen. Byron K. Marshall, Capitalism and Nationalism in Prewar Japan: The Ideology of the Business Elite, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1967), helps one to understand the way profit and patriotism could be combined. The modern agricultural system is the subject of Thomas C. Smith’s classic The Agrarian Origins of Modern Japan (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1959), a book that, with the same author’s collection of essays in Native Sources of Japanese Industrialization, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), is must reading for any student of modern Japanese history. Richard J. Smethurst, in Agricultural Development and Tenancy Disputes in Japan, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986), discerns better living standards in the Meiji transition of peasants into farmers, though his critics reproach him with selecting a relatively favored area for examination. The tenancy situation and movement have been treated by Ann Waswo, Japanese Landlords: The Decline of a Rural Elite (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977), who takes the story into the 1930s. ## Diplomacy and War It is easy, but wrong, to overlook the formal diplomatic history approach of Sterling Tatsuji Takeuchi, War and Diplomacy in the Japanese Empire (New York: Doubleday, 1935), who gives concise and soundly documented accounts of matters from the revision of the unequal treaties to the Manchurian crisis, with careful exposition of the mechanisms provided by the Meiji constitutional order. Meiji foreign relations begin with the squabble over policy toward Korea, and that story, through its annexation in 1910, is treated in F. Hilary Conroy, The Japanese Seizure of Korea, – (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1960). More recently Peter Duus, The Abacus and the Sword: The Japanese Penetration of Korea, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995) provides more richly documented economic as well as political details, and becomes the best study of the annexation. Neither work, however, makes use of Korean sources. The Sino-Japanese War of 1894–95 is the subject of Morinosuke Kajima, The Diplomacy of Japan, – , vol. 1: Sino-Japanese War and Triple Intervention (Tokyo: Kajima Institute of International Peace, 1976); Foreign Minister Mutsu Munemitsu’s account of his stewardship, Kenkenroku: A Diplomatic Record of the Sino-Japanese War, – , trans. Gordon Mark Berger (Tokyo: Japan Foundation, 1982), is an essential supplement. The war is put in its social history context by Stewart Lone, Japan’s First Modern War: Army and Society in the Conflict with China, – (London: St. Martin’s Press, 1994). Ian Nish has put his stamp on the Russo-Japanese War. His Origins of the Russo-Japanese War (London: Longman, 1985) is the place to begin. His study of the alliance with Great Britain, The Anglo-Japanese Alliance: A Study of Two Island Empires, – (London: Athlone Press, 1966), lays the groundwork. Vol. 2 of the Kajima Institute’s Diplomacy of Japan, Anglo-Japanese Alliance and Russo-Japanese War (Tokyo: Kajima Institute of International Peace, 1978), contains useful documentation, though one is wise to move beyond it for interpretation. Shumpei Okamoto’s The Japanese Oligarchy and the Russo-Japanese War (New York: Columbia University Press, 1970) is unique for its coverage of the decision process and the Hibiya riots. ## Social Conditions, Radicalism, and Protest E. Patricia Tsurumi, Factory Girls: Women in the Thread Mills of Meiji Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990), is a balanced and careful study, but there is so far a dearth of books that concentrate on conditions in Japan’s cities and factories. There are, however, some collections and works that try to counter the “consensus” model of Japan’s as a cooperative, if not completely “familial,” society. Tetsuo Najita and J. Victor Koschmann, eds., Conflict in Japan: The Neglected Tradition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982) from a historical perspective, and Ellis S. Krauss, Thomas P. Rohlen, and Patricia G. Steinhoff, eds., Conflict in Japan (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1984), from a sociological and anthropological perspective, address this need. Mikiso Hane, Peasants, Rebels, and Outcasts: The Underside of Modern Japan (New York: Pantheon, 1982), and Reflections on the Way to the Gallows: Rebel Women in Prewar Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), comes close to positing a “two Japan,” or upper side and underside, alternative to “consensus.” Tanaka Sho¯zo¯, who devoted his life to a fight against the Ashio copper mine pollution (also treated, as noted, by F. G. Notehelfer in a symposium in JJS, 1, 2, 1975), is the subject of Kenneth Strong, Ox against the Storm: A Biography of Tanaka Sho¯zo¯, Japan’s Conservationist Pioneer ( – ) (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1977). The anarchist movement and the High Treason Trial are the subject of F. G. Notehelfer, Ko¯toku Shu¯sui: Portrait of a Japanese Radical (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971). There are a number of studies of the Japan Communist Party, among them Rodger Swearingen and Paul Langer, Red Flag in Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1952) and George M. Beckmann and Okubo Genji, The Japanese Communist Party, – (Stanford University Press, 1969). Hyman Kublin’s Asian Revolutionary: The Life of Sen Katayama (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1964), treats a communist who ended his days in Moscow. ## The s The Taisho¯ era has received surprisingly little attention, as historians have focused on the more tumultuous events that followed. A welcome step in making good this lack is a volume edited by Sharon A. Minichiello, Japan’s Competing Modernities: Issues in Culture and Democracy, – (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1998). Thomas Rimer, ed., Culture and Identity: Japanese Intellectuals during the Interwar Years (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990) provides compelling pen portraits of aspects of Taisho¯ culture. The politics of the interwar years are the subject of Peter Duus, Party Rivalry and Political Change in Taisho¯ Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1968). Japan in Crisis: Essays on Taisho¯ Democracy, ed. Bernard S. Silberman and H. D. Harootunian (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974), has a fine set of essays dealing with the ambiguities of the interwar period. A particularly challenging interpretation is that of Andrew Gordon, Imperial Democracy in Prewar Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991). There are interesting studies of political figures. The short life of O<sup>¯</sup> sugi Sakae is treated by Thomas A. Stanley in O<sup>¯</sup> sugi Sakae: Anarchist in Taisho¯ Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982), and Byron K. Marshall has translated The Autobiography of O<sup>¯</sup> sugi Sakae (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992). Sharon M. Minichiello’s Retreat from Reform: Patterns of Political Behavior in Interwar Japan (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1984) takes up the case of Nagai Ryu¯taro¯ (1881–1944). Intellectual and cultural life of the period receives increasing attention. Tatsuo Arima, The Failure of Freedom: A Portrait of Modern Japanese Intellectuals (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969), discusses a fascinating group of writers. The Special Higher School ethos is the subject of Donald Roden’s splendid Schooldays in Imperial Japan: A Study in the Culture of a Student Elite (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980). Henry DeWitt Smith II, Japan’s First Student Radicals (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972), published during the stormy days of postwar student radicalism, takes the Special Higher School students on to Tokyo Imperial University and Yoshino Sakuzo¯’s Shinjinkai (New Man Society). The government’s concern with university radicalism is treated in Byron K. Marshall’s Academic Freedom and the Japanese Imperial University, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992). An extremely useful dimension of cultural life is to be found in Gregory J. Kasza, The State and the Mass Media in Japan, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988). Popular culture of the era is also beginning to receive its due, as in Jennifer Robertson, Takarazuka: Sexual Politics and Popular Culture in Modern Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), and Gennifer Weisenfeld, “Maruyama, MAVO, and Modernity: Constructions of the Modern in Taisho¯ Japan Avant-garde Art” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1987). Interwar political relations with China have drawn much attention, but the dimensions of cultural relations are only now coming into focus. There is a large Japanese literature, and the studies of student exchanges by Saneto¯ Keishu¯ are discussed in my Japan and China from War to Peace, – (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1975). Joshua Fogel has made this area his own. Mention should be made of The Literature of Travel in the Japanese Rediscovery of China, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1996), Nakae Ushikichi in China (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989), and Life along the South Manchurian Railway: The Memoirs of Ito¯ Takeo (Armonk, N.Y.: Sharpe, 1988). In Japanese foreign policy the work of Akira Iriye takes first place. His After Imperialism: The Search for a New Order in the Far East, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1965) took up the Soviet, Japanese, and Chinese responses to the Washington Conference order, and three books examined aspects of Japanese-American relations: Across the Pacific: An Inner History of American-East Asian Relations (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1967), Pacific Estrangement: Japanese and American Expansion, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972), and Power and Culture: The Japanese-American War, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981). The same author’s The Origins of the Second World War in Asia and the Pacific (New York: Longman, 1987), gives a skillful and soundly based summary. Ernest R. May and James C. Thomson, Jr., have edited a set of essays that follow the full course of the exchange in American–East Asian Relations: A Survey (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972), which give some idea of the complexity of the field and the immense quantity of material available. The field of Japanese colonialism has expanded manyfold thanks to the contents of three conference volumes: The Japanese Colonial Empire, – , ed. Ramon H. Myers and Mark R. Peattie; The Japanese Informal Empire in China, – , ed. Peter Duus, Ramon H. Myers, and Mark R. Peattie; and The Japanese Wartime Empire, – , ed. Peter Duus, Ramon H. Myers and Mark R. Peattie, all from Princeton University Press, 1984, 1989, and 1996. To these must be added Louise Young, Japan’s Total Empire: Manchuria and the Culture of Wartime Imperialism (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998). ## The s As one enters the 1930s the amount of reading available increases dramatically, and it is possible to offer only a few guideposts. The last holdover of the old Meiji elite was Saionji Kinmochi, who is the subject of Lesley Connors, The Emperor’s Adviser: Saionji Kinmochi and Pre-war Japanese Politics (London: Croom Helm, 1987). His secretary, Harada Kumao, kept a careful diary during the 1930s that has been the source for much political coverage. The first volume has been translated by Thomas Francis Mayer-Oakes as Fragile Victory: Prince Saionji and the London Treaty Issue (New York: Weatherhill, 1968), a handsome volume that gets surprisingly little attention. Oka Yoshitake’s biography of Konoe, translated by Shumpei Okamoto and Patricia Murray as Konoe Fumimaro: A Political Biography (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1983), leaves many questions about that enigmatic aristocrat. Gordon Berger, Parties out of Power in Japan, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977) is essential for its coverage of the parties during the 1930s and the development of the Imperial Rule Assistance Association. Ben-Ami Shillony, Politics and Culture in Wartime Japan (Oxford: Clarendon, 1981), follows politics to the surrender. The factional struggles in the Imperial Army lie behind each of the “incidents,” and are well treated in James B. Crowley, “Japanese Army Factionalism in the Early 1930s,” JAS, 21, 3 (May 1962). The classic treatment of the February 1936 revolt is that of Ben-Ami Shillony, Revolt in Japan: The Young Officers and the February Incident (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973). There are many accounts of right-wing organizations and terrorism. A highly readable one is by Richard Storry, The Double Patriots: A Study of Japanese Nationalism (London: Chatto and Windus, 1957). More structured and carefully documented is the Marxist account by O. Tanin and E. Yohan, Militarism and Fascism in Japan (New York: International Publishers, 1934), two scholars who fell victim to Stalin’s purges. Civilian nationalists were no less important. George M. Wilson, Radical Nationalist in Japan: Kita Ikki, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969), treats a man involved in (and executed for) the 1936 revolt, and Thomas R. H. Havens, Farm and Nation in Modern Japan: Agrarian Nationalism, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974), studies Gondo Seikyo¯ and Tachibana Ko¯zaburo¯, two men whose writings and ideas had explosive consequences. ## From the Manchurian Incident to the Surrender The literature here is vast, but also repetitious, so these notes remain brief. Sadako N. Ogata, Defiance in Manchuria: The Making of Japanese Foreign Policy, – (University of California, 1964), an early work by a scholar who has gone on to become a distinguished United Nations official, remains probably the best account. Ian Nish, Japan’s Struggle with Internationalism: Japan, China, and the League of Nations, – (London: Kegan Paul, 1993) provides a carefully argued account of the response to the Lytton Commission. The matter looked quite different to defense specialists, and James B. Crowley, Japan’s Quest for Autonomy: National Security and Foreign Policy, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966), remains one of the best accounts of matters as Japanese military leaders saw them. Robert J. C. Butow’s Tojo and the Coming of the War (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961) bridges the career of an army bureaucrat with the Washington negotiations and war decisions, with explicit normative judgments. The same author’s The John Doe Associates: Backdoor Diplomacy for Peace, (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1974) details for the first time the strange and ultimately unhelpful efforts of well-meaning meddlers to help the Washington negotiations along. They failed, unfortunately, and Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1962) is a brilliant account that helps explain the many things that went wrong on Hawaii in December 1941. Dorothy Borg and Shumpei Okamoto have edited a splendid set of papers that take up in tandem the setting in comparable bureaus, agencies, and ministries in Japan and the United States in Pearl Harbor as History: Japanese-American Relations, – (New York: Columbia University Press, 1973). And for a close study of the immediate prelude to and unfolding of that fateful day, with particular attention to the Japanese planning and execution, Gordon W. Prange, At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981) remains a classic account. Japan’s path to war can best be studied in the selected translations by many specialists from the massive Japanese set Taiheiyo¯ senso¯ e no michi, published in five volumes, all from Columbia University Press, and edited by James William Morley. In sequence of the material covered they are Deterrent Diplomacy: Japan, Germany, and the U.S.S.R., – (1976), Japan Erupts: The London Naval Conference and the Manchurian Incident, – (1984), The China Quagmire: Japan’s Expansion on the Asian Continent, – (1983), The Fateful Choice: Japan’s Advance into Southeast Asia, – (1980), and The Final Confrontation: Japan’s Negotiations with the United States (1984). Finally, Nobutaka Ike’s translation of the minutes of the key conferences that were held in connection with the decision for war with the United States, Japan’s Decision for War: Records of the Policy Conferences (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1967), is a priceless resource. Life in Japan during the war is discussed by the French reporter Robert Guillain, who was there, in Le Peuple japonaise et la guerre (Paris: Julliard, 1947), a book hard to find and seldom cited. Thomas R. H. Havens, Valley of Darkness: The Japanese People and World War Two (New York: Norton, 1978), has used it and many other Japanese sources, and the diary of Kiyosawa Kiyoshi, Diary of Darkness: The Wartime Diary of Kiyosawa Kiyoshi (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999) gives a gripping and depressing account of years that seem well named. There are two invaluable collections of memories of the war. Frank Gibney, ed., and Beth Cary, trans., provide some of the thousands of letters that were sent to the editor of the Asahi Shinbun in 1986 and 1987 telling about war experiences, some in military and others in civilian life, in Senso¯: The Japanese Remember the Pacific War (Armonk, N.Y.: Sharpe, 1995). Somewhat similar is a splendid collection of memories dredged out in interviews by Haruko Taya Cook and Theodore F. Cook, Japan at War: An Oral History (New York: New Press, 1992). These materials give the reader entry into the minds of survivors of the war; the memories from victims and victimizers, shamed and shameless, explain why so many Japanese found it best to try to forget and move on. The shattering events that ended the war—atomic bombs, huge casualty lists, imperial conferences and the emperor’s decision, abortive revolt and ultimate acquiescence—have produced more titles than can be suggested here. The work of Robert J. C. Butow, Japan’s Decision to Surrender (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1954), remains the standard account. There is a highly readable account by the Pacific War Research Society, Japan’s Longest Day (Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1968) in which the emperor emerges as hero. The discovery of a “monologue” Hirohito prepared for possible use in the event he was questioned by the International Military Tribunal, however, permits other readings, some of them suggested by Herbert P. Bix, “The Showa Emperor’s ‘Monologue’ and the Problem of War Responsibility,” JJS 18, 2 (Summer 1992), and especially Bix, “Hiroshima in History and Memory: Japan’s Delayed Surrender—a Reinterpretation,” Diplomatic History, 19, 2 (Spring 1966): 197–235. The “Monologue” is also utilized by Bob T. Wakabayashi, “Emperor Hirohito on Localized Aggression in China,” Sino-Japanese Studies, 4, 1 (October 1991): 4–27. An overall biography of Hirohito is the work of Stephen S. Large, Emperor Hirohito and Sho¯wa Japan (London: Routledge, 1992). ## The Yoshida and MacArthur Years There is of course an abundance of material dealing with the Allied Occupation of Japan. Notes to the text identify some of the sources available on early steps taken for the demolition of the old order. Particular interest attaches to the Tokyo Tribunal for the Far East, Japan’s equivalent of the Nuremberg tribunal. Richard H. Minear has written a particularly sharp attack on its procedures in Victor’s Justice: The Tokyo War Crimes Trial (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971). It is interesting to note, however, that there has been relatively little critical writing about the trial in Japan, perhaps because progressive historians want no part of the prewar establishment and its policy, although there has been at least one major film effort at revisionism. An interesting study by Kazuko Tsurumi, Social Change and the Individual: Japan before and after Defeat in World War II (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1970), concludes that the tribunal and other trials brought little change. The official history prepared by General Courtney Whitney’s Government Section, Political Reorientation of Japan: September to September , issued by the Government Printing Office in two massive volumes in 1948, contains an uncritical summary and, in its larger volume, an essential collection of documents. There are of course memoirs by MacArthur himself and his aides, Whitney among them. A good guide through this forest is the lucid account by Richard B. Finn, Winners in Peace: MacArthur, Yoshida, and Postwar Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992). The Yoshida side of the story is contained in The Yoshida Memoirs (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962), a translation in Churchillian prose by his son from a slightly longer and often more acerbic original. John W. Dower’s Empire and Aftermath: Yoshida Shigeru and the Japanese Experience, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979), consistently critical of Yoshida and the overall Occupation turn away from reform, is carefully based on the right sources. But the story of the Occupation goes far beyond MacArthur’s staff in SCAP and Yoshida’s mobilization of former diplomats and politicians, and it has now received highly praised treatment in John W. Dower’s Embracing Defeat: Japan in the Wake of World War II (New York: Norton, 1999), an impressive survey I wish we had had earlier. Dower is concerned with ordinary people in extraordinary days of defeat and determination. He views retention of the throne as foreshadowing the turn from reform to reconstruction, and captures the mood of postwar years with skill. When one knows how the story came out, more or less, it is particularly interesting to see how it looked to those who wrote before they could have known. Japan’s Economy in War and Reconstruction by Jerome B. Cohen (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, Institute of Pacific Relations, 1949), with a foreword by George B. Sansom, regrets abandonment of early and more draconian plans but has wonderful detail on Japan’s wartime fumbling. Eleanor M. Hadley, who was involved in the implementation of the Occupation, describes the abandonment of plans for economic deconcentration in Anti-Trust in Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1970). Edwin O. Reischauer’s The United States and Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1950) was probably the more authoritative and balanced account in its successive revisions for twenty years. The land reform received classic treatment in R. P. Dore, Land Reform in Japan (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959). Labor reforms, implemented by SCAP and recounted by Theodore Cohen in Remaking Japan: The American Occupation as New Deal (New York: Free Press, 1987), edited by Herbert Passin, conveys some of the zest reformist SCAP officials took in their work; that the final product was to an important extent an outcome prepared by Japanese officials, however, is clear from Sheldon Garon’s scholarly The State and Labor in Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987). Probably the single most important contribution to postwar Japan is a splendid set of essays edited by Andrew Gordon, Postwar Japan as History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), a set of sixteen essays that range over many aspects of Japanese society. The death of Emperor Hirohito in 1989 brought many evaluations of an era and life that had spanned the twentieth century, and Carol Gluck edited a set of essays by Japanese and American commentators that appeared as a special issue of Daedalus (American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Summer 1990), entitled Showa: The Japan of Hirohito, that was subsequently published separately. It was inevitable that Japan’s economic resurgence should bring with it a flood of studies and commentaries on its significance for other industrializing and industrialized societies. Management and labor arrangements brought studies that began with James Abegglen’s The Japanese Factory: Aspects of Its Social Organization (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1958), which viewed the permanent employment system as a residue of traditional Japanese social practices. Further research, notably R. P. Dore’s British Factory—Japanese Factory: The Origins of National Diversity in Industrial Relations (London: Allen & Unwin, 1973), showed this was in no sense a product of tradition or continuity, and soon Garon’s State and Labor and especially Andrew Gordon’s magisterial The Evolution of Labor Relations in Japan: Heavy Industry, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Council on East Asian Studies, Harvard University, 1985), showed that the system, while it resonated with Japanese perceptions of social justice and mutuality, came into existence during the labor shortages immediately prior to World War II. Next scholars began to ask about the relations between the state and private enterprise in Japan. William W. Lockwood, ed., The State and Economic Enterprise in Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965), one of the Modernization series volumes, strove for a balanced assessment in these matters, but as Japan’s economy grew and seemed to threaten the predominance of the United States positions became stronger and the perception of “Japanese capitalism” as structurally different was heard more often. A major contribution to this discussion was Chalmers Johnson’s MITI and the Japanese Miracle: The Growth of Industrial Policy, – (Stanford University Press, 1982), which distinguished between the “regulatory state” of the United States and other industrial democracies and the “developmental state” best exemplified by Japan but mirrored by other latecomers whose governments worked actively to discipline, direct, fund, and ultimately promote heavy and export industries. Other scholars have refined this by emphasizing the function of the market and internal politics. Bai Gao, Economic Ideology and Japanese Industrial Policy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), Daniel I. Okimoto, Between MITI and the Market (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1988), and Kent Calder, Crisis and Compensation (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1988) make important contributions. All in all, one can conclude, Japanese economics history, a field in which William W. Lockwood’s The Economic Development of Japan: Growth and Structural Change stood almost alone when it was published by Princeton University Press in 1955, has experienced a growth as robust as that of Japan itself. For years the issues seemed so pressing that journalists and other pundits took up the cry, notably Karel van Wolferen, The Enigma of Japanese Power: People and Politics in a Stateless Nation (New York: Knopf, 1989); the “enigma” lay in the author’s inability to identify a central, “state” spider in the web of Japanese interrelationships. Many others, for example Patrick Smith, Japan: A Reinterpretation (New York: Vintage, 1997) leaped aboard this vehicle, determined to denounce as somehow subversive figures like Edwin Reischauer who had argued the long-range convergence of Japan and the West. Meanwhile a group of scholars organized by Murakami Yasusuke and Hugh T. Patrick rethought the paradigms of the “modernization” school of the 1960s in a series of conferences that produced three fine volumes on the Political Economy of Japan published by Stanford University Press: The Domestic Transformation, edited by Kozo Yamamura and Yasukichi Yasuba (1987), The Changing International Context, edited by Takeshi Inoguchi and Daniel I. Okimoto (1988), and Cultural and Social Dynamics, edited by Shumpei Kumon and Henry Rosovsky, (1992). The 1990s, during which the Japanese economy experienced its first postwar and longest slump, were remarkably free of this controversy. Japan no longer seemed as remarkable to its neighbors or as threatening to its competitors. Nevertheless it would be as great a mistake to dismiss the dormant giant of the 1990s as it was to accept the demonic interpretations of the 1980s.