# NOTES Excerpts from Sources of Japanese Tradition (1958), comp. Ryusaku Tsunoda, Wm. Theodore de Bary, and Donald Keene, and Society and Education in Japan (Columbia Teachers College, 1965), trans. Herbert Passin, are republished with permission of Columbia University Press, 562 W. 113th St., New York, N.Y. 10025. Reproduced by permission of the publisher via Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. ## . Sekigahara 1. George Elison, “Introduction,” in George Elison and Baldwell L. Smith, eds., Warlords, Artists, and Commoners: Japan in the Sixteenth Century (Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii, 1981), pp. 1ff. 2. Jurgis Elisonas, “The Inseparable Trinity: Japan’s Relations with China and Korea,” in Cambridge History of Japan [hereafter CHJ ], vol. 4: Early Modern Japan, ed. John Whitney Hall (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), p. 255. 3. Jurgis Elisonas, “Christianity and the Daimyo,” in CHJ, 4:303. 4. Teppo¯-ki, in Ryusaku Tsunoda, Wm. Theodore de Bary, and Donald Keene, comps., Sources of Japanese Tradition (New York: Columbia University Press, 1958), pp. 319– 320. 5. Asao Naohiro with Marius B. Jansen, “Shogun and Tenno¯,” in John Whitney Hall, Nagahara Keiji, and Kozo Yamamura, eds., Japan before Tokugawa: Political Consolidation and Economic Growth, (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981), p. 249. 6. Nagahara Keiji with Kozo Yamamura, “The Sengoku Daimyo and the Kandaka System,” in Hall, Nagahara, and Yamamura, Japan before Tokugawa, p. 50. 7. One finds these claims repeated in the nineteenth century as the moral standing of samurai rule weakened. In the province of Tosa, on the island of Shikoku, a league of village leaders secretly distributed criticism of samurai rule that argued “we were once commissioned directly by the Imperial Court . . . should we not say that village heads, the head of the commoners, are superior to the retainers who are the hands or feet of the nobles?” Marius B. Jansen, “Tosa during the Last Century of Tokugawa Rule,” in John Whitney Hall and Marius B. Jansen, eds., Studies in the Institutional History of Early Modern Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968), p. 341. 8. Asao with Jansen, “Shogun and Tenno¯,” pp. 252–253. 9. George Sansom, A History of Japan, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1981), p. 310. 10. Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 315–316. 11. Fujiki Hisashi with George Elison, “The Political Posture of Oda Nobunaga,” in Hall, Nagahara, and Yamamura, Japan before Tokugawa, pp. 155–173. 12. Asao with Jansen, “Shogun and Tenno¯,” p. 255. 13. Michael Cooper, S.J., They Came to Japan: An Anthology of European Reports on Japan, (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1965), pp. 93–95. 14. Ibid., pp. 134–135. 15. James Murdoch, A History of Japan, vol. 2 (London: Kegan, Trench, Trubner, 1925), p. 386. 16. Mary Elizabeth Berry, Hideyoshi (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982), is the best biography. See also John Whitney Hall, “Hideyoshi’s Domestic Policies,” and Elison, “Hideyoshi, the Bountiful Minister,” both in Hall, Nagahara, and Yamamura, Japan before Tokugawa. 17. Quoted from a contemporary translation in Berry, Hideyoshi, p. 219. 18. Yoshio Kuno, Japanese Expansion on the Asiatic Continent (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1937), 1:311–312. 19. John W. Hall, Government and Local Power in Japan, to : A Study Based on Bizen Province (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966), p. 288. 20. Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, p. 330. 21. Marius B. Jansen, “Tosa in the Sixteenth Century,” in Hall and Jansen, Studies in the Institutional History, and Hall, “Hideyoshi’s Domestic Policies.” 22. Philip C. Brown, Central Authority and Local Autonomy in the Formation of Modern Japan: The Case of Kaga Domain (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1993), pp. 76–84. 23. Berry, Hideyoshi, p. 105. 24. Quoted in C. R. Boxer, The Christian Century in Japan, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1951), pp. 54–55. ## . The Tokugawa State 1. Lee Butler, “Tokugawa Ieyasu’s Regulations for the Court: A Reappraisal,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 54, 2 (1994): 451–509, provides the best study of this document. 2. Hall, Government and Local Power in Japan, pp. 6–7. 3. Thomas C. Smith, “The Japanese Village in the Seventeenth Century,” in Hall and Jansen, Studies in Institutional History, pp. 263–282. 4. Albert M. Craig, Cho¯shu¯ in the Meiji Restoration (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1961), p. 22. 5. William Coaldrake, Architecture and Authority in Japan (London: Routledge, 1996). 6. Bob T. Wakabayashi, “In Name Only: Imperial Sovereignty in Early Modern Japan,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 17, 1 (1991): 41. 7. John W. Hall, “The bakuhan System,” in CHJ, 4:152. 8. Ka¨ren Wigen, The Making of a Japanese Periphery (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995). 9. Quoted in George M. Wilson, “Hashimoto Sanai in the Political Crisis of 1858,” in Albert M. Craig and Donald H. Shively, eds., Personality in Japanese History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1970), p. 260. 10. Conrad Totman, Politics in the Tokugawa Bakufu, (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967), pp. 213ff. 11. Donald H. Shively, “Tokugawa Tsunayoshi, the Genroku Shogun,” in Craig and Shively, Personality in Japanese History, pp. 85–126. 12. Beatrice Bodart-Bailey, “The Laws of Compassion,” Monumenta Nipponica, 40, 2 (Summer 1985): 163–189. 13. Hall, “The bakuhan System,” in CHJ, 4:166–167, and Totman, Politics in the Tokugawa Bakufu, pp. 270–277. 14. Thomas C. Smith, “ ‘Merit’ as Ideology in the Tokugawa Period,” in R. P. Dore, ed., Aspects of Social Change in Modern Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967), pp. 75–76. 15. Robert K. Sakai et al., eds., The Status System and Social Organization of Satsuma (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1975). 16. Bonnie Abiko, “Watanabe Kazan, His Life and Times” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1982). 17. Marius B. Jansen, “Tosa in the Sixteenth Century: The 100 Article Code of Cho¯sokabe Motochika,” in Hall and Jansen, Studies in Institutional History, pp. 89–114. 18. Jansen, “Tosa in the Seventeenth Century: The Establishment of Yamauchi Rule,” in Hall and Jansen, Studies in Institutional History, pp. 115–139, and Luke S. Roberts, Mercantilism in a Japanese Domain (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), chap. 2, “The Geography and Politics of Seventeenth Century Tosa.” 19. Philip C. Brown, Central Authority and Local Autonomy in the Formation of Early Modern Japan: The Case of Kaga Domain (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1993), pp. 24ff. 20. Ronald DiCenzo, “Daimyo Domain and Retainer Band in the Seventeenth Century” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1978). 21. Hall, “The bakuhan System,” in CHJ, 4:159. 22. Harold Bolitho, “The han,” in CHJ, 4:194. 23. Hall, Government and Local Power in Japan, pp. 414–418. 24. Harold Bolitho, Treasures among Men: The Fudai Daimyo in Tokugawa Japan (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1974), p. 35, and William Kelley, Deference and Defiance in Nineteenth-Century Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), pp. 78ff., take up the event as social history. 25. Yoon Byung-nam, “Domain and Bakufu in Tokugawa Japan: The Copper Trade and Development of Akita Domain Mines” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1994). 26. Hiraide Kojiro¯, “kataiuchi” (vendetta), in Kokushi daijiten, vol. 3 (Tokyo, 1983), pp. 350–352. 27. Constantine N. Vaporis, “Post Station and Assisting Villages: Labor and Peasant Contention,” Monumenta Nipponica, 41 (1986): 377–414. 28. Mary Elizabeth Berry, “Public Policy and Private Attachment: The Goals and Conduct of Power in Early Modern Japan,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 12, 2 (1986). 29. James W. White, “State Growth and Popular Protest in Tokugawa Japan,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 14, 1 (1988). 30. A leading voice in this is Watanabe Hiroshi, whose Higashi Ajiya no O<sup>¯</sup> ken to shiso¯ (Tokyo: Tokyo Daigaku Shuppankai, 1997) is introduced by Luke Roberts’s translation of its introduction in Sino-Japanese Studies, 10, 2 (April 1998). Some recent histories use the term bakufu only beginning in the mid-ninetenth century, and Asao Naohiro, who was cited earlier, avoids the entire “bakuhan state” terminology as problematic and prefers simply “Tokugawa political structure.” ## . Foreign Relations 1. Olof G. Lidin, The Life of Ogyu¯ Sorai, a Tokugawa Confucian Philosopher, Scandinavian Institute of Asian Studies Monograph Series (Lund: Studentlitt., 1973), p. 120. 2. Japanese Family Storehouse, trans. G. W. Sargent (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1959), pp. 85–86. 3. Leonard Blusse´, Strange Company (Dordrecht: Foris Publications, 1986), pp. 99, 103. 4. George Elison, Deus Destroyed: The Image of Christianity in Early Modern Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1973), p. 116. 5. Tashiro Kazui, “Foreign Relations during the Edo Period: Sakoku Reexamined,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 8, 2 (Summer 1982), and her magisterial Kinsei Ni-Cho¯ tsu¯ko¯- bo¯ekishi no kenkyu¯ (Tokyo: Sobunsha, 1981). 6. Ronald P. Toby, State and Diplomacy in Early Modern Japan: Asia in the Development of the Tokugawa Bakufu (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984), provides the definitive statement of this position. 7. Arai Hakuseki’s autobiography, Joyce Ackroyd, trans., Told Round a Brushwood Fire (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979), p. 62. 8. Dan F. Henderson, “Chinese Legal Studies in Early Eighteenth Century Japan: Scholars and Sources,” Journal of Asian Studies, 30 (November 1970): 21–50. 9. Sin Yu-han, Haeyurok (Seoul: Chongumsa), trans. Byungnam Yoon, unpublished paper, 1976. 10. Deshima Diaries: Marginalia, – , ed. Paul van der Velde and Rudolf Bachofner (Tokyo: Japan-Netherlands Institute, 1992), p. 148. 11. On whom see Michael Cooper, S.J., Rodrigues the Interpreter: An Early Jesuit in Japan and China (New York: Weatherhill, 1974). 12. Kamigaito Kenichi, Sakoku no hikaku bummei ron (Tokyo: Kodansha, 1994), pp. 42ff. 13. Derek Massarella, A World Elsewhere: Europe’s Encounter with Japan in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990), a work solidly based on EIC records. 14. See Ivan I. Morris, The Nobility of Failure: Tragic Heroes in the History of Japan (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1975), pp. 143–179, for an account of the rebellion and Amakusa Shiro¯ as one of many tragic figures who have gained posthumous fame as righteous martyrs in Japan. 15. Dai Nihon Shiryo¯, 34, sect. 12. 16. Sakai et al., The Status System and Social Organization of Satsuma, p. 45. 17. Elison, Deus Destroyed, takes his title from one such pamphlet, of which he provides a translation. 18. Reinier H. Hesselink, “The Prisoners from Nambu: The Beskens Affair in Historical and Historiographical Perspective” (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Hawaii, 1992), a striking account of an affair in which Dutch prisoners were used to denounce imprisoned priests. 19. Endo¯ Shu¯saku’s novel Chinboku, translated as Silence, is built around the fate of two priests who reached Japan in an effort to reconvert an apostate priest and instead fell into the inquisitor’s hands. 20. Grant K. Goodman, Japan: The Dutch Experience (London: Athlone Press, 1986), and Kanai Madoka, Tai gaiko¯sho¯shi no kenkyu¯: kaikokuki no to¯zai bunka ko¯ryu¯ (Yokohama: Yurindo, 1988), provide an abundance of detail. 21. Robert LeRoy Innes, “The Door Ajar: Japan’s Foreign Trade in the Seventeenth Century” (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan, 1980), the fullest account of the Nagasaki trade. 22. Engelbert Kaempfer, History, trans. J. Scheuchzer (Glasgow: James MacLehose, 1906), 3:167–168. For Kaempfer and the history of his manuscript, see Beatrice M. Bodart-Bailey and Derek Massarella, eds., The Furthest Goal: Engelbert Kaempfer’s Encounter with Tokugawa Japan (London: Curzon Press, Japan Library, 1995). 23. Kaempfer, History, 3:334. Kaempfer argued that Japan was fortunate in having a ruler who wisely shut it off from unnecessary goods and temptations. “Happy and flourishing,” he concluded, “is the condition of [Tsunayoshi’s] subjects under his reign.” 24. Toby, State and Diplomacy, provides the classic account. 25. Ibid., p. 126. 26. O<sup>¯</sup> ba Osamu, Edo jidai no Ni-Chu¯ hiwa (Tokyo: Toho Shoten, 1980), and Edo jidai ni okeru Chu¯goku bunka juyo¯ no kenkyu¯ (Kyoto: Do¯ho¯sha, 1984). 27. Ironically, though, it was Kaempfer, and Thunberg, Titsingh, and von Siebold after him, who managed, despite the restrictions under which they lived, to scrape together the information on life in Edo Japan that still serves to educate us. The Chinese guests, with much better opportunities, did nothing of the sort. What would we not give for Ingen’s account of the conversations, seminars, and banquets with his Japanese hosts! 28. Wai-ming Benjamin Ng, The I Ching in Tokugawa Thought and Culture (Honolulu: Association for Asian Studies and University of Hawaii Press, 2000), pp. 66–67. 29. Letter from Ogyu¯ Sorai to the abbot Yu¨eh-feng (Japan’s Eppo¯, 1635–1734), who arrived in Nagasaki in 1655 and was invited to lecture before the shogun Tsunayoshi in 1708. Sorai was in touch with him for the remainder of his life. Lidin, The Life of Ogyu¯ Sorai, pp. 116–117. 30. William S. Atwell, “Ming China and the Emerging World Economy, c. 1470–1650,” chap. 8 in Denis Twitchett and Frederick W. Mote, eds., Cambridge History of China, vol. 8: The Ming Dynasty (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), pp. 376– 416. 31. Marius B. Jansen, China in the Tokugawa World (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992), p. 68, and De-min Tao, “Traditional Chinese Social Ethics in Japan, 1721–1943,” Gest Library Journal, 4, 2 (Winter 1991): 68–84. 32. In 1710, for example, the Dutch Deshima Diary noted that “seventeen Japanese were sentenced. Eight of them were crucified, nine were decapitated. All on charges of smuggling.” And a few days later, “The rampant smuggling by the Chinese during the past hundred years has drained Japan of silver and gold. Added to the fact that for over sixty years there has been no new prospecting for precious metals, it explains why there is a scarcity of these metals.” Deshima Diaries, pp. 128–129. Also Fred G. Notehelfer, “Smuggling in the Kyo¯ho¯ Period,” Princeton Papers on Japan (1972). 33. Quoted in Marius B. Jansen, “New Materials for the Intellectual History of Nineteenth Century Japan,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 20, 2–3 (1957): 597, quoting from Ihi nyu¯ko¯ roku (Tokyo, 1931). 34. Leonard Busse´, “Japanese Historiography and European Sources,” in P. C. Emmer and H. L. Wesseling, eds., Reappraisals in Overseas History (Leiden: Leiden University Press, 1979). ## Status Groups 1. Ko¯saka Masaaki, ed., Japanese Thought in the Meiji Period, trans. David Abosch (Tokyo: Pan-Pacific Press, 1958), p. 203. 2. John W. Hall, “Rule by Status in Tokugawa Japan,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 1, 1 (Autumn 1974). 3. Lafcadio Hearn, Japan: An Attempt at Interpretation (New York: Macmillan, 1907), pp. 386–387. 4. Herschel Webb, The Imperial Institution in the Tokugawa Period (New York: Columbia University Press, 1968), the best study. 5. Asao Naohiro, ed., Mibun to kakushiki, vol. 7 of Nihon no kinsei (Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, 1992), pp. 193ff. 6. Bob T. Wakabayashi, “In Name Only: Imperial Sovereignty in Early Modern Japan,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 17, 1 (Winter 1991): 48. 7. Ibid., p. 49. One offspring of such a marriage succeeded to the throne (the Empress Meisho¯) and one to the shogunate (Tokugawa Ieharu). 8. Adapted from F. G. Notehelfer, “Ebina Danjo¯: A Christian Samurai of the Meiji Period,” Papers on Japan (Harvard University, 1963), 2:6. 9. Tamamoto Tsunetomo, The Hagakure: A Code to the Way of the Samurai, trans. Takao Mukoh (Tokyo: Hokuseido, 1980), p. 35. See also Yukio Mishima, The Way of the Samurai, trans. Kathryn Sparling (Putnam, N.Y.: Pegasus, 1977), pp. 110–112. 10. Quoted from Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, p. 399. 11. Asao, Mibun to kakushiki, pp. 14ff., for the principal Chinese and Japanese texts. 12. Donald H. Shively, “Popular Culture,” in CHJ, 4:708. 13. Recent scholarship refines this somewhat. Takagi Shunsaku argues that the edicts were initially the products of wartime emergency, and concerned less with samurai than with their servants and designed to prevent desertion, but no one doubts that the separate “class” as such dates from that period. Cf. Asao, Mibun to kakushiki, p. 45. 14. W. G. Beasley, “Feudal Revenue in Japan at the Time of the Meiji Restoration,” Journal of Asian Studies, 19 (1960): 235–275. 15. E. Herbert Norman, Japan’s Emergence as a Modern State (1940; New York: Institute of Pacific Relations, 1946), p. 81. 16. Carmen Blacker, “Ku¯hanjo¯, by Fukuzawa Yukichi,” Monumenta Nipponica, 13 (1953): 304–329. 17. John W. Hall, “The Ikeda House and Its Retainers,” in Hall and Jansen, Studies in Institutional History, p. 87. 18. Kate Wildman Nakai, Women of the Mito Domain (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1992), p. xiii, for Yu¯ koku’s humble origins. 19. Kozo Yamamura, A Study of Samurai Income and Entrepreneurship (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1974). 20. Luke Roberts, trans., “ ‘From a Parrot’s Cage’—The Diary of a Samurai,” unpublished diary of Asahi Monzaemon (1674–1718). 21. Musui’s Story: The Autobiography of a Tokugawa Samurai, trans. Teruko Craig (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1988). For more detail on the context of the diary, see Journal of Japanese Studies, 16, 2 (1990). 22. Gary P. Leupp, Servants, Shophands, and Laborers in the Cities of Tokugawa Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992), p. 32. 23. Donald H. Shively, “Sumptuary Regulation and Status in Early Tokugawa Japan,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 25, 4–5 (1965): 152. 24. Nakai, Women of the Mito Domain, p. 54. 25. Brown, Central Authority and Local Autonomy, presents a (Kaga-based) challenge to the acceptance of sweeping claims made for the effect of Hideyoshi’s measures. 26. Adapted from Dan Fenno Henderson, Village “Contracts” in Tokugawa Japan (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1975), p. 188. 27. This is argued persuasively by Luke Roberts in Mercantilism in a Japanese Domain. 28. Smith, “The Japanese Village in the Seventeenth Century,” p. 265. 29. See Harumi Befu, “Village Autonomy and Articulation with the State,” in Hall and Jansen, Studies in Institutional History, pp. 301–316, and Befu, “Duty, Reward, Sanction, and Power: Four-cornered Office of the Tokugawa Village Headman” in B. S. Silberman and H. Harootunian, eds., Modern Japanese Leadership (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1966), pp. 25–50. 30. Thomas C. Smith’s The Agrarian Origins of Modern Japan (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1959) is the classic work. 31. Kodama Ko¯ta, Kinsei no¯min seikatsu shi (Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan, 1957), pp. 215ff. 32. Jansen, “Tosa in the Seventeenth Century,” p. 120. But if things became sufficiently difficult emigration would take place. See the discussion of movement from Tosa to Satsuma in Roberts, Mercantilism in a Japanese Domain, pp. 68ff. 33. George Sansom, A History of Japan, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1963), p. 99. 34. Shively, “Sumptuary Legislation,” pp. 154–155. 35. Smith, Agrarian Origins, p. 280. 36. Thomas C. Smith, “The Land Tax during the Tokugawa Period,” in Hall and Jansen, Studies in Institutional History, pp. 283–300. 37. Hayami Akira, Keizai shakai no seiritsu – seiki (Tokyo: Iwanami, 1988). 38. Naito¯ Jiro¯, Kinsei Nihon keizaishi ron (Tokyo: Yachiyo, 1981), pp. 57ff. 39. Kumakura Isao, Kan’ei bunka no kenkyu¯ (Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan, 1988), and Kumakura, “From the Outlandish to the Refined: Art and Power at the Outset of the Edo Period,” Asian Cultural Studies, 17 (March 1989): 59–68. 40. Attractively presented in Yoshikazu Hayashi with the unfortunate title Seventeenthcentury Japan: A Time of Mystery and Isolation— Paintings by Yusetsu Kaiho (Tokyo, 1991). Another, roughly contemporaneous collection of artisan professions, Jinrin kinmo¯zu, depicts four hundred occupations. 41. Sasamoto Sho¯ji in Asao, Nihon no kinsei, 4:90ff. 42. It is worth noting that Hideyoshi’s turn against the Christian missionaries in 1587 included the wording, “the sale of Japanese to China, South Barbary, and Korea is outrageous. In Japan trade in human beings is prohibited.” Elison, Deus Destroyed, p. 118. 43. Leupp, Servants, Shophands, and Laborers, p. 41. 44. David Howell, Geographics of Japanese Identity: Polity, Status, and Civilization in the Nineteenth Century (forthcoming, University of California Press). 45. Edwin McClellan, Woman in the Crested Kimono: The Life of Shibue Io and Her Family Drawn from Mori O<sup>¯</sup> gai’s “Shibue Chu¯sai” (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), a literary work with rich materials for social history. 46. Bito¯ Masahide, in Japan Foundation Newsletter, 1981, a useful summary of a large body of work. ## Urbanization and Communications 1. Toshio G. Tsukahira, Feudal Control in Tokugawa Japan: The Sankin Ko¯tai System (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1966), and Bolitho, “The han,” in CHJ, 4:198ff. 2. Constantine Vaporis, “To Edo and Back: Alternate Attendance and Japanese Culture in the Early Modern Period,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 23, 1 (Winter 1997): 30. 3. F. G. Notehelfer, ed., Japan through American Eyes: The Journal of Francis Hall, Kanagawa and Yokohama, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992), pp. 133, 382. 4. Kaempfer, History of Japan, 2:336. 5. Journaal van Dirk de Graeff van Polsbroek (Maastricht, 1978), pp. 33, 34. 6. DiCenzo, “Daimyo Domain and Retainer Band,” p. 44. 7. The authoritative study is that of Constantine Novikos Vaporis, Breaking Barriers: Travel and the State in Early Modern Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994). 8. One might compare this with the cumbersome distribution system of contemporary Japan, maintained to protect the uneconomic and the weak. 9. William Wray, “Shipping: From Sail to Steam,” in Marius B. Jansen and Gilbert Rozman, eds., Japan in Transition: From Tokugawa to Meiji (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986), pp. 250–254, provides a convenient summary. 10. Van Polsbroek, Journaal, p. 34. 11. Vaporis, “To Edo and Back,” provides a richly documented discussion of Tosa samurai travels and purchases on such trips. See also the same author’s discussion in Ko¯tsu¯shi kenkyu¯ (1995). 12. Tsukahira, Feudal Control, p. 68. 13. Roberts, Mercantilism in a Japanese Domain, persuasively points out that arguments contract complaint, brought by men living in different jurisdictions, in which the judge tries to force a private settlement by threatening to punish both parties if they fail to work things out. for such policies frequently, as in Tosa, had their origins in merchant opinion and proposals. 14. As in Yokkaichi, “fourth-day market,” in memory of market days on the fourth, fourteenth, and twenty-fourth day of the month. 15. Jinnai Hidenobu, Tokyo: A Spatial Anthropology, trans. Kimiko Nishimura (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995); see also the same author’s “The Spatial Structure of Edo” in Chie Nakane and Shinzaburo O<sup>¯</sup> ishi, eds., Tokugawa Japan: The Social and Economic Antecedents of Modern Japan (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1990). 16. Jinnai, Tokyo, p. 40. 17. Coaldrake, Architecture and Authority in Japan, and William H. Coaldrake, “Building a New Establishment,” in James L. McClain, John M. Merriman, and Ugawa Kaoru, eds., Edo and Paris: Urban Life and the State in the Early Modern Era (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1994). The only gate that has survived in place is the “Red Gate” of the University of Tokyo, designed to be a “guardian gate” for the shogun Ienari’s daughter when she entered the daimyo (Maeda) family as a bride. 18. One might extend this comparison to modern Tokyo, whose central space, like that of New York, is given over to a world of green which, unlike Central Park, is off limits. 19. Miyazaki Katsumi, “Edo no tochi—daimyo, bakushin no tochi mondai,” in Yoshida Nobuyuki, ed., Toshi no jidai, vol. 9 in Nihon no kinsei (Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, 1992), provides illuminating details and figures for warrior holdings in Edo. See also, for spatial allocation, Gilbert Rozman, Urban Networks in Ch’ing China and Tokugawa Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973). 20. Constantine Vaporis, “Edo to Tosa—Edo hantei no ichi ko¯satsu,” Tosa shidan (Kochi, 1995). 21. Notehelfer, Japan through American Eyes, p. 592. 22. McClellan, Woman in the Crested Kimono, pp. 28–29. 23. Jinnai, Tokyo, p. 39. 24. On the history and role of the Senso¯ji temple at Asakusa, see Nam-il Hur, Prayer and Play in Tokugawa Japan: Asakusa’s Senso¯ji and Edo Society (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000). 25. James L. McClain, “Edobashi: Power, Space and Popular Culture in Edo,” in McClain, Merriman, and Ugawa, Edo and Paris, pp. 105ff. 26. Quoted by McClain, in ibid., pp. 105ff. 27. William W. Kelley, “Incendiary Action: Fires and Fire Fighting in the Shogun’s Capital and the People’s City,” in McClain, Merriman, and Ugawa, Edo and Paris, pp. 310–331. 28. Hatano Jun, “Edo’s Water Supply,” in McClain, Merriman, and Ugawa, Edo and Paris, pp. 234–250. 29. O<sup>¯</sup> oka (1677–1751) was city magistrate for twenty years and then commissioner of shrines and temples for another twenty-five. He served as a judge at the shoguna court (Hyo¯jo¯sho) throughout the entire period and attained a legendary fame for Solomonic wisdom. 30. Thus Dan Fenno Henderson, Conciliation and Japanese Law (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1965), pp. 142–162, gives the transcript of hearings in a breach of 31. Kato¯ Takashi, “Governing Edo,” in McClain, Merriman, and Ugawa, Edo and Paris, pp. 57ff. 32. Misbehavior on the part of persons lower in status was treated quite differently. For a thoughtful discussion of the interrelationships between status society and punishment, see Daniel V. Botsman, “Crime, Punishment, and the Making of Modern Japan, 1790–1895” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1999). 33. Katsu, Musui’s Story, pp. 101, 155, 68. Mori O<sup>¯</sup> gai finds a doctor’s family resorting to the same measure in an effort to curb behavior by a son who is disgracing the family. “Chu¯sai, in utter despair, had a room of incarceration built upstairs, with bars on the windows and doorway, so that his son could be thrown into it.” McClellan, Woman in the Crested Kimono, p. 46. 34. The Autobiography of Fukuzawa Yukichi, trans. Eiichi Kiyooka (Tokyo: Hokuseido, 1948), pp. 252–253. ## The Development of a Mass Culture 1. Shively, “Popular Culture,” in CHJ, 4:716. 2. Yoshiaki Shimizu, Japan: The Shaping of Daimyo Culture, – (Washington, D.C.: National Gallery of Art, 1988), and Shimizu, “Workshop Management of the Early Kano Painters circa a.d. 1590–1600,” Archives of Asian Art, 34 (1981). 3. Quoted from Robert Treat Paine and Alexander Soper, The Art and Architecture of Japan (London: Penguin, 1955), pp. 273–274. 4. Henry D. Smith II, “The Book,” in McClain, Merriman, and Ugawa, Edo and Paris, p. 333. 5. Smith, in ibid., gives an admirably succinct discussion of the process. 6. See the discussion by Ekkehard May, Die Kommerzialisierung der japanishen Literature in spa¨ten Edo—Zeit – (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1985). 7. Shively, “Popular Culture,” pp. 718–720. 8. Mary Elizabeth Berry, The Culture of Civil War in Kyoto (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994), p. 186. 9. Paine and Soper, Art and Architecture, pp. 268–269. 10. Berry, The Culture of Civil War in Kyoto, p. 210. 11. The many works of the Osaka historian Miyamoto Mataji explore the intricacies of this system. 12. Nishizi Yasushi, in Yoshida Nobuyuki, ed., Toshi no jidai, vol. 9 in Asao, Nihon no kinsei, pp. 173ff. It is ironic that present-day Japan, in the interests of equity within its distribution system, limits store size through its “Big Store Law” (Daiten Ho¯). 13. The code, or kaho¯, is translated in full in Sansom, History of Japan, , 2:251– 253. 14. Translated with commentary by E. S. Crawcour in Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, 3d ser., 8 (1961). 15. Mitsui history is discussed in an authorized volume, John G. Roberts, Mitsui: Three Centuries of Japanese Business (New York: Weatherhill, 1973), and authoritatively in Mitsui jigyo¯ shi (Tokyo: Mitsui Library, 1980), 3 vols., and by Hayashi Reiko in Sho¯nin no katsudo¯, vol. 5 of Asao, ed., Nihon no kinsei. 16. J. Mark Ramseyer, “Thrift and Diligence: House Codes of Tokugawa Merchant Families,” in Monumenta Nipponica, 34, 2 (1979): 219–230. 17. Nishizaka Yasushi in Yoshida, To¯shi no jidai, pp. 203–206. 18. Donald Keene, World within Walls: Japanese Literature of the Pre-Modern Era, (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1976), p. 93. 19. Yoshikawa Ko¯jiro¯, Jinsai, Sorai, Norinaga: Three Classical Philologists of Mid-Tokugawa Japan (Tokyo: To¯ho¯ Gakkai, 1983), p. 268. 20. Shively, “Popular Culture,” pp. 728ff., and Keene, World within Walls, pp. 156ff. 21. Keene, World within Walls, p. 156. 22. Howard Hibbett, The Floating World in Japanese Fiction (New York: Oxford University Press, 1959), p. 63. 23. See Shively, “Popular Culture,” pp. 742ff. 24. See Liza Crihfield, “Geisha,” in Encyclopedia of Japan (Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1988), 3:14–15, and Liza Dalby, Geisha (New York: Vintage Books, 1985). 25. Donald H. Shively, The Love Suicide at Amijima: A Study of a Japanese Domestic Tragedy by Chikamatsu Monzaemon (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1953), pp. 26–27. 26. See the discussion by Donald H. Shively in ibid. 27. The play is translated by Donald Keene in Major Plays of Chikamatsu (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961), pp. 39–56. 28. Translated by Donald Keene: Chu¯shingura: The Treasury of Loyal Retainers (New York: Columbia University Press, 1971). ## Education, Thought, and Religion 1. Tetsuo Najita, Visions of Virtue in Tokugawa Japan: The Kaitokudo¯ Merchant Academy of Osaka (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), and Tao De-min, Kaitokudo¯ Shushigaku no Kenkyu¯ (Osaka: Osaka University Press, 1994). 2. R. P. Dore, Education in Tokugawa Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1965), pp. 76ff.; the standard work. 3. Richard Rubinger, Private Academies of Tokugawa Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982). 4. See, for example, the picture of Seizan Sensei in the Meiji novel by Tokutomi Roka, Omoide no ki, translated by Kenneth Strong as Footprints in the Snow (Tokyo: Tuttle, 1971), pp. 80ff. 5. John W. Hall, “The Confucian Teacher in Tokugawa Japan,” in David S. Nivison and Arthur E. Wright, eds., Confucianism in Action (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1959), and Kate Wildman Nakai, “The Naturalization of Confucianism in Tokugawa Japan: The Problem of Sino-Centrism,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 40, 1 ( June 1980). 6. Arai is among the most studied and translated of the scholars. In addition to Kate Wildman Nakai’s splendid study Shogunal Politics: Arai Hakuseki and the Premises of Tokugawa Rule (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1988), there are two translations by Joyce Ackroyd: Told Round a Brushwood Fire: The Autobiography of Arai Hakuseki (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979) and Lessons from History: Arai Hakuseki’s Tokushi Yoron (St. Lucia: University of Queensland Press, 1982). 7. Hall, “The Confucian Teacher,” and John W. Hall, “Ikeda Mitsumasa and the Bizen Flood of 1654,” in Craig and Shively, Personality in Japanese History, pp. 57ff. 8. Told Round a Brushwood Fire, trans. Ackroyd, pp. 202–203. 9. Ansai is most accessible in the study by Herman Ooms, Tokugawa Ideology: Early Constructs, (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985). 10. Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 369–370. 11. See Mary Evelyn Tucker, Moral and Spiritual Cultivation in Japanese Neo-Confucianism: The Life and Thought of Kaibara Ekken ( – ) (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1989). 12. Kaibara Ekken, “The Greater Learning for Women,” trans. Basil Hall Chamberlain; first published in Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain (X, pt. 3, July 1878), and republished by him in Things Japanese (Tokyo, 1905), pp. 502–508. 13. Masao Maruyama, Studies in the Intellectual History of Tokugawa Japan, trans. Mikiso Hane (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974); Yoshikawa, Jinsai, Sorai, Norinaga; Lidin, The Life of Ogyu¯ Sorai, and Olof G. Lidin, trans., Ogyu¯ Sorai’s “Distinguishing the Way”: An Annotated English Translation of the Bendo (Tokyo: Sophia University, 1970); J. R. McEwan, The Political Writings of Ogyu¯ Sorai (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962); and Samuel Hideo Yamashita, Master Sorai’s Responsals: An Annotated Translation of “Sorai sensei to¯monsho¯’’ (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1994). 14. Tetsuo Najita, “History and Nature in Eighteenth-Century Tokugawa Thought,” in CHJ, 4:599. 15. From the fine exposition of Sumie Jones, “Language in Crisis: Ogyu¯ Sorai’s Philological Thought and Hiraga Gennai’s Creative Practice,” in Earl Miner, ed., Principles of Classical Japanese Literature (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), p. 221. 16. W. J. Boot, The Adoption and Adaptation of Neo-Confucianism in Japan: The Role of Fujiwara Seika and Hayashi Razan (Leiden, 1992), p. 244. 17. Bob Tadashi Wakabayashi, Japanese Loyalism Reconstrued: Yamagata Daini’s Ryu¯shi shinron of (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1995), p. 105, and Martin Collcutt, “The Legacy of Confucianism in Japan,” in Gilbert Rozman, ed., The East Asian Region: Confucian Heritage and Its Modern Adaptation (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991). 18. Robert L. Backus, “The Kansei Prohibition of Heterodoxy and Its Effects on Education,” and “The Motivation of Confucian Orthodoxy in Tokugawa Japan,” in Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 39, 1, and 39, 2 ( June and December 1979): 55–106 and 275–358. 19. Some have related the statecraft of the Meiji Restoration leaders, who constructed a new institutional order, to Sorai’s praise of inventive system builders. See Robert Bellah, “Baigan and Sorai,” in Tetsuo Najita and Irwin Scheiner, eds., Japanese Thought in the Tokugawa Period (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978), p. 148. 20. Nakai, “The Naturalization of Confucianism,” pp. 157ff. 21. Tsunoda, de Bary, Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 389–400. 22. Bob Tadashi Wakabayashi, Anti-Foreignism and Western Learning in Early-Modern Japan: The New Theses of (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986), p. 149. 23. Nakai, “The Naturalization of Confucianism,” p. 173. 24. Quoted in Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 538–540. 25. Ibid., pp. 512–514. 26. Heinrich Dumoulinn, “Kamo Mabuchi: Kokuiko¯,” Monumenta Nipponica, 2, 1 (1939): 165–192. Pledges of this sort were not uncommon, for most private academy heads demanded full loyalty from their charges. This was true also of the authority structure of the iemoto (“house head”) system in applied arts like flowers, tea, and incense. Nevertheless its application here to instruction in historical poetics indicates something of the instructor’s intensity. 27. Shigeru Matsumoto, Motoori Norinaga, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1970), an important character study from the perspective of Eriksonian psychology. 28. Harry D. Harootunian, “The Functions of China in Tokugawa Thought,” in Akira Iriye, ed., The Chinese and the Japanese: Essays in Political and Cultural Interactions (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980), pp. 9–36. 29. Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 544–548. 30. Donald Keene, The Japanese Discovery of Europe (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1969), chap. 7, “Hirata Atsutane and Western Learning,” p. 170. 31. Thomas C. Smith, “O<sup>¯</sup> kura Nagatsune and the Technologists,” in Craig and Shively, Personality in Japanese History, p. 129. 32. Harry Harootunian, “Late Tokugawa Culture and Thought,” in Cambridge History of Japan, vol. 5: The Nineteenth Century, ed. Marius B. Jansen (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), pp. 198–215. 33. These doctors are the subject of a forthcoming study by Professor Harm Beuker of Leiden University. 34. Yoshida Tadashi, “The rangaku of Shizuki Tadao: The Introduction of Western Science in Tokugawa Japan” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1974). 35. Adapted from Keene, The Japanese Discovery of Europe, p. 22, as used in Marius B. Jansen, Japan and Its World: Two Centuries of Change (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980), pp. 32–33. 36. Jansen, Japan and Its World, pp. 38–39. 37. All Sugita texts quoted can be found in Haga To¯ru, ed., Sugita Genpaku, Hiraga Gennai, Shiba Ko¯kan, vol. 22 of Nihon meicho (Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, 1971). 38. Paul B. Watt, “Jiun Sonja (1718–1804): A Response to Confucianism within the Context of Buddhist Reform,” in Peter Nosco, ed., Confucianism and Tokugawa Culture (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984), pp. 188ff. 39. Kuroda Toshio, “Shinto in the History of Japanese Religion,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 7, 1 (1981): “The word Shinto by itself probably means popular beliefs in general” (p. 5), and Helen Hardacre, Shinto and the State, (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989), pp. 15ff. 40. Helen Hardacre, “Conflict between Shugendo¯ and the New Religions of Bakumatsu Japan,” Japanese Journal of Religious Studies, 21, 2–3 (1994), and Carmen Blacker, The Catalpa Bow: A Study of Shamanistic Practices in Japan (London: Allen & Unwin, 1975). 41. Hardacre, “Shugendo¯,” p. 147. 42. For a sample of the fare that held them spellbound, see “A Sermon Given by Hosoi Heishu¯ on 14 December 1783” in Michiko Y. Aoki and Margaret B. Dardess, “The Popularization of Samurai Values,” Monumenta Nipponica, 30, 4 (Winter 1976): 401– 413. 43. Janine Sawada, Confucian Values and Popular Zen: Sekimon Shingaku in Eighteenth-Century Japan (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1993), p. 45; see also the older study by Robert Bellah, Tokugawa Religion: The Values of Pre-Industrial Japan (Glenco, Ill.: Free Press, 1957). ## Change, Protest, and Reform 1. Conrad Totman, “Tokugawa Peasants: Win, Lose, or Draw?” Monumenta Nipponica, 41, 4 (1986): 468. 2. Susan B. Hanley and Kozo Yamamura, Economic and Demographic Change in Preindustrial Japan, (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977). 3. Ann Bowman Jannetta, Epidemics and Mortality in Early Modern Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987), discusses outbreaks of smallpox, measles, and dysentery. Japan was fortunately spared an outbreak of plague, probably thanks to its rel ative isolation. Note also the work in progress of William S. Atwell tracing the effect of volcanic eruptions on climate change, crop failure, and political unrest in Japan and China simultaneously. 4. Hayami Akira, Kinsei no¯son no rekishi jinko¯gakuteki kenkyu¯ (Tokyo: To¯yo¯ keizai shinpo¯, 1973), and other works. 5. Laurel Cornell, “Infanticide in Early Modern Japan? Demography, Culture, and Population,” Journal of Asian Studies, 55, 1 (February 1996): 22–50. 6. Thomas C. Smith, Nakahara: Family Farming and Population in a Japanese Village, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1977). 7. Thomas C. Smith, “The Land Tax in the Tokugawa Period,” Journal of Asian Studies 18, 1 (November 1958), and reprinted in Hall and Jansen, Studies in the Institutional History, pp. 283–299, and in Smith, Native Sources of Japanese Industrialization, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988). 8. Matsudaira Sadanobu, Kokuhonron, quoted in David Lu, ed., Sources of Japanese History (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1974), 2:6–7. 9. Haruko Iwasaki, “Writing in Circles: Cultural Networks of Edo Gesaku Literature, 1760–1790” (Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1991), pp. 318, 148–151. 10. Kozo Yamamura, A Study of Samurai Income and Entrepreneurship (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1974), p. 133. 11. Lu, Sources of Japanese History, 2:4. 12. Yamamura, Samurai Income, pp. 47–48. 13. Kelley, Deference and Defiance in Nineteenth-Century Japan, chap. 3, and Bolitho, Treasures among Men, p. 35. 14. James W. White, Ikki: Social Conflict and Political Protest in Early Modern Japan (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1995), is now the standard study. 15. Studies of “peasant rebellions” in Japan flourished during the 1970s and 1980s, both in Japan and abroad, partly, some have suggested, in response to the “Cultural” (more accurately, counter-cultural) Revolution in China, and more generally in rejection of the consensus model of Japanese society. This literature is reviewed and appraised in Conrad Totman, “Tokugawa Peasants: Win, Lose, or Draw?” pp. 457–476. See also Tetsuo Najita and J. Victor Koschmann, eds., Conflict in Modern Japanese History: The Neglected Tradition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982). 16. See, in this connection, Irwin Scheiner, “Benevolent Lords and Honorable Peasants: Rebellion and Peasant Consciousness in Tokugawa Japan” in Tetsuo Najita and Irwin Scheiner, eds., Japanese Thought in the Tokugawa Period (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978). 17. The subject of Anne Walthall, Peasant Uprisings in Japan: A Critical Anthology of Peasant Histories (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991). 18. The martyr tradition in rebellions is explored by Yokoyama Toshio, Hyakusho¯ ikki to gimin densho¯ (Tokyo: Kyo¯ikusha, 1977). Reference to this splendid little book is one of many debts I owe Hayami Akira. Similar themes of “restless spirits” (onryo¯) in Japanese culture generally and No¯ drama in particular are the subject of several studies by Umehara Takeshi. 19. Jansen, “Tosa in the Seventeenth Century,” p. 120. Luke Roberts uncovers a case in which the flight of Tosa residents from overpopulated areas to Satsum led to an emigration agreement worked out by Edo representatives of the two domains, but agrees that arrangements for extradition would have been more common. Roberts, Mercantilism in a Japanese Domain, p. 68, with documentation. 20. Marius B. Jansen, “Tosa during the Last Century of Tokugawa Rule,” in Studies in Institutional History, p. 335, following Hirao Michio, Tosa no¯min ikki shiko¯ (Ko¯chi: Shimin toshokan, 1953), pp. 32–61. 21. Herbert Bix, “Leader of Peasant Rebellions: Miura Meisuke,” in Murakami Hyoei and Thomas Harper, eds., Great Historical Figures of Japan (Tokyo: Japan Culture Institute, 1978), pp. 243–260. See also Bix, Peasant Protest in Japan, – (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986). 22. White, Ikki, p. 125. 23. The opposite, in other words, of the arrangement of signatures on the Declaration of Independence, in which John Hancock allegedly led off by inscribing his name so large that the king would be able to read it without his spectacles. 24. David L. Howell, Capitalism from Within: Economy, Society, and the State in a Japanese Fishery (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994). 25. Tsuji Tatsuya, “Politics in the Eighteenth Century,” in CHJ, 4:445ff. 26. Luke Roberts, “The Petition Box in Eighteenth-Century Tosa,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 20, 2 (1994): 423–458. 27. A revealing instance of this principle is an 1808 litigation, mentioned earlier, studied and translated by Dan Fenno Henderson. The litigants, after making their way into a lower court with some difficulty, were repeatedly ordered to settle things themselves on penalty of punishment for both parties. Henderson, Conciliation and Japanese Law (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1965), 1:135ff. 28. Tsuji, “Politics in the Eighteenth Century,” in CHJ, 4:456. 29. Najita, Visions of Virtue, pp. 148ff. 30. This is the persuasive argument of Luke Roberts in Mercantilism in a Japanese Domain, who contends that domain merchants espoused this form of protectionism earlier than domain administrators. 31. Byung-nam Yoon, “The Akita Copper Trade” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1994). 32. John W. Hall, Tanuma Okitsugu ( – ): Forerunner of Modern Japan (Cam bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1955), the standard source. 33. Ibid., pp. 119ff. 34. Sadanobu is the subject of Herman Ooms, Charismatic Bureaucrat: A Political Biography of Matsudaira Sadanobu (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975). 35. Keene, The Japanese Discovery of Europe, p. 75. 36. I have discussed these trends at greater length in Chapter 1, “Japan in the Early Nineteenth Century,” CHJ, 5:71–87. 37. Gilbert Rozman, “Edo’s Importance in Changing Tokugawa Society,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 1, 1 (1974): 94. 38. Katsuhisa Moriya, “Urban Networks and Information Networks,” in Nakane and O<sup>¯</sup> ishi, Tokugawa Japan, pp. 97–123. 39. Buyo Inshi, Seji kemmonroku (Tokyo: Misuzu shobo¯, 1969). 40. Harold Bolitho, “The Tempo¯ Crisis,” in CHJ, 5:117. 41. Ivan Morris, The Nobility of Failure (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1975), p. 197, offers a highly readable account of the rebellion. For an analysis of O<sup>¯</sup> shio’s thought, see Tetsuo Najita, “O<sup>¯</sup> shio Heihachiro¯, 1793–1838,” in Craig and Shively, Personality in Japanese History, pp. 155–179. 42. Lu, Sources of Japanese History, 2:8. 43. Keisei hisaku (A secret plan of government), translated in Keene, The Japanese Discovery of Europe, p. 191. 44. Charles L. Yates, Saigo¯ Takamori (London and New York: Kegan Paul, 1995), p. 19, and, in greater detail, “Restoration and Rebellion in Satsuma: The Life of Saigo¯ Takamori” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1987), pp. 57–75. See also Nishikawa Shunsaku, Edo jidai no poriteikaru-ekonomii (Tokyo: Nihon Hyo¯ronsha, 1974), pp. 161–182. 45. Craig, Cho¯shu¯ in the Meiji Restoration, chap. 2, “Cho¯shu¯ and the Tempo¯ Reform,” and Nishikawa Shunsaku, “Grain Consumption: The Case of Cho¯shu¯,” in Jansen and Rozman, Japan in Transition, pp. 421–446. 46. See Ooms, Charismatic Bureaucrat, pp. 85–86. 47. Bolitho, “The Tempo¯ Crisis,” p. 156. 48. Ibid., p. 151. 49. To¯yama Shigeki, Meiji Ishin (Tokyo: Iwanami, 1950), perhaps the classical statement of this view. ## The Opening to the World 1. Howell, Capitalism from Within, provides the first careful description of this enterprise. 2. Yoshikazu Nakamura, “The Satsuma Dialect in St. Petersburg, or the Adventures of Gonza the Castaway,” Japan Foundation Newsletter (Tokyo), 26, 3, November 1998, pp. 1–3. This story, discovered by a scholar researching Bogdanov, has so delighted Kagoshima residents that a street has been named for Gonza. 3. John J. Stephan, The Kuril Islands: Russo-Japanese Frontiers in the Pacific (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1974), p. 55. 4. W. G. Beasley, “The Foreign Threat and the Opening of the Ports,” in CHJ, 5:265–266. 5. Haga To¯ru, ed., Nihon no meicho: Sugita Genpaku, Hiraga Gennai, Shiba Ko¯kan (Tokyo, 1971), pp. 269–295, for text. 6. See the fine summary by Takakura Shin’ichiro¯ in Kokushi Daijiten, vol. 2 (Tokyo, 1980), pp. 271–273. 7. Honda’s “Secret Plan of Government” (Keisei hissaku) is discussed and translated in part by Donald Keene in The Japanese Discovery of Europe. 8. In the same period the English East India Company was becoming an arm of government, a change that was completed in 1834. 9. Kanai Madoka, Nichi-Ran ko¯sho¯shi no kenkyu¯ (Kyoto: Shibunkaku Shuupan, 1986), gives the details of ships and captains. 10. Jansen, “New Materials for the Intellectual History of Nineteenth Century Japan,” p. 575. 11. Translation by Bob T. Wakabayashi, Anti-Foreignism and Western Learning in Early-Modern Japan, p. 60. 12. Wakabayashi, Anti-Foreignism and Western Learning in Early-Modern Japan, p. 103. 13. The work and influence of Philipp Franz von Siebold are the subject of a massive biographical study by Kure Sho¯zo¯, Shiiboruto sensei (Tokyo, 1926) and a journal, Shiiboruto kenkyu¯, issued for several years beginning in 1982 by the Von Siebold Society of Ho¯sei University in Tokyo. His Nippon: Archiv zur Beschreibung von Japan (Leiden, 1832) was the basis for a popular work entitled Manners and Customs of the Japanese that was published in London and New York in 1852 and taken to Japan as textbook by Commodore Perry the next year. 14. Abiko, “Watanabe Kazan: The Man and His Times.” 15. Sato¯ Sho¯suke, Yo¯gakushi no kenkyu¯ (Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, 1980). Haruko Iwakasi first called this to my attention. 16. Wakabayashi, Anti-Foreignism and Western Learning in Early-Modern Japan, p. 149, translates the entire work. 17. From Aizawa’s “New Theses,” as translated by Wakabayashi in ibid., p. 169. 18. I have discussed this at greater length in China in the Tokugawa World, pp. 74–75. 19. Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, p. 613. 20. Bob T. Wakabayashi, “Opium, Expulsion, Sovereignty: China’s Lessons for Bakumatsu Japan,” Monumenta Nipponica, 47, 1 (Spring 1992): 5. 21. Robert van Gulik, “Kakkaron: A Japanese Echo of the Opium War,” Monumenta Serica (1939): 516–540. 22. C. R. Boxer, Jan Compagnie in Japan – (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1950), app. V, p. 186. 23. J. A. van der Chijs, Nee¨rlands Streven tot Openstelling van Japan voor den Wereldhandel (Amsterdam, 1867), pp. 47–52, for full text. The Lao Tzu reference was lost on bakufu scholars, who promised to research the matter. 24. For many years scholars credited Mizuno with a desire for opening Japan to trade and related his resignation to his failure, but Mitani Hiroshi finds little basis for this. “Kaikoku zen’ya,” in Nihon gaiko¯ no kiki ishiki (Tokyo: Kindai Nihon kenkyu¯kai, 1985), pp. 7ff. 25. W. G. Beasley, Great Britain and the Opening of Japan, – (London: Luzac, 1951), p. 93. 26. For the flags, Miwa Kimitada, “Perri ‘daiyon no shokan,’ ” in Kokusai seiji, no. 102 (Tokyo: Kokusai seiji gakkai, February 1993), pp. 1–21; a discussion expanded and enriched in the same author’s Kakurareta Peri no “shirohata” (Tokyo: Sophia University Press, 1999). Peter Booth Wiley, Yankees in the Land of the Gods: Commodore Perry and the Opening of Japan (New York: Viking, 1990), gives the fullest account of the mission. Perry’s own account appeared in 1856 as F. J. Hawks, ed., Narrative of an Expedition of an American Squadron to the China Seas and Japan, 2 vols. (Washington, D.C.: “Published by Order of the Congress,” 1856). Perry’s personal account, The Japan Expedition of – : The Personal Journal of Commodore Matthew C. Perry, ed. Roger Pineau, appeared in 1968 from the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. 27. See, on this point, W. G. Beasley, “Japanese Castaways and British Interpreters,” Monumenta Nipponica, 46, 1 (Spring 1991), who notes that the English too decided that negotiations in Dutch went better than those in Chinese. 28. A contemporary painting shows those hulls as brown, but the more ominous black had long served to distinguish ships from beyond the borders from the “white” ships from China. Printmakers emphasized their blackness, and the term has become standard in Japan. 29. In his diary S. Wells Williams, whose help was necessary for a Chinese version of the treaty, deplored Perry’s hauteur. “I do not at all like the way in which this nation is spoken of by the commodore and most of his officers, calling them savages, liars, a pack of fools, poor devils; cursing them and then denying practically all of it by supposing them worth making a treaty with. Truly, what sort of instruments does God work with!” Wiley, Yankees in the Land of the Gods, p. 398. 30. From W. G. Beasley, Select Documents on Japanese Foreign Policy, – (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1955), pp. 102–107. 31. From ibid., pp. 117–119. 32. Conrad Totman, “Political Reconciliation in the Tokugawa Bakufu: Abe Masahiro and Tokugawa Nariaki, 1844–1852,” in Craig and Shively, Personality in Japanese History, pp. 180–208, and, a less favorable view, Harold Bolitho, “Abe Masahiro and the New Japan,” in Jeffrey P. Mass and William B. Hauser, eds., The Bakufu in Japanese History (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1985), pp. 173–188. 33. Harris can be followed in his Complete Journal, ed. Mario Cosenza (Rutland and Tokyo: C. E. Tuttle, 1959); see also the account by his Dutch-speaking interpreter Henry C. J. Heusken, Japan Journal – (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1964), and Oliver Statler’s more critical, carefully researched, and highly readable Shimoda Story (New York: Random House, 1969). 34. Text of Nariaki’s letter in Beasley, Select Documents on Japanese Foreign Policy, pp. 168–169. 35. Letter in Ishin shi, 6 vols. (Tokyo: Meiji shoin, 1941), 2:442–443. See also the discussion of one such daimyo agent in George M. Wilson, “The Bakumatsu Intellectual in Action: Hashimoto Sanai in the Political Crisis of 1858,” in Craig and Shively, Personality in Japanese History, pp. 234–263. 36. The classic work by G. B. Sansom, The Western World and Japan (New York: Knopf, 1950), pp. 248–274, “Forerunners of the Restoration Movement,” and especially H. D. Harootunian, Toward Restoration: The Growth of Political Consciousness in Tokugawa Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1970), provide appealing detail (Sansom) and incisive analysis (Harootunian) of the men considered here. 37. Text in Beasley, Select Documents on Japanese Foreign Policy, pp. 102–107, a work that has as preface a masterly discussion of competing views about Japan’s opening. Fujita is also discussed in Richard T. Chang, From Prejudice to Tolerance: A Study of the Japanese Image of the West, – (Tokyo: Sophia University, 1970), pp. 21–97. 38. From Sakuma Sho¯zan, “Reflections on My Errors,” in Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 608f. 39. A formula also worked out by Chinese reformers like Chang Chih-tung, but only at the end of the century. 40. Adapted from Chang, From Prejudice to Tolerance, p. 124. Miyamoto Chu¯, Sakuma Sho¯zan (Tokyo, 1940), provides Sakuma’s major writings as well as full biographical coverage. 41. Quoted in Thomas M. Huber, The Revolutionary Origins of Modern Japan (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1981), p. 13, who provides good biographical detail. 42. Sukehiro Hirakawa, “Japan’s Turn to the West,” in CHJ, 5:451. 43. From Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 618–622, and (the last), CHJ, 5:452. ## The Tokugawa Fall 1. Text in Ishin shi, 2:731–739. 2. Marius B. Jansen, Sakamoto Ryo¯ma and the Meiji Restoration (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961), pp. 108–109. 3. In addition to Richardson, the party consisted of a Mr. Marshall and Mrs. Boradaile; Marshall received a chest wound, and the lady sustained a head wound from a blow partially deflected by her pith helmet. A Dutch diplomat wrote that “Marshall later told me that it was entirely Richardson’s fault. They could have let the procession pass, but Richardson paid no attention to Marshall, who called ‘For God’s sake let’s not have a row! Turn back!’ Richardson, a great braggart, cut right through the escort and was cut down immediately.” Journal van Jonkheer Dirk de Graeff van Polsbroek (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1987), p. 60. 4. Harold Bolitho, “Aizu, 1853–1868,” Proceedings of the British Association for Japanese Studies, 2 (1977): 8ff. 5. Shimazaki To¯son’s epic account of the Restoration, Yoake mae (translated by William Naff as Before the Dawn; University of Hawaii Press, 1987), details these events as experienced by his father, a station (honjin) master on the central mountain highway. 6. The best account is to be found in Conrad Totman, The Collapse of the Tokugawa Bakufu, – (Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii, 1980), pp. 108–122. 7. Jansen, Sakamoto Ryo¯ma and the Meiji Restoration, p. 300. 8. From ibid., pp. 295–296. 9. Lu, Sources of Japanese History, 2:29. 10. Sugitami Akira draws a pointed contrast between Saga and bakufu officials in their reaction to the miniature railroad Perry presented the bakufu at Shimoda in 1854. Edo representatives, quite innocent of the engine which provided its power, sat on the roof of the little passenger cars and whooped with pleasure as the engine carried them along; Saga men, by contrast, selected for their training, headed straight for the engine room of the Dutch steamer they boarded, asked the right questions, and set out to build their own as soon as possible. “Kaikoku zengo ni okeru Nichi-Ran kankei” in Marius B. Jansen, ed., Kyu¯shu¯ to Nihon no rekishi, Monograph Series no. 1 (Singapore: National University of Singapore, 1991), pp. 113–139. 11. W. G. Beasley, “The Foreign Threat and the Opening of the Ports,” in CHJ, 5:301. 12. Rutherford Alcock, minister to Japan, to Lord Russell, November 19, 1864. Quoted in ibid., 5:297. 13. Shinya Sugiyama, “Thomas B. Glover: A British Merchant in Japan, 1861–70,” Business History, 26, 2 ( July 1984): 115–138. 14. Japan through American Eyes: The Journal of Francis Hall, Kanagawa and Yokohama, – , ed. Notehelfer. 15. Jansen, “New Materials for the Intellectual History of Nineteenth Century Japan,” p. 579. 16. I have discussed the missions abroad in Japan and Its World, pp. 45ff. The diaries of members of the first mission are discussed in Masao Miyoshi, As We Saw Them: The First Japanese Embassy to the United States ( ) (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979). 17. Carmen Blacker, The Japanese Enlightenment: A Study of the Writings of Fukuzawa Yukichi (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1964), p. 8. 18. The Autobiography of Fukuzawa Yukichi, trans. Eiichi Kiyooka (Tokyo: Hokuseido, 1948), pp. 143–144. 19. Jansen, “Tosa during the Last Century of Tokugawa Rule,” p. 341. This intermediate role is also clear in Anne Walthall, “Caught in the Middle: Gunchu¯ So¯dai in the Restoration Era,” Asian Cultural Studies, 18 (February 1992): 164ff. 20. See Before the Dawn, trans. Naff; see also Naff, “Shimazaki Toson’s Before the Dawn: Historical Fiction as History and as Literature” in James White, Michio Umegaki and Thomas Havens, eds., The Ambivalence of Nationalism: Modern Japan between East and West (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1990), pp. 79– 114. 21. M. William Steele, “Goemon’s New World View: Popular Representations of the Opening of Japan,” Asian Cultural Studies, 17 (March 1989): 79. 22. This is most sharply seen in comparing Conrad Totman’s Collapse of the Tokugawa Bakufu, – , with the Cho¯shu¯-centered account by Albert Craig, Cho¯shu¯ in the Meiji Restoration, or Marius Jansen’s Sakamoto Ryo¯ma and the Meiji Restoration. 23. Jansen, Sakamoto Ryo¯ma and the Meiji Restoration, pp. 108–109; for Takechi, p. 133. 24. Reinier Hesselink, “The Assassination of Henry Heusken,” Monumenta Nipponica, 49, 3 (Autumn 1994): 351. 25. Conrad Totman, “From Sakoku to Kaikoku: The Transformation of Foreign-Policy Attitudes, 1853–1868” Monumenta Nipponica, 36, 1 (1980), and Totman, The Collapse of the Tokugawa Bakufu, – . 26. Bob T. Wakabayashi, “Rival Statesmen on a Loose Rein,” in White, Umegaki, and Havens, The Ambivalence of Nationalism, p. 33. 27. Sensaku Nakagawa, Kutani Ware, trans. John Bester (New York: Kodansha, 1979), pp. 104–143. I owe this reference to Louise Cort. 28. Bolitho, “Aizu, 1853–1868.” 29. Takie Sugiyama Lebra, Above the Clouds: Status Culture of Modern Japanese Nobility (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), p. 92. 30. Sir Ernest Satow, A Diplomat in Japan (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1921), p. 184. ## The Meiji Revolution 1. See, on this point, the discussion by Thomas C. Smith, “Japan’s Aristocratic Revolution,” reprinted in his Native Sources of Japanese Industrialization, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988). 2. Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, p. 644. 3. Slightly variant translations of the three drafts can be found in Lu, Sources of Japanese History, 2:35–36. I follow the analysis of Inoue Kiyoshi, Meiji ishin, Nihon no rekishi, no. 20 (Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, 1966), pp. 84–90. 4. For Kido, Jansen, Japan and Its World, p. 63, following Kume Kunitake memoirs; for the emperor’s rescript renouncing his divinity, Government Section, Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers, Political Reorientation of Japan, vol. II, appendices (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1949), p. 470. 5. James Edward Ketelaar, Of Heretics and Martyrs in Meiji Japan: Buddhism and Its Persecution (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990), pp. 88–89. See also John Breen, “The Imperial Oath of 1868: Ritual, Politics, and Power in the Restoration,” Monumenta Nipponica, 51, 4 (Winter 1996): 407–429. 6. Inoue, Meiji ishin, pp. 77ff., provides a deft summary of the tensions involved. 7. Albert M. Craig, “The Central Government,” in Jansen and Rozman, Japan in Transition, p. 45. 8. The Diary of Kido Takayoshi, trans. Sidney Devere Brown and Akiko Hirota (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1983), 1:71 (entry of August 6, 1868). 9. Craig, “The Central Government,” p. 48. 10. Ibid., p. 47. 11. The Autobiography of Fukuzawa Yukichi, p. 212. 12. Lu, Sources of Japanese History, 2:38. 13. Michio Umegaki, After the Restoration: The Beginning of Japan’s Modern State (New York: New York University Press, 1988), p. 124. 14. The Diary of Kido Takayoshi, 1:186 (entry of February 28, 1869). 15. From the petition submitted by the daimyo of Satsuma, Choshu¯, Tosa, and Hizen in March 1869; Kan’ichi Asakawa, The Documents of Iriki (Tokyo, reprint 1955), pp. 377–378. 16. Translation modified from Umegaki, After the Restoration, p. 61. 17. On whom see Edward R. Beauchamp, An American Teacher in Early Meiji Japan (Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii, 1976). 18. F. G. Notehelfer, American Samurai: Captain L. L. Janes and Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985). Janes, and a number of other Americans including Griffis, were recruited from Nagasaki by the Dutch-American missionary-educator Guido Verbeck through his contacts with the Dutch Reformed Seminary at Rutgers, New Brunswick, New Jersey. 19. Umegaki, After the Restoration, p. 63. 20. Craig, “Central Government,” p. 55. 21. Ibid., p. 54. 22. Quoted in Beasley, “Meiji Political Institutions,” in CHJ, 5:634. 23. W. E. Griffis, The Mikado’s Empire (New York, 1876), pp. 526, 534, 536. Griffis left Japan in 1874, but his book went through twelve editions by 1912, and it was probably the most-read work on Japan for a half century in the United States. 24. The site was to become the impact center of the second atomic bomb of August 9, 1945. 25. Martin Collcutt, “Buddhism: The Threat of Eradication,” in Jansen and Rozman, Japan in Transition, pp. 144–153. 26. Griffis, The Mikado’s Empire, pp. 336–337. 27. Collcutt, “Buddhism: The Threat of Eradication,” p. 159; Ketelaar, Of Heretics and Martyrs in Meiji Japan. 28. Fukuda Gyo¯kai, quoted in Japanese Religion in the Meiji Era, ed. Kishimoto Hideo and trans. John F. Howes (Tokyo: Obunsha, 1956), p. 111. 29. Helen Hardacre, Shinto¯ and the State, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989), pp. 28–29, provides a succinct summary of a very complex process. 30. Barbara Rose, Tsuda Umeko and Women’s Education in Japan (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), and Akiko Kuno, Unexpected Destinations: The Poignant Story of Japan’s First Vassar Graduate (New York: Kodansha, 1993), follow the careers of two of these, the one a pioneer educator and founder of Tsuda College, the other the wife of General O<sup>¯</sup> yama Iwao. 31. Marlene Mayo, “The Western Education of Kume Kunitake,” Monumenta Nipponica, 27, no. 1 (1973): 3–67; Tanaka Akira, “Bei-O<sup>¯</sup> kairan jikki” no gakusaiteki kenkyu¯ (Sapporo, 1993); and Kume’s five-volume account, Bei-O<sup>¯</sup> kairan jikki, first published in 1875 and again in edited form by Professor Tanaka in the 1970s. At this writing the entire journal is being prepared for publication in English. 32. Irokawa Daikichi, The Culture of the Meiji Period (translation of Irokawa, Meiji no bunka), ed. Marius B. Jansen (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), pp. 55ff., discusses Kido’s observations. 33. The Diary of Kido Takayoshi, 2:187. 34. Fukuzawa Yukichi, An Encouragement of Learning, trans. David A. Dilworth and Umeyo Hirano (Tokyo: Sophia University, 1969), p. 15. Fukuzawa later built this into a longer Outline of a Theory of Civilization, trans. David A. Dilworth and G. Cameron Hurst (Tokyo: Sophia University, 1973). 35. Quoted in Mayo, “The Western Education of Kume Kunitake,” p. 48. 36. Quoted in Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 650–651. 37. Quoted in Eugene Soviak, “On the Nature of Western Progress: The Journal of the Iwakuea Embassy” in Donald Shively, ed., Tradition and Modernization in Japanese Culture (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971), p. 31. 38. James F. Conte, “Overseas Study in the Meiji Period: Japanese Students in America, 1867–1902” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1977). Also Ishizuki Minoru, Kindai Nihon no kaigai ryu¯gakushi (Kyoto: Mineruba shobo¯, 1972). 39. The Diary of Kido Takayoshi, 1:167–168. 40. Ibid., 1:191 (entry for March 12, 1869). 41. Inoue, Meiji ishin, pp. 314–340; the most thoughtful treatment of Saigo¯ in this struggle is that of Charles L. Yates, Saigo¯ Takamori: The Man behind the Myth (London: Kegan Paul, 1994), pp. 130–155, who argues that Saigo¯ may have expected to work out a peaceful compromise like those he masterminded in the bakufu’s first expedition against Cho¯shu¯ and the surrender of Edo with Katsu Kaishu¯. 42. The Fifteenth National Bank, established in 1877, was capitalized at 17,820,000 yen, almost eight times the next largest, and its 484 investors were all kazoku. 43. Stephen Vlastos, “Opposition Movements in Early Meiji,” in CHJ, 5:367–382. 44. See the striking case detailed by Selc¸uk Esenbel in Even the Gods Rebel: The Peasants of Takaino and the Nakano Uprising in Japan (Ann Arbor, Mich.: Association for Asian Studies, 1998). 45. A convenient summary can be found in Kozo Yamamura, “The Meiji Land Tax Reform and Its Effects,” in Jansen and Rozmen, Japan in Transition, pp. 382–397. 46. Neil Waters finds this to be the case in Kawasaki; Japan’s Local Pragmatists (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1983); James C. Baxter, The Meiji Unification through the Lens of Ishikawa Prefecture (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994), pp. 100–108, though in basic agreement, notes that changes that followed the abolition of the Kaga domain included a conscious effort to bypass old village leaders that took effect gradually. 47. Meiji kenpakusho shu¯sei, 6 vols. (Tokyo, 1986–). ## Building the Meiji State 1. Roger F. Hackett, “Political Modernization and the Meiji Genro¯,” in Robert E. Ward, ed., Political Development in Modern Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968), and Lesley Connors, The Emperor’s Adviser: Saionji Kinmochi and Pre-war Japanese politics (London: Croom Helm, 1987). 2. Samurai and Silk, by his granddaughter Haru Matsukata Reischauer (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986), gives a warm and understandably favorable account of Matsukata’s career. 3. Sydney Crawcour, “Economic Change in the Nineteenth Century,” in CHJ, 5:606. 4. Adapted from translation from Ito¯ Hirobumi den (Tokyo, 1940), 1:622–623, by D. W. Anthony and G. H. Healey, “The Iwakura Embassy in Sheffield,” Research Papers in East Asian Studies, no. 2 (University of Sheffield, December 1994): 14. 5. Crawcour, “Economic Change,” p. 614, quoting Thomas C. Smith, Political Change and Industrial Development in Japan: Government Enterprise, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1955), pp. 96–97. 6. Ann Waswo, Japanese Landlords: The Decline of a Rural Elite (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977). 7. Richard J. Smethurst, Agricultural Development and Tenancy Disputes in Japan, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986), grants the hardship of the Matsukata decade, but emphasizes instead land reclamation and entrepreneurial vitality as elements in the growth of owner-tenant categories. The Smethurst study, based on a relatively favored area, has drawn sharp criticism from scholars he takes to task, a controversy that can be located and followed in his own response in the Journal of Japanese Studies, 15, 2 (Summer 1989): 417–437. 8. Smith, Political Change and Industrial Development in Japan. 9. Kazushi Okawa and Henry Rosovsky, “A Century of Japanese Economic Growth,” in W. W. Lockwood, ed., The State and Economic Enterprise in Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965), pp. 47–92. 10. Adapted from W. W. McLaren, Japanese Government Documents (Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan), 42, May 1914, pp. 426–433, who translated the entire document. Nobutaka Ike, The Beginnings of Political Democracy in Japan (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1950), remains the standard account of the birth of the party movement. 11. Itagaki’s bearded, John Brown–like visage appeared on the basic 100-yen note that served as the center of the post–World War II currency until inflation changed the unit to a metal coin. 12. George M. Beckmann, The Making of the Meiji Constitution: The Oligarchs and the Constitutional Development of Japan, – (Lawrence: University of Kansas, 1957), provides in appendices the views of Kido, O<sup>¯</sup> kubo, Yamagata, Ito¯, and Iwakura in addition to O<sup>¯</sup> kuma’s, which proposed elections by the end of 1882. 13. From the translation in ibid., p. 149. 14. Ozaki Yukio, Nihon kenseishi o kataru, in vol. 11 of Ozaki Gakudo¯ zenshu¯ (Tokyo: Ko¯ronsha, 1956). An English translation by Fujiko Hara is forthcoming from Princeton University Press. 15. Irokawa, The Culture of the Meiji Period (translation of Irokawa, Meiji no bunka), ed. Marius B. Jansen, p. 45. 16. Irokawa, The Culture of the Meiji Period. For another such spiritual pilgrimage, see My Thirty-three Years’ Dream: The Autobiography of Miyazaki Torazo¯, trans. Eto¯ Shinkichi and Marius B. Jansen (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982), which shows a comparable hegira of another intense young man who found purpose in life by serving Sun Yat-sen in order to save Asia from Western imperialism. 17. Ivan Parker Hall, Mori Arinori (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1973), p. 292. 18. Lafcadio Hearn, Japan: An Attempt at Interpretation (New York: 1907), appendix, p. 531; letter to Kaneko Kentaro¯, who had relayed a query from Ito¯ Hirobumi, dated August 26, 1892. 19. See W. G. Beasley, “Meiji Political Institutions,” in CHJ, 5:651–665; Johannes Siemes, S.J., Hermann Roesler and the Making of the Meiji State (Tokyo: Sophia University Press, 1966); and Joseph Pittau, S.J., Political Thought in Early Meiji Japan, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967). 20. Pittau, Political Thought, pp. 177–178. 21. Ibid. 22. Theodore F. Cook, “Soldiers in Meiji Society and State: Japan Joins the World,” in Banno Junji, ed., Nihon kin-gendai shi (Tokyo, 1993). 23. David C. Evans and Mark R. Peattie, Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics, and Technology in the Imperial Japanese Navy, – (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1997), now the standard authority. 24. Text in Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 705–707. World War II would show, unfortunately, that these values were not always “easy to practice.” 25. O<sup>¯</sup> sawa Hiroaki, “Emperor versus Army Leaders: The ‘Complications’ Incident of 1886,” in Acta Asiatica, 59 (Tokyo, 1990): 10. 26. Roger Hackett, Yamagata Aritomo in the Rise of Modern Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971), p. 111. 27. The structure and problems of the police system are discussed by D. Eleanor Westney in Imitation and Innovation: The Transfer of Western Organizational Patterns to Meiji Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1987), pp. 35–99. 28. Hall, Mori Arinori, provides a full account. 29. Adapted from text translated in Herbert Passin, Society and Education in Japan (New York: Columbia Teachers College, 1965), pp. 210–211. 30. See the summary by Richard Rubinger, “Education: From One Room to One System,” in Jansen and Rozman, Japan in Transition, pp. 195–230. 31. Ibid., pp. 212–213. 32. Cook, “Soldiers in Meiji Society and State,” p. 14. 33. The subject of Brian Wesley Platt, “School, Community, and State in Nineteenth Century Japan” (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Illinois, 1998). 34. Donald H. Shively, “Motoda Eifu: Confucian Lecturer to the Meiji Emperor,” in David S. Nivison and Arthur F. Wright, eds., Confucianism in Action (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1959), pp. 302–334. 35. From translation in Passin, Society and Education in Japan, p. 227. 36. Cook, “Soldiers in Meiji Society and State,” pp. 26–27. 37. Donald H. Shively, “Nishimura Shigeki: A Confucian View of Modernization,” in Marius B. Jansen, ed., Changing Japanese Attitudes toward Modernization (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965), pp. 193–241. 38. Hall, Mori Arinori. 39. Masamichi Inoki, “The Civil Bureaucracy: Japan,” in Robert A. Ward and Dankwart K. Rustow, eds., Political Modernization in Japan and Turkey (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1964), pp. 296–297. See also Byron K. Marshall’s chapter “The Academic Elite,” in his Academic Freedom and the Japanese Imperial University, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), pp. 21–52. 40. For a study of student culture in these institutions, see Donald T. Roden, Schooldays in Imperial Japan: A Study in the Culture of a Student Elite (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980). 41. Quotations from Hall, Mori Arinori, pp. 426, 430, 424. 42. Shively, “Motoda Eifu,” p. 330. 43. Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 646–647. 44. Hirakawa Sukehiro, “Japan’s Turn to the West,” in CHJ, 5:497. 45. See Carol Gluck, Japan’s Modern Myths: Ideology in the Late Meiji Period (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), for a brilliant study of the context and content of the new imperial ideology. ## Imperial Japan 1. R. H. P. Mason, Japan’s First General Election, (London: Cambridge University Press, 1969), provides much of the information below. 2. Ibid., p. 208. 3. Adapted from quotation in ibid., p. 189. 4. The provision was in fact not so different from that in the United States Congress, which can enact the previous year’s allocations by a “Continuing Resolution” when agreement on a new budget is not forthcoming. 5. The discussion that follows owes a great deal to Andrew Fraser, “The House of Peers (1890–1905): Structure, Groups, and Role,” and “Land Tax Increase: The Debates of December 1898,” in Andrew Fraser, R. H. P. Mason, and Philip Mitchell, eds., Japan’s Early Parliaments, – (London: Routledge, 1995), and to George Akita, Foundations of Constitutional Government in Japan, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967). 6. Fraser, “Land Tax Increase.” 7. Though now part of a newly defined Japan, Okinawa and the rest of Ryukyu were not yet given full equality. Reform and voting rights would come more slowly than they did elsewhere, the islands were sacrificed as buffers for the defense of the main Japanese islands in World War II, they were left under American control long after the occupation of Japan came to an end, and they were required to bear the burden of American military bases after reversion to Japan in 1972. 8. Akira Iriye, “Japan’s Drive to Great-Power Status,” in CHJ, 5:747ff., provides an admirable overview of domestic politics and overseas expansion. 9. Chin Young Choe, The Rule of the Taewon’gun, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972). 10. These machinations have been treated by Hilary Conroy, The Japanese Seizure of Korea, – (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1960), and more recently by Peter Duus, The Abacus and the Sword: The Japanese Penetration of Korea, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995), which now becomes the standard work. 11. Sugimura Fukashi in 1894, quoted in Duus, Abacus and Sword, p. 60. 12. Akira Iriye, “Japan’s Drive,” in CHJ, 5:758. 13. See Alan Takeo Moriyama, Imingaisha: Japanese Emigration Companies and Hawaii (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1985). 14. Actually even the Times thought this unreasonable, and argued that “it is idle to pretend that the institutions of Japan are not sufficiently civilized to afford adequate security for the rights and interests of British subjects.” Quoted in Tatsuji Takeuchi, War and Diplomacy in the Japanese Empire (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1935), p. 95. 15. On whom, see Marius B. Jansen, “O<sup>¯</sup> i Kentaro¯ (1843–1922): Radicalism and Chauvinism,” Far Eastern Quarterly, 6, no. 3 (May 1952). 16. See Marius B. Jansen, “Mutsu Munemitsu,” in Craig and Shively, Personality in Japanese History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1970), pp. 309–334. 17. The standard study of this interesting movement, which combined social protest with syncretic religion, is Benjamin B. Weems, Reform, Rebellion, and the Heavenly Way (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1964). 18. Mutsu’s account of the diplomacy of the Sino-Japanese War, Kenkenroku, has been translated by Gordon Berger (Tokyo: Japan Foundation, 1982). Quotation taken from Hakushaku Mutsu Munemitsu iko¯ (Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1929), p. 322. 19. I have discussed these events at some length in Japan and China from War to Peace, – (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1975), and “Mutsu Munemitsu.” 20. See, in this connection, Donald Keene, “The Sino-Japanese War of 1894–95 and Its Cultural Effect on Japan,” in Shively, Tradition and Modernization in Japanese Culture. 21. Stuart Lone, Japan’s First Modern War: Army and Society in the Conflict with China, – (London: St. Martin’s Press, 1994). 22. Duus, Abacus and Sword, p. 81. 23. I have discussed his travels in China in “Konoe Atsumaro,” in Akira Iriye, ed., The Chinese and the Japanese: Essays in Political and Cultural Interactions (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980), pp. 107–123. 24. A prime example is Miyazaki To¯ten (Torazo¯), whose autobiography, My Thirty-three Years’ Dream, is available in translation by Eto¯ Shinkichi and Marius B. Jansen (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982). 25. Akira Iriye, “Japan’s Drive,” in CHJ, 5:774, notes that its reverberations were enormous, in that it forced France closer to Britain while maintaining its Russian ties, and thus contributing to the conflagration of 1914. 26. The extensive literature is surveyed and summarized in Ian Nish, The Anglo-Japanese Alliance: The Diplomacy of Two Island Empires, – (London: Athlone Press, 1966), and Nish, The Origins of the Russo-Japanese War (London: Longman, 1985). 27. Marius B. Jansen, The Japanese and Sun Yat-sen (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1954), and Jansen, “Japan and the Chinese Revolution of 1911,” in John K. Fairbank and Kwang-ching Liu, eds., Late Ch’ing, vol. 11 of Cambridge History of China (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980). 28. Duus, Abacus and Sword, pp. 181–187. 29. Ibid., p. 189. 30. Quoted in Jansen, Japan and China from War to Peace, pp. 124–125. 31. Quoted in Duus, Abacus and Sword, p. 190. 32. Akira Iriye, Pacific Estrangement: Japanese and American Expansion, – (Chicago: Imprint Publications, 1994, reprint of the 1972 Harvard University Press edition), p. 101. 33. Andrew Gordon, Labor and Imperial Democracy in Prewar Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), p. 33. The fullest analysis of the event is that of Shumpei Okamoto, The Japanese Oligarchy and the Russo-Japanese War (New York: Columbia University Press, 1970), pp. 167–223, and Okamoto, “The Emperor and the Crowd: The Historical Significance of the Hibiya Riot” in Najita and Koschmann, Conflict in Modern Japanese History. Portsmouth negotiations are described in John Albert White, The Diplomacy of the Russo-Japanese War (Princeton University Press, 1964). 34. Akita, Foundations of Constitutional Government, p. 142. 35. Ozaki Yukio recalled later that “as the leader of a political party Hoshi held a stick in his right hand and money in his left. If money did not work he used the stick. He conquered one after another, and within a short period he became a powerful figure. Not surprisingly, he needed money . . . To be sure, his objective was not money itself but power.” Ozaki, Nihon kenseishi o kataru. 36. Yoshida’s examination standing is taken from Inoki Masamichi, Hyo¯den: Yoshida Shigeru (Tokyo: Yomiuri Shinbunsha, 1978), pp. 66–68. A full account of the diplomatic/consular (and other) examinations can be found in Robert M. Spaulding, Jr., Imperial Japan’s Higher Civil Service Examinations (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967), pp. 100ff. 37. Nagatsuka Takashi, The Soil, trans. Ann Waswo as A Portrait of Rural Life in Meiji Japan (London: Routledge, 1989). 38. Susan Hanley, “The Material Culture: Stability in Transition,” in Jansen and Rozman, Japan in Transition, p. 468. ## Meiji Culture 1. Mention should be made of Donald Keene, Dawn to the West, 2 vols. (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1984); Christine Guth, Art, Tea, and Industry: Matsuda Takashi and the Mitsui Circle (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993); Kishimoto Hideo, ed., Japanese Religion in the Meiji Era (Tokyo: O<sup>¯</sup> bunsha, 1956); Dallas Finn, Meiji Revisited: The Sites of Victorian Japan (New York: Weatherhill, 1995); and Ellen P. Conant, Nihonga: Transcending the Past: Japanese-Style Painting, – (St. Louis: St. Louis Art Museum, 1995). 2. Irokawa, The Culture of the Meiji Period, p. 51. 3. Quoted by Isamu Fukuchi, “Kokoro and the Spirit of Meiji,” Monumenta Nipponica, 48, 4 (1993): 469. 4. Breen, “The Imperial Oath of April 1868.” 5. Irokawa Daikichi, “The Impact on Popular Culture,” in Nagai Michio and Miguel Urrutia, eds., Meiji Ishin: Restoration and Revolution (Tokyo: United Nations University, 1985), pp. 120–133. 6. Hazel Jones, Live Machines: Hired Foreigners and Meiji Japan (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1980), analyzes the number and contributions of the foreign experts. 7. O<sup>¯</sup> ta Yu¯zo¯, Eigo to Nihonjin (Tokyo: Ko¯dansha), 1995, characterizes those who dominated this era as “Gods of English.” 8. Carmen Blacker, The Japanese Enlightenment: A Study of the Writings of Fukuzawa Yukichi (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1964). Translations exist of An Encouragement of Learning, trans. David Dilworth and Umeyo Hirano (Tokyo: Sophia University, 1969) and An Outline of a Theory of Civilization, trans. David A. Dilworth and Cameron Hurst (Tokyo: Sophia University, 1973). 9. There is a complete translation by William R. Braisted, Meiroku Zasshi: Journal of the Japanese Enlightenment (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1976). 10. See Earl H. Kinmonth, The Self-Made Man in Meiji Japanese Thought: From Samurai to Salary Man (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981). 11. F. G. Notehelfer, American Samurai: Captain L. L. Janes and Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), p. 205; for the oath, pp. 196–197. 12. John F. Howes, “Japanese Christians and American Missionaries,” in Jansen, Changing Japanese Attitudes toward Modernization, p. 339. 13. Masatake Oshima, “Memories of Dr. Clark,” Japan Christian Intelligencer, 2, 2 (April 5, 1926), the only eye-witness account. I owe this reference to Atsushi Fukushima. 14. On whom see John F. Howes, ed., Nitobe Inazo¯: Japan’s Bridge across the Pacific (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1995). 15. Naganawa Mitsuo, “The Japanese Orthodox Church in the Meiji Era,” in J. Thomas Rimer, ed., A Hidden Fire: Russian and Japanese Cultural Encounters, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press and Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 1995), pp. 158– 169. There is a recent biography by Nakamura Kennosuke, Senkyo¯shi Nikorai to Meiji Nihon (Tokyo: Iwanami, 1996). 16. Quoted in Masaharu Anesaki, History of Japnese Religion (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1930), p. 342. 17. James Edward Ketelaar, Of Heretics and Martyrs in Meiji Japan, p. 206. 18. See the collected petitions in Irokawa Daikichi and Gabe Masato, eds., Meiji kempaku shusei (Tokyo: Chikuma shobo¯, 1980). 19. See Hirakawa Sukehiro, “Japan’s Turn to the West,” in CHJ, 5:477ff. 20. Sansom, The Western World and Japan, p. 414. 21. Translated by Kenneth Strong as Footprints in the Snow: A Novel of Meiji Japan (Tokyo: Tuttle, 1970). 22. My Thirty-three Years’ Dream: The Autobiography of Miyazaki To¯ten, trans. E<sup>¯</sup>to and Jansen, pp. 12–13. 23. Tokutomi Soho¯, The Future Japan, trans. Vinh Sinh (Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 1989), p. 126. Tokutomi’s life can be followed in John Pierson, Tokutomi Soho¯, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980), and Vinh Sinh, Tokutomi Soho¯ ( – ): The Later Career (Toronto: University of Toronto/York University Joint Centre on Modern East Asia, 1986). 24. These issues are taken up by Kenneth B. Pyle in The New Generation in Meiji Japan: Problems of Cultural Identity, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1969), and Pyle, “Meiji Conservatism,” in CHJ, 5: 674–720. 25. On whom, see Thomas R. H. Havens, Nishi Amane and Modern Japanese Thought (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1970). 26. J. Scott Miller, “Japanese Shorthand and Sokkibon,” Monumenta Nipponica, 49, 4 (Winter 1994): 471–487. 27. Translated by Marleigh Grayer Ryan, in Japan’s First Modern Novel: Ukigumo of Futabatei Shimei (New York: Columbia University Press, 1967). 28. Quoted by Ury Eppstein, “Musical Instruction in Meiji Education: A Study of Adap tation and Assimilation,” Monumenta Nipponica, 40, 1 (Spring 1985): 32. 29. See William Malm, “The Modern Music of Meiji Japan,” in Shively, Tradition and Modernization in Japanese Culture. 30. Quoted in Eppstein, “Musical Instruction,” p. 12. 31. The recent work of Dallas Finn, Meiji Revisited: The Sites of Victorian Japan (New York: Weatherhill, 1995), provides an authoritative illustrated guide and commentary. 32. I owe this point to William Coaldrake. 33. These reflections owe much to a forthcoming study of Fenollosa by Ellen Conant. 34. See Conant, Nihonga: Transcending the Past, and Michiyo Morioka and Paul Berry, eds., The Transformation of Japanese Painting Traditions: Nihonga from the Griffith and Patricia Way Collection (Seattle, Wash.: Seattle Art Museum, 1999). 35. Shu¯ji Takashina, J. Thomas Rimer, and Gerald Bolas, eds., Paris in Japan: The Japanese Encounter with European Painting (Tokyo: Japan Foundation; St. Louis: Washington University, 1987). 36. The magisterial survey by Donald Keene, Dawn to the West, and the distinguished translations of major authors by Keene, Edward Seidensticker, Howard S. Hibbett, and Edwin McClellan deserve mention, though they are too numerous to itemize. 37. Edwin McClellan, Two Japanese Novelists: So¯seki and To¯son (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1969), p. 5. 38. Hearn (1850–1904), a freelance writer, came to Japan in 1890 and after teaching English in Matsue and Kumamoto, was appointed lecturer on English literature at the Imperial University. He was enthralled by traditional Japan, married the daughter of a former samurai, and was adopted as Koizumi Yakumo, thereby becoming a Japanese citizen. (As such his salary was sharply reduced to put him on the Japanese pay scale.) He became famous for a stream of books derived from Japanese folklore. His last work, Japan: An Attempt at Interpretation (New York: Macmillan, 1904), has been drawn on earlier. See also Sukehiro Hirakawa, ed., Rediscovering Lafcadio Hearn: Japanese Legends, Life, and Culture (Kent: Global Books, 1997). 39. Kokoro: A Novel by Natsume So¯seki (Chicago: Henry Regnery, 1957), p. 245. See Isamu Fukui, “Kokoro and the Spirit of Meiji,” Monumenta Nipponica, 48, 4 (1993), for a discussion of alternate explanations of that “spirit” by Japanese critics. 40. Richard Bowring, Mori O<sup>¯</sup> gai and the Modernization of Japanese Culture (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979), p. 19. 41. Many translated by David Dilworth and J. Thomas Rimer in The Incident at Sakai and Other Stories and Saiki ko¯i and Other Stories (both Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii, 1977). 42. Translation by William E. Naff (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1987). 43. See, for the larger question, the splendid study by Carol Gluck, Japan’s Modern Myths. 44. See, for example, Kate Wildman Nakai, “Tokugawa Confucian Historiography: The Hayashi, Early Mito School, and Arai Hakuseki,” in Nosco, Confucianism and Tokugawa Culture, pp. 62–91. 45. Tao De-min, “The Influence of Sorai in Meiji Japan: Shigeno Yasutsugu as an Advocate of ‘Practical Sinology,’ ” in Tao, Nihon kangaku shiso¯shi ronko¯ (Osaka: Kansai University, 2000), pp. 69–81. 46. Quoted in Numata Jiro¯, “Shigeno Yasutsugu and the Modern Tokyo Tradition of Writing,” in W. G. Beasley and E. G. Pulleyblank, eds., Historians of China and Japan (London: Oxford University Press, 1961), p. 277. 47. John S. Brownlee, Japanese Historians and the National Myths, – : The Age of the Gods and Emperor Jimmu (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1997), p. 86. 48. Japan and the United States adopted the German system of graduate instruction through seminars in the same era, and developed historical research as an academic profession in the same decade. The American Historical Association was founded in 1885, the Japanese Shigakkai in 1889, with Shigeno as president. 49. Margaret Mehl, “Scholarship and Ideology in Conflict: The Kume Affair, 1892,” Monumenta Nipponica, 48, 3 (Winter 1993): 342. See also the longer discussion in Brownlee, Japanese Historians. 50. Brownlee, Japanese Historians, p. 96. 51. The larger problem of censorship of literature is treated by Jay Rubin in Injurious to Public Morals: Writers and the Meiji State (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1984). 52. Brownlee, Japanese Historians, p. 109. 53. The Works of Inazo Nitobe, 5 vols. (Tokyo: University of Tokyo, 1972), 1:138–141. 54. See the chart and discussion of riots in Andrew Gordon, Labor and Imperial Democracy in Prewar Japan (Berkeley: University of California, 1991), pp. 26ff. 55. See Richard J. Smethurst, A Social Basis for Prewar Japanese Militarism: The Army and the Rural Community (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973), the standard work. 56. From the introduction by Ann Waswo, trans., The Soil by Nagatsuka Takashi: A Portrait of Rural life in Meiji Japan (London: Routledge, 1989), p. xv. 57. Irokawa, The Culture of the Meiji Period, p. 219. 58. Quoted in ibid., p. 241. Irokawa is also author of a recent biography, Kitamura To¯- koku (Tokyo: Tokyo Daigaku Shuppankai, 1994). 59. Eiji Yoshikawa, Fragments of a Past: A Memoir, trans. Edwin McClellan (Tokyo: Kodansha, 1992), pp. 112, 186. 60. Quoted in F. G. Notehelfer, Ko¯toku Shu¯sui: Portrait of a Japanese Radical (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971), p. 203. Nitobe Inazo¯, then head of the First Higher School, was held responsible fort Tokutomi’s talk, and the Ministry of Education requested his resignation, which he submitted without protest. Howes, Nitobe Inazo¯, p. 148. The prison diary of Kano Sugako, Ko¯toku’s common-law wife and the only woman hanged, is translated by Mikiso Hane in Reflections on the Way to the Gallows: Rebel Women in Prewar Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988). 61. Brownlee, Japanese Historians. The controversy is also discussed in H. Paul Varley, Imperial Restoration in Medieval Japan (New York: Columbia University Press, 1971). ## Japan between the Wars 1. See the discussion by Taichiro¯ Mitani in “The Establishment of Party Cabinets, 1898–1932,” in CHJ, 6. 2. His career can be followed in Leslie Connors, The Emperor’s Adviser: Saionji Kinmochi and Pre-war Japanese Politics (London: Croom Helm, 1987). 3. Tetsuo Najita, Hara Kei in the Politics of Compromise, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967), provides the best coverage of these tactics. 4. Ozaki autobiography, Nihon kenseishi o kataru, chap. 9. 5. Richard H. Mitchell, Censorship in Imperial Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983), pp. 132ff., provides the standard treatment of censorship. For censorship of literature the basic work is that by Rubin, Injurious to Public Morals. 6. Byron K. Marshall, trans., The Autobiography of O<sup>¯</sup> sugi Sakae (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), pp. 132–133. 7. Harry Emerson Wildes, Social Currents in Japan: With Special Reference to the Press (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1927), p. 108. I am grateful to Soowon Kim for identification of the unfortunate Mr. Min. 8. Mitchell, Censorship in Imperial Japan, pp. 196–197. See also Richard H. Mitchell, Thought Control in Prewar Japan (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1976). 9. Ben-Ami Shillony, “The Meiji Restoration: Japan’s Attempt to Inherit China,” in Ian Neary, ed., War, Revolution, and Japan (Kent: Sandgate, Folkestone, 1993), pp. 20–32. 10. These events are discussed in greater detail in Jansen, The Japanese and Sun Yat-sen, and Eto¯ and Jansen, trans., My Thirty-three Years’ Dream. 11. Ikuhiko Hata, “Continental Expansion, 1905–1941,” in CHJ, 6:271–277. 12. The standard study is that by James W. Morley, The Japanese Thrust into Siberia, (New York: Columbia University Press, 1957). 13. Frank P. Baldwin, “The March First Movement: Korean Challenge, Japanese Response” (Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University, 1969), and Baldwin, “Participatory Anti-Imperialism: The 1919 Independence Movement,” Journal of Korean Studies, 1 (1979): 123–162. 14. See Joshua A. Fogel, The Literature of Travel in the Japanese Rediscovery of China (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1996), and Carter J. Eckert, Offspring of Empire: the Koch’ang Kims and the Cultural Origins of Korean Capitalism, – (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1991). 15. Ian Nish, Japan’s Struggle with Internationalism: Japan, China, and the League of Nations, – (London: Kegan Paul, 1993), p. 10. 16. Joshua Fogel, Politics and Sinology: The Case of Naito¯ Konan ( – ) (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1984), and Yue-him Tam, “In Search of the Oriental Past: The Life and Thought of Naito¯ Konan (1860–1934)” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1975). 17. The authoritative work is Arthur Waldron, From War to Nationalism: China’s Turning Point, – (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995). 18. Akira Iriye, After Imperialism: The Search for a New Order in the Far East, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1965). For Chang Tso-lin, see Gavan McCormack, Chang Tso-lin in Northeast China, – : China, Japan, and the Manchurian Idea (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1977). 19. Quoted from translation by Herbert Bix, “The Showa Emperor’s ‘Monologue’ and the Problem of War Responsibility,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 18, 2 (Summer 1992): 339, and also discussed in Marius B. Jansen, “The Pacific War and the Twentieth Century,” published in Japanese as “Niju¯ seiki ni okeru Taiheiyo¯ senso¯ no imi,” in Hosoya Chihiro, Homma Nagayo, Iriye Akira, and Hatano Sumiyo, Taiheiyo¯ senso¯ (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1993), p. 599. 20. On whom, see George Akita, “The Other Ito¯: A Political Failure,” in Craig and Shively, Personality in Japanese History, pp. 335–372. 21. Sterling Tatsuji Takeuchi, War and Diplomacy in the Japanese Empire (New York: Doubleday, 1935), pp. 262–274, provides a full account. 22. On the slow pace at which daily life changed, see Susan B. Hanley, “The Material Culture: Stability in Transition,” in Jansen and Rozman, Japan in Transition from Tokugawa to Meiji, pp. 447–469. 23. The most cogent discussion of these issues is that of E. Sydney Crawcour, “Industrialization and Technological Change, 1885–1920,” in CHJ, 6:420. The Crawcour, Nakamura, and Taira essays referred to below have also been reprinted in Kozo Yamamura, ed., The Economic Emergence of Modern Japan (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), chaps. 1, 2, 3, 6. 24. See Mikiso Hane in Peasants, Rebels, and Outcasts: The Underside of Modern Japan (New York: Pantheon Books, 1982), pp. 172ff., and E. Patricia Tsurumi, Factory Girls: Women in the Thread Mills of Meiji Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990). 25. Followed more closely in Marius B. Jansen, “Yawata, Hanyehping, and the 21 Demands,” Pacific Historical Review, 23, 1 (1954): 31–48. 26. Peter Duus, “Zaikabo¯: Japanese Cotton Mills in China, 1895–1937,” in Peter Duus, Ramon H. Myers, and Mark R. Peattie, eds., The Japanese Informal Empire in China, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989), pp. 65–100. 27. Crawcour, “Industrialization and Technological Change,” p. 443. 28. There is a magisterial summary by Takafusa Nakamura, “Depression, Recovery, and War, 1920–1945,” in CHJ, 6:451–493, and a pointed discussion by Hugh Patrick, “The Economic Muddle of the 1920’s” in James W. Morley, ed., Dilemmas of Growth in Prewar Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971), pp. 211–266. 29. From his statement reprinted in Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 767–769. 30. And commemorated on its sixtieth anniversary in 1989 with a sumptuous volume detailing its elegance from the Corinthian columns that circle the building to (imported) marble mantels to washroom fixtures. Mitsui honkan (Mitsui Real Estate Development Co, Inc., 1989). Prestige still lay with the import. 31. Thomas Schalow, “The Role of the Financial Panic of 1927 and Failure of the 15th Bank in the Economic Decline of the Japanese Aristocracy” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1989), p. 160. 32. Nakamura, “Depression, Recovery, and War,” p. 459. 33. Ibid., p. 466. ## Taisho¯ Culture and Society 1. The standard source for these schools and the environment they created is the work of Donald Roden, Schooldays in Imperial Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980). 2. Ibid., p. 137. 3. Bushido, in The Works of Inazo Nitobe (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1972), 1: 131–132. 4. This was also true in military schools, though flagrant conduct was punished, as was the case with the future anarchist O<sup>¯</sup> sugi Sakae. See Byron Marshall, trans., The Autobiography of O<sup>¯</sup> sugi Sakae (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), p. 77. 5. The army cadet schools did the same; “they made me stand at attention in the middle of a large group while they took turns punching me . . . I could not raise a hand to protect myself—to do so would be insubordination against an upperclassman. As I was struck I remained still, mainly careful to keep my feet. I feared being kicked if I fell.” O<sup>¯</sup> sugi, trans. Marshall, pp. 71–72. 6. Roden, Schooldays, p. 210. 7. These cases are the subject of Byron K. Marshall’s Academic Freedom and the Japanese Imperial University, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992). 8. William J. Cummings, Education and Equality in Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980), pp. 26–29. These figures are conservative, for other sources add universities and graduates. 9. Henry DeWitt Smith II, Japan’s First Student Radicals (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972), pp. 7–8. 10. Minobe is the subject of Frank O. Miller, Minobe Tatsukichi: Interpreter of Constitutionalism in Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1965). 11. Peter Duus, “Yoshino Sakuzo¯: The Christian as Social Critic,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 4, 2 (Summer 1978): 301–320. 12. References are to “Minpon shugi ron,” translated with some excisions in Tsunoda, de Bary and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 724–746. See also Peter Duus and Irwin Scheiner, “Socialism, Liberalism, and Marxism” in CHJ, 6:673–681. 13. See, on this point, Tetsuo Najita, “Some Reflections on Idealism in the Political Thought of Yoshino Sakuzo¯” in Bernard Silberman and Harry D. Harootunian, eds., Japan in Crisis: Essays on Taisho¯ Democracy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974), pp. 29–66. 14. Smith, Japan’s First Student Radicals, pp. 52ff. 15. The career of Abe (1865–1949) illustrates many of the themes discussed here. When a student at Do¯shisha, he was baptized by Niijima Jo¯. He later traveled to America to study theology and socialism. He played a leading role in the early (and abortive) socialist organizations. As Japanese radicalism turned left he became a leader of the “right wing” socialist movement. 16. For details, see F. G. Notehelfer, “Japan’s First Pollution Incident,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 1, 2 (Spring 1975): 351–383. The struggle was led by a political maverick who died in 1913; see Kenneth Strong, Ox against the Storm: A Biography of Tanaka Sho¯zo¯, Japan’s Conservationist Pioneer (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1977). 17. Yamakawa’s wife Kikue is the author of the Women of the Mito Domain: Recollections of Samurai Family Life, to which reference was made in Chapter 4. 18. Haruko Taya Cook and Theodore F. Cook, Japan at War: An Oral History (New York: New Press, 1992), p. 51. 19. I find persuasive Donald Roden’s discussion of this in “Taisho¯ Culture and the Problem of Gender,” in J. Thomas Rimer, ed., Culture and Identity: Japanese Intellectuals during the Interwar Years (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990), p. 39. 20. See Earl H. Kinmonth in The Self-Made Man in Meiji Japanese Thought (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981), chap. 6, “Anguished Youth.” 21. Quotations are from Roden, Schooldays, pp. 212–215. For details, see Stephen W. Kohn, “Abe Jiro¯ and The Diary of Santaro¯” and J. Thomas Rimer, “Kurata Hyakuzo¯ and The Origins of Love and Understanding,” in Rimer, Culture and Identity, pp. 7–36. 22. Valdo H. Viglielmo, “Nishida Kitaro¯: The Early Years,” in Shively, Tradition and Modernization in Japanese Culture, pp. 507–562. 23. Isaiah Berlin, “Kant as an Unfamiliar Source of Nationalism,” in Berlin, The Sense of Reality: Studies in Ideas and Their History (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1997), pp. 232–248. 24. Gennifer Weisenfeld, “Murayama, MAVO, and Modernity: Constructions of the Modern in Taisho¯ Japan Avant-garde Art” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1997), and Miriam Silverberg, “Constructing the Japanese Ethnography of Modernity,” Journal of Asian Studies, 51, 1 (February 1992): 30–54. 25. See the excellent discussion by Peter Duus and Irwin Scheiner, “Socialism, Liberalism, and Marxism, 1901–1931,” in CHJ, 6:654–710. 26. Ronald A. Morse, Yanagita Kunio and the Folklore Movement: The Search for Japan’s National Character and Distinctive Culture (New York: Garland, 1990). Yanagita’s best-known work, “Legends of To¯no,” appeared in translation by Ronald Morse (Tokyo: Japan Foundation, 1975). See also Yanagita’s thoughtful About Our Ancestors: The Japanese Family System, trans. Fanny Hagin Mayer and Ishiwara Yasuyo (Tokyo: Japan Society for the Promotion of Science—Ministry of Education, 1970). 27. See Leslie Pincus, Authenticating Culture in Imperial Japan: Kuki Shu¯zo¯ and the Rise of National Aesthetics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996). 28. Kathleen and Barbara Molony, One Woman Who Dared: Ichikawa Fusae and the Japanese Women’s Suffrage Movement (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1995). 29. Shizue Ishimoto, Facing Two Ways: The Story of My Life (New York: Farrar and Rinehart, 1935), and Dorothy Robins-Mowry, The Hidden Sun: Women of Modern Japan (Boulder, Co.: Westview Press, 1983). For the Einstein tour, Marius B. Jansen, “Einstein in Japan,” Princeton Library Chronicle, 50, 3 (Winter 1989): 145–154. 30. See particularly Andrew Gordon, Labor and Imperial Democracy in Prewar Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991); Gordon, The Evolution of Labor Relations in Japan: Heavy Industry, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985); Sheldon Garon, The State and Labor in Modern Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987); and Koji Taira, “Economic Development, Labor Markets, and Industrial Relations in Japan, 1905–1955,” in CHJ, 6:606–653. 31. Thomas O. Wilkinson, The Urbanization of Japanese Labor, – (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1965). 32. See Tsurumi, Factory Girls, and Mikiso Hane, Peasants, Outcasts, and Rebels: The Underside of Modern Japan (New York: Pantheon, 1982), pp. 172–204. 33. Gordon, Evolution of Labor Relations. 34. Yoshikawa Eiji, Fragments of a Past: A Memoir, trans. Edwin McClellan (Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1992), pp. 204–205. Yokohama Dock is one of the enterprises studied in Gordon, Evolution of Labor Relations. 35. Thomas C. Smith, “The Right to Benevolence: Dignity and Japanese Workers, 1890– 1920,” in Smith, Native Sources of Japanese Industrialization, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), p. 242. Here one remembers the contemporary Japanese worker with coat and tie carrying his lunch in a briefcase. 36. Quoted in Smith, Native Sources, p. 268. 37. See Gordon, Labor and Imperial Democracy, pp. 17–18, for the overtones of this term at the time. More recently, however, its thrust is to exclude outsiders and narrow the sense of ethnicity. 38. See Gordon’s biographical sketches of the victims of the Kameido Incident, as it is known, in Labor and Imperial Democracy, pp. 345–348. 39. The standard coverage is that of Garon, The State and Labor in Modern Japan. 40. See Kenneth Pyle, “Advantages of Followership: German Economics and Japanese Bureaucrats, 1890–1925,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 1 (August 1974): 127–164, and Garon, The State and Labor in Modern Japan, pp. 25–26. 41. R. P. Dore, Land Reform in Japan (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959), p. 33. 42. Ann Waswo, Japanese Landlords: The Decline of a Rural Elite (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977), and Waswo, “The Transformation of Rural Society, 1900– 1950,” in CHJ, 6:541–605. 43. Dore, Land Reform in Japan, pp. 69ff. 44. Waswo, “The Transformation of Rural Society,” p. 586. 45. As doctor, medical school chief, bureaucrat, colonial administrator in Taiwan, head of the South Manchurian Railroad, cabinet member holding the posts of foreign affairs, communications, and home ministry, mayor of Tokyo, and architect of Japan’s recognition of the new Soviet state, Goto¯’s career provides a vivid history of modern Japan. For a recent biography, see Kitaoka Shin’ichi, Goto¯ Shinpei: Gaiko¯ to vuishion (Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, 1988). 46. Figures from Gregory J. Kasza, The State and the Mass Media in Japan, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), p. 28. 47. Edward Seidensticker, Tokyo Rising: The City since the Great Earthquake (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1991), p. 30. Together with Seidensticker’s Low City, High City (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1991), Tokyo Rising provides engaging and thoughtful descriptions of Edo and Tokyo life, richly documented by extracts from major Japanese authors. 48. See Jennifer Robertson, Takarazuka: Sexual Politics and Popular Culture in Modern Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998). 49. Thomas R. H. Havens, Architects of Affluence: The Tsutsumi Family and the Seibu-Saison Enterprises in Twentieth-Century Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994), p. 5. 50. Weisenfeld, “Murayama, MAVO, and Modernity.” 51. Shunsuke Tsurumi, “Edo Period in Contemporary Popular Culture” in William Beasley, ed., Edo Culture and Its Modern Legacy, a special issue of Modern Asian Studies, 18, 4 (October 1984): 748ff. 52. Miriam Silverberg, “Constructing the Japanese Ethnography of Modernity,” Journal of Asian Studies, 51, 1 (February 1992): 31. ## The China War 1. Jansen, China in the Tokugawa World, p. 90. 2. Ramon H. Myers, “Japanese Imperialism in Manchuria: The South Manchuria Railway Company, 1906–1933,” in Duus, Myers, and Peattie, The Japanese Informal Empire in China, – , pp. 101–132. See also John Young, The Research Activities of the South Manchurian Railway Company, – : A History and Bibliography (New York: Columbia University, East Asian Institute, 1966). 3. Alvin D. Coox, “The Kwantung Army Dimension,” in Duus, Myers, and Peattie, The Japanese Informal Empire in China, – , pp. 395–428, and, in greater detail, Coox, Nomonhan: Japan against Russia, (Stanford University Press, 1985), 1:1–16. 4. The standard work on Ishiwara is Mark R. Peattie, Ishiwara Kanji and Japan’s Confrontation with the West (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1975); the details of the preparation for and carrying out of the Incident can be followed in Sadako N. Ogata, Defiance in Manchuria: The Making of Japanese Foreign Policy, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1964), and Hiroharu Seki, “The Manchurian Incident,” trans. Marius B. Jansen, in James W. Morley, ed., Japan Erupts: The London Conference and the Manchurian Incident (New York: Columbia University Press, 1984), pp. 123–240. 5. Hata Ikuhiko, Hirohito Tenno¯ itsutsu no ketsudan (Tokyo: Ko¯dansha, 1984), p. 1. Honjo¯ went on to become the emperor’s aide-de-camp; his memoirs have been translated by Mikiso Hane as Emperor Hirohito and His Chief Aide-de-Camp: The Honjo¯ Diary, – (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1982). 6. The Lytton Commission and its impact on Japan receive careful study in Nish, Japan’s Struggle with Internationalism. 7. This section owes much to Louise Young, “Imagined Empire: The Cultural Construction of Manchukuo” in Peter Duus, Ramon H. Myers, and Mark R. Peattie, eds., The Japanese Wartime Empire, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996), pp. 71–96, and especially her important Japan’s Total Empire: Manchuria and the Culture of Wartime Imperialism (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997), p. 456. 8. Joshua Fogel, Life along the South Manchurian Railway: The Memoirs of Ito¯ Takeo (Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe, 1988), discusses this phenomenon and translates Ito¯’s memoir. 9. These tactics were considered possible models for Vietnam a quarter century later. See Chang-sik Lee, “Counterinsurgency in Manchuria: The Japanese Experience, 1931–1940,” memorandum RM-5012-ARPA, RAND Corporation, 1967, p. 352. 10. This trade is the subject of a forthcoming study by Bob T. Wakabayashi of York University, Toronto. 11. Young, Total Empire, p. 411. 12. Figures from Roger F. Hackett “The Military,” in Ward and Rustow, Political Modernization in Japan and Turkey, p. 346. 13. See the discussion in Connors, The Emperor’s Adviser, pp. 126ff. 14. See Masaru Ikei, “Ugaki Kazushige’s View of China and His China Policy, 1915– 1930,” in Iriye, The Chinese and the Japanese, pp. 199–219. 15. These tangled politics receive authoritative treatment in Kitaoka Shin’ichi, Nihon rikugun to tairiku seisaku, – (Tokyo: Tokyo University Press, 1978), and Kitaoka, “China Experts in the Army,” in Duus, Myers, and Peattie, The Japanese Informal Empire in China, – , pp. 330–368. Note also Kitaoka’s deft summary in “The Army as a Bureaucracy: Japanese Militarism Revisited,” Journal of Military History, 57 (October 1993): 67–86. 16. “Designs on North China, 1933–1937” by Shimada Toshihiko, translation and commentary by James B. Crowley, in James William Morley, ed., The China Quagmire: Japanese Expansion on the Asian Continent, – (New York: Columbia University Press, 1983). 17. James B. Crowley, Japan’s Quest for Autonomy: National Security and Foreign Policy, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966), p. 195. 18. The standard study of the rebellion is that of Ben-Ami Shillony, Revolt in Japan: The Young Officers and the February Incident (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973). The Ugaki quotation is from p. 203, Hata, Hirohito Tenno¯ itsutsu no ketsudan. 19. The second volume of Mishima Yukio’s final tetrology, Honba, translated by Michael Gallagher as Runaway Horses (New York: Knopf, 1973), attempts a sympathetic recreation of the romantic and murderous nationalism of the 1930s. 20. The documents included the makeup of the proposed cabinet to be led by General Mazaki and numerous other details. Asahi Shinbum, February 15, 1988. 21. See Robert J. C. Butow, To¯jo¯ and the Coming of the War (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1964). 22. One of the author’s first assignments in 1945 was to act as interpreter so a U.S. Army doctor could question Ugaki, who was living in an Izu Peninsula hot spring village, to see whether his health would permit a flight to Manila, where General Yamashita Tomoyuki had asked for him as a witness in the trial that preceded his execution. The doctor decided against the flight; Ugaki, for his part, told the author that Yamashita’s rank was so far below his own that he scarcely knew him. When Ugaki stood for the House of Councillors under the new constitution in 1953 he received the largest vote of any candidate in Japan. 23. Araki was sentenced to prison by the International Tribunal that met in Tokyo, after which he steeped himself in Buddhist philosophy, was released for illness, and then was pardoned; he died in 1966. 24. Translated by Owen Guntlett, with introduction by Robert King Hall, as Kokutai no Hongi: Cardinal Principles of the National Entity of Japan (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1949). 25. For a thoughtful treatment of this current, see Tetsuo Najita and H. D. Harootunian, “Japanese Revolt against the West: Political and Cultural Criticism in the Twentieth Century,” in CHJ, 6:711–734. 26. R. P. Dore, “Tenancy and Aggression,” chap. 5 in Dore, Land Reform in Japan; and Dore and Tsutomu O<sup>¯</sup> uchi, “Rural Origins of Japanese Fascism,” in Morley, Dilemmas of Growth in Prewar Japan, pp. 181–209. 27. The standard study of Kita is that of George M. Wilson, Radical Nationalist in Japan: Kita Ikki, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969). 28. To this day Japanese universities have separate departments of Japanese, Asian, and Western history. 29. Irokawa Daikichi, Aru Sho¯wa shi: jibunshi no kokoromi (Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, 1975), p. 92. 30. Takafusa Nakamura, “Depression, Recovery, and War,” in CHJ, 6:451–493, and reprinted in Kozo Yamamura, ed., The Economic Development of Modern Japan (Cam bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), pp. 116–158. 31. Haruko Taya Cook and Theodore F. Cook, Japan at War: An Oral History (New York: New Press, 1992), p. 49. 32. Bai Gao, Economic Ideology and Japanese Industrial Policy: Developmentalism from to (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997). 33. Yasukichi Yasuba, “Did Japan Ever Suffer from a Shortage of Natural Resources before World War II?” Journal of Economic History, 56, 3 (September 1996). 34. The extensive literature on tenko¯ is capped by a multivolume compilation edited by Tsurumi Shunsuke, for the Society for the Scientific History of Thought (Shiso¯ no kagakkai), from which he has drawn in An Intellectual History of Wartime Japan, – (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986), workbook material pp. 10–11. See also George M. Beckmann and Okubo Genji, The Japanese Communist Party, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1969). 35. Germaine A. Hoston, “Marxists and Japanese Expansionists: Takahashi Kamekichi and the Theory of ‘Petty Imperialism,’ ” Journal of Japanese Studies, 10, 1 (Winter 1984), and, for the Marxist debates on Japan’s historical stage, Hoston, Marxism and the Crisis of Development in Prewar Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986). 36. See, for this and other cases, Byron K. Marshall, Academic Freedom in the Imperial Japanese University, – (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992). 37. The organization’s scope and importance are discussed by James Crowley, “Intellectuals as Visionaries of the New Asian Order,” in Morley, Dilemmas of Growth in Prewar Japan. See also Miles Fletcher, “Intellectuals and Fascism in Early Sho¯wa Japan,” Journal of Asian Studies, 29, 9 (November 1979). 38. Bai Gao, “Arisawa Hiromichi and His Theory for a Managed Economy,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 20, 1 (Winter 1994): 115–153, and Gao, Economic Ideology and Japanese Industrial Policy: Developmentalism from to (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997). 39. The literature here is vast. I have discussed the incident in Japan and China from War to Peace, – , pp. 425–426. 40. The most accessible study is that by Yoshitake Oka, Konoe Fumimaro: A Political Biography (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1983), a translation by Shumpei Okamoto and Patricia Murray of the 1972 original. 41. Morley, The China Quagmire. 42. Daqing Yang, “A Sino-Japanese Controversy: The Nanking Atrocity in History,” Sino-Japanese Studies, 3, 1 (November 1990), and Yang, The Rape of Nanjing in History and Public Memory: A Critical Anthology (forthcoming, Westview Press). For the most reasonable of many Japanese studies, see Hata Ikuhiko, Nankin jiken (Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, 1986). ## The Pacific War 1. A more detailed discussion of nomenclature draws on a extensive and still unpublished essay by Bob T. Wakabayashi of York University. The translation of the Japan’s Road to the Pacific War series was published under the editorship of James William Morley by Columbia University Press as Japan Erupts: The London Conference and the Manchurian Incident, – (1984), Deterrent Diplomacy: Japan, Germany, and the USSR, – (1976), The China Quagmire: Japan’s Expansion on the Asian Continent, – (1983), and The Fateful Choice: Japan’s Advance in Southeast Asia, – (1980). 2. Chronicled in a splendid two-volume study by Alvin D. Coox, Nomonhan: Japan against Russia, 3. Some writers, among them Irokawa Daikichi, however, argue that Hirohito’s actions then constituted an assertion of direct rule that made him directly responsible for everything that followed. 4. Gordon M. Berger, Parties out of Power in Japan, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977), provides the standard coverage of this period. 5. See the account of those days by Matsumoto Shigeharu, Konoe jidai, 2 vols. (Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron, 1986), 2:28ff. 6. Akira Iriye, The Origins of the Second World War in Asia and the Pacific (London and New York: Longman, 1987), p. 107. 7. This curious chapter in diplomacy has been unraveled by Robert J. C. Butow, who entitles his study by the code name that was used for Father Walsh and his associates. The John Doe Associates: Backdoor Diplomacy for Peace, (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1974). See also his earlier Tojo and the Coming of the War (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961), pp. 129ff. 8. See Chalmers Johnson, An Instance of Treason: Ozaki Hotsumi and the Sorge Spy Ring (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1964, and expanded ed., 1990). 9. Nobutaka Ike, ed. and trans., Japan’s Decision for War: Records of the Policy Conferences (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1967), gives the documents and transcripts of the discussions. Quote from p. 79. 10. James B. Crowley, “Japan’s Military Foreign Policies,” in James William Morley, ed., Japan’s Foreign Policy, – (New York: Columbia University Press, 1974), p. 98. 11. I have discussed this in Japan and China from War to Peace, – , pp. 397–409. 12. For the note that was never sent, see Robert J. C. Butow, “Marching off to War on the Wrong Foot: The Final Note that Tokyo Did Not Send to Washington,” Pacific Historical Review, 62, 1 (February 1994): 67–79. 13. Excerpts from Tokutomi’s commentary can be found in Tsunoda, de Bary, and Keene, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 798–801. 14. For Takemura, Irokawa, The Culture of the Meiji Period, p. 11; for Ito¯ and other writers, Donald Keene, “Japanese Writers and the Greater East Asian War,” in Keene, Landscapes and Portraits: Appreciations of Japanese Culture (Tokyo and Palo Alto: Kodansha International, 1971), pp. 300–321. 15. Translated by Edward Seidensticker as The Makioka Sisters (New York: Knopf, 1957). 16. See Edward Seidensticker, Kafu¯ the Scribbler: The Life and Writings of Nagai Kafu¯, – (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1965). 17. Translated by Eugene Soviak and Kamiyama Tamie as Diary of Darkness: The Wartime Diary of Kiyosawa Kiyoshi (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998). 18. Ben-Ami Shillony, Politics and Culture in Wartime Japan (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1981), surveys these and other trends. 19. Treated in depth with discernment by Sheldon Garon in Molding Japanese Minds: The State in Everyday Life (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997). 20. See Thomas R. H. Havens, Valley of Darkness: The Japanese People and World War II (New York: Norton, 1978), and the dispassionate account by a French correspondent, Robert Guillain, Le Peuple Japonais et la Guerre (Paris: Rene´ Julliard, 1947). 21. Admirably summarized by Alvin D. Coox in chapter 7, “The Pacific War,” in CHJ, 6: 315–382. 22. Gordon W. Prange, At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor (New York: McGraw Hill, 1981) gives the fullest account. 23. See the eyewitness and critical account by Colonel Hiromichi Yahara, a high staff officer, The Battle for Okinawa (New York: Wiley, 1995), translated by Roger Pinneau and Masatoshi Uehara with an introduction by Frank Gibney. Gibney was Yahara’s interrogator. For the civilian side, see the gripping account by Masahide O<sup>¯</sup> ta, The Battle of Okinawa: Typhoon of Steel and Bombs (Tokyo: Kume Publishers, 1984). Mr. O<sup>¯</sup> ta became governor of Okinawa in the 1990s. 24. Donald Keene, Meeting with Japan (Tokyo: Gakuseisha, 1979), p. 45. 25. John W. Dower, War without Mercy: Race and Power in the Pacific War (New York: Pantheon, 1986). 26. Gavan Daws, Prisoners of the Japanese: POWs of World War II in the Pacific (New York: William Morrow, 1994). 27. Konoe Fumitaka was tried and found guilty of “aiding the international bourgeoisie” and died at Ivanovo outside Moscow in 1956. 28. The classic account of the surrender decision remains that of Robert J. C. Butow, Japan’s Decision to Surrender (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1954). See also the gripping account compiled by the Pacific War Research Society, Japan’s Longest Day (Tokyo: Ko¯dansha, 1968). 29. As given in Butow, Japan’s Decision to Surrender, p. 248. 30. These attempts are detailed in Hata, Hirohito Tenno¯ itsutsu no ketsudan. Genda, who died in 1989, became a leading figure in Japan’s postwar air defense, for which he received the Legion of Merit, the highest United States honor awarded to foreigners. 31. Robert J. C. Butow, the most careful student of these negotiations, scouts revisionist views in “How Roosevelt Attacked Japan at Pearl Harbor: Myth Masquerading as History,” Prologue, 28, 3 (Fall 1996): 209–221. 32. Takagi letter of October 7, 1941, in Toward International Understanding, vol. 5 of Takagi Yasaka chosakushu¯ (Tokyo: Tokyo University Press, 1971), pp. 100–101. 33. James C. Thomson, Jr., “The Role of the Department of State,” in Dorothy Borg and Shumpei Okamoto, eds., Pearl Harbor as History: Japanese-American Relations, – (New York: Columbia University Press, 1973), p. 103. 34. O<sup>¯</sup> kita Saburo¯, Japan’s Challenging Years: Reflections on My Lifetime (Canberra: Australian National University, 1983). 35. Edwin O. Reischauer, The United States and Japan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1950), p. 224. 36. For whose account, Theodore E. Cohen, Remaking Japan: The American Occupation as New Deal (New York: Free Press, 1987). 37. Alfred D. Oppler, Legal Reform in Occupied Japan: A Participant Looks Back (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1976). 38. Helen Hardacre, Shinto¯ and the State (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989), p. 25. 39. Text in Government Section, Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers, Political Reorientation of Japan, 2 vols. (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1949), 2:467. 40. This may not have been entirely his fault. According to one account MacArthur’s interpreter rendered Konoe’s explanation (about changing election laws) that there were problems about the “organization of government” (seifu no soshiki) as “the constitution of the government,” at which MacArthur fired back that in that case the constitution would have be be revised to incorporate “the essential elements of liberalism” (in this case women’s suffrage), and that Konoe ought to be in a position to do something about that. See Dale M. Hellegers, “The Konoe Affair,” in L. H. Redford, ed., The Occupation of Japan: Impact of Legal Reform (Norfolk, Va.: MacArthur Memorial, 1977), p. 168. 41. David Anson Titus, Palace and Politics in Prewar Japan (New York: Columbia University Press, 1974), is the standard study of the reach of palace power and politics in Japan. 42. Kazuko Tsurumim, Social Change and the Individual: Japan before and after Defeat in World War II (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1970), pp. 139ff., discusses the testaments left by those executed. For Soviets, John W. Dower, Embracing Defeat: Japan in the Wake of World War II (New York: W. W. Norton/New Press, 1999), p. 449. 43. See Richard H. Minear, Victors’ Justice: The Tokyo War Crimes Trial (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971). It may be added that the United States had suggested that the Soviet Union justify its violation of its treaty obligations to Japan by citing the United Nations as higher authority, advice that was gratefully followed. To be sure, a half-decade earlier many Japanese leaders had advocated that Japan sack the Neutrality Pact and attack to the north. 44. The executions took place in Sugamo Prison. It has since been demolished, and the developers have named the high rise built on the site Sunshine City. ## The Yoshida Years 1. For the participants’ view, see Theodore Cohen, Remaking Japan: The American Occupation as New Deal, ed. Herbert Passin (New York: Free Press, 1987); for the process, see Sheldon Garon, The State and Labor in Modern Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987). 2. The relationship is well described by Richard B. Finn in Winners in Peace: MacArthur, Yoshida, and Postwar Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992). 3. See the Report of the United States Education Mission to Japan (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1946), submitted by a delegation of twenty-seven educators in March 1946. 4. The standard work is Dore, Land Reform in Japan. 5. Garon, The State and Labor in Modern Japan. For the SCAP side, see Cohen, Remaking Japan. 6. MacArthur had initially said that constitutional revision was beyond his authority, but responded to a memorandum from General Whitney arguing that he did indeed have that authority. See Robert E. Ward, “The Origins of the Present Japanese Constitution,” American Political Science Review, 50, 4 (December 1956), and more recently Finn, Winners in Peace, pp. 89–106. Most recently, Theodore McNelly summarizes decades of research and publishing in The Origins of Japan’s Democratic Constitution (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 2000). 7. Beate Gordon, The Only Woman in the Room (New York: Kodansha, 1997). 8. See Tetsuya Kataoka, The Price of a Constitution: The Origin of Japan’s Postwar Politics (New York: Taylor & Francis, 1991). 9. Douglas MacArthur, “Reply to Criticism of Economic Policy,” February 1948, in SCAP, Political Reorientation of Japan, 2:762. 10. Best described in Howard B. Schonberger, Aftermath of War: Americans and the Remaking of Japan, – (Kent: Kent State University Press, 1989). 11. George F. Kennan, Memoirs, – (New York: Little, Brown and Co., 1967), p. 376. 12. The standard work, by a SCAP participant in the process, is that of Eleanor M. Hadley, Antitrust in Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1970). 13. Finn, Winners in Peace. Mention must also be made of the critical biography by John W. Dower, Empire and Aftermath: Yoshida Shigeru and the Japanese Empire, – (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979), and Yoshida Shigeru’s own account, translated as The Yoshida Memoir: The Story of Japan in Crisis (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962). 14. Yutaka Ko¯sai, “The Postwar Japanese Economy, 1945–1970,” in CHJ, 6:494–537. 15. Gao, “Arisawa Hiromi and His Theory for a Managed Economy.” 16. Gao, Economic Ideology and Japanese Industrial Policy, p. 20. 17. Saburo¯ O<sup>¯</sup> kita, Japan’s Challenging Years: Reflections on My Lifetime (Canberra: Australian National University, 1983), pp. 32–33. 18. Ibid., p. 34. 19. This shift, with heavy emphasis on the role of the cold war and Pentagon priorities, is the subject of Michael Schaller, The American Occupation of Japan: The Origins of the Cold War in Asia (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985). 20. These cursory comments receive careful treatment in Andrew Gordon, ed., Postwar Japan as History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993). 21. John K. Emmerson, a diplomat assigned an office in the Mitsui Bank Building, describes moving in as a Mitsui executive was taking his leave: “Before turning to go out the door, he hesitated, pointing to a map on the wall of Japan’s Co-Prosperity Sphere in Eastern Asia. ‘There it is,’ he said smiling, ‘We tried. See what you can do with it.’ ” The Japanese Thread: A Life in the U.S. Foreign Service (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1978), p. 256. 22. Hata, Hirohito Tenno¯ itsutsu no ketsudan, and Toyoshita Haruhiko, “Japanese Peace Negotiations and ‘Double Diplomacy,’ ” paper presented at “Social Change and International Affairs,” Paris, December 1994. 23. Yoshida, The Yoshida Memoirs, p. 4. 24. For a discussion of what the author calls a “Yoshida doctrine,” see Kenneth B. Pyle, The Japanese Question: Power and Purpose in a New Era (Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1992). 25. See Herbert Passin, “Modernization and the Japanese Intellectual: Some Comparative Observations” in Jansen, Changing Japanese Attitudes toward Modernization, pp. 425–446. 26. Masaru Tamamoto, “Unwanted Peace: Japanese Intellectuals in American Occupied Japan, 1948–52” (Ph.D. dissertation, Johns Hopkins University, 1988). 27. The standard account of these events is George R. Packard, Protest in Tokyo: The Security Treaty Crisis of (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966). 28. Irmela Hijiya-Kirchnereit in Richard Bowring and Peter Kornicke, eds., Cambridge Encyclopedia of Japan (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), p. 145. 29. Both works translated by Edward G. Seidensticker: Makioka Sisters (New York: Knopf, 1957) and Snow Country (New York: Knopf, 1956). 30. O<sup>¯</sup> oka Sho¯hei, Taken Captive: A Japanese POW’s Story, trans. Wayne P. Lammers (New York: John Wiley, 1996). 31. For a study of this strange man, John Nathan, Mishima: A Biography (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1974). 32. On Tenrikyo¯, see Henry van Staelen, The Religion of Divine Wisdom: Japan’s Most Powerful Religious Movement (Kyoto: Veritas Shoin, 1957); on Kurozumikyo¯, see Helen Hardacre, Kurozumikyo¯ and the New Religions of Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986). 33. On Reiyu¯kai, see Helen Hardacre, Lay Buddhism in Contemporary Japan: Reiyu¯kai yo¯- dan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984). On So¯ka Gakkai, see James W. White, The Soka Gakkai and Mass Society (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1970), and Noah S. Brannen, Soka Gakkai: Japan’s Militant Buddhists (Richmond, Va.: John Knox, 1968). 34. Helen Hardacre, in Bowring and Kornicke, Cambridge Encyclopedia of Japan, p. 177. 35. For a full account, Joseph L. Anderson and Donald Richie, The Japanese Film, expanded edition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982). ## Japan since Independence 1. Wada (1903–1967) played an important role in postwar politics. Elected to the House of Councillors, he was appointed minister of agriculture by Yoshida in his first cabinet and it fell to him to implement the land reform program. He also took steps to counter the critical food shortage. Wada then shifted his affiliation to the Japan Socialist Party after the emergence of the Katayama cabinet, in which he headed the Economic Stabilization Board, and subsequently affiliated with the party’s left wing. 2. The system has been studied by numerous political scientists and their studies are too numerous to list. Mention need only be made of Masumi Junnosuke’s authoritative Gendai seiji, 2 vols. (Tokyo: Tokyo Daigaku Shuppankai, 1985), translated by Lonny E. Carlile as Contemporary Politics in Japan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995). 3. For charts and a wealth of detail, see Masumi, Contemporary Politics, pp. 205ff. 4. For excerpts from the plan, T. J. Pempel, Party Politics in Japan: Creative Conservatism (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1982), pp. 78ff. 5. See the engrossing study of a local politician provided by Gerald L. Curtis, Election Campaigning Japanese Style (New York: Columbia University Press, 1972). 6. See, on this point, Kent Calder, Crisis and Compensation: Public Policy and Political Stability in Japan, – (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1988). 7. Chalmers Johnson, MITI and the Japanese Miracle (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1982). 8. The subject of Garon, Molding Japanese Minds. 9. Yutaka Ko¯sai, “The Postwar Japanese Economy, 1945–1975,” in CHJ, 6:518ff. 10. The best history is by Michael A. Cusumano, The Japanese Automobile Industry, Technology, and Management: Nissan and Toyota (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985). 11. William N. Tsutsui, “W. Edwards Deming and the Origins of Quality Control in Japan,” Journal of Japanese Studies (Summer 1996): 295–326, and Tsutsui, Manufacturing Ideology: Scientific Management in Twentieth-Century Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998). 12. Johnson, MITI and the Japanese Miracle, is central here. See also David Williams, Japan and the Emergence of Open Political Science (London: Routledge, 1996). 13. Yasusuke Murakami, An Anticlassical Political and Economic Analysis: A Vision for the Next Century, trans. Kozo Yamamura (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1996). 14. See Ezra Vogel, Japan as Number One: Lessons for America (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979), for a highly favorable view, and Karl van Wolferen, The Enigma of Japanese Power: People and Politics in a Stateless Nation (London: Macmillan, 1989), for a sharply contrasting view by an author who seems to discern a conspiracy directed by dark-suited graduates of Tokyo University. 15. Paul Krugman, “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle,” Foreign Affairs (November/December 1994), and elsewhere. For a more extended comparative study of Japan and Russia, see Cyril E. Black, Marius B. Jansen, Herbert S Levine, Marion J. Levy Jr., Henry Rosovsky, Gilbert Rozman, Henry D. Smith II, and F. Fredrick Starr, The Modernization of Japan and Russia (New York: Free Press, 1975). 16. See Bai Gao, Economic Ideology and Japanese Industrial Policy, who relates “private” organization to “public” policy formation, and Kent Calder, Strategic Capitalism: Private Business and Public Purpose in Japanese Industrial Finance (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993), who tries to find a middle ground; Daniel I. Okimoto, Between MITI and the Market: Japanese Industrial Policy for High Technology (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1988); and finally three volumes edited respectively by Kozo Yamamura and Yasukichi Yasuba, Takashi Inoguchi and Daniel Okimoto, and Shumpei Kumon and Henry Rosovsky, The Political Economy of Japan: The Domestic Transformation (I), The Changing International Context (II), and Cultural and Social Dynamics (III) (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1989, 1990, and 1992). 17. There was—and is—a special poignancy about the provision that Buddhist temples and cemeteries make for aborted fetuses, the mizuko, discussed by William LaFleur in Liquid Life: Abortion and Buddhism in Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992). Oddly, there was relatively little debate about the origins of life that was waged so vigorously in the United States, but a great deal about the end of life in connection with organ transplants. 18. Takekazu Ogura, Can Japanese Agriculture Survive? (Tokyo: Agricultural Policy Research Center, 1980). 19. For a first-hand description by a reporter posing as a part-time farmer-hand, see Satoshi Kamata, Japan in the Passing Lane: An Inside Account of Life in a Japanese Auto Factory (New York: Pantheon, 1982). 20. William W. Kelly, “Rationalization and Nostalgia: Cultural Dynamics of New Middle-Class Japan.” American Ethnologist, 13, 4 (November 1986). 21. John F. Embree, Suye Mura: A Japanese Village (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1939); Ushijima Morimitsu, Henbo suru Suemura (Kyoto: Mineruva Shobo¯, 1971), and Suemura, – (Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Hyo¯ronsha, 1988). 22. Rozman, Urban Networks in Ch’ing China and Tokugawa Japan. 23. See David M. Bayley, Forces of Order: Police Behavior in Japan and the United States (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976). 24. Sheldon Garon and Mike Mochizuki, “Negotiating Social Contracts,” in Gordon, Postwar Japan as History, pp. 144–186. Similar consideration was shown, as Garon and Mochizuki write, for small and medium-sized business through an agency established for that purpose. 25. See the optimistic view of Sumiko Iwao, The Japanese Woman: Traditional Image and Changing Reality (New York: Free Press, 1993). 26. Thomas Rohlen, Japan’s High Schools (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983). 27. The ambiguities of those final days are captured in Norma Field, In the Realm of a Dying Emperor (New York: Pantheon Books, 1991), and Thomas Crump, The Death of an Emperor: Japan at the Crossroads (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991).