# Copyright © Daniel Miller 1987 First published 1987 Basil Blackwell Ltd 108 Cowley Road, Oxford, OX4 1JF, UK Basil Blackwell Inc. 432 Park Avenue South, Suite 1503 New York, NY 10016, USA All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes of criticism and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher. Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser. ## British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data Miller, Daniel Material culture and mass consumption (Social archaeology). i. Ethnology I. Title II. Series 306'.4 GN316 ISBN 0-631-15605-4 Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data Miller, Daniel, 1954– Material culture and mass consumption. (Social archaeology) Bibliography: p. Includes index. 1. Social archaeology—Philosophy. 2. Material culture. 3. Consumption (Economics) 4. Object (Philosophy) I. Title II. Series. CC72.4.M55 1907 900.1 07-14027 ISBN 0-631-15605-4 Typeset in 10½ on 12 pt Garamond by OPUS, Oxford Printed in Great Britain by T.J. Press (Padstow) Ltd ## Contents Preface vii Part I Objectification 1 1 Introduction 3 2 Hegel and Objectification 19 3 Marx: Objectification as Rupture 34 Munn: Objectification as Culture 50 5 Simmel: Objectification as Modernity 68 Part II Material Culture 83 6 The Humility of Objects 85 7 Artefacts in their Contexts 109 Part III Mass Consumption 131 8 The Study of Consumption 133 9 Object Domains, Ideology and Interests 158 10 Towards a Theory of Consumption 178 References 219 Index 233 For Rachel ## Preface Several factors have influenced the writing of this book, an awareness of which may assist the reader in transcending the intentions of the author. First, my perspective evolved during the course of lecturing within the framework of 'Material Culture Studies'. This category may have had a coherent focus in the nineteenth century, under the influence of evolutionary studies in anthropology, but it has since become something of a residual box, housing otherwise ‘homeless' interests such as the links between archaeology and social anthropology, or cross-cultural studies in the arts and technology. This lack of clear disciplinary allegiance has, however, afforded me the perhaps rare freedom to range over several disciplines in my discussion and to draw together threads which might otherwise have remained unconnected. Furthermore, the category may gain a new integrity as a basis for tackling topics such as mass consumption which have been neglected because they also happen to lie outside the particular emphases of the various branches of the social sciences as they have arisen historically. The second influence dates back to my years as a graduate student. In attending interesting-sounding courses - whether in geography, architecture or psychology – I found that the chances were that the lecture would actually be on Habermas and a set of propositions which were very much the academic fashion of the time. Of these, the one which has best maintained its original impact is the denial of the fact-value dichotomy and the insistence that all academic work is informed by, and in turn contributes to, the moral and political climate within which it is conducted. In the present work I have attempted to address directly the relationship between my critical accounts of earlier writers and the models of possible future or ideal societies which lie implicit within such criticisms. A third influence has been the experience of conducting fieldwork in several developing countries. I suspect that I am not alone in having found that my first period of fieldwork reinforced the initial propensity in much anthropological enquiry to romanticize the place under investigation as idealizedother', a perspective which focuses almost exclusively on its attractive features. This vision tends to fall away with subsequent studies and is, at least in part, replaced by a growing awareness of the constraints of poverty, close kin relations, and the generally limited possibilities available to people within non-industrial societies such as the archetypal peasant community. Experience of these constraints has curbed any tendency to indulge in easy nostalgia for assumed ancestral roots, and social life in earlier times. It has therefore seemed to me important to distinguish between a conflation of criticisms of the inequaltites and oppression associated with ‘capitalism'or the state', and what may often be at root a general critique of industrial culture per se, based on a presumption of simple authenticity for pre-industrial culture. A further influence derives from the experience of conducting fieldwork which concentrated upon the social symbolism of the material world. This is the observation that an abiding concern with the precise status and social implications of the object world, which we tend to marginalize as existing only among yuppies', may in fact be manifested in an equally extreme form under the very different conditions of poverty, where lack of access to material goods may almost result in an involution of concern with those which are available. I appreciate that the result of my research is a book which advocates a perilous course of investigation. Both writer and reader may so easily fall prey to either fetishism of the object or else Romanticization of the subject; indeed, the attempt to avoid both of these has determined the very structure of this work. My overall intention has been to excavate certain areas of investigation formerly branded as 'trivial' or inauthentic', and to show why it is crucial for these to be reclaimed as pivotal aspects of any present or feasible future industrialized society. I gratefully acknowledge the assistance given by the often critical readers of sections of this book, including Barbara Bender, Janet Coleman, Adrian Forty, Bruce Kapferer, Alison Kelly of Basil Blackwell and especially Allen Abramson, Stephen Frosh and Mike Rowlands who have provided stimulating debate throughout the period of writing. I am also grateful to Rickie Burman, who has shared many tasks which may not have seemed relevant to this book, but were actually essential to its production. PART I Objectification