# Preface D<sup>esign</sup> <sup>thinking</sup> <sup>is</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>core</sup> <sup>creative</sup> <sup>process</sup> <sup>for</sup> <sup>any</sup> <sup>designer;</sup> <sup>this</sup> book explores and explains this apparently mysterious design ability. This new edition is a completely revised, updated and extended version of a classic text. Focusing on what designers actually do when they are designing, the book is structured around a series of in-depth case studies of the work of outstanding and expert designers, interwoven and developed with commentary and comparison. The coverage reflects the breadth of design from architecture to engineering, from consumer products to communications and from individual designing to teamwork and collaborative designing. The scale of designing ranges from Formula One racing cars to city commuting cars, locomotives to bicycles, sewing machines to litter bins and lemon squeezers. The book is based on evidence from observation and investigation of design practice, providing insights into and understanding of design thinking, and the development of design ability from novice to expert. Design Thinking: Understanding How Designers Think and Work offers an overview from one of design’s most experienced and influential scholars. This book goes to the heart of what it means to think and work as a designer. It is an ideal guide for anyone who wants to become a designer or to know how good designers work in the field of contemporary design.