## Glossary abduction/abductive As well as the two more commonly understood forms of logical reasoning – deduction and induction – there is another form known as abduction. Abductive reasoning leads to a plausible or satisfactory, but not certain, conclusion from a set of observations or problematic situation. It provides a reasonable and defensible suggestion that something may be, but not that it definitely is or must be, an appropriate conclusion. It is the rhetorical, persuasive logic of design. See pages 11, 26–7. co-evolution Both the understanding of the problematic situation and proposals for its solution co-evolve during the process of designing. Designers look for structures within the problem space that prompt complementary structures within the solution space. Iteration between the two search spaces of problem and solution proceeds in a process of co-evolution, progressively refining together both the formulation of the problem and a matching proposal for its solution. See pages 92–5. emergence Emergence occurs in designing when patterns or properties that were not explicitly included or intended are perceived in a solution conjecture. This perception can then lead to improving or developing the solution. The recognition of emergent solution features can also lead to reconsidering the problem, the co-emergence of new issues or the re-definition of requirements and the re-interpretation of the problem. See pages 12, 89. fixation A weakness in design behaviour can occur where details of known previous design solutions are inappropriately, and perhaps unconsciously, carried over into new solutions. This fixation effect can lead to inhibiting creative thought and to restricting the search space for appropriate solutions. See pages 67–70. framing Framing is a key aspect of design expertise and the central feature of reflective practice. It involves forming a viewpoint that structures the loose complexity of a problematic situation and thereby establishes a constructive coherence within the problem space. The framed viewpoint provides a perspective that also sets some boundaries on the solution space and promotes and guides the search for solution conjectures. See pages 24, 88–91. metacognition Cognition, commonly referred to as ‘thinking’, includes many aspects of intellectual functioning such as perception, reasoning and problem-solving. Metacognition is a higher level of awareness of one’s own thought processes and an understanding of the patterns behind them: thinking about thinking or knowing about knowing. Designers use metacognition when they reflect on their ways of acting and thinking during a design process, assess their progress and choose a particular strategy or procedure to follow. See page 142. opportunism An apparent weakness in design behaviour has been termed opportunistic behaviour. This is observed as deviations from a structured plan or methodical process into the pursuit of issues or partial solutions that catch the designer’s attention, or as ‘drifting through a sequence of partial solution developments. The cognitive cost of maintaining a very broad focus may be a reason for these behaviours. It may also be a consequence of working with the ill-structuredness of design problems and should not necessarily be equated with poor design behaviour but accepted as a natural characteristic of experienced design behaviour. See pages 116, 145–6. reflective practice The theory of reflective practice proposes a model of skilled professional activity around processes of naming, framing, moving and reflecting, which iteratively move towards problem understanding and solution development. Naming identifies things of interest; framing guides subsequent activity by providing a way to perceive and shape the problem; moves generate potential solutions suggested by the frame; reflecting on the appropriateness and contextual implications of the moves assesses their validity and/or identifies more things of interest. See pages 21–2, 89. representations Tentative design solution conjectures are expressed in various representations, including not only sketches and drawings but also physical prototypes and computer models. They support the uncertain, exploratory nature of conceptual design activity by externalizing and facilitating design cognition, and they store and communicate the designer’s thinking. Representations aid the generation and evaluation of solution concepts, the identification of what needs to be known about a developing concept and the recognition of emergent features and properties. See page 13.