## References Ahmed, S., Wallace, K. and Blessing, L. (2003) Understanding the Differences between How Novice and Experienced Designers Approach Design Tasks, Research in Engineering Design, Vol. 14, 1–11. Akin, Ö. and Lin, C. (1995) Design Protocol Data and Novel Design Decisions, Design Studies, Vol. 16, 211–236, and in Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst, K. (eds.) Analysing Design Activity, Wiley, Chichester, UK, 35–63. Alexiou, K., Zamenopoulos, T., Johnson, J. and Gilbert, S. (2009) Exploring the Neurological Basis of Design Cognition Using Brain Imaging: Some Preliminary Results, Design Studies, Vol. 30, 623–647. Atman, C. (2014) Designing Design Learning, Keynote Presentation, Conference of the European Society for Engineering Education, Birmingham, UK. Atman, C. (2019) Design Timelines: Concrete and Sticky Representations of Design Process Expertise, Design Studies, Vol. 65, 125–151. Atman, C., Borgford-Parnell, J., Deibel, K., Kang, A., Kilgore, D. and Turns, J. (2009) Matters of Context in Design, in McDonnell, J. and Lloyd, P. (eds.) About: Designing – Analysing Design Meetings, CRC Press, Leiden, The Netherlands, 399–416. Atman, C., Cardella, M., Turns, J. and Adams, R. (2005) Comparing Freshman and Senior Engineering Design Processes: An In-Depth Follow-Up Study, Design Studies, Vol. 26, 325–357. Ball, L., Christensen, B. and Halskov, K. (2021) Sticky Notes as a Kind of Design Material: How Sticky Notes Support Design Cognition and Design Collaboration, Design Studies, Vol. 76, 101034, 1–34. Ball, L., Onarheim, B. and Christensen, B. (2010) Design Requirements, Epistemic Uncertainty and Solution Development Strategies in Software Design, Design Studies, Vol. 31, 567–589. Ball, L. and Ormerod, T. (1995) Structured and Opportunistic Processing in Design: A Critical Discussion, International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, Vol. 43, 131–151. Brereton, M., Cannon, D., Mabogunje, A. and Leifer, L. (1996) Collaboration in Design Teams: How Social Interaction Shapes the Product, in Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst, K. (eds.) Analysing Design Activity, Wiley, Chichester, UK, 319–341. Bucciarelli, L. (1994) Designing Engineers, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. Cagan, J. and Vogel, C. (2002) Creating Breakthrough Products. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA. Candy, L. and Edmonds, E. (1996) Creative Design of the Lotus Bicycle, Design Studies, Vol. 17, 71–90. Chen, C.-C., Neroni, M., Vasconcelos, L. and Crilly, N. (2017) The Importance of Leadership in Design Team Problem-Solving, in Christensen, B., Ball, L. and Halskov, K. (eds.) Analysing Design Thinking, CRC Press, Leiden, The Netherlands, 77–96. Christiaans, H. (1992) Creativity in Design: The Role of Domain Knowledge in Design, Lemma, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Christiaans, H. and Dorst, K. (1992) Cognitive Models in Industrial Design Engineering: A Protocol Study, in Taylor, D. and Stauffer, D. (eds.) Design Theory and Methodology, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, NY, USA, 131–140. Crilly, N. and Moroşanu Firth, R. (2019) Creativity and Fixation in the Real World: Three Case Studies of Invention, Design and Innovation, Design Studies, Vol. 64, 169–212. Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst, K. (1994) Design Expertise Amongst Student Designers, Journal of Art and Design Education, Vol. 13, 39–56. Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst, K. (eds.) (1996) Analysing Design Activity, Wiley, Chichester, UK. Darke, J. (1979) The Primary Generator and the Design Process, Design Studies, Vol. 1, 36–44. Davies, R. (1985) A Psychological Enquiry into the Origination and Implementation of Ideas, MSc Thesis, Department of Management Sciences, University of Manchester, UK. Davies, R. and Talbot, R. (1987) Experiencing Ideas: Identity, Insight and the Imago, Design Studies, Vol. 8, 17–25. Dong, A. (2005) The Latent Semantic Approach to Studying Design Team Communication, Design Studies, Vol. 26, 445–461. Dorst, K. (1997) Describing Design: A Comparison of Paradigms, Published PhD Thesis, Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands. Dorst, K. (2015) Frame Innovation: Create New Thinking by Design, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. Dorst, K. and Cross, N. (2001) Creativity in the Design Process: Co-evolution of Problem-Solution, Design Studies, Vol. 22, 425–437. Ericsson, K. A. (1999) Expertise, in Wilson, R. and Keil, F. (eds.) The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 298–300. Ericsson, K. A. (2001) Attaining Excellence Through Deliberate Practice: Insights from the Study of Expert Performance, in Ferrari, M. (ed.), The Pursuit of Excellence Through Education, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 21–56. Gardner, H. (1983) Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences, Heinemann, London, UK. Garner, S. (2004) Case Studies of Design and Designing, The Open University, Milton Keynes, UK. Gedenryd, H. (1998) How Designers Work, PhD Thesis, Department of Cognitive Science, Lund University, Sweden. Goel, V. (1995) Sketches of Thought, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. Goel, V. and Grafman, J. (2000) Role of the Right Prefrontal Cortex in Ill-Structured Planning, Cognitive Neuropsychology, Vol. 17, 415– 436. Goldschmidt, G. (1995) The Designer as a Team of One, Design Studies, Vol. 16, 189–209, and in Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst, K. (eds.) Analysing Design Activity, Wiley, Chichester, UK, 65–91. Guindon, R. (1990) Designing the Design Process: Exploiting Opportunistic Thoughts, Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, 305–344. Günther, J., Frankenberger, E. and Auer, P. (1996) Investigation of Individual and Team Design Processes, in Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst, K. (eds.) Analysing Design Activity, Wiley, Chichester, UK, 117–132. Lawson B. (1994) Design In Mind, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK. Lawson, B. (2004) What Designers Know, Architectural Press/Elsevier, Oxford, UK. Lawson, B. (2006) How Designers Think, Architectural Press/Elsevier, Oxford, UK. Lloyd, P., Lawson, B. and Scott, P. (1995) Can Concurrent Verbalisation Reveal Design Cognition? Design Studies, Vol. 16, 237–259, and in Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst, K. (eds.) Analysing Design Activity, Wiley, Chichester, UK, 437–463. Lloyd, P. and Scott, P. (1995) Difference in Similarity: Interpreting the Architectural Design Process, Planning and Design, Vol. 22, 383–406. Lloyd, P. and Snelders, D. (2003) What was Philippe Starck Thinking Of? Design Studies, Vol. 24, 237–253. Maccoby, M. (1991) The Innovative Mind at Work, IEEE Spectrum, December, 23–35. March, L. (1976) The Logic of Design, in March, L. (ed.) The Architecture of Form, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1–40. Murray, D. (1993) An Ethnographic Study of Graphic Designers, in De Michelis, G. and Simone, C. (eds.) European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 295–309. Radcliffe, D. (1996) Concurrency of Actions, Ideas and Knowledge Displays Within a Design Team, in Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst, K. (eds.) Analysing Design Activity, Wiley, Chichester, UK, 343–364. Rowe, P. (1987) Design Thinking, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. Roy, R. (1993) Case Studies of Creativity in Innovative Product Development, Design Studies, Vol. 14, 423–443. Schön, D. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action, Basic Books, New York, NY, USA. Schön, D. (1988) Designing: Rules, Types and Worlds, Design Studies, Vol. 9, 181–190. Stacey, M., Eckert, C. and Earl, C. (2009) From Ronchamp by Sledge: On the Pragmatics of Object References, in McDonnell, J. and Lloyd, P. (eds.) About: Designing – Analysing Design Meetings, CRC Press, Leiden, The Netherlands, 361–379. Suwa, M., Gero, J. and Purcell, T. (2000) Unexpected Discoveries and S-invention of Design Requirements: Important Vehicles for a Design Process, Design Studies, Vol. 21, 539–567. Taffe, S. (2018) Generate Don’t Evaluate: How can Codesign Benefit Communication Designers? CoDesign, Vol. 14, 345–365. Valgeirsdottir, D. and Onarheim, B. (2017) Metacognition in Creativity: Process Awareness Used to Facilitate the Creative Process, in Christensen, B., Ball, L. and Halskov, K. (eds.) Analysing Design Thinking, CRC Press, Leiden, The Netherlands, 215–228. Visser, W. (1990) More or Less Following a Plan During Design: Opportunistic Deviations in Specification, International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, Vol. 33, 247–278. Wiltschnig, S., Christensen, B. and Ball, L. (2013) Collaborative Problem-Solution Co-evolution in Creative Design, Design Studies, Vol. 34, 515–542.