# EMBROIDERY

Above left: Embroidered panel designed by May Morris and worked by the Battye family, who commissioned the design; cushion cover (below left) designed by Jessie Newbery and embroidered by her mother, Mrs Rowat, c. 1916; and (left) one of a pair of embroidered and appliquéd linen panels, enhanced with glass beads, metal thread, braid and ribbon, designed by Margaret Macdonald Mackintosh and exhibited ın the 'Rose Boudoir' at the Turin lnternational Exhibition in 1902

Janey Morris, the medieval chatelaine of Morris's Red House, was taught by her husband how to do simple woollen crewel work, and she became an accomplished embroideress. Her sister, Elizabeth Burden, became chief instructress at the Royal School of Art Needlework, opened in South Kensington in 1872. The women associated with the School were not, however, encouraged to design their own work, but only to execute designs by Morris, Burne-Jones, Crane and others.

May Morris, who took over the Morris and Co. embroidery section in 1885, produced well-spaced, light, floral designs for curtains, table-cloths, cushion covers, cot quilts and work-bags, as well as executing work designed by her father. In 1893 she published Decorative Needlework, and in 1910 undertook a lecture tour of America.

Gertrude Jekyll, inspired by a meeting with Morris in the 1860s also became a talented needlewoman and won commissions from Lord Leighton and the Duke of Westminster. She was forced by failing eyesight to abandon close work and concentrate on garden design.

Jessie Newbery, wife of the principal of Glasgow School of Art, established embroidery classes there in 1894. Many of her students intended to become primary- and secondary-school teachers, and Mrs Newbery rejected the highly skilled intricacy of the Royal School of Art Needlework, favouring instead simpler techniques, such as appliqué, and cheaper materials that could be used in local schools. 'I specially aim at beautifully shaped spaces,' she wrote, and try to make them as important as the patterns.' It was her assistant, Ann Macbeth, who, in Educational Needlecraft, the book she wrote in 1911 with Margaret Swanson, publicized Jessie Newbery's approach, as well as suggesting new ways of teaching primary-school children to sew and encouraging them to use embroidery as a means of selfexpression.

Jessie Newbery's influence can be seen in the work of Frances and Margaret Macdonald, who were students at the School of Art and who opened their studio in Glasgow in 1896, producing not only embroidery but also gesso, book illustrations and metalwork. After her marriage to Charles Rennie Mackintosh in 1900, Margaret used embroidery within schemes he designed for interior decoration at the Turin International Exhibition of 1902, and in the Willow Tea-Rooms and Hill House near Glasgow. Her elongated female figures were strikingly realized through stylized appliqué with added beads, ribbon, braid and metal threads.

In England, there was a resurgence of interest in many traditional rural techniques, such as smocking: in America, too, needlework skills such as quilting were revived. In 1896 Margaret Whiting and Ellen Miller founded the Society of Blue and White Needlework in Deerfield, Massachusetts. Initially they adapted old designs, worked in blue thread on a white ground, but then began to create their own designs, using multi-coloured threads and appliqué on coloured fabric. They exhibited their work at Arts and Crafts Society exhibitions in Boston, New York and Chicago. At the H. Sophie Newcomb College for Women in New Orleans, students used the colours and forms of local flora and fauna in their embroidery designs.