## EPILOGUE serious was going on. In Munich one Friday early in August 2008, over lunch in a sleek restaurant that served traditional Bavarian cuisine in such a way as not to scare off those with a suspicion of white sausages, it began to strike home to a group of curators, gathered to talk over the place of contemporary design in museums, that a decade of fin de siècle irrational exuberance was on the verge of imploding. The room was a carefully preserved slice of early nineteenthcentury stonework, transplanted into a striking plateglass-fronted cavern in a city centre shopping mall. It was surrounded by the fleeting consolations of shops stocked with leather satchels rustling with tissue paper, and costly pens wrapped in chamois leather. I remember noticing the carefully understated \$1500 bag made by Hermès that one of my companions had under her seat. The aggressive branding that once characterised such objects had given way to subtly stitched leather handles and dusty pink canvas. These were still the kind of things that seemed important to a personal sense of self-worth at the time. I wanted to buy one, even though the thought of such a brutal amount of money for something that a plastic shopping bag could do equally well felt like a deliberate act of self-harm. As the coffee came, somebody looked at his Blackberry. The Dow it seemed had fallen by 400 points. The Federal Reserve and the governments of Britain, France and Germany were pumping billions of dollars into financial markets as they found themselves impotent to overcome the stubborn unwillingness, born of fear, of the banks to lend to one another. We looked at each other for a minute, and then the conversation moved on. The credit crunch had arrived, and yet nothing really seemed to be happening. My American Express card still worked to pay the bill. If I had tried to buy my house that weekend, it would still have cost me three times what I had paid for it five years earlier, and I would have been unlikely to be asked to prove that I could afford the mortgage. The idea that in less than twelve months I would be calling up the finance director at the Design Museum to ask him where he was keeping our money for fear that it was about to vanish into a digital black hole would have seemed the stuff of lurid dreams. At Lehman Brothers, regional managing partners went on with their plans to rent the usual house in the Hamptons. Ian Schrager was putting the finishing touches to 40 Bond, his development designed by the architects of Beijing’s Olympic stadium that was turning a derelict street in the Bowery into desirable real estate. Michael Peters, the first graphic designer in Britain to float his business on the stock exchange, back in 1983, and to go bust not long afterwards, was busy. He was working in Reykjavik on a new online identity for an Icelandic financial services company. He came up with a clever name: Icesave. It offered a full percentage point in interest above its on-shore competitors for savings. Peters’ job was, as he describes it, to reassure those nervous about putting their money in an overseas bank. In his book, Yes Logo, Peters calls Icesave ‘the future’. In words that will no doubt come to haunt him, he claimed: ‘It became clear through the research that the naturalness, purity and perceived simplicity of Iceland was a key factor in the development of the name. The naturalness and purity of Peters’ work was persuasive enough to convince 300,000 Britons to entrust £4 billion of their savings to Icesave, their doubts laid to rest by the freshness of Peters’ typography – unfussy Helvetica, rendered in fruit-flavoured popsicle colours that seemed to say fresh, modern and honest, and so reliable and competent. In the autumn of 2008, when the fundamental implausibility of a nation of 300,000 people, with no more than cod and geothermal energy to keep them afloat, hosting a banking sector with international reach became too glaringly apparent to ignore, the British government invoked the provisions of its antiterrorism laws to freeze any Icelandic assets still within their reach to ensure that those savers got their money back. While I was writing the first draft of this book – and beginning to sound like that fifteenthcentury fanatic, Savanarola, calling for a bonfire of the vanities in Renaissance Florence – all this was still some way off. Car makers were still a long way from closing factories for a full month over Christmas. (A move of course that could have repercussions far more threatening for the hourly-paid assembly line teams than for those who were to end up handing in the keys of the Bentley on which they could not keep up finance payments.) Vogue was still 800 pages thick on the basis of its advertising. HSBC’s private banking arm was honouring its commitment to sponsor the annual Art Basel/Miami jamboree, and Damien Hirst’s staff was working flat out to prepare for his unprecedented auction sale, while Hirst himself went bear shooting with a Ukranian oligarch with a taste for contemporary art. A year later all that was solid was melting into air, and Hirst was laying off his assistants. Now, as with the sudden disappearance of Art Nouveau in the early part of the twentieth century after 15 years of world domination, we will see a radical shift. After excess comes sobriety. In the years after World War I it was machine-age modernity that reshaped visual culture. Now, driven by our guilty carbon footprints, our disgust at the activities of corrupt fund managers, and the absurdity of competitive yacht building, conspicuous consumption is going to take a backseat for a while. Some designers are already beginning to express their regrets at the wave of limited editions they were involved with. They will certainly be talking about craft skills, and ways to recapture memories and emotional interaction on a more profound level. Some of the most interesting work will take place not in shaping objects, but in coming to terms with the immaterial varieties of design that exist in the digital world. However, as the Icesave story shows, the screen can be used to much the same cynically manipulative ends. I am still fascinated by the process of design, and the window it offers in understanding the world. Yet it makes us susceptible to the same difficulties that we suffer in our relationship with food and alcohol, oscillating between binge and extreme self-denial. The natural emotional relationship we look for with everyday things opens the way to a self-destructive narcotic addiction. The simple pleasure of the possession of a familiar, well-crafted artefact is perverted to become a variety of substance abuse. We find ourselves seduced into constantly searching for the fleeting high of a new possession, a new purchase, and a fascination with the new. This will not go away through the collapse of the market but it will make it harder for most of us to get our fix. It may bring an abrupt end to a tidal wave of pointless overproduction. Yet of course no government, even in Iceland (which saw the value of its currency halved in a week, leaving not enough foreign exchange to import fresh vegetables and medicines), can afford to see us do away entirely with the impulse to engineer desire. We find ourselves exactly at the point that Earnest Elmo Calkins was at 80 years ago, when he pointed out that it was the patriotic duty of all of us to consume our way out of the Great Depression.