# SOURCES OF QUOTATIONS Earnest Elmo Calkins first used the term ‘consumer engineering’ in a lecture, then contributed a foreword to Consumer Engineering: A New Technique for Prosperity published in 1932. Philippe Starck is a designer with an indefatigable appetite for self-publicity. Most of the words attributed to him in this book come either from conversations with the author, or from the numerous interviews that he has given over the years to many specialist magazines and newspapers, or from notes transcribed from the soundtrack that he recorded for his monographic exhibtion at the Pompidou Centre in Paris in 2001. p. 11, Jean Baudrillard: from The System of Objects, translated by James Benedict, published by Verso in 2005. pp. 90–91, Thorsten Veblen: from The Theory of the Leisure Class, first published in 1899. pp. 100, 101–102, Josef Hoffmann: The manifesto of The Wiener Werkstätte, known as the Work Programme of the Wiener Werkstätte, was written by Josef Hoffmann with Koloman Moser in 1905. It is reproduced in Design in Vienna: Wiener Werkstätte 1903–32, edited by Werner Schweiger and published by Thames and Hudson in 1984. pp. 103–104, Adolf Loos: The best source in English for the writings of Adolf Loos are the two volumes published by the Ariadne Press. Ornament and Crime (1997) has the text of the essay of the same name, which dates from 1908 and was given in various forms as a lecture. The second volume, On Architecture, was published in 2007. p. 151, Alan Bowness: as reported by Stephen Bayley in the Observer. In a subsequent interview with this author, Bayley conceded that these may not have been the exact words used by Bowness. p. 152, George Nelson: from ‘Both Fish and Fowl’, George Nelson’s 1934 article for Fortune, which explored his view of the designer’s role in the depression years. An anthology of Nelson’s writings was published under the title Problems of Design in 1957. p. 155, Arthur Drexler: from Introduction to 20th Century Design, published by MoMA in 1959. p. 168, Gerrit Rietveld: what was to become Rietveld’s Red Blue Chair was published for the first time in the September 1919 issue of De Stijl magazine. p. 169, Horatio Greenough: from Form and Function: Remarks on Art, an anthology of writing, first published in 1946, by the American sculptor, who died in 1852. p. 169, Frank Lloyd Wright: from ‘The Art and Craft of the Machine’, a lecture that Wright delivered on several occasions from 1901 onwards. A version is reprinted in America Builds, edited by Leland Roth and published by Harper and Row in 1983.