# THE GLITTERING PLAIN; OR, THE LAND OF LIVING MEN. On one side of the hall was a row of shut-beds, and Hallblithe deemed that there might be men therein ; but since none had greeted him he refrained him from searching them for fear of a trap, and he thought, "I will abide amidst the floor, and if there be any that would deal with me, friend or foe, let him come hither to me.' So he fell to walking up and down the hall from buttery to daīs, and his wargear rattled upon him. At last as he walked he thought he heard a small thin peevish voice, which yet was too husky for the squeak of a rat. So he stayed his walk and stood still, and said : "Will any man speak to Hallblithe, a new-comer, and a stranger in this Stead?" Then the small yoice made words and said : "Why paceth the fool up and down our hall, doing nothing, even as the Ravens flap croaking about the crags, abiding the war-mote and the clash of the fallow-blades?"? Said Hallblithe, and his voice sounded big in the hall : "Who calleth Hallblithe a fool and mocketh at the sons of the Raven ?"/ Spake the voice : "Why cometh not the fool to the man that may not go to him ?" Then Hallblithe bent forward to hearken, and he deemed that the voice came from one of the shut-beds, so he leaned his spear against a pillar, and went into the shutbed he had noted, and saw where there lay along in it a man exceeding old by seeming, sore wasted, with long hair as white as snow lying oyer the bed-clothes.. When the elder saw Hallblithe, he laughed a thin cracked laugh as if in mockery and said: "Hail new-comer! wilt thou eat ?" "Yea," said Hallblithe. "Go thou into the buttery then," said the old carle, " and there shalt thou find on the cupboard cakes and curds and cheese: eat thy fill, and when thou hast done look in the ingle, and thou shalt see a cask of mead exceeding good, and a stoup thereby, and two silyer cups : fill the stoup and bring it hither with the cups ; and then may we talk amidstldrinking, which is good for an old carle. {Hasten thou! or 1 shall deem thee a double fool who will not fare to fetch his meat, though he be hungry." Then Hallblithe laughed, and went down the hall into the buttery and found the meat, and ate his fill, and came away with the drink back to the Long-hoary man, who chuckled as he came and said: "Fill up now for thee and for me, and calí a health to me and wish me somewhat." "I wish theeluck," said Hallblithe, and drank. Said the elder: " And I wish thee more wits ; is luck all that thou mayst wish me? What luck may an outworn elder have?", Well then," quoth Hallblithe, "what shall I wish thee? Wouldst thou have me wish thee.youth?" " Yea, certes,"said the Long-hoary, "that and nought else." "Youth then' I wish thee, if it may avail thee aught," said Ilallblithe, and he drank àgain therewith. "Nay, nay," said thè old carle peevishly, "take a third cup, and wish me youth with noidle.words tacked thereto."! Said Hallblithe raising the cup : " Herewith I wish thee youth!" and he drank., "Good is the wish," said the clder; "now ask thou the old carle whatso thou wilt." Said Hallblithe : "What is this land called?γ " Son," said the other, "hast thou heard it called the 1sle of Ransom ?", Yed," said Hallblithe, "but what wilt thou call it ?" "By no other name," said the hoary carle. "It is far from other lands?" said Hallblithe. "Yea," said the carle, "when the light winds blow, and the ships sail slow." "What do ye who live here?" said Hallblithe. " How do ye live, what work win ve "We win diverse work," said the elder, "but the gainfullest is robbing men by the high hand." "Is it ye who have stolen from me the Hostage of the Rose?" said Hallblithe. Is it ye who have stolen trom me the Hostage of the Rose?" said Hallblithe. Said the Long-hoary, " Maybe ; I wot not ; in diverse ways my kinsmen traffic, and they visit many lands. " Why should they not have come to Čleveland also?" "Is she in this lsle, thou old runagate?" said Hallblithe. "She is not, thou young fool," saǐd the elder. Then Hallblithe flushed red and spake : "Knowest thou the Puny Fox?" Figure 34 Morris's The Story of the Glittering Plain was originally published in the English Illustrated Magazine (June-September 189o); here Morris marks the text for his printers at the Kelimscott Press. In the 1891 edition nearly all indentations were replaced by paragraph symbols, thus creating the solid, black-looking rectangle of type that Morris favoured. the first volume printed at the Kelmscott Press, a very wonderful production. . . . While we were sitting talking this copy was brought in to him by the printer, the first that had been bound and made up, and I asked hin “what do you mean to do with these books?" He said to sell them of course[.]" “Will you sell this copy to me?"“Certainly[.]" “"How much?" “A pound". So I paid a pound and took it away. ...' Two and a half years after Emery Walker's memorable lecture, the Kelmscott Press was successfully launched.