# Acknowledgements This book would not have been possible without the kind assistance of Mrs Nelly van Doesburg whose vivid memory for facts concerning both Van Doesburg and several other artists, and her unforgettable anecdotes regarding the Dada movement, helped to build up a colourful picture of this exhilarating period. In all respects I am indebted to her never-failing and stimulating cooperation. Translation of Theo van Doesburg's texts given here is as literal as possible. The extracts from his poetry and prose were translated by Mrs Esther Z. R. Cohen, whereas I made the translations of his writings dealing with art and architecture. We thought this a sound approach because Van Doesburg attempted to project different personalities in his literature and in his writing on art through his use of language. I wish to thank Esther Cohen for her invaluable help, in particular with çompiling the bibliography, as well as her personal encouragement during the years in which this book was produced. I am also very grateful to Dr Robert Welsh from the Department of Fine Art at the University of Toronto for his accurate help in rendering these translations into the clearest possible English. Dr Welsh was invited to do so through the kind offices of the Rijksbureau voor Kunsthistorische Documentatie, The Hague, and its then director, Dr H. Gerson, at present professor of art history at the University of Groningen, the Netherlands. In this connection I should also like to thank Mr Stephen Adamson for his editing the final phrasing of these texts. I am also indebted to the late Mrs H. Milius for kindly providing me with information concerning Van Doesburg's activity before his first trip to Germany; Professor C. van Eesteren for information about his collaboration with Van Doesburg on the De Stijl models of private and studio houses made in Paris; Mr A. Elzas for explaining his part in making some drawings for Van Doesburg's later architectural projects; and Dr W. Sandberg for his carefully reading the manuscript and bringing to my attention various details concerning Hans Richter's relationship with Van Doesburg as well as those of Naum Gabo and others. The University Library in Amsterdam, the Royal Library in The Hague, and the Technical Department of the Public Library in Amsterdam were my principal sources of bibliographical material. Apart from the manuscripts at Meudon, almost every publication by Van Doesburg can be found in these institutions. Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the many private collectors and museums possessing works by Theo van Doesburg for their kind cooperation in providing photographs and other information. It is my hope that the reader will find the present edition of this book, which is the final form of work started many years ago, surprisingly topical on the contemporary issues of the relationship of art, architecture and life as a whole. joost baljeu 1973