# Introduction I imagined myself making a daring, spiritual crusade throughout artistic and intellectual Europe. Theo van Doesburg, 1914¹ No attempt can be made to understand the history of the De Stijl movement without a knowledge of the works and writings of its founder, Theo van Doesburg. While Piet Mondrian laid the basis for this movement with his abstract geometric painting, Van Doesburg's main concern was to develop it in all aspects of life through architecture. Whereas Mondrian could stay quietly in his studio, carefully selecting the exact position of each line, plane or colour in a painting to theorize about it afterwards, Van Doesburg travelled restlessly from one city to another, all over Europe, whenever he sensed that a new development was to be expected. On each such occasion he tested his work and ideas against those of other artists and movements in art. Many of the approaches he encountered this way reacted with his own, through either absorption or rejection, in the main with no other goal than synthesizing those elements which he considered could promote a new universal art. Because he believed in the unity of art and life in a future plastic expression he often revolted against circumstances as they were. Van Doesburg was the prototype of the antibourgeois, the non-conformist. Thus Dada, the earliest ‘action-group' of this century, to which he adhered under a pseudonym, I. K. Bonset, fitted him like a glove. It provided him with an excellent weapon to smash what was held sacred so as to prepare the grounds for a new art. Convention and dogma were further attacked under another pseudonym, as the antiphilosopher Aldo Camini. He synthesized many characters in his own personality. Some of his work reveals him as a Surrealist as well as a Dadaist; he was Utopian and romantic, but preoccupied with the problems of translating his visions into reality. In art he was a painter, designer, typographer and architect; but he was also a prolific writer and included in his activities the roles of poet, novelist, art-historian and art-critic. Many of the issues in the relationship between art and architecture upon which Van Doesburg focused his attention remain with us and are again under consideration today. Similarly, Van Doesburg provided much of contemporary Constructivism in the Western world with a basis for survival after the Second World War, when towards the end of his life he created his systematic Concrete Art. When further comparing Van Doesburg to Mondrian, an important difference in their contribution to modern art and architecture can be discerned. In spite of his contemplation on the significance of his Neo-plasticism for life as a whole, painting meant for Mondrian an end in itself. Thus his large oeuvre of excellent paintings represents itself the transition towards a new era, and at the same time marks the end of a period in art. In contrast, Van Doesburg's architectural models and theories opened up the road for the development of the future. Finally, if a lesson can be drawn from Van Doesburg's approach, it is that first and foremost the artist's life is a creative process rather than the production of many works of art. In this respect Theo van Doesburg can also be considered to represent an extremely modern man.