# Writings ## Articles Art criticism, modern art in the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam, Exhibition Mondrian, Leo Gestel, ·Sluiters, Schelfhout, Le Fauconnier (Fragments coņcerning Mondrian) Mondrian. The works of this painter above all produce a most spiritual impression. They achieve this all the more because they are hung opposite the prismatic colourcompositions of Leo Gestel in the same room. The problem which Mondrian undertook to solve in nr. 116 was handled very successfully. This work spiritually dominates all others. It gives the impression of Repose; the repose of the soul. Its pre-determined structure embodies ‘becoming' rather than ‘being'. This represents a true element in art, for art is not ‘being' but ‘becoming'. The idea of ‘becoming' has been expressed in black and white; it derives from the theories of Picasso and Uexkuell. The first of these artists arrived at a metaphysical palette which reduced Luminist prismatic colour to white, black, grey and sepia. Through years of hard work my own experiences have led me, before I came to know the theories of Uexkuell or Picasso. to prefer the use of the white-black-grey palette in works of a purely spiritual content. The feeling I obtained from painting 116 was of a purely spiritual, almost religious character, which, however, possessed no zeal... . To reduce the artist's means to such a minimum and to produce an impression of pure art using only black paint on a white canvas and horizontal and vertical lines is most extraordinary. This work, however, should be hung separately. ## # 商 (above) Composition XIII, Still life 1918 oil on panel, 29.5 × 29.5 cm. (12 × 12 in.) Collection of Mrs J. J. P. Oud. Photo: L'Art en photographie I would like to draw attention to this kind of work. . . . The other works by Mondrian could be described as coloured architecture. Here too one colour emanates from another. The colours mutually influence each other. In some works the motives which inspired them can still be discerned, without, however. these becoming aesthetically disturbing (aesthetic' here is not used in its traditional meaning but in the sense of a ‘feeling for art’). These works, which produce an extraordinarily elementary or pure impression of art, remain ## Thought – Vision - Creation The development of plastic art is determined by the will to visualize. Art of the past represented the subjective vision of naturalistic relationships. Neo-plasticism embodies a subjective vision of plastic relationships. It is wrong to identify the essence of thought with vision, just as it is wrong to identify vision with the sensuous expression of naturalistic form. The latter concept derives from Classical and Roman-Catholic origins and was opposed by Protestantism (iconoclasm). The nature of thought can be subdivided into three classes: first, pure abstract thought reposeful and dignified in spite of the scornful laughter of the public who always seek the familiar. Mondrian realizes the importance of line. The line has almost become a work of art in itself; one cannot play with it as when the representation of objects perceived was all-important. The white canvas is almost solemn. Each superfluous line, each wrongly placed line, any colour placed without veneration or care, can spoil everything – that is, the spiritual. Eenheid no. 283, 6 November 1915 or thought for thought's sake, second, concrete thought or thought for the sake of vision and third, the intermediate class of deformed thought. In pure abstract thought no sensuous associations in perception (of nature) are incorporated. Instead, we find a relationship of concepts. This relationship can be visualized in à precise (mathematical) figure and is also contained in numbers. In this case, expressing the content of pure conceptual thought, one can already speak of plastic vision. I call concrete that thought which demands the visualization of sensuous associations in perception, for instance of an Alphabet, 1919 ## ABCDEFG NOPQRST