with nature" as the essence of his work, but he could also say that "all true creation is a thing born out of nothing." The seeming contrast is resolved through his unfailing originality "born out of nothing" which is the spiritual cause. The optical effect is a pictorial composition that uses the identifiable natural shape as mediary. In THE ROOM AND ITS INHABITANTS from 1921, floor boards, window frame and door, are recognizable, together with the faces of woman and child. But they are mere points of reference in a world of lines, arrows, reflections, fade outs that reveal intuitively the mysterious man-shelter relationship that has determined the course of civilization. If ever an artist understood the visual aspirations of his epoch it was Paul Klee; and the civilized world came to recognize his contemporane ousness even before his death in 1940. Exhibitions and publications have constantly increased in number; and it might be assumed that, together with Cezanne and Picasso, he will be the most reproduced and annotated painter of this century. But it is known to few that Paul Klee was more than a painter. His "communication with nature" produced much more than the transfiguration of the perceived form. It produced a philosophy that rested on empathy with the created world, accepting everything that is with equal love and humility. As a very young man he had spoken of his art as "andacht zum kleinen" (devotion to small things). In the Microcosm of his own visual world he worshipped the Macrocosm of the universe. This was his revolution. Academic art had been based since the Renaissance on the Aristotelian principle of de duction, meaning that all representation was deduced from the broad general principles of absolute beauty and conventional color canons. Paul Klee replaced deduction by induction. Through observation of the smallest manifestation of form and interrelationship, he could conclude about the magnitude of natural order. Energy and substance, that which moves and that which is moved, were of equal importance as symbols of creation. He loved the natural event; therefore he knew its meaning in the universal scheme. And with the instinct of the true lover he had to comprehend what he loved. The phenomenon perceived and analyzed, was investigated until its significance was beyond doubt. It is in Paul Klee that science and art fuse. Exactitude winged by intuition was the goal he held out for his students. Paul Klee the painter could not help becoming a teacher in the original meaning of the term. The word "to teach" derives from the Gothic "taiku-sign" (our word token). It is the mission of the teacher to observe what goes unnoticed by the multitude. He is an interpreter of signs. When Walter Gropius developed the curriculum of his German Bauhaus, he gave back to the word teacher its basic significance. Kandinsky, Klee, Feininger, Moholy-Nagy, Schlemmer, Albers, who taught there, were interpreters of the visual as tokens of a fundamental optical and struc tural order that had been obscured by centuries of literary allegorism. In this community of guides Paul Klee chose for himself the task of pointing out new ways of studying the signs of nature. "By contem plating the optical-physical appearance, the ego arrives at intuitive con clusions about the inner substance." The art student was to be more than a refined camera, trained to record the surface of the object. He must realize that he is "child of this earth; yet also child of the Universe; issue of a star among stars." A mind so in flux, so sensitive to intuitive insights, could never write an academic textbook. All he could retain on paper were indications, hints, allusions, like the delicate color dots and line plays on his pictures. The PEDAGOGICAL SKETCHBOOK is the abstract of Paul Klee's inductive vision. In it the natural object is not merely rendered two-dimensionally, it becomes "räumlich," related to physical and intellectual space con cepts, through four main approaches that form the four divisions of the Sketchbook: Dimension and Balance Gravitational Curve The first part of the Sketchbook (Sections 1.1-1.13) introduces the trans formation of the static dot into linear dynamics. The line, being succes sive dot progression, walks, circumscribes, creates passive-blank and active-filled planes. Line rhythm is measured like a musical score or an arithmetical problem. Gradually, line emerges as the measure of all structural proportion, from Euclid's Golden Section (1.7) to the energetic power lines of ligaments and tendons, of water currents and plant fibers. Each of the four divisions of the Sketchbook has one key-sen tence, strewn almost casually-without the pompousness of a theorem among specific observations. This one sentence in each chapter points the path from the particular to the universal. The first part on "Propor tionate Line and Structure" is condensed into one laconic statement: