"purely repetitive and therefore structural" (1.6), explaining in five words the nature of vertical structure as the repetitive accumulation of like units. The second part of the Sketchbook (11.14-11.25) deals with "Dimension and Balance." Here the object, rendered by line, is related to the sub jective power of the human eye. Man uses his ability to move freely in space to create for himself optical adventures. What are railroad ties? Functional cross-beams, occurring at regular intervals. Yes, but they are also subdivisions of infinite spacer capable of bisecting the third dimen sion at a hundred different angles (11.15). Man, precariously balanced on two unstable legs, uses optical illusion as a safety device. Horizon as concrete fact, and horizon as an imaginary safety belt that has to be believed in, are exemplified on the graceful example of the tightrope walker and his bamboo pole (11.21). The purely material balance of the scale finds its counter-part in the purely psychological balance of light and dark, weightless and heavy colors (11.24).. The key word to this section reads: "non-symmetrical balance" (11.23). It asserts that "the bilateral conformity of two parts" which is the old definition of sym metry, has been superseded by "the equalization of unequal but equiv alent parts. Dimension is in itself nothing but an arbitrary expansion of form into height, width, depth and time. It is the balancing and proportioning power of eye and brain that regulate this expansion of the object toward equilibrium and harmony. The third aspect of the study of nature in the Sketchbook (111.26-111.32) deals with the tension existing between man's ability to project himself and the object into space, and the limitations imposed upon this urge by the gravitational pull. The linear extension of the first section of the book, and the balance of dimensional form in the second section, is here followed up with the projection of motion above and below the hori zon of the human eye. The plump line (111.26) is man's umbilical cord to the center of the earth. It symbolizes the tragic termination of his will to fly, but it also symbolizes firmness and rhythm and the assuring direction toward rest. The falling stone, the ascending flier, the shooting star on the firmament (111.30-32) are natural dynamics whose course is decided by the gravitational curve. "But," Klee concludes„ "there are regions with different laws and new symbols, signifying freer move ment and more dynamical position.'] With this mere hint (111.26) at the existence of purely spiritual dynamism, that supersedes the phenomenal world and its earthbound fate, Klee defines his Naturalism as a sym bolism of great depth. The core of this third section, which is a transi tion from observation to intuition, is defined in the axiom that is per haps Klee's deepest wisdom: ## TO STAND DESPITE ALL POSSIBILITIES TO FALL! The concluding chapter (1111.33.43) allows the student a glimpse at the forces that create optical sensation, forces that are either kinetic-mobile, or chromatic-caloric. Plato spoke of EIDOS as the inner essence of an object as distinguished from the apparent outer form; and Aristotle uses the term ENTELECHY when he defines the form-giving cause that mani fests an idea in a material configuration. True to his inductive creed, Paul Klee demonstrates inner essence and form-giving cause on the most insignificant objects, the spinning top, for instance (1111.33) that defies gravity by the centrifugal energy of its gyrations, or the feathered arrow (1111.37) whose path is hampered by gravitational friction. "To be im pelled toward motion, and not to be the motor!" Thought and intention that send the arrow on its way are identified with the supra-mechanical force of the Eidos. With the ease of the perfect dancer who has subli mated his intense effort into seeming play, Paul Klee presents his new naturalism through an interchange of natural phenomenon and pure idea. The proportionate relationship of point and rudder to shaft in the actual arrow (1111.38) is calculated on a strictly mechanical basis. But the same exactitude is applied in calculating the orbit of the symbolic arrow, overcoming the friction of human fear by aiming "a bit farther than customary-farther than possible!" The final decision rests with man's willingness to produce energy. "The stronger the pull of the ascension rudder, the higher the rise; the stronger the pull of the drop rudder, the steeper the fall." Energy, the Sketchbook concludes, is without termination only in the chromatic and thermo-dynamic field. Motion that may be called infinite in the sense of unending self-transformation, exists only in the activa tion of color, moving between the fervid contrasts of utter black and utter white (1111.40) with the thermo-dynamic implications of intense heat and extreme cold. The last six diagrams complete the cycle that had started on page one when the dot was stirred from its static exist ence into line progression. On its way through the Sketchbook it has