## CRADLE TO CRADLE Michael Braungart was in the front rank of 1960s scientists who addressed environmental issues and while he was a chemistry student at Hannover University he founded the chemistry division of Greenpeace, and was one of the founders of Germany's Green Party. He has always worked 'for himself' and set up his Hamburg research company EPEA in 1988. It was when he established a New York office for EPEA that he met Bill McDonough, and together they created an American company, MBDC, in 1995. Michael has a lifelong professorship at the University of Luneburg in chemistry and process engineering, and in 2008 he took the joint chair created for him at Erasmus University in Rotterdam and in Delft, in both industrial ecology and Cradle to Cradle management for companies. He continues to publish as a chemist and to speak widely as Braungart Consulting. William McDonough is an architect and founding partner of William McDonough + Partners which specialises in architecture and community design and has studios in Charlottesville, Virginia, and San Francisco. In 1996, he received the Presidential Award for Sustainable Development. In 1999 Time magazine recognised him as a 'Hero for the Planet', stating that 'his utopianism is grounded in a unified philosophy that . . . is changing the design of the world.' Time again recognised Bill McDonough and Michael Braungart as 'Heroes of the Environment' in October 2007. He was elected a 2008 International Fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects. He is on the management committee of the University of Cambridge's 'Business and the Environment Programme', which is steered by the Prince of Wales, and on the China-US Center for Sustainable Development.