## Notes Chapter One. A Question of Design 20 "Citys . . . are nothing": John Clare (1793–1864), "Letter to Messrs Taylor and Hessey, II," in The Oxford Authors: John Clare, edited by Eric Robinson and David Powell (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1984), 457. 21 Consider cars: James P. Womack, Daniel Jones, and Daniel Roos, The Machine That Changed the World (New York: Macmillan, 1990), 21–25. 22 Henry Ford: Quoted in Ray Batchelor, Henry Ford: Mass Production, Modernism, and Design (Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press, 1994), 20. 24 "power, accuracy, economy": Ibid., 41. 25 "essences unchanged": Ralph Waldo Emerson, "Nature," in Selections from Ralph Waldo Emerson, edited by Stephen E. Whicher (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1957), 22. 27 more than 90 percent: Robert Ayres and A. V. Neese, "Externalities: Economics and Thermodynamics," in Economy and Ecology: Towards Sustainable Development, edited by F. Archibugi and P. Nijkamp (Netherlands: Kluwer Academic, 1989), 93. 30 mutations and infertility: Marla Cone, "River Pollution Study Finds Hormonal Defects in Fish Science: Discovery in Britain Suggests Sewage Plants Worldwide May Cause Similar Reproductive-Tract Damage," Los Angeles Times, September 22, 1998. 31 The reality of global warming: DuPont, BP, Royal Dutch Shell, Ford, Daimler Chrysler, Texaco, and General Motors have withdrawn from the Global Climate Coalition, a group backed by industrialists that discounts global warming. 32 Regulations for airborne pollutants: The EPA is also adding statutes that manufacturers upwind of polluted areas are affected by regulations in those areas. See Matthew Wald, "Court Backs Most EPA Action in Polluters in Central States," The New York Times, May 16, 2001, and Linda Greenhouse, "EPA's Authority on Air Rules Wins Supreme Court's Backing," The New York Times, February 8, 2001. 33 asphalt and concrete: In 1996 the impervious surfaces of the tristate metropolitan region around New York—the roads, buildings, parking lots, and nonliving parts—were measured at 30 percent. A generation ago this figure was 19 percent. The projection for 2020 is 45 percent. See Tony Hiss and Robert D. Yaro, A Region at Risk: The Third Regional Plan for the New York–New Jersey–Connecticut Metropolitan Area (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1996), 7. 35 single-minded cultivation: Wes Jackson has pointed out that the prairie as it was, with all of its diversity and grasses, actually produced more carbohydrates and protein per hectare than modern agriculture. But conventional agriculture has not engaged this rich ecosystem on its own terms. 35 "a simplifier of ecosystems": Paul R. Ehrlich, Anne H. Ehrlich, and John P. Holdren, Ecoscience: Population, Resources, Environment (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1970), 628. 35 returning complexity: Many forms of "organic" agriculture that celebrate complexity and productivity are being developed around the world with rotations of animals and plants. For details, see the work of Sir Albert Howard, J. I. Rodale, Masanobu Fukuoka, Joel Salatin, and Michael Pollan. Another example of "homeostatic" (not single-purpose monocultural) farming, according to Wes Jackson, is the Amish agricultural method. 37 a simplistic economic figure: For an in-depth discussion of the GDP's failures and a presentation of new measurements for progress, see Clifford Cobb, Ted Halsted, and Jonathan Rowe, "If the GDP Is Up, Why Is America Down?," Atlantic Monthly, October 1995, 59. 38 Since 1987: Michael Braungart et al., "Poor Design Practices—Gaseous Emissions from Complex Products," Project Report (Hamburg, Germany: Hamburger Umweltinstitut, 1997), 47. 39 "a formal risk assessment": Wayne R. Orr and John W. Roberts, "Everyday Exposure to Toxic Pollutants," Scientific American, February 1998, 90. 40 legislation establishing: Legislation is just beginning in Sweden. 41 a child's swim wings: Braungart et al., "Poor Design Practices," 49. 41 Consider endocrine disruptors: See Rachel Carson, Silent Spring (1962; rpt. New York: Penguin Group, 1997), and Theo Colburn, Dianne Dumanoski, and John Peterson Myers, Our Stolen Future, for an indepth look at the effects of synthetic chemicals on human and ecological health. Chapter Two. Why Being "Less Bad" Is No Good 45 "I have read": Thomas Malthus, Population: The First Essay (1798) (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1959), 3, 49. 46 "in Wildness": Henry David Thoreau, "Walking" (1863), in Walden and Other Writings, edited by William Howarth (New York: Random House, 1981), 613. 46 "When I submit": Quoted in Max Oelshaeger, The Idea of Wilderness: From Prehistory to the Age of Ecology (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), 217. 48 "hundreds of millions": Paul R. Ehrlich, The Population Bomb (New York: Ballantine Books, 1968), xi, 39. 48 "Then the fuse": Paul R. Ehrlich and Anne H. Ehrlich, The Population Explosion (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1984), 9, 11, 180–81. 49 "If the present": Quoted in Donella H. Meadows, Dennis L. Meadows, and Jorgan Sanders, Beyond the Limits: Confronting Global Collapse, Envisioning a Sustainable Future (Post Mills, VT: Chelsea Green, 1992), xviii. 49 "Minimize the use": Ibid., 214. 49 "The idea of unlimited growth": Fritz Schumacher, Small Is Beautiful: Economics as if People Mattered (1973; rpt. New York: Harper and Row, 1989), 31, 34, 35, 39. 50 "The simple truth": R. Lilienfield and W. Rathje, Use Less Stuff: Environmental Solutions for Who We Really Are (New York: Ballantine Books, 1998), 26, 74. 51 "What we thought was boundless": Joan Magretta, "Growth Through Sustainability: An Interview with Monsanto's CEO, Robert B. Shapiro," Harvard Business Review (January– February 1997), 82. 51 "You must get the most": Quoted in Joseph J. Romm, Lean and Clean Management: How to Boost Profits and Productivity by Reducing Pollution (New York: Kodansha America, 1994), 21. 52 "Industries and industrial operations": World Commission on Environment and Development, Our Common Future (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1987), 213. 52 "Within a decade": Stephan Schmidheiney, "Eco-Efficiency and Sustainable Development," Risk Management 43:7 (1996), 51. 53 more than \$750 million: 3M, "Pollution Prevention Pays," http://www.3m.com/about3m/environment/policies\_about3P.jht ml. 53 almost 70 percent: Gary Lee, "The Three R's of Manufacturing: Recycle, Reuse, Reduce Waste," Washington Post, February 5, 1996, A3. 54 a groundbreaking report: Theo Colborn, Dianne Dumanoski, and John Peterson Myers, Our Stolen Future (New York: Penguin Group, 1997), xvi. 54 new research on particulates: Mary Beth Regan, "The Dustup Over Dust," Business Week, December 2, 1996, 119. 59 two fundamental syndromes: Jane Jacobs, Systems of Survival: A Dialogue on the Moral Foundations of Commerce and Politics (New York: Vintage Books, 1992). 65 no independent value: For an interesting discussion of the "value" of efficiency, see James Hillman, Kinds of Power: A Guide to Its Intelligent Uses (New York: Doubleday, 1995), 33– 44. Chapter Three. Eco-Effectiveness 76 a manager's job: Peter Drucker, The Effective Executive (New York: Harper Business, 1986). 79 some species of ant: Erich Hoyt, The Earth Dwellers: Adventures in the Land of Ants (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996), 27, 19. 80 nature's services: Gretchen C. Daily, introduction to Nature's Services: Societal Dependence on Natural Ecosystems, edited by Gretchen C. Daily (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1997), 4. 84 "Nature being known": Quoted in Clive Ponting, A Green History of the World: The Environment and the Collapse of Great Civilizations (New York: Penguin Books, 1991), 148. Chapter Four. Waste Equals Food 94 Rome's imperialism: Sir Albert Howard notes that the "main causes" of Rome's decline "appear to have been fourfold: the constant drain on the manhood of the country side by the legions, which culminated in the two long wars with Carthage; the operations of the Roman capitalist landlords; failure to work out a balanced agriculture between crops and live stock and to maintain the fertility of the soil; the employment of Slaves instead of free labourers." Albert Howard, An Agricultural Testament (London: Oxford University Press, 1940), 8. 94 "The central story": William Cronon, Nature's Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West (New York and London: W. W. Norton, 1991), xv, 19. 95 For centuries in Egypt: For more details on the Egyptians' sustainable usage of the Nile, see Donald Worster, "Thinking Like a River," in Meeting the Expectations of the Land, edited by Wes Jackson, Wendell Berry, and Bruce Colman (San Francisco: North Point Press, 1984), 58–59. 96 the Chinese perfected a system: Also see F. H. King, Farmers of Forty Centuries: Or, Permanent Agriculture in China, Korea, and Japan (London: Jonathan Cape, 1925). 100 Great Stink of London: Clive Ponting, A Green History of the World: The Environment and the Collapse of Great Civilizations (New York: Penguin Books, 1991), 355. 105 Most packaging: Kyra Butzel, "Packaging's Bad 'Wrap,' " Ecological Critique and Objectives in Design 3:3 (1994), 101. 112 rent-a-solvent: Michael first proposed this concept in 1986. It is important to note, however, that it is not yet optimized; none of the companies that have adopted the concept so far have yet completely rematerialized the solvent as a technical nutrient. ## Chapter Five. Respect Diversity 120 Think again of the ants: Erich Hoyt, The Earth Dwellers (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996), 211–13. 121 ten species of ant wren: John Terborgh, Diversity and the Tropical Rain Forest (New York: Scientific American Library, 1992), 70–71. 121 A tapestry is the metaphor: William K. Stevens, "Lost Rivets and Threads, and Ecosystems Pulled Apart," The New York Times, July 4, 2000. 147 "Every man working": Adam Smith, "Restraints on Particular Imports," in An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (New York: Random House, 1937), 423. 148 "Masses of laborers": Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto (1848; rpt. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1964), 70. 148 "ecocide": See Murray Feshbach and Alfred Friendly, Jr., Ecocide in the U.S.S.R.: Health and Nature Under Siege (New York: Basic Books, 1992). 151 a fractal tile: Our fractal diagram is modeled on the Sierpinski gasket, named for the Polish mathematician who discovered it in 1919. 153 "triple bottom line": For more on this concept, see the work of John Elkington at www.sustainability.com. Chapter Six. Putting Eco-Effectiveness into Practice 157 a "disassembly line": Charles Sorenson, My Forty Years with Ford (New York: W. W. Norton, 1956), pp. 174–75. 185 "All biological structures": Stephen Jay Gould, "Creating the Creators," Discover, October 1996, pp. 43–54.