## FIGURES AND COLOUR PLATES The following list of figures also indicates those illustrations that are reproduced in colour. Colour plates are located between pages 228 and 229. 1.1 Comparative GDP per capita in China and Western Europe, 1400–2050. Source: Angus Maddison, The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective (Paris: Development Centre Studies, 2001), p. 44. 9 1.2 Explaining divergence: between ‘exceptionalism’ and ‘contingency’. Sources: David S. Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why are Some so Rich and Others so Poor? (New York: W. W. Norton, 1998); E. L. Jones, The European Miracle: Environments, Economies, and Geopolitics in the History of Europe and Asia, 3rd edn (Cambridge University Press, 2003); Joel Mokyr, The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy (Princeton University Press, 2002); Joel Mokyr, The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain, 1700–1850 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009); Robert C. Allen, The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective (Cambridge University Press, 2009); Maxine Berg, ‘In Pursuit of Luxury: Global History and British Consumer Goods in the Eighteenth Century’, P&P 132 (2004): 85–142; Maxine Berg, Luxury and Pleasure in Eighteenth-Century Britain (Oxford University Press, 2005); Prasannan Parthasarathi, Why Europe Grew Rich and Asia did Not: Global Economic Divergence, 1600–1850 (Cambridge University Press, 2011); Kenneth Pomeranz, The Great Divergence: China, Europe and the Making of the Modern World Economy (Princeton University Press, 2000). 9 ## <sup>viii</sup> / List of figures 2.1 Cotton textile fragment, resist-dyed and mordant-dyed red and resist-dyed blue, fourteenth century. Produced in Gujarat, India, and excavated in Old Fustat, Egypt. 39.5 × 23 cm. Presented by Professor Percy Newberry, 1946. Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, EA1990.1129. (See colour plate.) 18 2.2 Cotton cloth, block-printed with resist and mordant-dyed blue, produced in Gujarat c. 1340 (plus or minus forty years) and traded to the Sulawesi Islands in Southeast Asia. Victoria and Albert Museum, purchased with the assistance of the Art Fund, IS.96–1993. (See colour plate.) 19 2.3 Cotton sash (patka) produced in Burhanpur. Printed, painted and dyed cotton, eighteenth century. Victoria and Albert Museum, IM.311–1921. 22 2.4 Ceremonial hanging with a hunting scene. Block printed and mordant-dyed cotton. Made in Gujarat for the Indonesian market in the style of a Gujarati silk patola, late seventeenth to eighteenth century. Victoria and Albert Museum, IS.97–1990. (See colour plate.) 28 2.5 Jacket (baju). Painted mordant-dyed and resist-dyed cotton cloth produced on the Coromandel coast and tailored into a jacket in Sumatra, late eighteenth century. Victoria and Albert Museum, purchased with the assistance of the Art Fund, IS.101–1993. (See colour plate.) 28 2.6 Rai Surjan Hada, the ruler of Ranthambhor, northwest India, submitting to the Mughal emperor Akbar (r. 1556–1605) in 1569. This scene from the Akbarnama (Book of Akbar) was designed by the Mughal court artist Mukund and painted by Shankar; it shows the profusion of textiles used by the court. Victoria and Albert Museum, IS.2:75–1896. (See colour plate.) 31 2.7 Page from an album of sketches of costumes of South India. Opaque watercolour with letterpress. Company school, c. 1842. -C The Trustees of the British Museum, Asia Department 1951,1006,0.1.7. (See colour plate.) 32 3.1 A cotton tree as depicted by John Mandeville. 38 ## <sup>ix</sup> / List of figures 3.2 (a and b) Two nineteenth-century paintings in Company style representing ginning with a charkha and the bowing of cotton, 1851. 23 × 18.7 cm. -C The Trustees of the British Museum, London, funded by the Brooke Sewell Permanent Fund 1984.0124.1.1.44 and 1984.0124.1.1.56. (See colour plate.) 51 3.3 Bowing: technological diffusion (numbers are centuries CE of invention and diffusion). Source: see Chapter 3, notes 68–76. 52 3.4 A nineteenth-century painting in Company style representing the spinning and weaving of cotton yarn, 1851. 23 × 18.7 cm. -C The Trustees of the British Museum, London, funded by Brooke Sewell Permanent Fund 1984.0124.1.1.35. (See colour plate.) 53 3.5 The spinning wheel: technological diffusion (numbers are centuries AD of invention/adoption). Sources: see Chapter 3 notes 77–84. 53 3.6 Treadle-operated multi-spindle wheel used for doubling cotton yarn. Illustration from Shui-chuan ta-fang-chhe (1313), 1530 edition, ch. 25, p. 9a; reproduced in Dieter Kuhn, Science and Civilisation in China, vol. V, Chemistry and Chemical Technology. Part IX. Textile Technology: Spinning and Reeling (Cambridge University Press, 1998), p. 217. 54 3.7 Water-powered multiple spinning frame used in China probably for ramie, Illustration from Shui-chuan ta-fang-chhe (1313), 1530 edition, ch. 20, pp. 17ab; reproduced in Dieter Kuhn, Science and Civilisation in China, vol. V, Chemistry and Chemical Technology. Part IX. Textile Technology: Spinning and Reeling (Cambridge University Press, 1998), p. 228. 55 3.8 ‘Weaver Seated at a Loom’. Painting on mica, Company school, c. 1800–50. -C The Trustees of the British Museum 1989,1225,0.18, In Memory of Mrs Dick. (See colour plate.) 57 4.1 Brush drawing of the weaver-saint Kabir. Colour wash on paper made in Panjab (Pakistan), late nineteenth century. Victoria and Albert Museum IM.2:59–1917. (See colour plate.) 60 ## <sup>x</sup> / List of figures 4.2 Two Indian women winding cotton. Watercolour on paper, early nineteenth century. -C The Trustees of the British Museum, 1880,0.2107. (See colour plate.) 61 4.3 ‘Weavers’ house at Santipore, the Tant\`ıe at his Loom’. Stipple engraving by P. W. Tomkins after a painting by Arthur William Devis. British school, 1797. -C The Trustees of the British Museum. Department of Prints and Drawings 1856,1011.104. 62 4.4 (a) (above) The organisation of production of the Indian cotton industry; and (b) (below) The organisation of production of the European woollen industry (West of England). Sources: (a) the author; (b) from Maxine Berg, ‘Factories, Workshops and Industrial Organisation’, in Donald N. McCloskey and Roderick Floud, eds., The Economic History of Britain since 1700, vol. I, 1700–1860 (Cambridge University Press, 1994, p. 131). 65 4.5 Blue and white linen and cotton towel, Italy, c. fifteenth century. -C Museum of Fine Arts Boston 06.102. Gift of Miss Louise M. Nathurst. (See colour plate.) 74 4.6 ‘Cloth Printer’ from an album of Kashmiri trades, c. 1850–60. -C The British Library Add.Or.1735 (left) and Add. Or.1714 (right). (See colour plate.) 81 5.1 Painting of selling cloth. Company school, c. 1860. Watercolour on paper, 26.9 × 31.6 cm. Reproduced by kind permission of the Royal Ontario Museum, Gift of Peter Brock 998.126.6. (See colour plate.) 88 5.2 Cotton coverlet, made in India, c. 1600, embroidered with Tussar thread and produced for the Portuguese market. Victoria and Albert Museum 616.1886. (See colour plate.) 91 5.3 Textiles imported from Asia into Europe by the Portuguese Carreira and the Dutch, English and French East India Companies, 1586–1829. Sources: Carreira da <sup>´</sup>India (1586–1631): James C. Boyajian, Portuguese Trade in Asia under the Habsburgs (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993), pp. 247–53, 139–40. EEIC (1630–63): ‘Sales in London’, from Sergio Aiolfi, Calicos und Gedrucktes Zeug: die ## <sup>xi</sup> / List of figures Entwicklung der englischen Textilveredelung und der Tuchhandel der East India Company, 1650–1750 (Stuttgart, 1987), table 10, ‘Estimates of percentage of cottons’, from A. M. Millard, ‘Analyses of the Port Books Recording Merchandises Imported in the Port of London . . . Between 1588 and 1640’, unpublished MSS, 1959, TNA Library 382.5 Lon. EEIC (1665–1760): K. N. Chaudhuri, The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company 1660–1760 (Cambridge University Press, 1978), pp. 540–1. EIC (1760–1834): database ‘The East India Company: Trade and Domestic Financial Statistics, 1755–1838’ compiled by Huw Bowen. VOC (1665–1760): Femme S. Gaastra, ‘The Textile Trade of the VOC: The Dutch Response to the English Challenge’, South Asia 19/special issue (1996): 85–95; Michel Morineau, ‘The Indian Challenge: Seventeenth to Eighteenth Centuries’, in Sushil Chaudhuri and Michel Morineau, eds., Merchants, Companies and Trade: Europe and Asia in the Early Modern Era (Cambridge University Press, 1999), pp. 273–5; Niels Steensgaard, ‘The Indian Ocean Network and the Emerging World-Economy, c. 1500–1750’, in Satish Chandra, ed., The Indian Ocean: Explorations in History, Commerce and Politics (New Delhi: Sage, 1987), p. 126. VOC (1760–89): quantities have been estimated from auction sales (in value) by using an average value per piece calculated for the period 1665–1760. FEIC (1720–69): Philippe Haudrere,\` La Compagnie franc¸aise des Indes au XVIIIe siecle (1719–1795)\` (Paris: Librairie de l’Inde, 1989), vol. I, p. 293. 94 5.4 Cotton textiles as a percentage of the value of all commodities traded to Europe by the VOC (1700–89) and EIC (1665–1834). Source: present volume, figure 5.3. VOC (1760–89): quantities have been calculated from auction sales (in value) by using an average value per piece calculated for the period 1665–1760. 95 5.5 Types of cotton textiles imported into Europe by the EEIC, 1660–1759. Source: Sergio Aiolfi, Calicos und gedrucktes Zeug: die Entwicklung der englischen Textilveredelung und der Tuchhandel der East India Company, 1650–1750 (Stuttgart: Steiner, 1987), pp. 424–8. 97 5.6 An Indian cotton cloth with dark background. Longcloth, block-printed, mordant-dyed and painted cotton, produced in Gujarat, c. 1680–1760. Victoria and Albert Museum, IS.100–1993. Purchased with the assistance of the Art Fund. 101 ## <sup>xii</sup> / List of figures 5.7 A cotton cloth preferred by Europeans: a woman’s chintz jacket with birds and flowers on a white background. Produced on the Coromandel coast for the European market, c. 1725. Victoria and Albert Museum, London, IS.14–1950. Given by G. P. Baker. (See colour plate.) 102 5.8 Part of a palampore, bedcover or hanging, produced on the Coromandel coast for the Indonesian market and found in Sumatra. Cotton, block-printed and painted outline, drawn and resist-dyed, eighteenth century. 324 × 210 cm. Victoria and Albert Museum, London, IS.99–1993. Purchased with the assistance of the Art Fund. (See colour plate.) 103 5.9 A large palampore produced on the Coromandel coast for the European market, c. 1720–40. 307 × 248 cm. Victoria and Albert Museum, IS.36–1950. Given by G. P. Baker. (See colour plate.) 104 5.10 Block-printed mezzaro inspired by Indian palampores. Produced in Genoa, Italy, early nineteenth century. Victoria and Albert Museum, IS.146–1950. (See colour plate.) 105 5.11 Purchasing price and markup of the EEIC on textiles imported from India, 1664–1829. Sources: K. N. Chaudhuri, The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company 1660–1760 (Cambridge University Press, 1978), pp. 540–1, and the database ‘The East India Company: Trade and Domestic Financial Statistics, 1755–1838’ compiled by Huw Bowen. The import price is expressed in pounds sterling. The markup is the sale price at auction in London divided by the price of purchase in India. 108 6.1 Fragment of a baby’s garment. London Metropolitan Archive, Foundling 220 (15 November 1745). Reproduced from John Styles, Threads of Feeling: The London Foundling Hospitals’ Textile Token, 1740–1770 (London: Foundlings’ Hospital, 2010), p. 33. -C Coram. 111 6.2 Cotton and linen textile prices in London, 1660–1760. Sources: Sir William Beveridge, Prices and Wages in England from the Twelfth to the Nineteenth Century (London: Macmillan, 1939); K. N. Chaudhuri, The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company 1660–1760 (Cambridge University Press, 1978), pp. 440–8 and ## <sup>xiii</sup> / List of figures 499–502; Carole Shammas, ‘The Decline of Textile Prices in England and British America prior to Industrialization’, EHR 47/3 (1994): 483–507. Prices in Beveridge and Shammas are taken from the purchase of cloth by the Greenwich hospital in London and therefore are less subject to price variations than market prices as they were set by long-term contracts. 114 6.3 ‘The weavers tryumph or an abstract, of the callicoe-act, of parliament’. Broadsheet, 1722. Reproduced courtesy of Senate House Library, University of London. 120 6.4 ‘Plombs’ used to identify white cottons and muslin cloth legally imported into France. Archives Nationales de France, Paris, F12 1405A. 122 6.5 Part of a palampore made of chintz produced on the Coromandel coast of India, possibly for the European market. Eighteenth century. Victoria and Albert Museum, IS.53&A-1950. Given by G. P. Baker. (See colour plate.) 127 6.6 ‘Homme en robe de chambre’. Etching on paper by Jean Lepautre, Paris, c. 1675. -C The Trustees of the British Museum, Prints & Drawings Department, I,7.160. 128 6.7 Back lining of a stomacher, possibly printed fustian. English, 1740s. -C Manchester Art Gallery, Gallery of Costume, Platt Hall, 2008.23. (See colour plate.) 129 6.8 ‘Molly Milton, the Pretty Oyster Woman’. Hand-coloured mezzotint published by Carington Bowles after Robert Dighton, London, 1788. -C The Trustees of the British Museum, 1935,0522.1.109. (See colour plate.) 130 6.9 ‘Manufactures a Rouen. \` 1737. Etoffes de fil et cotton’. Page from the Collection d’echantillons d’´ etoffes du Mar´ echal de Richelieu´ , Bibliotheque Nationale de France, Paris, Richelieu, LH-\` 45 (1)-FOL(4), fo. 25. (See colour plate.) 131 6.10 ‘Silk Fringe’ and ‘Flowered Cotton’ from the Foundling Entry Books. London Metropolitan Archive, Foundling 2584 (27 October 1756) and 14093 (4 October 1759). Reproduced from John Styles, Threads of ## <sup>xiv</sup> / List of figures Feeling: The London Foundling Hospital’s Textile Token, 1740–1770 (London: Foundlings’ Hospital, 2010), pp. 32–3. -C Coram. (See colour plate.) 132 6.11 Hooded cape, southern France, c. 1790. -C Manchester Art Gallery, Gallery of Costume, Platt Hall, 1992.9. (See colour plate.) 134 7.1 Albert Eckhout, African Woman (Brazil, 1641). Oil on canvas, 261 × 178 cm. Nationalmuseet, Etnografisk Samling, Copenhagen. (See colour plate.) 136 7.2 ‘Marche d’esclaves’. Plate from M. Chambon,´ Le Commerce de l’Amerique par Marseille´ (Avignon, 1764). Private collection. 140 7.3 Francisco Clapera, De Chino, e India, Genizara (Mexico, c. 1780). Denver Art Museum, Gift of Frederick and Jan Mayer, 2011.482.14. Photography Denver Art Museum. (See colour plate.) 143 7.4 Jose de Alc´ ´ıbar (attributed), De Espanol y Negra, Mulato˜ (c. 1760). Denver Art Museum: Collection of Frederick and Jan Mayer TL-29337. Photo -C James O. Milmoe. (See colour plate.) 145 7.5 Textiles ordered by James Alexander of New York from David Barclay of London, 1726. The New York Historical Society, Alexander Papers, Series 3: Mary Alexander (1736–60), Box 10, Folder 1: ‘Mary Alexander – Fabric Samples’. (See colour plate.) 146 7.6 Indian and English cotton textiles exported to West Africa, 1751–1807. Source: Elizabeth Schumpeter, English Overseas Trade Statistics, 1697–1808 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1960), pp. 29–34, tables 10 and 11. 149 7.7 Export of English printed cottons and linens by geographical area, 1765–1800. Source: Elizabeth Schumpeter, English Overseas Trade Statistics, 1697–1808 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1960), pp. 29–34, tables 10 and 11. 150 7.8 Indiennes produced at Dieppe, 1783. Archives Nationales des France, Paris, F12 1404B. (See colour plate.) 155 ## <sup>xv</sup> / List of figures 7.9 Typical checks traded to Africa that were seized in Rouen; they were produced by a Tocqueville manufacturer in 1785. Archives Nationales de France, Paris, F12 1412 (See colour plate.) 156 7.10 ‘Manufactures a Rouen.\` 1737. Siamoiserie’. Page from the Collection d’echantillons d’´ etoffes du Mar´ echal de Richelieu´ , 1737. Bibliotheque\` Nationale de France, Paris, Richelieu, LH-45C-FOL(4), fo. 4. (See colour plate.) 158 8.1 ‘Les Travaux de la manufacture’. Toile by Oberkampf, 1783. -C Musee de l’Impression sur´ Etoffes, Mulhouse, n.<sup>´</sup> 219. (See colour plate.) 161 8.2 The patterning of textiles in Eurasia. 163 8.3 ‘A Weaver’. Print made by Jan van Vliet and published by Cornelis Danckerts. Dutch, 1635. British Museum, Prints and Drawings S.219. -C The Trustees of the British Museum. 164 8.4 ‘Malabar de caste Cavari qui peint sur toile’. Calico printer from the Malabar coast of India. Drawing, mid nineteenth century. Bibliotheque\` Nationale de France, Paris, Manuscrits orientaux, RC-B-10340, Indien 743, fo. 35. 165 8.5 ‘Peintre sur toile’. Probably from the Malabar coast of India, eighteenth century. Bibliotheque Nationale de France, Paris,\` Estampes et photographie, RC-A-31698, OD-46A-4, fo. 38. (See colour plate.) 166 8.6 Fragment of a European printed cotton, c. 1660–1700. -C Manchester Art Gallery, Gallery of Costume, Platt Hall, 2004.93. (See colour plate.) 166 8.7 Maniere de fabriquer les toiles peintes dans l’Inde\` . Manuscript, 1734. Bibliotheque Central du Mus\` eum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris,´ MSS 193(9). -C Paris, Bibliotheque Centrale du MNHN,\` 2012. (See colour plate.) 168 8.8 ‘Toilles de Cotton . . . Marseille 1736 . . . Indiennes ou Guinees’. Page´ from the Collection d’echantillons d’´ etoffes du Mar´ echal de Richelieu´ , ## <sup>xvi</sup> / List of figures 1736. Bibliotheque Nationale de France, Paris, Richelieu, LH-\` 45 (1)-FOL, fo. 28. (See colour plate.) 171 8.9 Joseph Gabriel Maria Rossetti, Manufacture de tissu d’indienne des freres Wetter\` (1764). Musee Municipale, Orange, France.´ -C 2012. White Images/Scala, Florence. (See colour plate.) 174 8.10 Jean-Baptiste Huet, The Factory at Jouy (1807). -C Le Musee Municipal´ de la Toile de Jouy, Jouy, France. (See colour plate.) 175 8.11 ‘Indigotoire’. French coloured print, second half of the eighteenth century. Private collection. 177 8.12 Linen and cotton cloth printed from engraved copper plates and wood blocks and painted blue by Robert Jones & Co., Old Ford, Middlesex, England, 1769. Victoria and Albert Museum T.140–1934. (See colour plate.) 180 9.1 ‘A Pholey Town & Plantation’, from Francis Moore, Travels into the inland parts of Africa: containing a description of the several nations . . . up the River Gambia (London: Edward Cave, 1738), vol. II, p. 359. 188 9.2 ‘Indigo and Cotton Plants’, from a print by I. C. Philips, 1730. Private collection. 192 9.3 ‘Coton’. Plate VIII from M. Chambon, Le Commerce de l’Amerique´ par Marseille (Avignon, 1764). Private collection. 196 9.4 William Berryman, ‘Bagging Cotton’ (in Jamaica). Drawing, c. 1808–15. Library of Congress DRWG 1 – Berryman, no. 158. Reproduced courtesy of the Library of Congress. 199 9.5 Augustin Brunias, At the Linen Market in Santo Domingo. Oil painting, c. 1775. Museo Thyssen-Bornenisza, Madrid, INV. Nr. CTB. 1986.22. 49.6 × 64.8 cm. -C Christie’s Images Ltd – ARTOTHEK. (See colour plate.) 202 9.6 ‘The First Cotton Gin’, Harper’s Weekly, 18 December 1869. Private collection. 205 ## <sup>xvii</sup> / List of figures 9.7 Charles Giroux, Cotton Plantation. Oil on canvas, c. 1850s–60s. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston 47.1144. Gift of Maxim Karolik for the M. and M. Karolik Collection of American Paintings, 1815–65. (See colour plate.) 206 9.8 ‘A Cotton Plantation on the Mississippi’. Lithograph. New York: Currier & Ives, 1884. Courtesy Library of Congress, LC-DIG-pga-00675. 208 9.9 ‘Scene of the Levee, at New Orleans’. Print from Ballou’s Pictorial 1855. Private collection. 209 10.1 Sir Richard Arkwright, Japanese print, second half of the nineteenth century. Chadbourne collection of Japanese prints, Library of Congress, hosho paper, LC: FP ¯ 2 – Chadbourne, no. 30. 213 10.2 Explanations of changes in cotton production during the Industrial Revolution. 215 10.3 ‘Coton’. Plate IX from M. Chambon, Le Commerce de l’Amerique par´ Marseille (Avignon, 1764). Private collection. 218 10.4 ‘Tisserands qui mouillent le coton file avec de l’eau pure’. Drawing,´ c. 1780. Bibliotheque Nationale de France, Paris, Estampes et\` photographie, RC-A-31696, OD-46A-4, fo. 36. 219 10.5 European ‘industrious revolution’ and Chinese ‘commercial involution’. 220 10.6 Richard Arkwright’s water frame, c. 1775. -C Science Museum, London, Science and Society Picture Library no. 10319128. 226 10.7 Indian weaver from Pierre Sonnerat’s Voyage aux Indes Orientales et a\` Chine (1782). Private collection. 230 10.8 ‘View of Swainson Birley Cotton Mill’, 1834. Print taken from a drawing by Thomas Allom. -C Science Museum, London, Science and Society Picture Library no. 10243005. 231 ## <sup>xviii</sup> / List of figures 10.9 Plate illustrating sections of Strutt’s cotton mill at Belper in Derbyshire, from Rees’s Cyclopaedia (1819). -C Science Museum, London, Science and Society Picture Library no. 10418825. 232 10.10 ‘Dye House’. Plate from John Barrow’s New and Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (1754). -C Science Museum, London, Science and Society Picture Library no. 10422641. 233 10.11 ‘View of the print room at Swainson Birley Cotton Mill’, 1834. Print taken from a drawing by Thomas Allom. -C Science Museum, London, Science and Society Picture Library no. 10243006. 233 11.1 ‘The Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing’, engraved in 1687 by Francis Barlow, from Aesop’s Fables, 2nd edn, 1703. Private collection. 239 11.2 ‘Common method of beetling, scutching and hackling the flax’ by William Hincks. Hand-coloured engraving, published London, 20 June 1791. Library of Congress, LC-USZC4–4494. 245 11.3 Consumption of raw wool and cotton in Britain, 1700–1850. Sources for cotton: Alfred P. Wadsworth and Julia de Lacy Mann, The Cotton Trade and Industrial Lancashire, 1600–1780 (Manchester University Press, 1931), p. 520; B. R. Mitchell, British Historical Statistics (Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 331–5. Sources for wool: Phyllis Deane, ‘The Output of the British Woollen Industry in the Eighteenth Century’, Journal of Economic History 17/2 (1957): 207–23; Giorgio Riello, ‘The Ecology of Cotton in the Eighteenth Century: Possibilities and Potentials’, unpublished paper, October 2005 (www2.lse.ac.uk/economicHistory/Research/GEHN/GEHNPDF/ RielloPadua.pdf); and Giorgio Riello, ‘Counting Sheep: A Global Perspective on Wool, 1800–2000’, in Giovanni Luigi Fontana and Gerard Gayot, eds.,´ Wool: Products and Markets, 13th–20th Century (Padua: Cleup, 2004), pp. 103–31. 251 11.4 Price of raw cotton from the West Indies, the US South and Syria, 1728–1860. Sources for British West Indies, Surinam and Berbice (1728–1820): Brian R. Mitchell, British Historical Statistics (Cambridge University Press, 1988), p. 759. I used the mean value. The result is a possible overevaluation of the British West Indies price. Sources for Upland and Middling American (1801–60): Brian R. ## <sup>xix</sup> / List of figures Mitchell, British Historical Statistics (Cambridge University Press, 1988), p. 760. Sources for French West Indies (1749–89): Jean Tarrade, Le Commerce colonial de la France a la fin de l’ancien r\` egime.´ L’evolution du r´ egime de ‘l’exclusif’ de 1763´ a 1789\` (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1972), pp. 771–2, based on a ‘quintal de cent livres’ equal to 108 British lbs and 21 livres tournois equal to a British pound sterling. Sources for Syrian cotton imported into Holland (1728–1806): P. W. Posthumus, Nederlandsche Prijsgeschiedenis (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1943), pp. 281–3, based on 11 guilders to a British pound sterling. 254 11.5 Raw cotton imported into Britain by geographic area, 1700–80 and 1791–1850. Sources: Alfred P. Wadsworth and Julia de Lacy Mann, The Cotton and Industrial Lancashire, 1600–1780 (Manchester University Press, 1932), p. 520; Barbara Gaye Jaquay, ‘The Caribbean Cotton Production: An Historical Geography of the Region’s Mysterious Crop’, unpublished PhD thesis, Texas A&M University, 1997, tables 10 and 12. Data for 1791–1820 are just for the port of Liverpool: Henry Smithers, Liverpool, Its Commerce, Statistics and Institutions, with a History of the Cotton Trade (Liverpool, 1825) and data for the period 1821–50 are from the Annual Statements of the Trade and Navigation of Great Britain for their respective years. No data is available for the period 1781–90. 257 11.6 ‘Cotton Bales Lying at the Bombay Terminus of the Great Indian Peninsula Railway ready for Shipment to England’. Print from History of Indian Railways, 1862. Private collection. 262 12.1 Edgar Degas, Le Bureau de coton a la Nouvelle Orleans en 1873\` . Oil on canvas, 73 × 92 cm. Musee des Beaux-Arts, Pau, France,´ 2012. White Images / Scala, Florence. 265 12.2 Export of British cotton textiles by world area, 1784–1856. Source: Ralph Davis, ‘The English Export Trade: Textiles from 1784 to 1856’, in Stanley D. Chapman, ed., The Textile Industries, vol. II, Cotton, Linen, Wool and Worsted (London and New York: I. B. Tauris, 1997), p. 235. 269 12.3 ‘King Cotton of Manchester’. Nazi propaganda, 1943. Private collection. 274 ## <sup>xx</sup> / List of figures 12.4 Tie-dyed cotton cloth for a turban, Delhi, c. 1880. Victoria and Albert Museum, IS.493–1883. 279 12.5 ‘The Progress of Civilization’, from John Russell, Around the World with General Grant: A Narrative of the Visit of General US Grant . . . to Various Countries in Europe, Asia, and Africa (New York: American News Co., 1879), vol. II, p. 477. 281 12.6 Power looms in the cotton industry in the world, 1820–1900. Source: Douglas A. Farnie, ‘The Role of Merchants as Prime Movers in the Expansion of the Cotton Industry, 1760–1990’, in Douglas A. Farnie and David J. Jeremy, eds., The Fibre that Changed the World: The Cotton Industry in International Perspective, 1600–1990s (Oxford University Press, 2004), p. 25. 284 13.1 Cotton bandana, India, nineteenth century. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 49.461. Gift of Miss Mary Lee, Guy Hunter Lee, Mrs. Henry Jackson, Mrs. Thornton K. Ware, and Mrs. Joseph T. Walker, in memory of Marion Glidden Dove Lee (Mrs. Francis Wilson Lee). (See colour plate.) 289 13.2 The relationship between continents in the old and the new cotton systems. 291