## PREFACE Today the world textile and garment trade amounts to a staggering 425 billion US dollars in value. We are told that under the pressure of increasing globalisation, it is Asia – India and China in particular – that is the new worldmanufacturing powerhouse. However the recent growth of Asia into the world’s leading textile manufacturer is not a new phenomenon. Until the industrial revolution at the end of the eighteenth century, both India and China were leading economic areas and their skills in cotton textile manufacturing were superior to those of Europe. Asia manufactured great quantities of colourful printed and painted cottons that were sold across the Indian Ocean and reached faraway places such as Japan and Europe where they were craved as exotic fashionable goods. Historians have argued that this ensured for Asia – and in particular India – widespread prosperity, as well as high rates of economic growth and technological development, but that sometime after 1750 Europe experienced a sudden and radical economic transformation: the continent industrialised. Mechanisation was first experienced in the textile sector. The spinning machine allowed one late eighteenth-century European woman to produce as much yarn as three hundred women in India. By the early decades of the nineteenth century, India, China and the Ottoman Empire switched from being world producers to being buyers of European cotton textiles, a position that they retained for the following two centuries. This book is the first global analysis of cotton textiles. It argues that Europe’s engagement with cotton textiles changed the shape of the world we still live in. It brings together the history of European industrialisation and the global significance of cotton textiles. Key to this book is the explanation of when, how and why Europe replaced Asia as the main area of production and trade of cotton textiles and the profound effects that this generated. Cotton was central to the creation of a ‘new global system’ increasingly presided over by Europe, not Asia. But technological development was just one among the many factors explaining this transition. The importance of raw materials, markets for products and consumers’ preferences, and the increasing power of European nations over vast areas of the globe are in this book seen as critical in explaining the divergent paths of Europe and Asia. This book was researched and written over a period of several years. Its original idea and formulation emerged from the activities of the Leverhulmefunded Global Economic History Network (GEHN) based at the London School of Economics and coordinated by Patrick O’Brien between 2003 and 2007. The network constituted the first truly collaborative platform for research and discussion in the field of global economic history. Over the years, I learned a great deal about global history and about the challenges posed by this relatively new field of historical enquiry. I also learned from Patrick what historians should aim for, a lesson that is more important than any other. Several members of GEHN provided much needed support. I would like to thank in particular Kent Deng, Kenneth Pomeranz, Om Prakash, Kaoru Sugihara and Peer Vries. I have also a considerable debt to the late Larry Epstein. My move to the University of Warwick in 2007 and the foundation of the Global History and Culture Centre was a second and no less important stage in the shaping of this book. It allowed me to engage with a new agenda in cultural and social history that has greatly enriched my analysis. I also found the best colleagues that one can hope for, in particular Maxine Berg, Anne Gerritsen and Luca Mola. The four of us developed courses and organised sometimes\` logistically complicated events and trips that entailed cooking dyes in a famous London museum, broken arms, and getting lost in Beijing. The Warwick Global History and Culture Centre has provided the perfect setting for completing the research included in this book. Adventure and friendship mix together. Beverly Lemire, Peter McNeil and John Styles were great companions in several trips to archives, museums and artisans’ workshops in Europe, North America and Asia. We risked our lives on at least a couple of motorways and got lost in dodgy neighbourhoods, all in the name of research. Tirthankar Roy and Prasannan Parthasarathi rescued me from the maze of editing books. My collaboration with both of them has been essential for the writing of this book as has been the intellectual input of over thirty contributors to these edited projects. I would like to thank in particular Prasannan for checking on me every week during the writing of this book, making sure that it was completed. Maxine Berg, Pat Hudson, Beverly Lemire, Patrick O’Brien, Prasannan Parthasarathi and John Styles read closely the entire manuscript, commenting, questioning and correcting it. Needless to say that any remaining errors are entirely their fault! Shengfang Chou, Amy Evans and Sara van Dijk provided much needed research and practical assistance. Glenn Adamson, Alain and Michele Bresson, Barbara Canepa, Giovanni Luigi Fontana, Kayoko Fujita,\` Sakis Gekas, Regina Grafe, Hannah Greig, Philippe Minard, Maria Giuseppina Muzzarelli, Liliane Perez, Jeannie Siegman and the late Tony Siegman, Claudia´ Stein, Sarah Teasley, Elisa Tosi Brandi and Amanda Vickery have been great friends and have supported this project in different and extraordinary ways. Richard Butler read every single word with enormous patience and care. Finally, my mother, brother, sister-in-law and nieces Eleonora and Anastasia hope that the book will be soon translated into Italian so that they can find out what it is about. Any heartless economic historian like me should point out that love and friendship do not pay bills. The research and writing of this book has been possible thanks to the financial support and hospitality of the following instutions: Australian National University, Canberra; British Academy; Ecole des Hautes Etudes in Sciences Sociales, Paris; European University Institute; Leverhulmefunded Global Economic History Network, LSE; Fondation Les Treilles, France; Leverhulme Trust; Stanford Humanities Center, Stanford University; University of Technology Sydney; and Warwick Global History and Culture Centre. Several libraries, archives and museums allowed me to use their collections. I would like to thank in particular: Archives Nationales de France, Paris; Ashmolean Museum, Oxford; Bibliotheque Nationale de France, Paris; Boston\` Museum of Fine Arts; British Library, London; British Museum, London; European University Institute Library, Florence; Institute of Historical Research, London; London School of Economics Library; Musee de l’Impression sur´ Etoffes, Mulhouse; National Archives, Kew; National Art Library at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; The New York Historical Society; The Philadelphia Museum of Art; Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto; School of Oriental and African Studies Library, London; Stanford University Library; University of London Library; Victoria and Albert Museum, London; Warburg Institute Library, London; University of Warwick Library. Several institutions kindly invited me to present my research. The list over the years has become so long that I will mention only the cities where my research brought me: Aix-en-Provence, Beijing, Bilbao, Binghamton, Boston, Cambridge, Catania, Coventry, Dublin, Edinburgh, Exeter, Florence, Konstanz, Helsinki, Istanbul, Leicester, London, Madrid, Melbourne, Norwich, Osaka, Padua, Paris, Pune, Reading, Santa Cruz, Stanford, Stockholm, Sydney, Uppsala, Utrecht, Wilmington – Delaware, York and Wolverhampton. I am particularly grateful to the Leverhulme Trust for the Leverhulme Research Fellowship (RF/3/RFG/2010/0089) and the Stanford Humanities Center for the External Fellowship (2010–11) that enabled me to complete this book. This publication has been made possible by a grant from the Scouloudi Foundation in association with the Institute of Historical Research and the financial assistance of the Humanities Research Fund at the University of Warwick. The majority of this book was written in Palo Alto while a fellow at the Stanford Humanities Center. I was surrounded by a group of absorbing scholars who made me often forget the throbbing toothache that accompanied the slow writing of this work. To Anastasia and Eleonora Christmas 2012