PART I ## THE FIRST COTTON REVOLUTION: A CENTRIFUGAL SYSTEM, CIRCA 1000–1500 From the beginning of the second millennium and over the following six centuries, the cultivation of cotton fibres, the production of cotton textiles and their trade developed across Eurasia. During these centuries, South Asia emerged as the key producer of cotton textiles. Although several other areas came to produce, trade and consume cotton textiles on a large scale, India was the core of a ‘global system’ that was only loosely coordinated by the subcontinent. Whilst India enjoyed competitive advantages provided by high-quality production, most of the areas with which India interacted engaged in their own right in the cultivation of raw cotton, its processing and manufacture into cloth. Together they formed a system of competition as well as symbiosis. By ‘system’ I mean the logic that connects different areas through products, technologies and economic relationships. The world’s first cotton revolution was ‘centrifugal’, a difficult word indicating it was based on diffusion. Chapter 1 considers the wide reach of Indian cottons and their ability to complement as well as to compete with similar local products and substitutes. Chapter 2 considers the diffusion of cotton cultivation across Asia to form several poles of production and trade with which India interacted. Finally, Chapter 3 elaborates upon the spread of technologies across most of Asia, Africa and Europe. Trade and exchange were at the heart of this system and explain why cotton became a key commodity and productive activity across Eurasia in this period. The system did not rest on an international division of labour in which different regions of the world are locked into their respective roles. In this period there was no hierarchical relationship of cores and peripheries and their connections remained rather fluid. India was not the undisputed head or coordinator of the system: its products enjoyed wide appeal and spurred attempts at imitation. South Asia did not triumph over other concentrations of production and the ‘open’ and participatory nature of the system implies that the hegemony of India was progressively weakened.