PART II # LEARNING AND CONNECTING: MAKING COTTONS GLOBAL, <sup>CIRCA</sup> 1500–1750 When Europeans first disembarked from their ships in India at the very end of the fifteenth century, they were amazed by the profusion of cotton textiles. Just over three centuries later European ships disembarked cargoes of cotton cloth produced in Europe on the same shores of India. What had happened between 1500 and 1800 to radically change the geography of world production and trade? The second part of this book explains this change as a slow but important transition in the position that Europe occupied in global trade and manufacturing. The concentration on a single commodity serves to explain a transformation that was much wider than cotton manufacturing and trade. The central section of the book argues that the early modern period witnessed the emplacement of the conditions for cotton textiles in particular and manufacturing in general to bring the West towards a modern industrial society. The introduction to this book points out that the ‘divergence’ of the West has been explained in different ways. From the microperspective of the cotton industry it can be represented as a protracted and cyclical process dependent upon a variety of factors, some endogenous to Europe, but in most cases dependent on the connections that Europe created with other continents. The aim of this section is not to explore a world of ‘endless possibilities’, and it therefore sidelines what other parts of the world did (or might have done) to create their own modern industries or develop versions of a cotton textile sector to rival India. Europe was a rather improbable candidate to become the new powerhouse of cotton textile production and trade, because the continent had never enjoyed much success in developing a sophisticated cotton textile industry before 1500. Indeed, the striking feature of the textile world at that time was that Europe performed well in wool, linen and even to some degree in silk manufacturing, but was rather backward in spinning, weaving and finishing cotton cloth. ## <sup>86</sup> / Learning and connecting The next four chapters map how backwardness was transformed into primacy via processes of learning about products and techniques, as well as consumers and their tastes. Cotton textiles did not emerge as a key sector of the European economy in the wake of technological innovations in spinning and weaving. This industry developed to become part and parcel of Europe’s economy and material culture for a variety of reasons. It took Europeans a great deal of time simply to master the basics of manufacturing and especially to develop highquality printing. Trade with Asia provided them with the information required to learn about varieties of cottons and the tastes of consumers. There was a great deal of experimentation in supplying varieties of products not just for European consumers but also for international markets. This multiplicity of factors had a chronology to it that makes the emergence of a cotton industry in Europe both contingent and less revolutionary than the many histories of industrialisation in the West have suggested. Over time cottons became integral to the consuming habits of Europeans and made fortunes for traders and producers. Europe acted like a sponge, absorbing technological and commercial knowledge, acquiring materials and translating and transforming products. This emerged thanks to the connections that the continent established with other parts of the world. Europe’s ability to get things from outside its frontiers, sometimes by force and plunder, at other times by scientific investigation or by means of trade, was distinctive. Its ability to combine different factors – inserting cotton fibres from the Americas into a system of exchange for slaves from Africa; the exchange of slaves from Africa for cloth produced in Europe; the cloth produced in Europe thanks to Asian knowledge of printing techniques – to the specific tastes of domestic and foreign customers was remarkable. These triangulations are important not just for their complexity, but also for their truly global scale.