P A R T I I I # THE SECOND COTTON REVOLUTION: A CENTRIPETAL SYSTEM, CIRCA 1750–2000 The final part of this book enters well-trodden terrain – that starting in the mid eighteenth century and normally classified as the period of European industrialisation. This is the time of cotton par excellence, and a vast literature explains how cotton was integral to the industrialisation of Europe. Most of these industrial histories have little space for the many topics that we have encountered so far and neglect to mention that at the time that Richard Arkwright, the putative inventor of one of the most revolutionary cotton spinning machines, perfected his device in the north of England in the 1770s, the Indian cotton industry was still the undisputed world leader. The previous chapters have elaborated and explained how Europe caught up with cotton textile manufacturing in Asia. The final part of this book enquires into why Europe did not become just another area among many producing cottons. I argue that under the label of an ‘industrial revolution’ there was a reconfiguration of the global economy. The first step of the restructuring of manufacturing and trade involved raw materials. Chapter 9 shows how Europe developed a new and dynamic industry on the back of supplies of raw materials totally coming from another continent. This was unprecedented. Millions of slaves were transported from Africa to the Americas to cultivate cotton and other produce for western markets. This was a coercive system that foresaw the ‘industrial’ path that cotton textile production came to assume in Europe, creating a global division of labour for the first ‘modern’ industry. Something extremely important certainly happened in Europe and technological innovation was indeed central to the story, but the reasons why such innovation emerged first in Europe (or to be more precise, in England) must be considered in relation to the positions of Indian and Chinese cottons. I argue that innovations in spinning and weaving were aimed not only at increasing productivity but also at quality, in order to manufacture a type of cloth that was not ## 186 <sub>/</sub> The second cotton revolution necessarily cheaper but that was of a quality produced on the subcontinent of India. In this sense, innovations in spinning and weaving are represented here as a continuation of a trajectory that started with printing and that then proceeded to replace not just the final stages of production but also the intermediate good (plain cotton cloth) previously imported from India into Europe. Chapter 10 argues that incentives to industrialise might have been stronger in specific parts of the world by comparing the European and Chinese trajectories for technological and organisational innovation in cotton manufacturing. Cotton textile production had long been an Asian specialism. Why Europe retooled itself in order to compete in a relatively unknown sector still remains subject to debate. What exactly was the attraction of cottons to Europeans? We need to assess not just the industrial but also the ecologic potential of cotton. In Chapter 11, I return to cotton as a raw material but also as an industrial input. I put forward the argument that cotton became revolutionary not simply via the application of machinery, but because machinery and cotton together allowed for a tremendous expansion of production. This could have not been achieved by any other natural fibre. The revolution in manufacturing was a ‘wave of cotton’, not a ‘wave of gadgets’ (to use Ashton’s famous expression). If machinery were applied (as eventually it was) to wool or linen, the results would have been much more modest because the elasticity of supply for raw cotton remained very high. From the beginning of the nineteenth century, the United States became the prime source of raw material for Europe’s cotton industries. Better access to American fibres became key to the success of the British industry vis-a-vis its\` French and Spanish rivals. The book concludes with a depiction of a new global industry, a ‘restructured’ system that united different areas of the world by way of connections to raw materials, products and technologies. The new system contained a clearly defined core set in Europe and North America. The West produced enormous quantities of manufactured commodities that sold on world markets in exchange for raw materials and primary products. Factories in Lancashire, Catalonia, Alsace or Massachusetts produced cotton textiles in European and western ways and designs. Power (imperialism and colonialism), but also the power of ideas and concepts such as modernity and liberalism, played an integral part in setting and maintaining a privileged position for the West. The system was ‘centripetal’ as it operated to consolidate and sustain comparative advantages for the western core.