## SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY Abu-Lughod, Janet L., Before European Hegemony: the World System, AD 1250–1350 (Oxford University Press, 1989). Aiolfi, Sergio, Calicos und gedrucktes Zeug: die Entwicklung der englischen Textilveredelung und der Tuchhandel der East India Company, 1650–1750 (Stuttgart: Steiner, 1987). Alam, Ishrat, ‘Cotton Technology in India Down to the Sixteenth Century’, in A. Rahman, ed., India’s Interaction with China, Central and West Asia, volume III, part 2 (Oxford University Press, 2002), pp. 445–63. Allen, Robert C., ‘Britain’s Economic Ascendancy in a European Context’, in Leandro Prados de la Escosura, ed., Exceptionalism and Industrialisation: Britain and its European Rivals, 1688–1815 (Cambridge University Press, 2004), pp. 15–34. The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective (Cambridge University Press, 2009). ‘The Great Divergence in European Wages and Prices from the Middle Ages to the First World War’, Explorations in Economic History 38/4 (2001): 411–47. ‘India in the Great Divergence’, in Timothy J. Hatton, Kevin H. O’Rourke and Alan M. Taylor, eds., The New Comparative Economic History: Essay in Honour of Jeffrey G. Williamson (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2007), pp. 9–32. Amsden, Alice, The Rise of ‘The Rest’: Challenges to the West from Late-Industrializing Economies (Oxford University Press, 2001). Arasaratnam, Sinnappah, Merchants, Companies and Commerce on the Coromandel Coast, 1650–1740 (Oxford University Press, 1986). ‘Weavers, Merchants and Company: the Handloom Industry in Southeastern India 1750–1790’, Indian Economic and Social History Review 17/3 (1980): 257–81. Ashtor, Eliyahu, ‘The Venetian Cotton Trade in the Later Middle Ages’, Studi Medievali 17/3 (1976): 675–715. Bag, A. K., ‘Technology in India in the Eighteenth–Nineteenth Century’, Journal of Indian Textile History 17/1 (1982): 82–90. Bairoch, Paul, Commerce exterieur et d´ eveloppement´ economique de l’Europe au XIXe´ siecle\` (Paris: Mouton, 1976). Economics and World History: Myths and Paradoxes (Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1993). Baker, George Percival, Calico Printing and Painting in the East Indies in the XVIIth and XVIIIth Centuries (London: Edward Arnold, 1921). ‘Indian Cotton Prints and Paintings of the 17th and 18th Centuries’, Transactions of the Newcomen Society 3 (1922/3): 52–6. Baker, Patricia L., Islamic Textiles (London: British Museum, 1995). Bala, Arun, The Dialogue of Civilizations in the Birth of Modern Science (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006). Balfour-Paul, Jenny, Indigo (London: British Museum, 1998). ‘Indigo in South and South-East Asia’, Textile History 30/1 Bally, W., ‘The Cotton Plant’, Ciba Review 95 (1952): 3402–7. Barendse, R. J., Arabian Seas 1700–1763, volume III, Men and Merchandise (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2009). Barnes, Ruth, Indian Block-Printed Textiles in Egypt. The Newberry Collection in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997). Barnes, Ruth, ed., Textiles in Indian Ocean Societies (London and New York: Routledge Curzon, 2005). Bayly, C. A., ‘“Archaic” and “Modern” Globalisation in the Eurasian and African Arena, c. 1750–1850’, in A. G. Hopkins, ed., Globalization in World History (London: Palgrave, 2002), pp. 45–72. The Birth of the Modern World, 1780–1914 (Oxford: Blackwell, 2004). ‘South Asia and the “Great Divergence”’, Itinerario 24/3–4 (2000): 89–101. Bean, Susan S., ‘The American Market for Indian Textiles, 1785–1820: in the Twilight of Traditional Cloth Manufacture’, in Textiles in Trade (Washington, DC: Proceedings of the Textile Society of America, Biennial Symposium, 1990), pp. 43–52. ‘Bandana: On the Indian Origins of All-American Textile’, in Peter Benes, ed., Textiles in Early New England: Design, Production, and Consumption (Boston University Press, 1997), pp. 168–83. Beckert, Sven, ‘Cotton: a Global History’, in Jerry Bentley, Renate Bridenthal and Anand A. Yang, eds., Interactions: Transregional Perspectives on World History (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2005), pp. 48–63. ‘Emancipation and Empire: Reconstructing the Worldwide Web of Cotton Production in the Age of the American Civil War’, American Historical Review 109/5 (2005): 1405–38. Belich, James, Replenishing the Earth: the Settler Revolution and the Rise of the Anglo-World, 1783–1939 (Oxford University Press, 2009). Bellezza, Rosina Margherita, ‘Tra oriente e occidente’, in Marzia Cataldi Gallo, ed., I Mezzari: tra Oriente e Occidente (Genoa: Sagep Editrice, 1988), pp. 15–24. Berg, Maxine, ‘The Genesis of “Useful Knowledge”’, History of Science 45 (2007): 123–33. ‘In Pursuit of Luxury: Global History and British Consumer Goods in the Eighteenth Century’, Past & Present 132 (2004): 85–142. Luxury and Pleasure in Eighteenth-Century Britain (Oxford University Press, 2005). ‘Manufacturing the Orient: Asian Commodities and European Industry 1500–1800’, in Simonetta Cavaciocchi, ed., Prodotti e tecniche d’oltremare nelle economie europee. Secc. XIII–XVIII. Atti della Ventinovesima Settimana di Studi, 14–19 aprile 1997 (Florence: Le Monnier, 1998), pp. 385–419. ‘Quality, Cotton and the Global Luxury Trade’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 391–414. Berg, Maxine, and Pat Hudson, ‘Growth and Change: a Comment on the Crafts-Harley View of the Industrial Revolution’, Economic History Review 47/1 (1994): 147–9. ‘Rehabilitating the Industrial Revolution’, Economic History Review 45/1 (1992): 24–50. Bhardwaj, H. C., and Kamal K. Jain, ‘Indian Dyes and the Dyeing Industry During the 18th–19th Centuries’, Indian Journal of History of Science 17/1 (1982): 70–81. Bier, Carol, ‘Textile and Society’, in C. Bier, ed., Woven from the Soul, 1987), pp. 1–6. Bier, Carol, ed., Woven from the Soul, Spun from the Heart: Textile Arts of Safavit and Qajar Iran 16th–19th Centuries (Washington, DC: Textile Museum, 1987). Bigwood, George, Cotton (London: Constable & Co., 1918). Blackburn, Robin, The Making of New World Slavery: from the Baroque to the Modern, 1492–1800 (London: Verso, 1997). Borlandi, F., ‘Fustaniers et fustaines dans l’Italie du moyen age’, in Eventail de l’histoire<sup>´</sup> vivante: hommage a Lucien Lebvre, volume II (Paris: Colin, 1953), pp. 133–40. Borsa, Giorgio, La Nascita del mondo moderno in Asia orientale. La penetrazione europea e la crisi delle societa tradizionali in India, Cina e Giappone\` (Milan: Rizzoli, 1996). Bowen, H. V., ‘British Exports of Raw Cotton from India to China During the Late Eighteenth and Early Nineteenth Centuries’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 115–37. The Business of Empire: the East India Company and Imperial Britain, 1756–1833 (Cambridge University Press, 2006). Boyajian, James C., Portuguese Trade in Asia under the Habsburgs, 1580–1640 (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993). Bray, Francesca, Technology and Gender: Fabrics and Power in Late Imperial China (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997). ‘Textile Production and Gender Roles in China, 1000–1700’, Chinese Science 12 (1995): 115–37. Brennig, Joseph Jerome, ‘Chief Merchants and European Enclaves of 17th-Century Coromandel’, Modern Asian Studies 11/3 (1977): 321–46. Broadberry, Stephen, and Bishnupriya Gupta, ‘The Early Modern Great Divergence: Wages, Prices and Economic Development in Europe and Asia, 1500–1800’, Economic History Review 59/1 (2006): 2–31. ‘Lancashire, India, and Shifting Competitive Advantage in Cotton Textiles, 1700–1850: the Neglected Role of Factor Prices’, Economic History Review 62/2 (2009): 279–305. Brook, Timothy, The Confusions of Pleasure: Commerce and Culture in Ming China (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998). Brooks, George E., Landlords and Strangers: Ecology, Society, and Trade in Western Africa, 1000–1643 (Boulder, Col.: Westview Press, 1993). Brunello, Franco, L’Arte della tintura nella storia dell’umanita\` (Vicenza: Neri Pozza, 1968). Cartier, Michel, ‘A Propos de l’histoire du coton en Chine: approche technologique,<sup>\`</sup> economique et sociale’,´ Etudes Chinoises<sup>´</sup> 13/1–2 (1994): 417–35. Cataldi Gallo, Marzia, ‘Indiane e mezzari a Genova’, in Marzia Cataldi Gallo, ed., I Mezzari: tra oriente e occidente (Genoa: Sagep Editrice, 1988), pp. 25–50. Chandra, Shoma, ‘Textile Production in Bengal: a Case Study of Dinajpur: 1793–1815’, Bengal Past & Present 110/1–2, 210–11 (1991): 50–74. Chao, Kang, The Development of Cotton Textile Production in China (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977). Chapman, Stanley David, ‘The Cost of Power in the Industrial Revolution: the Case of the Textile Industry’, Midland History 1/1 (1970): 1–23. ‘David Evans & Co. The Last of the Old London Textile Printers’, Textile History 14/1 (1983): 29–56. ‘Quality Versus Quantity in the Industrial Revolution: the Case of Textile Printing’, Northern History 21(1985): 175–92. ‘The Textile Factory Before Arkwright: a Typology of Factory Development’, Business History Review 48/4 (1974): 451–78. Chapman, Stanley David, and Serge Chassagne, European Textile Printers in the Eighteenth Century: a Study of Peel and Oberkampf (London: Heinemann Educational and Pasold Research Fund, 1981). Chassagne, Serge, ‘Calico Printing in Europe Before 1780’, in Jenkins, ed., Cambridge History of Western Textiles, volume I, pp. 513–27. La Manufacture de toiles imprimees de Tournemine-Les-Angers (1752–1820)´ (Paris: Librarie C. Klincksieck, 1971). Chaudhuri, K. N., The English East India Company: the Study of an Early Joint-Stock Company, 1600–1640 (London: Frank Cass, 1965). ‘Foreign Trade: 1. European Trade with India’, in Tapan Raychaudhuri and Irfan Habib, eds., The Cambridge Economic History of India, volume I, c. 1200 – c. 1750 (Cambridge University Press, 1982), pp. 382–406. ‘Some Reflections on the World Trade of the XVIIth and XVIIIth Century: a Reply’, Journal of European Economic History 7/1 (1978): 223–31. ‘The Structure of Indian Textile Industry in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries’, in Tirthankar Roy, ed., Cloth and Commerce. Textiles in Colonial India (New Delhi: Sage, 1996), pp. 33–84. The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company 1660–1760 (Cambridge University Press, 1978). Chaudhuri, Sushil, ‘European Companies and the Bengal Textile Industry in the Eighteenth Century: the Pitfall of Applying Quantitative Techniques’, Modern Asian Studies 27/2 (1993): 321–40. ‘Textile Trade and Industry in Bengal Suba, 1650–1720’, Indian Historical Review 1/2 (1974): 262–78. Chenciner, Robert, Madder Red: a History of Luxury and Trade. Plant Dyes and Pigments in World Commerce and Art (Richmond, Va.: Curzon, 2000). Chittick, N., ‘East African Trade with the Orient’, in D. S. Richards, ed., Islam and the Trade of Asia. A Colloquium (Oxford: Bruno Cassirer, 1970), pp. 97–104. C¸ izakc¸a, Murat, ‘Incorporation of the Middle East into the European World-Economy’, Review: a Journal of the Fernand Braudel Center 8/3 (1985): 353–77. Clarence-Smith, William Gervase, ‘The Production of Cotton Textiles in Early Modern South-East Asia’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 127–42. Clark, Gregory, ‘Why isn’t the Whole World Developed? Lessons from the Cotton Mills’, Journal of Economic History 47/1 (1987): 141–73. The Rise of the Atlantic Economies (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1973). The Rise of the English Shipping Industry in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries (Newton Abbot: David & Charles, 1962). Clarkson, Leslie, ‘The Linen Industry in Early Modern Europe’, in Jenkins, ed., Cambridge History of Western Textiles, volume I, pp. 473–92. Clouzot, Henri, La Manufacture de Jouy et la toile imprimee au XVIIIe si´ ecle\` (Paris and Brussels: G. Van Oest, 1926). Collins, Brenda and Philip Ollerenshaw, eds., The European Linen Industry in Historical Pespective (Oxford University Press and Pasold Research Fund, 2003). ‘The European Linen Industry Since the Middle Ages’, in Collins and Ollerenshaw, eds., European Linen Industry, pp. 1–42. Cooper, Frederick, ‘What is the Concept of Globalization Good For? An African Historian’s Perspective’, African Affairs 100 (2001): 189–213. Le Coton et la mode: 1000 ans d’aventures: Musee Galliera, mus´ ee de la mode de la´ ville de Paris (Paris: Somogy Editions d’Art, 2000). Crafts, N. F. R., British Economic Growth During the Industrial Revolution (Oxford University Press, 1985). Crafts, N. F. R., and C. Knick Harley, ‘Output Growth and the British Industrial Revolution: a Restatement of the Crafts-Harley View’, Economic History Review 45/4 (1992): 703–30. Crawford, M. D. C., The Heritage of Cotton: the Fibre of Two Worlds and Many Ages (New York: Putnams Sons, 1924). Crill, Rosemary, ‘Indian Painted Cottons’, Hali 10/4 (1988): 28–35. Crill, Rosemary, ed., Textiles from India: the Global Trade (Calcutta: Seagull, 2005). Crill, Rosemary, and Ian Thomas, Chintz: Indian Textiles for the West (London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 2008). Crouzet, Franc¸ois, Britain Ascendant: Comparative Studies in Franco-British Economic History (Cambridge University Press, 1990). Cuenca Esteban, Javier, ‘Comparative Patterns of Colonial Trade: Britain and its Rivals’, in Leandro Prados de la Escosura, eds., Exceptionalism and Industrialisation: Britain and its European Rivals, 1688–1815 (Cambridge University Press, 2004), pp. 35–66. ‘Factory Costs, Market Prices and Indian Calicos: Cotton Textile Prices revisited, 1779–1831’, Economic History Review 52/4 (1999): 749–55. ‘Further Evidence on Falling Prices of Cotton Cloth, 1768–1816’, Economic History Review 48/1 (1995): 145–50. Dale, Stephen F., ‘Silk Road, Cotton Road or . . . Indo-Chinese Trade in Pre-European Times’, Modern Asian Studies 43/1 (2009): 79–88. Dattel, Eugene R., Cotton and Race in the Making of America: the Human Costs of Economic Power (Chicago, Il.: Ivan R. Dee, 2009). David, Jeremy, ‘The International Diffusion of Cotton Manufacturing Technology, 1750–1990s’, in Farnie and Jeremy, eds., Fibre that Changed the World, pp. 85–127. Davis, Ralph, Aleppo and Devonshire Square: English Traders in the Levant in the Eighteenth Century (London: Macmillan, 1967). Davison, Patricia, and Patrick Harries, ‘Cotton Weaving in South-East Africa: its History and Technology’, Textile History 9 (1980): 175–93. Deane, Phyllis, and W. A. Cole, British Economic Growth, 1688–1959 (Cambridge University Press, 1962). Delgado Ribas, Josep M., ‘Mercado interno versus mercado colonial en la primera industrializacion espanola’,˜ Revista de Historia Economica´ 13/1 (1995): 11–31. Deng, Kent, China’s Political Economy in Modern Times: Changes and Economic Consequences, 1800–2000 (London and New York: Routledge, 2011). Deng, Gang [Kent], The Premodern Chinese Economy. Structural Equilibrium and Capitalist Sterility (London and New York: Routledge, 1999). Depitre, Edgard, La Toile peinte en France au XVIIe et au XVIIIe siecles: industries,\` commerce, prohibitions (Paris: Marcel Riviere,\` 1912). Dietrich, Craig, ‘Cotton Culture and Manufacture in Early Qing China’, in W. E. Willmott, ed., Economic Organization in Chinese Society (Stanford University Press, 1972), pp. 109–41. Dixin, Xu, and Wu Chengming, Chinese Capitalism, 1522–1840 (London: Macmillan, 2000). Dobie, Madeleine, Trading Places: Colonization and Slavery in Eighteenth-Century French Culture (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2010). Douglas, Audrey W., ‘Cotton Textiles in England: the East India Company’s Attempts to Exploit Developments in Fashion 1660–1721’, Journal of British Studies 18/2 (1969): 28–43. Driver, Felix, and Sonia Ashmore, ‘The Mobile Museum: Collecting and Circulating Indian Textiles in Victorian Britain’, Victorian Studies 52/3 (2010): 353–85. DuPlessis, Robert, ‘Cottons Consumption in the Seventeenth- and Eighteenth-Century North Atlantic’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 227–46. ‘Transatlantic Textiles: European Linens in the Cloth Culture of Colonial North America’, in Collins and Ollerenshaw, eds., European Linen Industry, pp. 123–37. DuPont, Ann, ‘Captives of Colored Cloth: the Role of Cotton Trade Goods in the North Atlantic Slave Trade (1600–1808)’, Ars Textrina 24 (1995): 177–83. Eijkern-Balkenstein, Jopie van, Peter Diebels and Ebeltje Hartkamp-Jonxis, ‘Orderoverzicht van door de VOC uit India “geeiste” sitsen’, in Ebeltje¨ Hartkamp-Jonxis, ed., Sits: oost-west relaties in textiel (Zwolle: Waanders 1987), pp. 113–21. Eltis, David, Economic Growth and the Ending of the Transatlantic Slave Trade (Oxford University Press, 1989). Elvin, Mark, ‘The High-Level Equilibrium Trap: the Causes of the Decline of Invention in the Traditional Chinese Textile Industries’, in W. E. Willmott, ed., Economic Organization in Chinese Society (Stanford University Press, 1972), pp. 142–72. The Pattern of the Chinese Past (Stanford University Press, 1973). Emmer, Pieter, ‘The Myth of Early Globalization: the Atlantic Economy, 1500–1800’, European Review 9/1 (2003): 37–47. Etemad, Bouda, Possessing the World: Taking the Measurements of Colonisation from the Eighteenth to the Twentieth Century (New York: Berghahn, 2007). Farnie, Douglas. A., ‘The Cotton Harverst of India and the World Market, 1770–2005’, in A. J. H. Latham and Heita Kawakatsu, eds., Intra-Asian Trade and Industrialization: Essays in Memory of Yasukichi Yasuba (London and New York: Routledge, 2009), pp. 79–110. ‘Cotton Industry’, in Joel Mokyr, ed., The Oxford Encyclopedia of Economic History, volume II (Oxford University Press, 2003), pp. 20–4. ‘The Role of Merchants as Prime Movers in the Expansion of the Cotton Industry, 1760–1990’, in Farnie and Jeremy, eds., Fibre that Changed the World, pp. 15–55. Farnie, Douglas A., and David J. Jeremy, eds., The Fibre that Changed the World: the Cotton Industry in International Perspective, 1600–1990s (Oxford University Press and Pasold Research Fund, 2004). Faroqhi, Suraiya, ‘Notes on the Production of Cotton and Cotton Cloth in Sixteenthand Seventeenth-Century Anatolia’, in Huri Islamoglu-Inan, ed.,˘ The Ottoman Empire and the World-Economy (Cambridge University Press and Paris: Editions<sup>´</sup> de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, 1986), pp. 262–70. ‘Notes on the Production of Cotton and Cotton Cloth in XVIth- and XVIIth-Century Anatolia’, Journal of European Economic History 8/2 (1979): 405–17. ‘Ottoman Cotton Textiles: the Story of a Success that did not Last, 1500–1800’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 89–104. Towns and Townsmen of Ottoman Anatolia. Trade, Crafts and Food Production in an Urban Setting, 1520–1650 (Cambridge University Press, 1984). Feldbæk, Ole, ‘The Danish Trading Companies of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries’, Scandinavian Economic History Review 34/3 (1986): 204–18. Ferrier, R. W., ‘The Trade Between India and the Persian Gulf and the East India Company in the 17th Century’, Bengal Past & Present 89/1, 167 (1970): 189–98. Fitton, R. S., and A. P. Wadsworth, The Strutts and the Arkwrights, 1758–1830: a Study of the Early Factory System (Manchester University Press, 1958). Fleet, Kate, European and Islamic Trade in the Early Ottoman State: the Merchants of Genoa and Turkey (Cambridge University Press, 1999). Floor, Willem, Textile Import into Qajar Iran: Russia Versus Great Britain. The Battle for Market Domination (Costa Mesa, Calif.: Mazda Publishers, 2009). Floud, Peter C., ‘The Development of Design in English Printed Textiles’, Ciba Review 1 (1961): 15–20. ‘The English Contribution to the Chemistry of Calico Printing Before Perkin’, Ciba Review 1 (1961): 8–14. ‘The Origins of English Calico Printing’, Journal of the Society of Dyers and Colourists 76 (1960): 275–81. Fogel, Robert W., Without Consent or Contract: the Rise and Fall of American Slavery (New York: W. W. Norton, 1989). Fogel, Robert W., and Stanley L. Engerman, Time on the Cross: the Economics of American Negro Slavery (Boston, Mass.: Little, Brown, 1974). Fontana, Giovanni Luigi, ed., Le Vie dell’industrializzazione europea: sistemi a confronto (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1997). Fox, Robert, and Agust´ı Nieto-Galan, eds., Natural Dyestuffs and Industrial Culture in Europe, 1750–1880 (Canton, Mass.: Watson Publishing, 1999). Frangakis-Syrett, Elena, ‘The Trade of Cotton and Cloth in Izmir: from the Second Half of the Eighteenth Century to the Early Nineteenth Century’, in C¸ aglar Keyder and˘ Faruk Tabak, eds., Landholding and Commercial Agriculture in the Middle East (State University of New York, 1991), pp. 98–111. Frangioni, Luciana, ‘Sui Modi di produzione e sul commercio dei fustagni milanesi alla fine del Trecento. Problemi economici e giuridici’, Nuova Rivista Storica 61/5–6 (1977): 493–554. Fujita, Kayoko, ‘Japan Indianized: the Material Culture of Imported Textiles in Japan, 1550–1850’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 181–204. Fukasawa, Katsumi, Toilerie et commerce du Levant, d’Alep a Marseille\` (Paris: Editions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 1987). Gaastra, Femme S., ‘De textielhandel en de VOC’, Textielhistorische Bijdragen 34 (1994): 50–69. ‘The Textile Trade of the VOC: the Dutch Response to the English Challenge’, South Asia, 19/special issue (1996): 85–95. Garc¸on, Anne-Franc¸oise, and Liliane Hilaire Perez, ‘“Open Technique” Between´ Community and Individuality in Eighteenth-Century France’, in Ferry de Goey and Jan Willem Veluwenkamp, eds., Entrepreneurs and Institutions in Europe and Asia, 1500–2000 (Amsterdam: Aksant, 2002), pp. 237–56. Geijer, Agnes, Oriental Textiles in Sweden (Copenhagen: Rosenkilde and Bagger, 1951). Gemery, Henry A., and Jan S. Hogendorn, ‘The Atlantic Slave Trade: a Tentative Economic Model’, Journal of African History 15/2 (1974): 223–46. ‘Comparative Disadvantage: the Case of Sugar Cultivation in West Africa’, Journa of Interdisciplinary History 9/3 (1979): 429–49. eds., The Uncommon Market: Essays in the Economic History of the Atlantic Slave Trade (New York: Academic Press, 1979). Genc¸, Mehmet, ‘Ottoman Industry in the Eighteenth Century: General Framework, Characteristics, and Main Trends’, in Donald Quataert, ed., Manufacturing in the Ottoman Empire and Turkey 1500–1950 (State University of New York Press, 1994), pp. 59–86. Gervers, Michael, ‘Cotton and Cotton Weaving in Meroitic Nubia and Medieval Ethiopia’, Textile History 21/1 (1990): 13–30. Gervers, Veronika, The Influence of Ottoman Turkish Textiles and Costume in Eastern Europe, with Particular Reference to Hungary (Toronto: Royal Ontario Museum, 1982). Gittinger, Mattiebelle, Master Dyers to the World: Technique and Trade in Early Indian Dyed Cotton Textiles (Washington, DC: Textile Museum, 1982). Glamann, Kristof, Dutch–Asiatic Trade, 1620–1740 (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1958). Goffman, Daniel, Izmir and the Levantine World, 1550–1650 (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1990). Goiten, S. D., Letters of Medieval Jewish Traders (Princeton University Press, 1973). Goldstone, Jack, ‘Efflorescence and Economic Growth in World History: Rethinking the “Rise of the West” and the Industrial Revolution’, Journal of World History 13/2 (2002): 323–89. ‘Gender, Work, and Culture: Why the Industrial Revolution Came Early to England but Late to China’, Sociological Perspectives 39/1 (1996): 1–21. Greysmith, David, ‘Patterns, Piracy and Protection in the Textile Printing Industry 1787–1850’, Textile History 14/2 (1983): 165–94. Griffiths, Trevor, Philip A. Hunt and Patrick K. O’Brien, ‘Inventive Activity in the British Textile Industry, 1700–1800’, Journal of Economic History 52/4 (1992): 881–906. ‘Scottish, Irish, and Imperial Connections: Parliament, the Three Kingdoms, and the Mechanisation of Cotton Spinning in Eighteenth-Century Britain’, Economic History Review 61/3 (2008): 625–50. Grove, Richard H., Green Imperialism: Colonial Expansion, Tropical Island Edens and the Origins of Environmentalism, 1600–1860 (Cambridge University Press, 1995). Guha, Amalendu, ‘The Decline of India’s Cotton Handicrafts, 1800–1905; a Quantitative Macro-Study’, Calcutta Historical Journal 17/1 (1995): 41–81. Gupta, Ashin Das, ‘Gujarati Merchants and the Red Sea Trade, 1700–1725’, in Blair B. Kling, and Michael N. Pearson, eds., The Age of Partnership: Europeans in Asia Before Domination (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1979), pp. 123–58. Gupta, Bishnupriya, ‘Competition and Control in the Market for Textiles: Indian Weavers and the English East India Company in the Eighteenth Century’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 281–306. Guy, John, ‘Sarasa and Patola: Indian Textiles in Indonesia’, Orientations 20/1 (1989): 48–60. Woven Cargoes: Indian Textiles in the East (London: Thames & Hudson, 1998). Habib, Irfan, ‘Capacity of Technological Change in Mughal India’, in Aniruddha Roy and S. K. Bagchi, eds., Technology in Ancient and Medieval India (New Delhi: Sundeep Prakashan, 1986), pp. 1–13. ‘Non-Agricultural Production and Urban Economy’, in Tapan Raychaudhuri and Irfan Habib, eds., The Cambridge Economic History of India, volume I, c. 1200 – c. 1750 (Cambridge University Press, 1982), pp. 76–92. ‘Technological Changes and Society, 13th and 14th Centuries’, in Debiprasad Chattodhyaya, ed., Studies in the History of Science in India (New Delhi: Editorial Enterprises, 1982), pp. 816–44. ‘The Technology and Economy of Mughal India’, Indian Economic and Social History Review 17/1 (1980): 5–34. Hall, Kenneth R., ‘The Textile Industry in Southeast Asia, 1400–1800’, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 39/2 (1996): 87–135. Hanchao, Lu, ‘Arrested Development: Cotton and Cotton Markets in Shanghai, 1350–1843’, Modern China 18/4 (1992): 468–99. Handler, Jerome S., and Frederick W. Lange, Plantation Slavery in Barbados: an Archaeological and Historical Investigation (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978). Hanson, John R. II, ‘World Demand for Cotton During the Nineteenth Century: Wright’s Estimates Re-examined’, Journal of Economic History 39/4 (1979): 1015–21. Hariharan, Shantha, Cotton Textile and Corporate Buyers in Cottonpolis: a Study of Purchase and Prices in Gujarat 1600–1800 (New Delhi: Manak, 2002). Harley, C. Knick, ‘Cotton Textile Prices and the Industrial Revolution’, Economic History Review 51/1 (1998): 49–83. ‘International Competitiveness of the Antebellum American Cotton Textile Industry’, Journal of Economic History 53/3 (1992): 559–84. Harley, C. Knick, and N. F. R. Crafts, ‘Cotton Textiles and Industrial Output Growth During the Industrial Revolution’, Economic History Review 48/1 (1995): 134–44. Harnetty, Peter, ‘“DeIndustrialization” Revisited: the Handloom Weaver of the Central Provinces of India, c. 1800–1947’, Modern Asian Studies 25/3 (1991): 455–510. Imperialism and Free Trade: Lancashire and India in the Mid-Nineteenth Century (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1972). Harte, Negley B., ‘The Rise of Protection and the English Linen Trade, 1690–1790’, in N. B. Harte and K. G. Ponting, eds., Textile History and Economic History (Manchester University Press, 1973), pp. 75–112. Harte, Negley B., ed., The New Draperies in the Low Countries and England, 1300–1700 (Oxford University Press and Pasold Research Fund, 1997). Hartkamp-Jonxis, Ebeltje, Sitsen uit India (Amsterdam: Rijksmuseum, 1994). Hartwell, R. M., ‘A Revolution in the Character and Destiny of British Wool’, in N. B. Harte and K. G. Ponting, eds., Textile History and Economic History (Manchester University Press, 1973), pp. 320–38. Haudrere, Philippe,\` La Compagnie franc¸aise des Indes au XVIIIe siecle, 3 volumes\` (Paris: Librairie de l’Inde, 1986). Haudrere, Philippe, and G\` erard Bou´ edec,¨ Les Compagnies des Indes (Rennes: Ouest France, 1999). Hazareesingh, Sandip, ‘Cotton, Climate and Colonialism in Dharwar, Western India, 1840–1880’, Journal of Historical Geography 38/1 (2012): 1–17. Heers, Jacques, ‘Il Commercio nel mediterraneo alla fine del sec. XIV e nei primi anni del XV’, Archivio Storico Italiano 113 (1955): 159–209. Henderson, William O., The Lancashire Cotton Famine, 1861–1865 (New York: A. M. Kelley, 1969). Hills, Richard Leslie, Power in the Industrial Revolution (Manchester University Press, 1970). Hobhouse, Henry, Seeds of Change: Five Plants that Tranformed Mankind (London: Papermac, 1985). Hood, Adrienne D., ‘Flax Seed, Fibre and Cloth: Pennsylvania’s Domestic Linen Manufacture and its Irish Connection, 1700–1830’, in Collins and Ollerenshaw, eds., European Linen Industry in Historical Pespective, pp. 139–58. Horn, Jeff, The Path Not Taken: French Industrialization in the Age of Revolution, 1750–1830 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2006). Huang, Philip C. C., The Peasant Economy and Social Change in North China (Stanford University Press, 1985). The Peasant Family and Rural Development in the Yangzi Delta, 1350–1988 (Stanford University Press, 1990). Hudson, Pat, ‘The Limits of Wool and the Potential of Cotton in the Eighteenth and Early Nineteenth Centuries’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 327–50. Huggill, Peter J., ‘Structural Changes in the Core Regions of the World-Economy, 1830–1945’, Journal of Historical Geography 14/2 (1988): 111–27. <sup>˙</sup>Inalcık, Halil, ‘When and how British Cotton Goods Invaded the Levant Markets’, in Huri Islamoglu-Inan, ed.,˘ The Ottoman Empire and the World-Economy (Cambridge University Press and Paris: Editions de la Maison des Sciences de<sup>´</sup> l’Homme, 1986), pp. 374–83. Inikori, Joseph E., ‘Africa and the Globalization Process: Western Africa, 1450–1850’, Journal of Global History 2/1 (2007): 63–86. Africans and the Industrial Revolution in England: a Study of International Trade and Economic Development (Cambridge University Press, 2002). ‘English Versus Indian Cotton Textiles: the Impact of Imports on Cotton Textile Production in West Africa’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 85–114. ‘Slavery and the Revolution in Cotton Textile Production in England’, Social Science History 23/4 (1989): 343–79. Irwin, Douglas A., ‘Mercantilism as Strategic Trade Policy: the Anglo-Dutch Rivalry for the East India Company’, Journal of Political Economy 99/6 (1991): 1296–314. Irwin, John, ‘Indian Textile Trade in the Seventeenth Century. II. Coromandel Coast’, Journal of Indian Textile History 2 (1956): 24–42. Irwin, John, and Margaret Hall, Indian Painted and Printed Fabrics (Ahmedabad: Calico Museum of Textile, 1971). Irwin, John, and P. R. Schwartz, Studies in Indo-European Textile History (Ahmedabad: Calico Museum of Textile, 1966). Jenkins, David, ed., The Cambridge History of Western Textiles, 2 vols. (Cambridge University Press, 2003). Jenkins, David T., and K. G. Ponting, The British Wool Textile Industry, 1770–1914 (London: Heinemann Educational and Pasold Research Fund, 1982). Jeremy, David J., ‘British Textile Technology Transmission to the United States: the Philadelphia Region Experience, 1770–1820’, Business History Review 47/1 (1973): 24–52. Transatlantic Industrial Revolution: the Diffusion of Textile Technologies Between Britain and America, 1790–1830s (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981). Johnson, Marion, Anglo-African Trade in the Eighteenth Century (Leiden: Centre for the History of European Expansion, 1990). Johnson, W. H., Cotton and its Production (London: Macmillan & Co., 1926). Jones, E. L., The European Miracle: Environments, Economies, and Geopolitics in the History of Europe and Asia, 3rd edn (Cambridge University Press, 2003). Kawakatsu, Heita, ‘The Emergence of a Market for Cotton Goods in East Asia in the Early Modern Period’, in A. J. H. Latham and Heita Kawakatsu, eds., Japanese Industrialization and the Asian Economy (London and New York: Routledge, 1994), pp. 9–34. ‘International Competition in Cotton Goods in the Late Nineteenth Century: Britain versus India and East Asia’, in Wolfram Fischer, R. Marvin McInnis and Jurgen¨ Schneider, eds., The Emergence of a World Economy 1500–1914: Papers of the IX International Congress of Economic History (Nuremberg: Anschrift der Schriftleitung, 1986), pp. 619–43. Keirn, Tim, ‘Parliament, Legislation and the Regulation of English Textile Industries, 1689–1714’, in Lee Davidson, Tim Hitchcock, T. Keirn and Robert D. Shoemakers, eds., Stilling the Grumbling Hive: the Response to Social and Economic Problems in England, 1689–1750 (Stroud: Sutton, 1992), pp. 1–24. Kellenbenz, Hermann, ‘The Fustian Industry of the Ulm Region in the Fifteenth and Early Sixteenth Centuries’, in N. B. Harte and K.G. Ponting, eds., Cloth and Clothing in Medieval Europe. Essays in Memory of Professor E. M. Carus-Wilson (London: Heinemann Educational and Pasold Research Fund, 1983), pp. 259–76. Kerlogue, Fiona, ‘The Early English Textile Trade in South East Asia: the East India Company Factory and the Textile Trade in Jambi, Sumatra, 1615–1682’, Textile History 28/2 (1997): 149–60. Keyes Adenaike, Carolyn, ‘West African Textiles, 1500–1800’, in Maureen Fennell Mazzaoui, ed., Textiles: Production, Trade and Demand (Aldershot: Ashgate, 1998), pp. 251–61. Kingma, Vibeke, ‘De katoendrukkerijen in Amsterdam en Nieuwer-Amstel’, Textielhistorische Bijdragen 38 (1998): 7–30. Knight, Frederick C., Working the Diaspora: the Impact of African Labor on the Anglo-American World, 1650–1850 (New York University Press, 2010). Kriegel, Lara, ‘Culture and the Copy: Calico, Capitalism, and Design Copyright in Early Victorian Britain’, Journal of British Studies 43/2 (2004): 233–65. Kriger, Colleen, ‘“Guinea Cloth”: Production and Consumption of Cotton Textiles in West Africa Before and During the Atlantic Slave Trade’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 105–26. ‘Mapping the History of Cotton Textile Production in Pre-Colonial West Africa’, African Economic History 33 (2005): 87–116. Kuhn, Dieter, Science and Civilisation in China, volume V, Chemistry and Chemical Technology. Part IX. Textile Technology: Spinning and Reeling (Cambridge University Press, 1998). Kurmus¸, Orhan, ‘The Cotton Famine and its Effects on the Ottoman Empire’, in Huri Islamoglu-Inan, ed.,˘ The Ottoman Empire and the World-Economy (Cambridge University Press and Paris: Editions de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme,<sup>´</sup> 1986), pp. 160–9. Kusamitsu, Toshio, ‘British Industrialization and Design Before the Great Exhibition’, Textile History 12 (1981): 77–95. Lakwete, Angela, Inventing the Cotton Gin: Machine and Myth in Antebellum America (Baltmore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003). Lamb, Venice, West African Weaving (London: Duckworth, 1975). Landes, David S., The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present (Cambridge University Press, 1969). The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: why are some so Rich and others so Poor? (New York: W. W. Norton, 1998). ‘What do Bosses Really Do?’, Journal of Economic History 46/3 (1986): 585–623. Lemire, Beverly, Cotton (Oxford: Berg, 2011). ‘Domesticating the Exotic: Floral Culture and the East India Calico Trade with England, c. 1600–1800’, Textile: the Journal of Cloth and Culture 1/1 (2003): 65–85. Fashion’s Favourite: the Cotton Trade and the Consumer in Britain, 1660–1800 (Oxford University Press and Pasold Research Fund, 1991). ‘Fashioning Cottons: Asian Trade, Domestic Industry and Consumer Demand, 1660–1780’, in Jenkins, ed., Cambridge History of Western Textiles, volume I, pp. 493–512. ‘Fashioning Global Trade: Indian Textiles, Gender Meanings and European Consumers, 1500–1800’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 365–90. ‘Revising the Historical Narrative: India, Europe, and the Cotton Trade, c. 1300–1800’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 205–26. ‘Transforming Consumer Custom: Linen, Cotton, and the English Market, 1660–1800’, in Collins and Ollerenshaw, eds., European Linen Industry in Historical Pespective, pp. 187–207. Lemire, Beverly, ed., The British Cotton Trade, 1660–1815 (London: Pickering & Chatto, 2009). Lemire, Beverly, and Giorgio Riello, ‘East and West: Textiles and Fashion in Early Modern Europe’, Journal of Social History 41/4 (2008): 887–916. Leunig, Timothy, ‘Cotton: Technological Change’, in Joel Mokyr, ed., The Oxford Encyclopedia of Economic History, volume II (Oxford University Press, 2003), pp. 24–9. Levi, Scott C., ‘India, Russia and the Eighteenth-Century Transformation of the Central Asian Caravan Trade’, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 42/4 (1999): 519–48. Li, Bozhong, Agricultural Development in Jiangnan, 1620–1850 (New York: St Martin’s Press, 1998). Lloyd-Jones, Roger, and A. A. LeRoux, ‘The Size of Firms in the Cotton Industry: Manchester in 1815’, Economic History Review 33/1 (1980): 72–82. Lyons, John Stephen, ‘The Lancashire Cotton Industry and the Introduction of the Powerloom, 1815–1850’, Journal of Economic History 37/1 (1978): 283–4. Lombard, Maurice, Les Textiles dans le monde musulman du VIIe au XIIe siecle\` (Paris: Mouton, 1978). Longfield, Ada K., ‘History of the Irish Linen and Cotton Printing Industry in the 18th Century’, Journal of Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland 58 (1937): 26–56. Lowengard, Sarah, ‘Colour Quality and Production: Testing Colour in Eighteenth-Century France’, Journal of Design History 14/2 (2001): 91–103. McCants, Anne E., ‘Modest Households and Globally Traded Textiles: Evidence from Amsterdam Household Inventories’, in Laura Cruz and Joel Mokyr, eds., The Birth of Modern Europe: Culture and Economy, 1400–1800. Essays in Honour of Jan de Vries (Leiden and Boston: E. J. Brill, 2010), pp. 109–31. Machado, Pedro, ‘Awash in a Sea of Cloth: Gujarat, Africa, and the Western Indian Ocean, 1300–1800’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 161–80. Maddison, Angus, The World Economy: a Millennial Perspective (Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2001). Mancall, Peter C., Joshua L. Rosenbloom and Thomas Weiss, ‘Exports and the Economy of the Lower Southern Region, 1720–1770’, Research in Economic History 25 (2008): 1–68. Mann, Susan, ‘Household Handicrafts and State Policy in Qing Times’, in J. K. Leonard and J. R. Watt, eds., To Achieve Security and Wealth: the Qing Imperial State and the Economy, 1644–1911 (Cornell, NY: Cornell East Asia Series, 1992), pp. 75–95. Matinez-Shaw, Carlos, ‘Entre orient et occident: l’approvisionnement en coton et l’industrialisation de la Catalogne’, in Jacques Bottin and Nicole Pellegrin, eds., Echanges et cultures textiles dans l’Europe pr<sup>´</sup> e-industrielle. Actes du colloque de´ Rouen, 17–19 mai 1993 (Lille: Revue du Nord Supplement 12, 1996), pp. 227–45. ‘Los Or´<sup>ι</sup>genes de la industria algodonera catalana y el comercio colonial’, in Jordi Nadal and Gabriel Tortella, eds., Agricultura, comercio colonial y crecimiento economico en la Espa´ na contempor˜ anea´ (Barcelona: Editorial Ariel, 1974), pp. 243–67. Maw, Peter, ‘Yorkshire and Lancashire Ascendant: England’s Textile Exports to New York and Philadelphia, 1750–1805’, Economic History Review 63/3 (2010): 734–68. Maxwell, Robyn, Textiles of Southeast Asia: Tradition, Trade and Transformation (Melbourne: Australian National Gallery and Oxford University Press, 1990). Mazzaoui, Maureen Fennell, ‘The Cotton Industry of Northern Italy in the Late Middle Ages: 1150–1450’, Journal of Economic History 32/1 (1972): 262–86. ‘The First European Cotton Industry: Italy and Germany, 1100–1800’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 63–88. The Italian Cotton Industry in the Later Middle Ages, 1100–1600 (Cambridge University Press, 1981). Meredith John, A., The Plantation Slaves of Trinidad, 1783–1816: a Mathematical and Demographic Enquiry (Cambridge University Press, 1988). Mokyr, Joel, The Enlightened Economy: an Economic History of Britain, 1700–1850 (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2009). The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy (Princeton University Press, 2002). Montgomery, Florence M., Printed Textiles: English and American Cottons and Linens, 1700–1850 (New York: Thoemmes Press [1970] 1999). Morineau, Michel, ‘The Indian Challenge: Seventeenth to Eighteenth Centuries’, in Sushil Chaudhuri and Michel Morineau, eds., Merchants, Companies and Trade: Europe and Asia in the Early Modern Era (Cambridge University Press and Paris: Editions de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme,<sup>´</sup> 1999), pp. 243–75. Mukerji, Chandra, From Graven Images: Patterns of Modern Materialism (New York: Columbia University Press, 1983). Myers, Ramon H., ‘Cotton Textile Handicraft and the Development of the Cotton Textile Industry in Modern China’, Economic History Review 18/3 (1965): 614–32. Nadal, Jordi, and Alex Sanchez, ‘En los or´ıgenes del exito algodonero catal´ an’, in´ Genevieve Gavignaud-Fontaine, Henri Michel and Elie P\` elaquier, eds.,´ De la fibre a la fripe: le textile dans la France m\` eridionale et l’Europe m´ editerran´ eenne´ (XVIIe–XXe siecles). Actes du colloque du 21 et du 22 mars 1997\` (Montpellier: Universite Paul-Val´ ery,´ 1998), pp. 35–60. Nam, Jong-Kuk, Le Commerce du coton en Mediterran´ ee´ a la fin du moyen age\` (Leiden and Boston: E. J. Brill, 2007). Naqvi, Hameeda Khatoon, ‘Colour Making and Dyeing of Cotton Textiles in Medieval Hindustan’, Journal of Indian Textile History 15/1 (1980): 58–70. ‘Dyeing of Cotton Goods in the Mughal Hindustan’, Journal of Indian Textile History 7/1 (1967): 45–55. Nash, R. C., ‘South Carolina Indigo, European Textiles, and the British Atlantic Economy in the Eighteenth Century’, Economic History Review 63/2 (2010): 362–92. Nieto-Galan, Agust´ı, ‘Dyeing, Calico Printing, and Technical Exchanges in Spain: the Royal Manufactures and the Catalan Textile Industry, 1750–1820’, in Robert Fox and Agust´ı Nieto-Galan, eds., Natural Dyestuffs and Industrial Culture in Europe, 1750–1880 (Canton, Mass.: Watson Publishing, 1999), pp. 101–28. North, Douglas C., The Economic Growth of the United States, 1790–1860 (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1961). O’Brien, Patrick, ‘A Conjuncture in Global History or an Anglo-American Construct: the British Industrial Revolution, 1700–1850’, Journal of Global History 5/3 (2010): 503–9. ‘European Economic Development: The Contribution of the Periphery’, Economic History Review 35/1 (1982): 1–18. ‘The Foundations of European Industrialization: from the Perspective of the World’, in Jose Casas Pardo, ed.,´ Economic Effects of the European Expansion, 1492–1824 (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1992), pp. 463–502. ‘The Geopolitics of a Global Industry: Eurasian Divergence and the Mechanisation of Cotton Textile Production in England’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 351–66. ‘The Micro Foundations of Macro Invention: the Case of the Reverend Edmund Cartwright’, Textile History 28/2 (1997): 201–33. ‘Path Dependency, or why Britain became an Industrialized and Urbanized Economy Long Before France’, Economic History Review 49/2 (1996): 213–49. O’Brien, Patrick K., and S. L. Engerman, ‘Exports and the Growth of the British Economy from the Glorious Revolution to the Peace of Amiens’, in Barbara L. Solow, ed., Slavery and the Rise of the Atlantic System (Cambridge University Press, 1991), pp. 177–209. O’Brien, Patrick K., Trevor Griffith and Philip Hunt, ‘Political Components of the Industrial Revolution: English Cotton Textile Industry, 1660–1774’, Economic History Review 44/3 (1991): 395–423. O’Donovan, Susan Eva, Becoming Free in the Cotton South (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2007). Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul W. Rhode, Creating Abundance: Biological Innovation and American Agricultural Development (Cambridge University Press, 2008). Ormrod, David, The Rise of Commercial Empires: England and the Netherlands in the Age of Mercantilism, 1650–1770 (Cambridge University Press, 2002). O’Rourke, Kevin H., and Jeffrey G. Williamson, ‘After Columbus: Explaining Europe’s Overseas Trade Boom, 1500–1800’, Journal of Economic History 62/2 (2002): 417–56. Globalization and History: the Evolution of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999). ‘When Did Globalisation Begin?’, European Review of Economic History 6/1 (2002): 23–50. Osumi, Tamezo, Printed Cottons of Asia: the Romance of Trade Textiles (Tokyo: Bijutsu Shuppan-sha, 1963). Owen, E. R. J., Cotton and the Egyptian Economy, 1820–1914: A Study in Trade and Development (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1969). Owen, Roger, The Middle East in the World Economy, 1800–1914: a Study of Trade and Development (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993). Pamuk, S¸evket, ‘The Decline and Resistance of Ottoman Cotton Textiles, 1820–1913’, Explorations in Economic History 23/2 (1986): 205–25. The Ottoman Empire and European Capitalism, 1820–1913 (Cambridge University Press, 1987). Pamuk, S¸evket, and Jeffrey G. Williamson, ‘Ottoman De-industrialization, 1800–1913: Assessing the Magnitude, Impact, and Response’, Economic History Review 64/supplement 1 (2010): 159–84. Parthasarathi, Prasannan, ‘Cotton Textiles in the Indian Subcontinent, 1200–1800’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 17–42. ‘Historical Issues of Deindustrialisation in Nineteenth-Century South India’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 415–36. ‘Rethinking Wages and Competitiveness in the Eighteenth Century’, Past & Present 158 (1998): 79–109. ‘Review Article: The Great Divergence’, Past & Present 167 (2002): 275–93. The Transition to a Colonial Economy: Weavers, Merchants and Kings in South India, 1720–1800 (Cambridge University Press, 2001). Why Europe Grew Rich and Asia did not: Global Economic Divergence, 1600–1850 (Cambridge University Press, 2011). Parthasarathi, Prasannan, and Ian Wendt, ‘Decline in Three Keys: Indian Cotton Manufacturing from the Later Eighteenth Century’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 397–407. Pearson, Michael N., The Indian Ocean (London and New York: Routledge, 2003). Perez, Liliane Hilaire, ‘Cultures, techniques et pratiques de l’´ echange, entre Lyon et le´ Levant: inventions et reseaux au XVIIIe si´ ecle’,\` Revue d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine 49/1 (2002): 89–114. L’Invention technique au siecle des lumi\` eres\` (Paris: Albin Michel, 2000). Perlin, Frank, ‘Proto-Industrial and Pre-Colonial South Asia’, Past & Present 98 (1983): 30–95. Petmezas, Socrates D., ‘Patterns of Protoindustrialization in the Ottoman Empire. The Case of Eastern Thessaly, ca. 1750–1860’, Journal of European Economic History 19/3 (1990): 575–603. Pfister, Rudolf, ‘The Indian Art of Calico Printing in the Middle Ages: Characteristics and Influences’, Indian Art and Letters, 13 (1939): 23–9. Les Toiles imprimees de Fostat et l’Hindoustan´ (Paris: Editons d’Art et d’Histoire, 1938). Phillips, Amanda, ‘Little-Known Ottoman-Period Cotton and Linen Textiles in Oxford’s Ashmolean Museum’, in Proceedings of the 13th International Congress of Turkish Art (Budapest: Hungarian National Museum, 2010), pp. 593–608. Pitoiset, Gilles, Toiles imprimees XVIIIe–XIXe si ´ ecles \` (Paris: Bibliotheque Forney, \` 1982). Pomeranz, Kenneth, The Great Divergence: China, Europe and the Making of the Modern World Economy (Princeton University Press, 2000). ‘Is there an East Asian Development Path? Long-term Comparisons, Constraints, and Continuities’, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 44/3 (2001): 322–62. ‘Political Economy and Ecology on the Eve of Industrialization: Europe, China, and the Global Conjuncture’, American Historical Review 107/2 (2002): 425–46. ‘Women’s Work, Family, and Economic Development in Europe and East Asia: Long-term Trajectories and Contemporary Comparisons’, in Giovanni Arrighi, Takeshi Hamashita and Mark Selden, eds., The Resurgence of East Asia: 500, 150, and 50 Year Perspectives (London and New York: Routledge, 2003), pp. 124–72. Ponting, K. G., ‘Important Natural Dyes of History’, Industrial Archaeology Review 2/2 (1973): 154–9. The Wool Trade: Past and Present (Manchester and London: Columbine Press, 1961). Prakash, Om, ‘Bengal Textiles in Seventeenth Century International Trade’, in Studies on Bengal. Papers Presented at the Seventh Annual Bengal Studies Conference, University of Minnesota 28–30 May 1971 (Michigan State University Press, Asian Studies Center, 1975), pp. 73–84. ‘Cooperation and Conflict among European Traders in the Indian Ocean in the Late Eighteenth Century’, Indian Economic and Social History Review 39/2–3 (2002): 131–48. ‘From Market-Determined to Coercion-Based: Textile Manufacturing in Eighteenth-Century Bengal’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 217–52. ‘The Indian Maritime Merchant, 1500–1800’, Journal of Economic and Social History of the Orient 47/3 (2004): 435–57. The New Cambridge History of India, volume V, European Commercial Enterprise in Pre-Colonial India (Cambridge University Press, 1998). Prakash Sangar, Satya, Indian Textiles in the Seventeenth Century (New Delhi: Reliance Publishing House, 1998). Prestholdt, Jeremy, Domesticating the World: African Consumerism and the Genealogies of Globalization (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008). ‘On the Global Repercussions of East African Consumerism’, American Historical Review 109/3 (2004): 755–82. Quataert, Donald, Ottoman Manufacturing in the Age of the Industrial Revolution (Cambridge University Press, 1993). Ragatz, Lowell Joseph, The Fall of the Planter Class in the British Caribbean, 1763–1833: a Study in Social and Economic History (New York: Century, 1928). Rahman, A., ‘General Ideas on Technology’, in A. Rahman, ed., India’s Interaction with China, Central and West Asia, volume III, Part 2 (Oxford University Press, 2002), pp. 358–72. Ramaswamy, Vijaya, ‘Interactions and Encounters: Indian Looms & Crafts Traditions Abroad – a South Indian Perspective’, in A. Rahman, ed., India’s Interaction with China, Central and West Asia, volume III, Part 2 (Oxford University Press, 2002), pp. 428–44. ‘Notes on the Textile Technology in Medieval India with Special Reference to the South’, Indian Economic and Social History Review 17/2 (1980): 227–41. ‘South Indian Textiles: a Case for Proto-Industrialization?’, in Deepak Kumar, ed., Science and Empire: Essays in Indian Context (1700–1947) (New Delhi: Anamika Prakashan, 1991), pp. 41–56. Raveux, Olivier, ‘The Birth of a New European Industry: l’indiennage in Seventeenth-Century Marseilles’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 291–306. ‘Les Debuts de l’indiennage dans les pays d’Aix (´ 1758–1770)’, Industries en Provence 4 (2004): 1–8. ‘Espaces et Technologies dans la France meridionale d’ancien r´ egime: l’example de´ l’indiennage marseillais (1648–1793)’, Annales du Midi 116/246 (2004): 155–70. Ray, Indrani, ‘Of Trade and Traders in the Seventeenth-Century India: an Unpublished French Memoir by Georges Roques’, in Lakshmi Subramanian, ed., The French East India Company and the Trade of the Indian Ocean: a Collection of Essays by Indrani Ray (New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1999), pp. 1–62. ‘The Trade and Traders in Ahmedabad in Late Seventeenth Century: Extracts from George Roques’ MSS’, in Lakshmi Subramanian, ed., The French East India Company and the Trade of the Indian Ocean: a Collection of Essays by Indrani Ray (New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1999), pp. 63–76. Raychaudhuri, Tapan, ‘Inland Trade’, in Tapan Raychaudhuri and Irfan Habib, eds., The Cambridge Economic History of India, volume I, c. 1200 – c. 1750 (Cambridge University Press, 1982), pp. 325–59. ‘Non-Agricultural Production: Mughal India’, in Tapan Raychaudhuri and Irfan Habib, eds., The Cambridge Economic History of India, volume I, c. 1200 – c. 1750 (Cambridge University Press, 1982), pp. 261–307. Raymond, Andre,´ Artisans et commerc¸ants au Caire au XVIIIe siecle \` (Paris: Damas, 1973). Reid, Anthony, Southeast Asia in the Age of Commerce, 1450–1680, volume I, The Lands Below the Winds (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1984). ‘Southeast Asian Consumption of Indian and British Cotton Cloth, 1600–1850’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 29–52. Richards, John F., The Unending Frontier: an Environmental History of the Early Modern World (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003). Riello, Giorgio, ‘Asian Knowledge and the Development of Calico Printing in Europe in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries’, Journal of Global History 5/1 (2010), pp. 1–28. ‘The Globalization of Cotton Textiles: Indian Cottons, Europe, and the Atlantic World, 1600–1850’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 261–87. ‘The Indian Apprenticeship: the Trade of Indian Textiles and the Making of European Cottons’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 307–46. Riello, Giorgio, and Prasannan Parthasarathi, eds., The Spinning World: A Global History of Cotton Textiles, 1200–1850 (Oxford University Press, 2009). Riello, Giorgio, and Tirthankar Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World: the World of South Asian Textiles, 1500–1850 (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2009). ‘Introduction: The World of South Asian Textiles, 1500–1850’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 1–27. Roberts, Richard, ‘Guinee Cloth: Linked Transformations in Production within´ France’s Empire in the Nineteenth Century’, Cahiers d’Etudes Africaines<sup>´</sup> 32–128 (1992): 597–627. Robinson, Stuart, A History of Printed Textiles (London: Studio Vista, 1969). A History of Dyed Textiles (London: Studio Vista, 1969). Rose, Mary B., ed., The Lancashire Cotton Industry. a History Since 1700 (Preston: Lancashire County Books, 1996). Rosenthal, Jean-Laurent, and Roy Bin Wong, Before and Beyond Divergence: the Politics of Economic Change in China and Europe (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2011). Rothermund, Dietmar, ‘The Changing Pattern of British Trade in Indian Textiles, 1701–1757’, in Sushil Chaudhuri and Michel Morineau, eds., Merchants, Companies and Trade: Europe and Asia in the Early Modern Era (Cambridge University Press and Paris: Editions de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme,<sup>´</sup> 1999), pp. 276–86. Rothstein, Natalie, ‘The Calico Campaign of 1719–1721’, East London Papers 7 (1964): 3–21. Roy, Tirthankar, Company of Kinsmen: Enterprise and Community in South Asian History, 1700–1940 (Oxford University Press, 2010). ‘Did Globalisation Aid Industrial Development in Colonial India? A Study of Knowledge Transfer in the Iron Industry’, Indian Economic and Social History Review 46/4 (2009): 570–613. India in the World Economy: From Antiquity to the Present (Cambridge University Press, 2012). ‘Knowledge and Divergence from the Perspective of Early Modern India’, Journal of Global History 3/3 (2008): 361–87. ‘The Long Globalisation and Textile Producers in India’, in Lex Heerma Van Voss, Els Hiemstra-Kuperus, and Elise Van Nederveen Meerkerk, eds., Ashgate Companion to the History of Textile Workers, 1650–2000 (Farnham: Ashgate, 2010), pp. 253–74. ‘Out of Tradition: Master Artisans and Economic Change in Colonial India’, Journal of Asian Studies 66/4 (2007): 963–91. Traditional Industry in the Economy of Colonial India (Cambridge University Press, 1999). Russell, Edmund, Evolutionary History: Uniting History and Biology to Understand Life on Earth (Cambridge University Press, 2011). Sadao, Nishijima, ‘The Formation of the Early Chinese Cotton Industry’, in Linda Grove and Christian Daniels, eds., State and Society in China. Japanese Perspectives on Ming/Qing Social and Economic History (University of Tokyo Press, 1984), pp. 17–77. Sangar, Shri Pramod, ‘Export of Indian Textiles to the Middle East and Africa in the Seventeenth Century’, Journal of Historical Research 17/1 (1974), pp. 1–5. Sangwan, Satpal, Science, Technology and Colonisation: an Indian Experience, 1757–1857 (New Delhi: Anamika Prakashan, 1991). Schlingloff, D., ‘Cotton Manufacture in Ancient India’, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 17/1 (1974): 81–90. Schoen, Brian, The Fragile Fabric of Union: Cotton, Federal Politics, and the Global Origins of the Civil War (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2009). Schulze-Gaevenitz, G. von, The Cotton Trade in England and on the Continent. A Study in the Field of the Cotton Industry (London: Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent & Co., 1895). Schumpeter, Elizabeth, English Overseas Trade Statistics, 1697–1808 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1960). Schwartz, Paul R., ‘French Documents on Indian Cotton Painting’, Journal of Indian Textile History 2 (1956): 5–23. Printing on Cotton at Ahmedabad, India in 1678: from an Unedited Manuscript in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris\` (Ahmedabad: Calico Museum of Textiles, 1969). Sen, S. P., ‘The Role of Indian Textiles in Southeast Asian Trade in the Seventeenth Century’, Journal of Southeast Asian History 3/2 (1962): 92–110. Sewell, William H., Jr, ‘The Empire of Fashion and the Rise of Capitalism in Eighteenth-Century France’, Past & Present 206 (2010): 81–120. Shah, Deepika, Masters of the Cloth: Indian Textiles Traded to Distant Shores (New Delhi: Tapi Collection, 2005). Shammas, Carole, ‘The Decline of Textile Prices in England and British America Prior to Industrialization’, Economic History Review 48/3 (1994): 483–507. Sickinger, Raymond L., ‘Regulation or Ruination: Parliament’s Consistent Pattern of Mercantilist Regulation of the English Textile Trade, 1660–1800’, Parliamentary History 19/2 (2000): 211–32. Silver, Arthur W., Manchester Men and Indian Cotton, 1847–1872 (Manchester University Press, 1966). Simon, Christian, ‘Labour Relations at Manufactures in the Eighteenth Century: the Calico Printers in Europe’, International Review of Social History 39 (1994): 115–44. Singleton, John, ‘The Lancashire Cotton Industry, the Royal Navy, and the British Empire, c. 1700–1960’, in Farnie and Jeremy, eds., Fibre that Changed the World, pp. 57–83. Sinopoli, Carla M., The Political Economy of Craft Production: Crafting Empire in South India, c.1350–1650 (Cambridge University Press, 2003). Smith, Woodruff D., Consumption and the Making of Respectability, 1600–1800 (New York and London: Routledge, 2002). Solar, Peter, ‘The Irish Linen Trade, 1852–1914’, Textile History 36/1 (2005): 46–68. Solow, Barbara L., ‘Capitalism and Slavery in the Exceedingly Long Run’, Journal of Interdisciplinary History 17/4 (1987): 711–39. Souza, George Bryan, ‘The French Connection: Indian Cottons and Their Early Modern Technology’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 347–64. Steensgaard, Niels, Carracks, Caravans and Companies: the Structural Crisis in the European–Asian Trade in the Early 17th Century (Copenhagen: Studentlitteratur, 1973). Studer, Roman, ‘India and the Great Divergence: Assessing the Efficiency of Grain Markets in Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century India’, Journal of Economic History 68/2 (2008): 393–437. Styles, John, ‘Clothing the North: the Supply of Non-Elite Clothing in the Eighteenth-Century North of England’, Textile History 25/2 (1994): 139–66. The Dress of the People: Everyday Fashion in Eighteenth-Century England (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2007). ‘Indian Cottons and European Fashion, 1400–1800’, in Glenn Adamson, Giorgio Riello and Sarah Teasley, eds., Global Design History (London and New York: Routledge, 2011), pp. 37–46. ‘Involuntary Consumers? Servants and their Clothes in Eighteenth-Century England’, Textile History 33/1 (2002): 9–21. ‘Product Innovation in Early Modern London’, Past & Present 168 (2000): 124–69. Threads of Feeling: The London Foundling Hospital’s Textiles Tokens, 1740–1770 (London: Foundling Hospital, 2010). ‘What were Cottons for in the Industrial Revolution?’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 307–26. Subrahmanyam, Sanjay, The Political Economy of Commerce: Southern India, 1500–1650 (Cambridge University Press, 2002). Subramanian, Lakshmi, ‘The Political Economy of Textiles in Western India: Weavers, Merchants and the Transition to a Colonial Economy’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 253–80. ‘Power and the Weave: Weavers, Merchants and Rules in Eighteenth-Century Surat’, in Rudrangshu Mukherjee and Lakshmi Subramanian, eds., Politics and Trade in the Indian Ocean World: Essays in Honour of Ashin Das Gupta (Oxford University Press, 1998), pp. 52–82. Sugana Sarma, V., Studies in Indian Textiles (Collection in Salarjung Museum & State Museum, Hyderabad) (New Delhi: Bharatiya Kala Prakashan, 1998). Sugihara, Kaoru, ‘The East Asian Path of Economic Development: a Long-term Perspective’, in Giovanni Arrighi, Takeshi Hamashita and Mark Selden, eds., The Resurgence of East Asia: 500, 150 and 50 Year Perspectives (London and New York: Routledge, 2003), pp. 78–123. ‘Labour-Intensive Industrialization in Global History’, Australian Economic History Review 47/2 (2007): 121–54. ‘The Resurgence of Intra-Asian Trade, 1800–1850’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 139–70. Tanaka, Masatoshi, ‘The Putting-Out System of Production in the Ming and Qing periods: with a Focus on Clothing Production (I)’, Memoirs of the Research Department of the toyo Bunko, 52 (1994): 21–43. ‘The Putting-Out System of Production in the Ming and Qing periods: with a Focus on Clothing Production (II)’, Memoirs of the Research Department of the toyo Bunko, 53 (1995): 29–65. Tarrant, Naomi E. A., ‘The Turkey Red Dyeing Industry in the Vale of Leven’, in John Butt and Kenneth Ponting, eds., Scottish Textile History (Aberdeen University Press, 1987), pp. 37–47. Tchitcherov, Alexander I., India: Changing Economic Structure in the Sixteenth to Eighteenth Centuries: Outline History of Crafts and Trade (New Delhi: Manohar, 1998). Thomas, P. J., Mercantilism and the East India Trade (London: Frank Cass, 1926). Thomson, James K. J., A Distinctive Industrialisation: Cotton in Barcelona, 1728–1832 (Cambridge University Press, 1992). ‘Invention in the Industrial Revolution: the Case of Cotton’, in Leandro Prados de la Escosura, ed., Exceptionalism and Industrialisation: Britain and its European Rivals, 1688–1815 (Cambridge University Press, 2004), pp. 127–44. ‘The Spanish Trade of American Cotton: Atlantic Synergies in the Age of Enlightenment’, Revista de Historia Economica 26/2 (2008): 277–313. ‘Transferring the Spinning Jenny to Barcelona: an Apprenticeship in the Technology of the Industrial Revolution’, Textile History 34/1 (2003): 21–46. Turnbull, Geoffrey, A History of the Calico Printing Industry of Great Britain (Altrincham: John Sherratt & Son, 1947). Ulrich, Pamela V., ‘From Fustian to Merino: the Rise of Textiles Using Cotton Before and After the Gin’, Agricultural History 68/2 (1994): 219–31. Van Campen, Jan, and Ebeltje Hartkamp-Jonxis, Asian Splendour: Company Art in the Rijksmuseum (Amsterdam: Rijksmuseum, 2011). Vanina, Eugenia, Urban Crafts and Craftsmen in Medieval India (Thirteenth– Eighteenth Centuries) (New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 2004). Van Zanden, Jan Luiten, ‘The Great Convergence from a West-European Perspective: Some Thoughts and Hypotheses’, Itinerario 24/3–4 (2000): 9–28. The Long Road to the Industrial Revolution: the European Economy in a Global Perspective, 1000–1800 (Leiden and Boston: E. J. Brill, 2009). ‘The Road to the Industrial Revolution: Hypotheses and Conjunctures about the Medieval Origins of the “European Miracle”’, Journal of Global History 3/3 (2008): 337–59. Varadarajan, Lotika, ‘Impact of European Traders on Indian Handicrafts and Industries’, Indica 16 (1979): 213–20. ‘Indian Textile Technology in the Pre-Industrial Period’, Indica 21/2 (1984): 61–9. ‘Syncretic Symbolism and Textiles: Indo-Thai Expressions’, in Om Prakash and Denys Lombard, eds., Commerce and Culture in the Bay of Bengal, 1500–1800 (New Delhi: Manohar, 1999), pp. 361–78. Verbong, Geert, ‘The Dutch Calico Printing Industry Between 1800 and 1875’, in Robert Fox and Agust´ı Nieto-Galan, eds., Natural Dyestuffs and Industrial Culture in Europe, 1750–1880 (Canton, Mass.: Watson Publishing, 1999), pp. 193–218. Verna, I. N., ‘Calico Printing in India’, Journal of Indian Textile History 15/1 (1980): 1–5. Vicente, Marta, ‘Artisans and Work in a Barcelona Cotton Factory’, International Review of Social History 45 (2000): 1–23. Clothing the Spanish Empire: Families and the Calico Trade in the Early Modern Atlantic World (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006). Vogt, John, ‘Notes on the Portuguese Cloth Trade in West Africa, 1480–1540’, International Journal of African Historical Studies 8/4 (1975): 623–51. Von Dieter, Kuhn, ‘Some Notes Concerning the Textile Technology Pictured in the Keng-chih-t‘u’,ˆ Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft¨ 130 (1980): 408–16. Vries, Jan de, ‘Connecting Europe and Asia: a Quantitative Analysis of the Cape-Route Trade, 1497–1795’, in Dennis O. Flynn, Arturo Giraldez and Richard von Glahn,´ eds., Global Connections and Monetary History, 1470–1800 (Ashford: Ashgate, 2003), pp. 35–106. ‘The Industrial Revolution and the Industrious Revolution’, Journal of Economic History 54/2 (1994): 249–70. The Industrious Revolution: Consumer Behavior and the Household Economy, 1650 to the Present (Cambridge University Press, 2008). ‘The Limits of Globalization in the Early Modern World’, Economic History Review 63/3 (2010): 710–33. Vries, P. H. H., ‘Are Coal and Colonies Really Crucial? Kenneth Pomeranz and the Great Divergence’, Journal of World History 12/2 (2001): 407–46. Wadsworth, Alfred P., and Julia de Lacy Mann, The Cotton Trade and Industrial Lancashire, 1600–1780 (Manchester University Press, 1931). Wallerstein, Immanuel M., The Modern World-System, volume I, Capitalist Agriculture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century (New York: Academic Press, 1974). The Modern World-System, volume II, Mercantilism and the Consolidation of the European World-Economy, 1600–1750 (New York: Academic Press, 1980). The Modern World-System, volume III, The Second Great Expansion of the Capitalist World-Economy, 1730–1840s (San Diego: Academic Press, 1989). The Modern World-System, volume IV, Centrist Liberalism Triumphant, 1789–1914 (University of California Press, 2011). Washbrook, David A., ‘From Comparative Sociology to Global History: Britain and India in the Pre-History of Modernity’, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 40/4 (1997): 410–43. ‘Progress and Problems: South Asian Economic and Social History, c. 1720–1860’, Modern Asian Studies 22/1 (1988): 57–96. Watson, Andrew M., ‘The Rise and Spread of Old World Cotton’, in Veronika Gervers, ed., Studies in Textile History in Memory of Harold B. Burnham (Toronto: Royal Ontario Museum, 1977), pp. 355–68. Weber, Henry, La Compagnie franc¸aise des Indes (1604–1875) (Paris: Arthur Rousseau, 1904). Weiji, Cheng, History of Textile Technology of Ancient China (New York: Science Press, 1992). Wendt, Ian C., ‘Four Centuries of Decline? Understanding the Changing Structure of the South Indian Textile Industry’, in Riello and Roy, eds., How India Clothed the World, pp. 193–216. Wescher, W., ‘Turkey Red Dyeing’, Ciba Review 12/135 (1959): 21–6. Wiens, Mi Chu, ‘Cotton Textile Production and Rural Social Transformation in Early¨ Modern China’, Journal of the Institute of Chinese Studies 7/2 (1973): 515–34. Wills, John E., ‘European Consumption and Asian Production in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries’, in J. Brewer and R. Porter, eds., Consumption and the World of Goods (London and New York: Routledge, 1993), pp. 133–47. Wong, Bin Roy, China Transformed: Historical Change and the Limits of European Experience (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996). ‘The Search for European Differences and Domination of the Early Modern World: a View from Asia’, American Historical Review 107/2 (2002): 447–69. Woolsey Cole, Charles, French Mercantilism, 1683–1700 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1943). Wright, Gavin, Slavery and American Economic Development (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2006). ‘World Demand for Cotton During the Nineteenth Century: Reply’, Journal of Economic History 39/4 (1979): 1023–4. Wrigley, E. A., Continuity, Chance and Change: the Character of the Industrial Revolution in England (Cambridge University Press, 1988). Xinwu, Xu, and Byung-Kun Min, ‘The Struggle of the Handicraft Cotton Industry Against Machine Textiles in China’, Modern China 14/1 (1988): 31–49. Zahedieh, Nuela, The Capital and the Colonies: London and the Atlantic Economy, 1660–1700 (Cambridge University Press, 2010). Zurndorfer, Harriet T., ‘Cotton Textile Manufacture and Marketing in Late Imperial China and the “Great Divergence”’, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 54/4 (2011): 701–38. ‘The Resistant Fibre: Cotton Textiles in Imperial China’, in Riello and Parthasarathi, eds., Spinning World, pp. 43–62.