# Body of the Book “The hand itself may be altered, redesigned repaired through, for example, an asbestos glove (allowing the hand to açt on materials as though it were indifferent to temperatures of 500°), a baseball mitt (allowing the hand to receive continual concussion as though immune to concussion), a scythe (magnifying the scale and cutting action of the cupped hand many times over), a pencil (endowing the hand with a voice), and so on, through hundreds of other objects. The natural hand (burnable, breakable, small, and silent) now becomes the artifact-hand (unburnable, unbreakable, large, and endlessly vocal)" ELAINE SCARRY In the 192os Laszlo Moholy-Nagy saw the camera as an extension of the human body, an instrument that allows the frail biological eye to halt time, cross extreme distances, magnify invisible landscapes, and penetrate opaque structures.¹ All objects é manufactured for use are extensions of the body; food,•furniture, shelter, and tools do not lie in a region safely “outside” the body, but instead are continuations of the body, turning it inside out. As Elaine Scarry has written, there is no fundamental difference between an object that is as external and disposable as a glove and one as internal and permanent as an artificial organ: both become part of the body.² What might be the relationship, then, between writing, typography, and the body? In the West, writing has historically been seen as secondary to speech: while speech appears to give an immediate voice to the interior self, writing is an external device, an intellectual technology employing an artificial code. Speech appears to be naturally birthed by the biological organs of the body, while writing depends on the mediation of external tools: chisel, stylus, pencil, keyboard. Every culture instinctively produces some form of speech; a system of writing, in contrast, must be deliberately designed. But what if one were to see writing as an extension of the body, no different in essence from an artificial limb or a contact lens? Like a chair supporting the human skeleton, writing supplements the body's capacity to speak: it is permanent rather than ephemeral, it withstands movements in place and time, and it remains readable in the absence of its author. There is another way in which writing extends the body: it is a physical by-product, a material trace of human activity.3 Unlike speech, writing leaves behind a visible mark. As the end-product of the so-called “thought process," writing thus resembles excrement. It is also akin to hair, finger nails, and the surface of the skin—each is a part of the body that is continually regenerated yet biologically dead, detachable, disposable. Writing is like blood, sweat, semen, saliva, and other substances that the body periodically produces and eliminates. I Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, Painting Photography Film (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1969) First published in 1925. 2 Elaine Scarry, The Body in Pain: The Making and Unmaking of the World (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985). 3 Jacques Derrida has discussed speech as a physical, material by-product of the mouth rather than a purely phonic, abstract signal: “The text is spit out. It is like a discourse in which the unities model themselves after an excrement, a secretion." Quoted in Gregory Ulmer, Applied Grammatology: Post(e) Pedagogy from Jacques Derrida to Joseph Beuys (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985): 55. ## head 1. The upper division of the body that contains the brain, mouth, and chief sense organs. 2. A word or series of words, often distinguished typographically, placed at the beginning of a passage or at the top of a page in order to introduce or categorize. gloss From the Greek glossa, glotta, meaning tongue. I. A brief explanation (as in the margins or between the lines of a text) of a difficult or obscure word’or 'expression. 2. A false and often willfully misleading interpretation. 3. A continuous commentary accompanying a text. A gloss could be an official element of a page or a handwritten outside, remark. Library books are often secondal defiled by the glosses of several readers. A book is thus not only subhead read by many, but written by many. is to arti element: In the language of publishing and typography, we refer to the body of a work as its “main part," its central, substantial core. When we refer to the "body" of a person, we invoke a division between inside and outside: body and soul, body and mind. Similarly, the typographic term “body" suggests a division between inside and outside, between that which properly belongs to a text and the secondary limbs attached to it: glosses, footnotes, heads and subheads, figures, appendices. One of the graphic designer's tasks is to articulate visually the differences between these secondary elements and the “body" of the text. But do such limbs remain safely “outside” the text? Instead we could see these seemingly detachable, outside" the text? Instead we external parts as internal organs, life-support systems fundamental to the shape of meaning. As an extension of the text, an element such as a gloss, footnote, figure, or appendix is an integral part of the body, opening up the skin of the text, turning it inside out. body 1. The organized physical substance of an animal or plant, whether living or dead. 2. The dead organism: CoRPsE. 3. The trunk of a person or a tree, as distinct from its head, limbs, branches, or roots. 4. The main part of a literary or journalistic work: TEXT. Whereas the "body” of a text is typically assigned to a single author, notes, glosses, figures, and appendices are organs for importing material from the outside, for exchanging discourse with other documents. Such organs nourish, impregnate, and sometimes deface, infect, the internal body. The valves of these organs serve not only to absorb, but also to expel, excrete. They generate substances, leaving a mark, a trail of argument in excess of the seemingly self-contained "body" of the work. The organs of the text are sites for elaboration, expansion, overflow, like the body's periodic release of semen or blood. For example, footnotes support the text from below; they represent the foundation of research. They do not constitute a merely passive base or pedestal, however, but rather a vital root system that feeds the work through a subterranean web of other texts. Footnotes can serve as minimal anchors or as loqua- anchors or as loquafigure I. Bodily shape, especially of a person. 2. A diagram or illustration supporting a text. cious networks that grossly enlarge the reach of the body. By documenting the exchange of fluids between texts, footnotes diagram the paternity of ideas. foot 1. The terminal part of the vertebrate leg upon which an individual stands. 2. Something resembling a foot in appearance or use. footnote i. A note of reference, explanation, or comment, placed below the text on a printed page. 2. Something that is subordinately related to a larger work: CoMMENTARY. appendix 1. A bodily outgrowth or process, specifically the organ VERIFoRM APPENDIX, commonly subject to surgical removal. 2. Supplementary material attached to the end of a piece of writing, often consisting of tables, diagrams, glossaries, etc.