Post-structuralist theory built upon and revised Saussure's ideas by questioning the supremacy of the system as the generator of meaning. While Saussure faulted writing for not being a transparent medium or “crystal goblet" for conveying speech, Derrida challenged this devaluation by foregrounding the typographic and rhetorical materiality of writing. Derrida and other writers have provoked suspicion of coherent “master-codes," such as Marxism or functionalism, that try to ground meaning in a totalizing structure or theory. This destabilizing (de-structuring, deconstructing) approach to language and culture has been called post-structuralism. Template Gothic # AaBbCcDdEeFfGgJjKkLIMmNnO Dead History AaBbCcDdEeFfGgHhliJjKk Beowolf AaBbCcDdEeFfGgHhIiJjKkLl Narly AaBBCCDDEEFFGGHHIIIJK The field of typographic design has seen a shift from the structuralist approach of modernism and neo-modernism to a more skeptical and inclusive view of digital technology. Template Gothic, designed by Barry Deck in 1990, mixes references to hand-made and machine-made forms, low and high technologies. In contrast with Albers's 1925 stencil characters, which celebrated industrial production and standardization, Deck's Template refers to an imperfect matrix yielding irregular yet mechanically mediated characters. Dead History, designed by P. Scott Makela in 199o, splices the traditional serif font Centennial with the rounded sans serif VAG, commonly used in packaging and advertising. Dead History grafts the classical with the Pop, the sharp with the blunt. Beowolf, designed by Erik von Blokland and Just van Rossum in Holland in 199o, is a randomized typeface whose edges change each time the letters are printed. Beowolf exploits digital technology not as a means for seamless reproduction but as a channel for injecting chance and uncertainty into the tidy typographic world. Narly, designed by Zuzana Licko in 1993, is a jubilantly organic revision of structuralist typography. Licko, one of the first designers to match neo-modernism with the Mac, is now breeding new life forms in her typographic hothouse. Strange organisms spawn along the limbs of her letters, from tendrils of ornament to knobby, crusty growths. These typefaces have exchanged the clean, mechanical paradigm of structuralism for a model that merges biology and technology. Such narrative, referential typographic practices have participated in the broader cultural reevaluation of modernism. While the avant-garde institutionalized the “shock of the new," post-modernism replaced this faith in renewal with parody, quotation, pastiche, and an uneasy alliance with technology.