# Graphic Design in America Time Line, 1829-1993 As a genre of graphic design, the time line combines pictorial and textual composition. Typically written in a terse, telegraphic style, the time line substitutes the rhythm of chronological order for the flow of traditional narrative. The time line visualizes history in a way that conventional prose does not, distributing words across a grid that regulates their placement. Often what the time line visualizes is merely the temporal proximity of one event to another. Time becomes an organizing principle that overwhelms other criteria of interpretation. The time line adopts chronology as an explanatory model, conceiving of history as a ribbon whose sequence reveals the significance of events. In the interest of brevity and clarity, the time line masks the interpretive character of historical narrative—hence its emphasis on “facts” and “information." The objective tone commonly used in time lines and the exclusion of critical commentary obscure the presence of an active author. Time lines are rarely “written” but are more often compiled, researched, and designed. By masking the subjectivity that is part of all writing and research, time lines tend to foster the notion that history is a matter of fact but not a question of values. Time lines de-politicize the writing of history. The linear model of the time line promotes a view of history as an organic “progression” toward contemporary values. The following series of essays adopts the discontinuous, fragmentary character of the time line. But instead f trying to present a schematic diagram of discrte events, we have tried to show how the history òf graphic design is diffused across various institutions and discourses. Rather than construct a spatial field for charting the “most important” events and names, we have used the time line format to create a flexible framework for a set of independent texts. Whereas many time lines divide a historical span abstractly according to decades, we have used the four-year cycle of the American Presidential term as our unit of measure. While a few of the case studies directly consider the Presidency, we have used the “Presidential grid’ primarily for its link to the texture of public life. Some of our essays are broken into two parts, reflecting an opposition within the text. The change in typography marks a shift in content. Each break indicates a polarity such as theory/practice, production/consumption, dominant/marginal, or artistic/anonymous. These divisions have allowed us to indicate contradictions, to bring together isolated discourses, or to present a topic from two different vantages. We have thus tried to use the time line as a critical matrix for representing history.