SOME RELIABLE RECIPES. SOME PRACTICAL DISHES. ## Modern Advertising The first advertising agencies of the 184os acted as liaisons between advertiser and newspaper. Through the efforts of such agencies, the placing of ads was simplified and rates became more uniform. In 1869 the advertising agent George Rowell published his American Newspaper Directory, which made circulation and publication data—the guarded expertise of competing advertising agents—commercially available. The function of the agency as a “space-broker” was challenged by advertising's own professionalization and by the growing force of national media, which, sure of their power, could set and maintain rates without the help of intermediaries. Brand-name manufacturers developing national marketing strategies also needed advertising services that could maintain a consistent image across national and local media. The 188os saw the development of the “full-service" ad agency, which, in addition to securing space and facilitating transactions, offered writing, design, illustration, and production to its clientele. I On the full-service ad agency and Rowell's role in its development, see Pope, The Making of Modern Advertising, 117-140. # Women as Consumers, Women as Producers 1889 By the time The Ladies'Journal (which later became The Ladies’ Home Journal) was founded in 1883, innumerable goods previously manufactured at home were being mass produced, making shopping a central part of American life. Under the direction of’editor Edward W. Bok and publisher Cyrus H. K. Curtis, The Journal became a profitable medium for advertising consumer goods. By 19oo The Journal's back cover was the most expensive advertising pošition in American magazines.² The Journal built up the trust of its readers by refusing to mention brand names in articles. Yet while forbidding direct links between editorial and advertising, The Journal recognized the fruitfulness of juxtaposing relevant ideas; ads for seeds appeared beside the gardening column, and ads for buttons and lace showed up in the fashion section. The ad (opposite page) for Extract of Beef strongly resembles the illustrated logo for the monthly “Practical Housekeeper” column (above right), which appeared on the same page. While both women wear white aprons, dark dresses, and pinned-up hair, the Extract of Beef cook is far more elegant than the Practical Housekeeper. Her apron is pleated rather than plain, her dress is tailored, her hair is ornamented, and her utensils are not homely pots and pans but a decorated tureen and some richly labeled tins of Extract of Beef. The advertiser used the Practical Housekeeper, an image familiar to Journal readers, as a modest counterpoint to a glamorous life enhanced by modern packaged goods.