# WRITING ON GRAPHIC DESIGN Over the past ten years, Ellen Lupton and Abbott Miller have moved graphic design into the realm of cultural and historical disputation. In so doing, they have raised the overall level of design discourse and have piayed a major part in the creation of a new field for serious study. This book provides esseritial back around in current deslgn theory and opens the way to a broader awareness of the fundamental role of graphic design in our time. Mildred Friedman We live in an age of written messages-from advertising to e-mail-and of theories of the text. At last, an analysis of the design of writing from two brilliant young theorists and practitioners: sophisticated, penetrating, inventive. Rosalind Krauss Ellen Lupton and Abbott Miller have produced an unusual book that questions the ideological innocence of design and challenges the validity of traditional polarities such as form and content theory and practice, high and low, nature and culture. Through clear prose, humor, and teliing typography, the authors make the history of design interesting and accessible to professionals and the uninitiated alike. Hans Haacke This valuable book is a banquet of ideas and imagery about design. The highly readable essays range over a vigorous mix of popular culture, classical book traditions, media and technology, design history, and challenging communications theories. Immensely literate, it makes a generous contribution to the graphic design bookshelf. The authors are two of the brightest lights of a germinating community of design critics and historians. Katherine McCoy Ellen Lupton and Abbott Miller's incisive work places them at the forefront of a new breed of designers cailed Information Architects. Richard Saul Wurman