# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

RITING THIs Book has involved more people, and taken me to more places, than I ever imagined it would, and to all of them I am grateful. Yale University was the birthplace of this project, and I am indebted to those who guided me while I was there. As a graduate student I benefitted enormously from the advice and insights of several outstanding scholars. Peter Gay and Linda Colley supervised this book in its formative stages, and stand as role models for thorough research, careful analysis, and elegant writing. Paul Kennedy, Frank Turner, Frans Coetzee, and Mark Micale provided me with opportunities to try out some of my ideas and approaches. Jennifer Hall-Witt and Cyrus Vakil speedily read chapters at critical times, and offered perceptive and valuable suggestions, as did David Cannadine, who was simultaneously witty, critical, supportive. I owe David a special debt of thanks for his careful reading of the entire manuscript in its later stages.

Financial assistance came most generously from the United States government in the form of a Jacob Javits Fellowship. I also received fellowships from the Macarthur Foundation and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, and grants from the John F. Enders fund at Yale University, St Mary's College of Maryland, and Stanford University.

I appreciate having had the opportunity to try out some of the ideas expressed here at the 1992 Northeast Victorian Studies Association Annual Meeting, the 1993 North American Conference on British Studies, and, at the invitation of Fred Leventhal, the 1994 Annual Meeting of the American Historical Association. My thanks to those in the audience, several of whom offered useful and provocative comments.

The directors and staffs at a number of libraries and archives went out of their way to be helpful, foremost among them being Valerie Phillips, Archivist for the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851 at Imperial College of Science, Technology & Medicine, who brought me volume after volume of letters and patiently assisted me while I learned to read nineteenth-century handwriting. At the Yale Center for British Art, Duncan Robinson, Patrick McCaughey, and Elisabeth Fairman all took an interest in my work. My thanks go also to staff at Yale University's Sterling Memorial Library, the British Library, the National Art Library at the Victoria and Albert Museum, the India Office Library, Manchester Central Library, Guildhall Library, the Royal Society for the Arts, Chatsworth, the Bodleian Library, the National Library of Scotland, the Public Record Office, the University of St Andrews Library, the Hartley Library at the University of Southampton, the University College London Library, and the West Sussex Record Office.

Because my research took me away from home for long periods of time, I found myself relying on the generosity of others, not just for food and lodging, but for the less material comforts of home. Special thanks go to Gerry Segal, Edwina Moreton, and Rachel Segal, my surrogate family in London, as well as to two other London

## Acknowledgments

friends, Mark Foley and Maya Weil. And, of course, to Chrissie Robertson, who was a formative presence in my life even before I knew how to write, and who took me on a wonderful tour of Scotland so that I could stop at archives in Edinburgh and St Andrews along the way. Other friends who contributed in less tangible but no less important ways include Phil Deloria, Emily Greenwald, David Herrmann, Fred Logevall, Paul Miller, and, more recently, Eric Haskell, Dion Scott-Kakures, Hao and Rachel Huang, and David Andrews. Keith Langston, especially, helped sustain me throughout the project with his friendship, and graciously helped proofread the final version.

In its later stages, this book benefitted greatly from the assistance of Elisheva Urbas, who provided invaluable stylistic suggestions, tempered always by a caustic sense of humor. I also owe a special debt of gratitude to my editors, John Nicoll, who has nurtured this project for several years, and to Candida Brazil, as well as to Adam Freudenheim for his work on the layout and design.

I could not have written this book without the support, encouragement, and assistance of my family. My father read an entire draft and helped me negotiate the dilemmas of multiple meanings even as he refused to solve them for me. My mother drew on her years of editorial experience to help me clarify and prune my prose. Susan, Shira, Rebecca, Pammy, Bart, Cole, Jonah, and, especially, my newborn daughter Dalia, continually remind me that this book is only one part of my life. And finally, above all, Nancy has read every word in this book (most of them more than once), talked me through every major argument and conceptual issue, rescued me from my work at critical moments, and supported me unfailingly in this endeavor. This has truly been a collaborative project in all but name.