# Introduction

N MAY DAY 1851, Queen Victoria opened the Great Exhibition of the Works of Industry of All Nations, at the newly constructed Crystal Palace in Hyde Park, London. The Times described the opening as the first morning since the creation of the world that all peoples have assembled from all parts of the world and done a common act'.1 Over 25,o0o people mobbed the exhibition building on the first day alone, with thousands more lining the streets to catch a glimpse of the Queen. Inside, visitors found works of art and industry from around the world, from blast furnaces to silk tapestries, from lumps of coal to the first facsimile machine. By the time the exhibition closed in October, there had been more than six million paid entrances to the Crystal Palace, which, allowing for foreign and repeat visits, represented almost one-fifth of the population of Britain.

There has been a whiggish inevitability to most historical accounts of the origins and creation of the exhibition.2 According to one historian, Prince Albert's announcement of the exhibition at the Society of Arts in 1849 rang like a trumpet blast through the land;'great' was ‘the energy and enthusiasm of all concerned;’ Joseph Paxton, the architect of the Crystal Palace, was the archetypal self-made man born of poor parents;''the exhibits were beyond calculation;'the weather for the opening was perfect;’ and It was a triumph for England." In point of fact, none of these statements was true. Albert was reluctant to become involved in the planning process, and his announcement was not only tentative, but fell, if not on dea ears, at least on only a few. Many Britons responded with apathy if not outright opposition, even after the exhibition opened. Paxton was not born of poor parents, nor was he without patronage and connections. The exhibits were a hodgepodge at best and severely criticized in many quarters. The morning of the opening was cloudy and raining, although the sun did appear just before the opening ceremony began. Finally, while Britain performed well at the exhibition, premonitions of its decline appeared almost as often as proclamations of victory.

Not only have narratives of the exhibition been teleological; they have also portrayed the exhibition as a monumental and monolithic event with a set of self-evident meanings.\* Historians have made the Great Exhibition the pre-eminent symbol of the Victorian age. According to traditional accounts, it symbolized peace, progress, and prosperity," and boldly asserted Britain's position not only as the first industrialized nation and as the workshop of the world,’ but also as the most powerful and advanced state, a paragon of liberalism.6 It was also, for many historians, the high point of what has been called the age of equipoise,’a period of domestic accord, when British society was in balance.' G. M. Young proclaimed it a pageant of domestic peace."8 The Crystal Palace itself has been variously described as the first embodiment of a commodity culture and the first modern building, marking the origin of industrial design and even the advent of modernity."

## Introduction

Scholars have also almost uniformly characterized the exhibition as the product of middle-class cultural ascendancy in mid-Victorian Britain. It advanced a particularly middle-class vision' of society, at a time when Middle-class ideals set the standard for the nation.'1º One historian interpreted its motto – ‘The workers, of all types, stand forth as the really great men' - as not the slogan of “two nations," but of a single nation sharing a single ethos and exulting in the monumental product of that ethos.'11 There is much evidence for this view, and, on a superficial level, the exhibition can be seen as a testament to the middle class. They had substantial input in the preparations, they attended in large numbers, and they were the target of much of the organizers' promotional efforts. More broadly, the organizers raised funds for the exhibition using public meetings and voluntary societies, both particularly middleclass forms of expression, and the exhibition itself presented and represented a vision of Britain and British society that was appealing to the middle classes.

But there are several problems in asserting that the Great Exhibition was the cultural product of the Victorian middle class. The first is a methodological one, that there is no consensus among historians about who should be considered middle class, and whether class is a useful category of analysis in the first place.12 Second, it will be argued here that the exhibition was an event that cut across traditional class boundaries and distinctions, both in its formulation and in its popularity. Third, and most importantly, this portrayal of the exhibition as a middle-class event promulgating a middle-class vision of society reduces the many and varied meanings of the exhibition to a single, unequivocal truth.

What is so remarkable about the Great Exhibition is that it included something for almost everyone. In this regard the exhibition was a protean event with numerous possible meanings. This book investigates these meanings by re-inserting the exhibition into the historical context from which it emerged in order to explore the many people and processes that led to its creation. It not only analyzes those who supported and promoted the event, but gives credence to those who opposed it, thus providing a broader and more informed reading of its meanings. Drawing on the unpublished minutes and correspondence of the organizers, along with published accounts, newspapers and periodicals, memoirs, visual material including engravings, and the exhibits themselves, this book investigates the contemporary views of and subsequent meanings ascribed to the Great Exhibition. In three parts, covering eight chapters in total, it considers the making of the event, the meanings encoded within it, and people's memories of it.

The first part tells in narrative form the story of the creation and organization of the exhibition. Chapter 1 discusses the historical context out of which the exhibition emerged, including the inadequate system of industrial education in Britain during the first half of the nineteenth century. It traces the early, unsuccessful attempts to produce a national industrial exhibition, and it examines the organizers of the exhibition, their backgrounds, and their motives. The second chapter turns to some of the difficulties the organizers experienced in planning the exhibition, such as funding and providing an exhibition building. Both of these issues forced the organizers to decide what they meant by a national’ and public' exhibition. Only after the organizers had resolved these issues were they able to turn to the vital task of promoting the exhibition, the subject of Chapter 3.

Contrary to what most historians have suggested, British men and women did not immediately embrace the exhibition. For months subscriptions and exhibits trickled in because Britons simply did not know what to make of it, or did not like what they heard. The organizers had to define for the public, and negotiate with the public, the meaning of the exhibition. They did so by presenting it in multiple and changing forms, as they shifted the focus of their appeal to fit their audience. In other words, giving meaning to the exhibition was less a statement of fact than a process. The exhibition was an idea that had to be sold to the public by means of a sophisticated publicity campaign that involved the careful cultivation of the press, the distribution of pamphlets, posters, and circulars, and the organization of 3oo local committees that sponsored large meetings with speeches and resolutions. In the process of promoting the exhibition, not only did the organizers continually redefine it to fit their audience; the exhibition itself was redefined by the public in a symbiotic relationship. Consequently, the story of the exhibition must be told in relation as much to the provincial towns as to London, because towns responded in very different ways that reflected local social, political, and economic issues.

Part II turns from the event's narrative creation to its thematic meanings. The Great Exhibition was a battleground in which different groups within Victorian society fought to present their vision of what sort of nation Britain should be. Chapter 4 analyzes the exhibits on display at the exhibition in order to argue that there were many at the time who did not view commerce and culture as inherently antithetical, and that industrialization in Britain did not have to take the form it did, but could have followed an altogether different path. It also suggests that the Great Exhibition was designed less to celebrate Britain's economic successes than to locate and remedy its deficiencies. In Chapter 5 the focus shifts from the economic system to the social structure. Whereas the organizers and many observers portrayed the exhibition as a tribute to social order and class integration, a careful analysis of attendance patterns discloses deep, underlying divisions. Moreover, the Crystal Palace segregated Victorian society not just along class lines, but on regional, occupational, and gender bases as well.

The final thematic chapter explores the dichotomy between the language used by the organizers and by many commentators which characterized the exhibition as a festival of peace and an opportunity to foster international harmony and trade, and the stridently nationalistic, jingoistic, and xenophobic cartoons and publications that turned the exhibition into a competition not only about products, but about values. As such, the Great Exhibition became a forum for discussions of British national identity in the broadest sense. If the earlier chapters explore the divisions within British society, this chapter elucidates those ties that largely bound it together. Whatever doubts British men and women may have had about the composition of their own society and culture, they had few such doubts about what differentiated them not only from their closest neighbors, but from the exotic, foreign other.'

Part III looks at the Great Exhibition as an aspect of both memory and popular culture, a national icon embedded with meanings, some of which date more from 1951, the date of the Festival of Britain that celebrated the centennial of the exhibition, than from 185 1. It analyzes the rebuilt version of the Crystal Palace, which stood in the London suburb of Sydenham from 1854 until it burned down in 1936, and discusses what was done with the proceeds from the exhibition. Ultimately, what emerged out of the Great Exhibition was the educational and museum complex in South Kensington that includes the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Science Museum, the Natural History Museum, Imperial College of Science and Technology, and the Royal Albert Hall, all of which were built on land purchased with the profits from the exhibition. Even as these have provided a lasting, tangible memorial to the Great Exhibition, it has been the hill in Sydenham, where the ruins of the Crystal Palace are being turned into a hotel and leisure center, that has become the locus for continuing reinterpretations of the meaning of the exhibition.

There are, then, two stories to tell about the exhibition. One is the official’ or 'received' version, based largely on the Reports of the commissioners, the Official Descriptive and Illustrated Catalogue of the exhibition, guidebooks, celebratory poems, the mainstream press such as The Times and the Illustrated London News, and highbrow periodicals such as Blackwood's, the Edinburgh Review, and the Westminster Review. The narrative that emerges from these sources and from the historians who have employed them treats the exhibition as an inevitable event, sprung from the mind of Prince Albert, embraced by the broadest spectrum of the British public, and symbolic of the middle-class ideals of peace, progress, and prosperity. The other story, less publicized, focuses on what occurred beneath the official veneer. This story is based on the less accessible and unpublished records of the 1851 commission, the exhibits themselves, the more peripheral but not necessarily less important newspapers such as John Bull, the Britannia, and the Mechanics' Magazine, the provincial press, and popular penny publications. This is the story of reluctant manufacturers, nationalistic and jingoistic rivalries, petty political disputes, and, in many areas of Britain, outright antipathy toward the exhibition. The Great Exhibition was not an immediately popular or successful event. Both its popularity and its success were carefully crafted and created by a small group of men over a considerable period of time.

Since 1983, Benedict Anderson's idea of the nation as an imagined political community' has become something of a cliché, but there have been few studies that explore the social, political, and cultural process by which a people come to imagine themselves as a distinct nation.13 Anderson's much cited definition also begs at least two important questions, both of which this book seeks to address. By whom is the political community imagined? And of what does this imagined community consist? Both questions complicate the notion of British national identity, and are reminders of how widely contested and differently conceived the British polity was during the mid-century years. From this perspective, the nation is less a given to be pursued or rejected than it is a site of contention, a source of conflict and debate. Moreover, whatever method is used to address the formation of national identity must also rectify what one scholar has identified as the artificial dichotomy between nationalism from above and from below, by exploring nationhood as a process by which people from all walks of life redefine concepts of space, time, and kin."14 The Great Exhibition provides just such an opportunity, for it can tell us how British men and women devised a common denominator between their intimate, immediate, and real local place and the distinct and abstract national world.'5

The Great Exhibition was arguably the greatest defining occasion for nineteenthcentury Britons between the Battle of Waterloo in 1815 and Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee in 1897, containing not one but many different narratives. As such, it reveals much about the ordering and disordering of Victorian society, which was undergoing profound social, economic, political, and cultural changes during the mid-nineteenth century. Walking through the nave of the building, the axial line of power, and then veering off into the side courts and galleries, men and women from all classes and regions learned much about themselves, their country, and their place in the world.

The analysis put forward here suggests that Victorians used the exhibition to define themselves as a nation. They were able to do so because the organizers of the exhibition constructed it as a protean event with numerous possible meanings, even as they used it to disseminate liberal ideas about society, the economy, and Britain's relationship with the rest of the world. From the outset, different individuals and groups were able to interpret the meaning of the exhibition in localized, individualized ways. The Great Exhibition was, in essence, a cultural battlefield, in which proponents of different and at times competing visions of Britain fought for ascendancy in a struggle to define Britain's past, present, and future. The analysis that follows considers the Great Exhibition as evidence of the cultural ties that bound Britons together, as well as those that were contested and potentially divisive. By marshaling a variety of sources, and by employing an interdisciplinary approach, it seeks to contribute to our understanding of British national identity in the nineteenth century, as well as of how national identity is formed more generally.

## PART I MAKING