# Introduction

by

# Neil McKendrick

There was a consumer revolution in eighteenth-century England. More men and women than ever before in human history enjoyed the experience of acquiring material possessions. Objects which for centuries had been the privileged possessions of the rich came, within the space of a few generations, to be within the reach of a larger part of society than ever before, and, for the first time, to be within the. legitimate aspirations of almost all of it. Objects which were once acquired as the result of inheritance at best, came to be the legitimate pursuit of a whole new class of consumers.

What men and women had once hoped to inherit from their parents, they now expected to buy for themselves. What were once bought at the dictate of need, were now bought at the dictate of fashion. What were once bought for life, might now be bought several times over. What were once available only on high days and holidays through the agency of markets, fairs and itinerant pedlars were increasingly made available every day but Sunday through the additional agency of an ever-advancing network of shops and shopkeepers. As a result ‘luxuries' came to be seen as mere decencies', and ‘decencies' came to be seen as ‘necessities'. Even ‘necessities' underwent a dramatic metamorphosis in style, variety and availability.

Where once material possessions were prized for their durability, they were now increasingly prized for their fashionability. Where once a fashion might last a lifetime, now it might barely last a year. Where once women had merely dreamed of following the prevailing London fashions, they could now follow them daily in the advertisements in the provincial press, and actually buy them from the ever-increasing number of commercial outlets dedicated to satisfying their wants and their needs. Where once consumers eager for new fashions were dependent on the chance of rumour and the impressions of gossip, they could now rely on the accurate details of the illustrated fashion print or ring the changes for themselves on the endless combinations made possible by the English fashion doll; instead of what a quick eye and a retentive memory could glean from the dress of the rich or a visit of the fashionable, there were now precise details minutely recorded in the pages of the fashion magazines for a new and larger market to pore over. Where once the ability to wear such fashions was limited to the very few, now rising real family incomes brought them increasingly within the reach of the many.

All these changes took place within the confines of the eighteenth century. The result of these changes for those engaged in making and selling objects for the person and for the home were revolutionary. And those making and selling such consumer goods had not only responded to those changes; they had, as a result of their earnest commercial endeavours, played a substantial and a positive role in bringing them about. They had helped to release and to satisfy a consumer boom of major proportions.

This is not to suggest, of course, that the desire to consume was an eighteenth-century novelty. It was the ability to do so which was new. The ferocious pursuit of getting and spending has a long history. The feverish pursuit of fashion is just as ancient. Extravagant patterns of consumer behaviour can be easily traced back to antiquity; and one does not need to trouble post-seventeenth century Europe for the most grotesque examples of conspicuous consumption. But in the past the acquisitive part of society was a tiny one. Its indomitable pursuit of possessions satisfied more than personal greed and personal whim. It signalled more than simple, or even ornate, extravagances. It served important social and political functions too. Rich clothes, fine furs and precious gems, for instance, could mark the divinity of a king, and radiate the splendour and standing of his court. They could underline the exclusive status of the nobility, or the professional status of lawyers, doctors, and the educated élite. To preserve those distinctions sumptuary laws might be required to reinforce the effects of poverty, to buttress the conservative effects of custom, to insist on the unavailability of a desired cloth, to prevent commercial cunning from bringing it within the reach of those who aspired to wear it.

The barriers to a consumer society were therefore numerous and effective. To overcome them required changes in attitude and thought, changes in prosperity and standards of living, changes in commercial technique and promotional skills, sometimes changes even in the law itself. Above all it required the commercialization of society—the process with which this book is mainly concerned. That process was so pervasive that to do justice to it requires that it be followed beyond the world of advertising and selling, beyond the world of fashion and credit. It needs to be pursued into the political world of eighteenth-century England, into the commercialization of leisure, and of childhood, and into the world of invention and creation, where unabashed by any sense of the plenitudė of Nature men deliberately sought to create new and improved species and exciting novelties with which to delight the eye, to exhibit one's taste and to assert one's wealth. The avowed intention was to proclaim one's ability constantly to improve on the old and the inherited, and of course, to swell the demand for what was new and exciting and modern.

The changes in attitude encompassed major political, intellectual and social adjustments as well as the more obvious economic realignments. To demonstrate the revolutionary nature of these changes, it will be necessary to marshal a wide array of diverse evidence, to explain in detail some of the reasons for, and the methods by which, the changes were effected, and to dissect some case studies of the changes themselves and the individual techniques of those who brought them about.

In claiming for the cumulative outcome a qualitative and distinctively important change of lifestyles, in speaking of a commercial revolution, in announcing the birth of a consumer society, it is not intended to dismiss the evidence for commercial change before the eighteenth century. Indeed an appreciation of the developments and embryonic growth of consumer behaviour in earlier periods is a necessary prerequisite for the dramatic turning point which is claimed for Georgian England.

But if there is no intention to condemn the value of what German historians call the Frühgeschichte of commercial activity, it is intended to put it firmly into perspective.

One could easily be forgiven for thinking that historians have been too prodigal in their inventive labelling of the past. Their zeal in finding revolutions, renaissances and rebirths—each one predating the last—has often been altogether excessive. One has to admit that there have been many false pregnancies, and some births so premature that the infant so fondly announced by one historian has been allowed to die without regret by the consensus of his historical colleagues.

Some of these unjustified announcements in the birth columns of the academic journals have performed a useful role. They have provoked a reevaluation of the evidence and, in doing so, often established the recognition of significant economic developments in periods previously dismissed under labels so unpromising for commercial development as the Dark Ages or the Bronze Age.¹ But their importance is often absurdly exaggerated by titles proclaiming the commercial revolutions' of Bronze Age and even Stone Age Britain, where first the wide distribution of bronze cauldrons has been held by respected scholars to herald industrial and commercial revolutions of the eighth century B.C.; and the distribution of axe heads from the flint mines of Grimes Graves has been held to point to an even earlier retailing revolution. Compared with these extreme examples the commercial revolutions found lurking unexpectedly in medieval and early modern Europe seem highly respectable and certainly more understandable.² Gibbon's sardonic dismissal of Charlemagne's economic activities as being little more than a preoccupation with the care of his poultry and the sale of his eggs' perhaps explains the medievalists' attempts to redress the balance,3 but the titles under which they announce their revisionary exercises are often comically exaggerated. 'Le grand commerce'of the Merovingian Age, ‘The Resurgence of Commerce' in the tenth century, the commercial Revolutions revolving remorselessly and repetitively in virtually every century, ‘big business' booming in The Birth of Western Economy in the Dark Ages', are, as the more cautious scholars have readily admitted, ‘too grandiose to describe the modest activities' in which most of these early traders were engaged.⁴

The evidence too is often exiguous in the extreme, as modest in amount as the activities it has been used to. misdescribe, as unimportant as the developments it has been used to exaggerate. The evidence in favour of Merovingian ‘shops' consists of little more than a mere mention in Gregory of Tours of domus negociatorum;⁵ and even the negative evidence is often disturbingly meagre—the fact that vague is a word of Scandinavian origin is used as ‘decisive proof of Frankish indifference to things of the sea’and therefore of seaborne trade.⁶

It is very proper for historians to identify these first stirrings of commercial activity—merchants settling down in one place, goods warehoușes being built in towns, stalls appearing, then small shops and workshops, and populations no longer consisting solely of clerics, nobles and peasants ... capitalism making its timid appearance under the name commenda, the oldest form of production loan'—but it is equally necessary to remember that ‘these origins are not easy to discern, since they are few and far between and often obscure'.? The evidence must not be overstated. Their importancé must not be exaggerated. The labels offered to the work of such great scholars as Henri Pirenne, Ferdinand Lot, Alfons Dopsch and Robert Latouche are often heavily qualified in the text. The very proper doubts, the anxious evaluation, the tentative conclusions and, reassuringly often, the final negative verdicts of the historical profession are far more appropriate to the identification of a false pregnancy than to anything as dramatic and certain as birth.

It requires evidence as unambiguous and changes as obvious as those which can be found in the eighteenth century to justify the vital metaphor of birth. One can see the embryonic signs of a consumer society appearing clearly enough in seventeenth-century England,8 but to speak merely of the continued development of a consumer society in the eighteenth century would not acknowledge sufficiently the sharp break in trend between Stuart England and Georgian England. To speak of the further growth of a consumer society would be even more banal—far too flat a description of an event which excited such a positive reaction, such an excited response from contemporary observers, and which introduced such marked changes into so many people's lives.

To speak of a birth indicates the organic nature of the whole development, the need for a long preceding period of growth, and the necessity for many further stagesª before the maturity of ‘a society of high mass consumption’ would be reached;¹º and yet also indicates the importance, the excitement, the novel sense of a dramatic event which is what I want to convey.

To claim that there is ample evidence to justify regarding these pervasive changes in commercial technique and consumer behaviour as an event of dramatic importance in English life is, by implication, to chide earlier historians for doing insufficient justice to it.

Some explanation is necessary, therefore, of why historians so.willing to discuss the nature and causes and impact of the Industrial Revolution have been so chary in proclaiming a Consumer Revolution." Some explanation is needed to explain why the widespread commercial changes which accompanied the decisive changes in production have received, relatively speaking, so much less attention. Some discussion is required of why attention has centred on the great industrialists and the supply side of the supply-demand equation, and why so little attention has been given to those hordes of little men who helped to boost the demand side and who succeeded in exciting new wants, in making available new goods, and in satisfying a new consumer market of unprecedented size and buying power. When Napoleon dismissed

England as a nation of shopkeepers, he little knew how eager English historians would be to try to live down the jibe, and to efface from the record of historical significance the efforts of those busy, inventive, profit-seeking men of business whose eager advertising, active marketing and inspired salesmanship did so much in eighteenth-century England to usher in a new economy and a new demand structure in English society.¹²

PART I

Commercialization and the Economy

Neil McKendrick

## Luxury

Employ'd a Million of the Poor,

(M.) And odious Pride a Million more.

(N.) Envy it self and Vanity Were Ministers of Industry; Their darling Folly, Fickleness In Diet, Furniture and Dress, That strange ridic’lous Vice, was made The very Wheel, that turn'd the Trade. Their Laws and Cloaths were equally Objects of Mutability;

Thus Vice nursed Ingenuity, Which join'd with Time, and Industry Had carry'd Life's Conveniencies,

(O.) It's real Pleasures, Comforts, Ease,

(P.) To such a Height, the very Poor Lived better than the Rich before; And nothing could be added more:

Mandeville, The Fable of the Bees, 1714.