## CHAPTER TWO

# The Commercialization of Fashion

In England the several ranks of men slide into each other almost imperceptibly, and a spirit of equality runs through every part of their constitution. Hence arises a strong emulation in all the several stations and conditions to vie with each other; and the perpetual ambition in each .of the inferior ranks to raise themselves to the level of those immediately above them. In such a state as this fashion must have uncontrolled sway. And a fashionable luxury must spread through it like a contagion.

N. Forster, 1767

Is Fashion in fact such a trifling thing? Or, as we think, do these signs constitute evidence in depth concerning the energies, possibilities, demands and joie de vivre of a given society, economy and civilization?

Costume is a language. It is no more misleading than the graphs drawn by demographers and price historians.

Ferdinand Braudel, 1973

The concept of fashion is now deeply embedded in Western European society, and its importance in modern industrialized economies is difficult to overlook. Whole industries are built around, and dependent upon, design changes and the public reaction to them. There are even explicitly named fashion industries which exploit man's—and more particularly, in some societies, woman's——constant need for variety and change. But it would be a mistake to think—as so many moralists have done—that the importance of fashion is a constant of the human condition. Man has not always hungered for fashionable change, and even in those societies in which they have hungered they have often been unable to satisfy their appetites.

An anthology of quotations concerning fashion might seem to point to both its age and its universal influence. Proverbial wisdom was recorded in classical Latin to the effect that Fashion is more powerful than any tyrant', and the poets of antiquity were as specific as they were prolific on the subject. Ovid, as early as the year 8 A.D., wrote in The Art of Love,

I cannot keep track of all the vagaries of fashion, Every day, so it seems, brings in a different style.

The Bible and Homer can take one even further into the past with variations on the same theme. Even English literature can provide a respectably antique pedigree. Chaucer in ‘The Knight's Tale' confirmed the truism that ‘There's never a new fashion but its old’; Shakespeare in Much Ado About Nothing affirmed that ‘The fashion wears out more apparel than the man', and in Henry VIII complained that ‘new customs, Though they be never so ridiculous (Nay, let 'em be unmanly), yet are followed.'But such quotations do not encompass all societies and, even in those they do include, they are often more relevant to a history of attitudes than to a history of material possessions.

It may be a constant of the human condition to want to be in fashion. It is certainly not 'a constant of that condition to be able to be so. Nor has being in fashion entailed frequent changes for many societies and most classes.

For if one takes a long enough view and a sufficiently international one, the history of costume is a remarkably stable one. Fashion, in the clothes worn by most men and women in most societies, has been remarkably static. ‘The general rule', to quote Braudel, ‘was changelessness'.¹ The fashionable tumult over the last two hundred years or so is the chronological exception not the rule; and geographically, until very recently, only the West experienced the full frenzy of fashionable excess. For much of human history most people have been virtually immune to the effect of fashion. Most were born to immunity through poverty; some acquired immunity through the scarcity of objects to indulge their fashionable whims upon—in such a consumer vacuum the propensity to spend is effectively held in check; some had immunity thrust upon them by royal edict or sumptuary laws.

Recent work in social history has reminded us forcibly that there are fewer constants in the human condition than we have usually imagined, or has often been assumed. The sex drive, for instance, was not constant. It could be severely repressed by hunger, hard work or an inadequate diet (not to mention the effect of changing cultural norms and expectations); it could be intensified by leisure, prosperity and ample nutrition. The age of marriage is not constant either. The average age at first marriage—or the proportions of any given society who marry at all—can vary remarkably in the face of varying social and economic restraints and inducements: from the child brides of the extended families of some Eastern societies, who marry soon after puberty, to the much higher age of the characteristic Western European marriage pattern, to the extremes of the middle-aged husbands of Irish farming society in the twentieth century who marry on average at the age of 38. The marriage rate can also fluctuate alarmingly with changing opportunities: ranging from the modest choice of marriage partners offered by eighteenth-century Lisbon where one-third of the women were nuns, to the ubiquitous marriage of prosperous twentieth-century America where some 90 per cent of women marry. Illegitimacy rates can vary from the remarkably low average of one or two per cent in the face-to-face society of pre-industrial Europe to 73 per cent in some parts of the West Indies of the mid-twentieth century. The age at which different societies characteristically give birth to their children is also more flexible than many historians have imagined. All such phenomena have proved to be very sensitive to economic circumstance and cultural expectations.

When the basic human drives to marry, to make love and to raise a family can vary so markedly in the face of social, cultural and economic restraints, so a fortiori can the less basic but nonetheless pressing human need to be dressed in the latest fashion.

It is not difficult to recognize the importance of diet, housing and medical breakthroughs in allowing so many more people to live to the full the ageold assumed life-potential of three score years and ten. It is not difficult to grasp that as a result the average expectation of life at birth has risen in Europe from less than thirty to nearly seventy in little more than three hundred years. It has not so far been so readily realized and accepted that man's potential to consume has also only very recently undergone a revolution of similar dimensions.

The historical forces working against fashion were many. Poverty was the most important. Custom and tradition were powerful allies. A stable society was a further buttress against change: established hierarchies, which prevented or severely restricted vertical social mobility, remained remarkably faithful to the costumes which distinguished men's place in that hierarchy.

In Japan the kimono and the jinbaori remained virtually unchanged for centuries: so much so, that in the early seventeenth century the Shogun's secretary at Yedo could claim to show‘by the evidence of traditions and old papers that his nation had not changed in costume for over a thousand years'.² In China, eighteenth-century engravers were still copying details of the same style of dress which had been drawn by Father de las Cortes in 1626; and in 1793, a traveller confirmed the lack of change when he wrote 'In China, the form of clothing is rarely changed by fashion or whim.... Even the women have scarcely any new fashions.' In Algiers, the detailed descriptions of female fashions provided by Father Haedo in 1590 could be used with very little correction as a caption to engravings of 1830'.4 In Peru, the peasants were faithful to the poncho for centuries; in India the dhoti has enjoyed similar popularity and longevity as the prevailing fashion; in North Africa and the Middle East, the jelabi has a long and barely disturbed history; and amongst many Muslim countries the pyjama and the chapkar reigned for long unchallenged. Indeed as Mouradj d'Osson wrote in 1741, Fashions which tyrannize European women hardly disturb the fair sex in the East: hair styles, cut of clothing and type of fabric are almost always the same'.⁵

Museums of costume can be deceptive. Richness and grandeur which strike us as strange, even fantastical' may have been the unchanging costume of kings and priests for centuries: splendour and variety in the dress of a queen may well have been the result of conspicuous consumption by a single individual operating within the bounds of a single hardly varying fashionable mode.

Power often needs display and ornament. The divinity which doth hedge about a king'has usually needed more tangible expression to impress most of his subjects. The Emperor's clothes' would be seen through by more than the innocent eye of a child, unless they were of a splendour and magnificence which could not be overlooked. Clothes in the past were ‘used to set apart men and women, enhance their glory, touch them with a divinity to which these men who toiled and worked, or bought and sold, could never hope to aspire'.⁶

Sumptuary laws forbidding imitation were designed to reinforce their élite status, to restrict the grandeur to the few, and to guarantee their sense of separateness. In its simplest but most extreme form, the great simply monopolized a single colour. The Sons of Heaven, the Chinese Emperors, wore yellow, reserved to them alone: the Roman emperors wore the imperial purple preserved for them and their immediate family. In societies in which such restrictive devices could not be enforced, separateness has been insisted on by wealth. The famous extravagance of Queen Elizabeth's wardrobe fulfilled a very political need. It was the visible external proof of her divinity; it buttressed her political power; and her courtiers were expected to buttress it further with a spectacular display of satellite finery. Professor Plumb has described the situation in characteristically vivid terms.

Her clothes, of course, marked her divinity. She wore ruffs and lace of almost inconceivable complexity; her hair elaborately adorned with pearls and jewels, her vast and ornate dresses alive with rubies, sapphires and diamonds. And nor were these clothes kept for portraits only: so bedecked, she was carried in a litter through London and through the countryside on her famous progresses, like some monstrous painted but living idol. Naturally this divine monarch was surrounded by her high priests and priestesses, whose clothing, too, marked them off from the common herd: aristocrats with velvet breeches studded with elaborate emblems in gold thread, sporting codpieces that proclaimed their more than mortal manliness, and ladies-in-waiting whose beflowered skirts and intricate ruffs were the result of years of patient embroidery that no mere mortal could afford. The cost was prodigious, for gods and goddesses must never appear old-fashioned and their clothes always had to be radiant and new. Viscount Montague spent £1,500 on two dresses for his daughters. Sir Edmund Bacon wore 138 goldbuttons on one suit which was no sooner worn than discarded. As one puritanically inclined member of the House of Commons burst out, women carry manors and thousands of oak trees about their necks'.

This was the last age of human gods, marked out by wanton exhibitionism, in Western Europe. And so one should not dismiss the rich furs, the costly velvets, the golden gleaming silks of Rembrandt's pictures as mere visual delight on Rembrandt's part. They proclaimed grandeur, nobility, virtù.'

But such a picture, accurate as it is, should not deceive us into thinking that the eighteenth century, by the end of which monarchs were much more soberly dressed, saw a decline of the power of fashionable excess. For where in the sixteenth century men longed to be able to follow fashion and ape the nobility and gentry, in the eighteenth century they were able to do so. Of course, the attractions of fashion were not new to the eighteenth century. ‘Since in every age fashions beguile all ages and classes in varying degrees, ordinary folks lower down the social scale were susceptible too, and strained their resources to ape their betters. As the proclamation of 1562 bewailed "such as be of the meaner sort, and be least able with their livings to maintain the same"felt that they must follow the fashion'.8

Dr. Thirsk has shown that sixteenth-century fashion is full of baleful comment upon the dictates of fashion, which first seized the rich in thrall and then their servants'.9 'No other nations take such pride in apparel as England', wrote Philip Stubbs in 1595, 'No people in the world are so curious in new fangles as they of England be’.I have known divers [serving men]', wrote William Vaughan in 1600, ‘who would bestow all the money they had in the world on sumptuous garments'.¹º But that pride, that curiosity, that desire to‘bestow their money' and strain their resources was not allowed its full expression until the eighteenth century. Just as some individuals lived their natural span to the full in previous centuries, so some succumbed happily to the tyranny of fashion. But just as the evidence of geriatric Elizabethans is no evidence of a high expectation of life in the late sixteenth century, so these quotations prove only the existence of the desire to follow fashion and the ability of a few to do so. It is only in the last two centuries that the ‘Veblen effect' has spread throughout society, only since the eighteenth century that fashion approached its full potential and was accepted by contemporaries as exercising ‘uncontrolled sway'."

The historian should be chary of reading too much into the unsupported views of the poets. After all John Donne was rhyming ‘shops of fashions' with changeable Camelions'long before the eighteenth century.¹² And at first sight there might seem to be widespread evidence of similar isolated contemporary views. One can span the eighteenth century with such famous comments on fashion as Colley Cibber's ‘One had as good be out of the world as out of fashion'¹³ which he wrote in 1696; through Lord Chesterfield's 'If you are not in fashion, you are nobody’which he wrote in 1750;¹ to Charles Caleb Colton's rather laboured Ladies of Fashion starve their happiness to feed their vanity, and their love to feed their pride'of 1825;1⁵ or William Hazlitt's more socially perceptive Fashion is gentility running away from vulgarity and afraid of being overtaken’of 1830.¹⁶

Such quotations—and the list could be effortlessly extended—are typical more for their brevity and their economy (and occasionally their perception and wit) than they are specially revealing of their time. They can be prefaced by Burton's view in The Anatomy of Melancholy that he is only fantastical that is not in fashion',1 and followed by Ambrose Bierce's definition of fashion from The Devil's Dictionary, ‘a despot whom the wise ridicule and obey',18 or George Bernard Shaw's briefer definition—only induced epidemics’.19

All such comments are a better index to the incidence of wit or the taste for attempted aphorisms, than an index to consumer behaviour or the strength of the grip of fashion. They do, of course, reflect in particularly well expressed form, the truisms of their day, and, therefore, inevitably tell us something about the attitudes and activities of their time, but they are hardly more relevant as a measure of the incidence of those activities than are the comments of Aeschylus, or Aretino, or Bion or Sir Thomas Browne on old age or on the span of human life. Old age simply had to exist to elicit comments from Euripides, to be ensconced in ancient proverbs, to find expression in the Bible. It did not have to be common. The same is true of fashion.

In one sense, of course, the poets and the proverbs are right. Such is the biological display function of clothes, such are the possibilities for displaying status, rank, wealth and class, that some form of costume differentiation can be found in most societies and most ages. But fashion in the sense of rapid change in shape, material and style is something quite different.

So the prudent historian does well to pause before translating the proverbial wisdom of the poets into the assumed behaviour of society. Just as he does well to check the comments of contemporaries for substantial independent evidential support. Much, for instance, might be made of the often quoted comments of Emmanuel van Meteren that in Elizabethan England they are very inconsistent and desirous of novelties changing their fashions every year, both men and women'.2º But the history of costume does not support him. There is no evidence of annual fashion in Tudor England: indeed fashions remained remarkably stable and spread very slowly, men in 1596 being reported as still wearing the fashions of the reign of Henry VIII.2¹ Moreover sharply rising prices and falling real wages in late Elizabethan England would make reading any great significance into van Meteren's remark highly suspect. The looked-for statistical support of rapidly rising consumption is not there, the looked-for costume changes to suggest annual fashion are not there, there is no supporting evidence of how fashions could have been rapidly and widely transmitted through Elizabethan England, no substantial biographical evidence of industrialists and merchants manipulating and profiting from fashionable innovations.

Such are the social and sexual potentialities of fine costume that there will always be examples to be found of inventive exploitation of it. Such is the perverse nature of mankind that sumptuary laws will always intensify the desire of some of those legally deprived in this way to wear the banned material.2 Such is the ingenuity of men and women that even in the most inauspicious circumstances some will contrive to indulge themselves in fashion. But more than that is needed to bring about the revolutionary commitment to fashion, the commercial hold over fashion and the widespread social dispersion of fashion which I want to describe and explain. It was no longer a matter of the aspiring few wanting to be in fashion. In the late eighteenth century large numbers in society felt that they must be in fashion, whether they liked it or not, even to the point of ridicule. It was no longer forbidden fruit or an atypical social need. It was now de rigueur, socially required of one to be in fashion. As the Town and Country Magazine asked plaintively in 1785, ‘What can a man do?'

Banyans are worn in every part of town from Wapping to Westminster, and if a sword is occasionally put on it sticks out of the middle behind. This however is the fashion, the ton, and what can a man do? He must wear a banyan.

By the end of the eighteenth century the first signs of a surfeit of fashion can be seen, as commerce increasingly took over the manipulation and direction of fashion. Men and women increasingly had to wear what commerce dictated, had to raise or lower their hems and their heels at the dictates of the cloth manufacturers and the shoe sellers. So that one finds Jane Austen describing the wife of an undistinguished colonel living in the depths of rural Hampshire turning up for a family dinner, on a freezing night in the first week of January 1801, dressed ‘nakedly in white muslin' as London fashion decreed she should,‘a devotion to fashion bordering on the frenetic'’.23

In my view the Western European fashion pattern (and indeed the more general Western European consumer pattern) is as marked, as important and as worthy of attention as the much studied ‘European Marriage Pattern'.24 If and when they are both recognized, the well advised historians will eventually wish to look back to the sixteenth century at least, just as they will certainly need to look at Holland in the early eighteenth century and France in the later, but for the first full efflorescence of the new fashion and consumer patterns they will need to concentrate on eighteenth-century England. There they will find not just one or two isolated comments on annual fashion but a multiplicity, not just the occasional foreign visitor describing his admiring reactions to English fashion but dozens expressing their astonishment, not just a few burgesses' wives desirous of following fashion but virtually all the middle class, many of the tradesmen, mechanics and more prosperous working classes. There too, they will find the statistical backing of rising aggregate demand, there they will find that before 1780 most of the increased demand came from the home consumption of manufactured goods. The other necessary supporting evidence will also be found there: the well-evidenced cases of commercial manipulation of fashion and the well-substantiated cases of major industrialists building their fortunes on fashionable goods. The vital agents in the spread of fashion can be found too: not only thetraditional fairs and pedlars, but the Manchester Men, the Scotch Drapers, Scotch Hawkers and the provincial shopkeepers. The vital agents in the transmission of accurate fashion intelligence were also for the first time available—the fashion magazines, the fashion plates and the English fashion doll. In addition there were the advertising columns of the press, both of the provinces and London. The role of London, indeed, swelled to a quite new significance as the radiant centre of the fashion world and conspicuous consumption, transmitting through its season, its exhibitions, its shops and their trade cards, new patterns of consumption more widely than ever before. They were transmitted along the new turnpike roads, by the more efficient coaching system, along the new canals, and through the new satellite centres of fashion and commerce in the province. The process was by 1800 unmistakable, the evidence overwhelming.

Where in the sixteenth century, for instance, we have a composite image of the Tudors—and one not due simply to the massive imprint of Holbein—for the eighteenth century it would be difficult to confuse the products of one reign with another. The accelerating pace of fashion change can only be accommodated by referring to the styles of George I, George II, the 1760s, the 1770s, the 1780s and 1790s, and with many fashion goods even that is insufficient and anyone with scholarship worthy of the name would have to refer to individual years.

One could not possibly confuse Wedgwood jasper with the pottery made under George II or confuse the classical simplicity of Schofield's silver with the rococo confections of the 1740s and 50s; nor, as the pace speeded up, confuse the furniture of Chippendale, Hepplewhite and Sheraton. Hepplewhite's Guide, published in 1788, claimed to follow the latest ... most prevailing fashions', but as Sheraton happily wrote of it in 1791, when he began to publish his Guide if we compare some of the designs, particularly the chairs, with the newest taste, we shall find his work has already caught the decline, and perhaps in a little time, will suddenly die of the disorder' In lesser fashion accessories the speed of change was even greater. Such was the fugitive conformity of taste that while the meanest tyro can distinguish between the dress fashion of the 1780s and 1790s, a trained eye can do better and place most fashion goods of the eighteenth century in their decade and, with real expertise, place many, like hats, in their year of production.

This fashion revolution did not happen by accident. The social and economic circumstances were immensely favourable, but fully to realize its great economic potential required careful guidance and skilful exploitation. The role played in this by the process of commercialization was of vital. importance. Many different experts have described many parts of it, many specialist scholars have assembled the raw materials, but the process has yet to be satisfactorily explained as a whole.²⁵

## \* \* \*

The historians of costume, pre-eminently the Cunningtons, have provided the detailed scholarship of the minutiae of fashion change. The theoretical implications of fashion for economics and business history have been discussed by H. Leibenstein,‘Bandwaggon, Snob and Veblen Effects in the Theory of Consumers' Demand', Quarterly Journal of Economics, 64 (1950), and D. E. Robinson The Importance of Fashions in Taste to Business History’, Business History Review, 37 (1963) and ‘The Styling and Transmission of Fashions Historically Considered’, Journal of Économic History, 20 (1960). The history of shopping has been illuminated by the work of Dorothy Davis, À History of Shopping (1966), and the history of retailing and distribution by such as R. B. Westerfield, Middlemen in English Business 1660–1760', Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences, 19 (New Haven, 1915) and D. Alexander, Retailing in England during the industrial revolution (1970). Individual case studies of Wedgwood by N. McKendrick and Boulton by Eric Robinson have shown how important fashion could be to major industrialists. But the interlocking relationships of these different developments (and the new explanations of the rise in home demand) have rarely been studied as a whole.

The commercialization of fashion in eighteenth-century England can be encapsulated in the history of the fashion doll. The doll may seem, to some, to be a curious, even a trivial, expression of the commercial techniques and the emergent consumer demand which underlay the Industrial Revolution. But as a vivid symbol of both the extension of the market and the means by which that market was extended, it dramatically exemplifies the change from fashion which was expensive, exclusive and Paris-based, to a fashion which was cheap, popular and London-based. Most dramatically of all it exemplifies the change from a fashion which was royal in origin, limited (essentially aristocratic) in its immediate influence, and very slow to filter through to the rest of society, to a fashion which was directly aimed at the popular market, indeed which was specifically intended to extend it further into a mass one. This fashion promoter was not only immediately available to the new consumer market, it was also capable of responding very rapidly to its needs, its growth, and its fluctuations. Where the French fashion doll of the first decades of the century served only an élite, the English fashion doll of the last decades of that century served a mass consumer market. Perhaps even more significantly, where the former was court controlled the latter was controlled by business. Entrepreneurs had taken over the fashion doll and committed it to the service of commerce. Its role was now the manipulation and extension of consumer demand. Its dramatic metamorphosis in the course of the century nicely confirms the change from a world where fashion was not only designed to serve the few but was designed to mark them off from the rest of society, to a world where fashion was being deliberately designed to encourage social imitation, social emulation and emulative spending, a world which blurred rather than reinforced class divisions and allowed the conspicuous lead of the fashion leaders to be quickly copied by the rest of society. By the end of the eighteenth century the competitive, socially emulative aspect of fashion was being consciously manipulated by commerce in pursuit of increased consumption. This new fashion world was one in which entrepreneurs were trying deliberately to induce fashionable change, to make it rapidly available to as many as possible and yet to keep it so firmly under their control that the consuming public could be sufficiently influenced to buy at the dictate of their fashion decisions, at the convenience of their production lines. Those fashion decisions were increasingly based on economic grounds rather than aesthetic ones, on the basis of what the factories could produce and what the salesmen could sell rather than on what the French court dictated. Commerce was now pulling the strings in control of the fashion doll. They still needed the co-operation of the exclusive world of the fashionable aristocracy. The fashionable few remained what Wedgwood called ‘the legislators of taste', but they were no longer the sole beneficiaries of its pleasures, and the fashionable lead they provided was increasingly under the manipulative control of entrepreneurs seeking a quicker access to a mass market.

The changing face of the fashion doll reveals the extent to which this change occurred in the course of the eighteenth century.

At the beginning of the eighteenth century the fashion doll came over every year from Paris. Even war could not hinder its progress. For as the Abbé Prevost wrote in 1704 by an act of gallantry, which is worthy of being noted in the chronicle of history, for the benefit of the ladies the ministers of both Courts granted a special pass to the mannequin; that pass was always respected, and during the times of greatest enmity experienced on both sides the mannequin was the one object which remained unmolested'. Addison was outraged at the import of ‘the wooden Mademoiselle'at the height of war, and in his anger claimed that one came carrying the French fashions every month.2⁶ Other evidence suggests that one a year was the normal ration. It also makes clear that the doll was sent first to the English court² and then, when the Queen and the ladies of the court had absorbed its fashionable lessons, it made its way to the leading London fashion makers.2⁸ Advertisements announcing that Last Saturday the French doll for the year 1712 arrived at my house in King Street, Covent Garden', suggests that those who believed that for a twelvemonths this remained the dressmakers model’were right.29

Variously known as pandoras', mannequins', dolls of the Rue St. Honoré' (the centre of French fashion) and ‘grand courriers de la mode'³º the fashion dolls could be extremely elaborate and very expensive. Many were made lifesize in order that the clothes with which they were dressed might immediately be worn';³1 they were to be models for hairstyles, head gear, and all the accessories of fashion—even down tò the details of how they wore their underclothing'.³2

Such was their influence that after the Queen, her ladies-in-waiting, and the London fashion shops had had their fill, the dolls spread further abroad. One was advertised in The New England Weekly Journal in 1733 where it was announced that for two shillings you could look at it, and for seven shillings take it away.³³

Eventually the geographical spread of the fashion doll's influence was very great.³4 But its immediate social impact was small, and it was too expensive to influence directly the mass market. To transmit fashions in quantity (cheaply and quickly, and yet accurately) something less ponderous was needed than the life size, fully dressed, elaborately coiffured French mannequin. The answer was the English fashion doll which has been described as ‘a revolutionary invention conquering the market from 1790 onwards'. It was a flat fashion model cut out of cardboard. It cost only three shillings in 1790 and later only a few pence. It was printed by the thousand. It was, in the words of a contemporary commentator in 1791, about eight inches high', with ‘simply dressed hair', and complete with underclothing and corset'. With it went

six complete sets of tastefully coloured, cut-out dresses and coiffures, which means summer—and winter—-clothing, complete dresses and négligés, caracos, chemises, furs, hats, bonnets, poufs, etc. Each dress and hat is made in such a way that the doll can easily be dressed in it, giving a fully dressed or décolleté effect while the dress fits perfectly in either case. Hat or bonnet can be adjusted freely to be pulled over the face or set back. They can be put straight or at an angle, suiting the hairstyle in a tasteful manner or otherwise. In short: dress and coiffure can be varied, and by trying, each given its particular air'. This dressing and undressing, being able to set up and change again, makes for the uniqueness of the English doll. One might obtain even more changes by having some extra dresses designed and painted. The whole is packed in a neat paper envelope, and can easily be carried in portfolio or working bag.³⁵

In 1791 it was described in Germany as a new and pretty invention'from England from which ‘mothers and grown women’could observe and even study ‘good or bad taste in dress or coiffure'.³⁶ Very soon hundreds of different sheets of the dolls were available, specifically aimed at different classes and professions, as it was realized how quickly it could spread new fashion ideas.

It was original, cheap and effective. It was capable of almost endless variety. It could penetrate many different social levels. As an advertisement it had good survival value, for even when discarded by mothers it was taken up by children as a toy, and so could begin the indoctrination of the next generation of fashion consumers—teaching even in infancy the importance and intricacies of fashion awareness. Those who produced the English fashion doll did not rely simply on the accidents of parental dispersal—they marketed the fashion doll separately as a toy aimed specifically at children.

The original fashion doll continued to serve the upper end of the market, while the English one publicized the latest fashions to the rest of society, until Napoleon finally ordered that the export of French dolls should cease.

After over four hundred years the French fashion doll was dethroned by a popular usurper. The first record of the fashion doll dates back to 1396 and the English royal court. The púrpose it had so expensively, so exclusively and so ponderously served was now to pass to a mere paper cut-out-so humble nd so ephemeral as to be beneath the notice of most historians but symptomatic of the rapid changes in the diffusion of fashion views which had occurred in the eighteenth century. For by the time of its appearance, the fashion manipulators had a host of other means by which they could spread the latest fashions down through the ranks of English society.³7

Some of them have fortunately proved more durable than the little paper cutouts. For few English fashion dolls have survived to offer us visible proof of the extension of the market. Their more imposing, more impressive, more collectable ancestors have displayed a greater ability to survive, and in doing so have helped to obscure the popular influence of their ephemeral, if popular, descendants. Like so many of the commercial techniques of the eighteenth century, the fashion doll has a tradition which long predates its commercial apotheosis. Its use by the French as a popular means of propaganda for centuries has long been recognized: At a time when as yet the press was non-existent, long before the invention of such mechanical means of reproduction as the woodcut and the copper plate, ... the doll was given the task of popularizing French fashions abroad’.³8 The English version of this rneans of spreading their fashions has received less attention, but it was certainly effective. Its almost infinite variety deservedly earned it the contemporary description of the protean figure'. It provided a direct channel to those who wished to be in fashion. It offered an effective means by which artisans, craftsmen and even labourers—and more especially the wives of all of them—could be sucked into the thrall of fashion. The wives of the newly prosperous artisans (those who in Moll Flanders'words had lived like a tradesman but spent like a lord’) now knew what to spend their money on.

## \* \* \*

Fortunately there were other sources of fashion intelligence to satisfy the growing appetite for accurate information which grew in step with the rising demand for consumer goods. The fashion plate and the fashion magazine and the advertisements of fashions in the newspapers were effective allies of the fashion doll, and have survived in sufficient numbers to demonstrate clearly both their quality and the period in which they revealed their importance.

For although the first fashion magazine appeared in France in the 1670s, and even fashion drawings have been found as early as 1677 in Le Mercure Galant, ‘it was in England that the systematic and . . . widespread production of fashion prints began'.³9 The time was the last three decades of the eighteenth century.

The Lady's Magazine brought out its first fashion print in 1770, and it was at this time that an enterprising advertiser started to insert a page of the latest hats and dresses into ladies pocket books and almanacs. These were specifically devised for the guidance of ‘ordinary young gentlewomen, not the extravagant few'. Between 1771 and 1800 the following ladies' almanacks and annuals, carrying such fashion details, have been identified: The Annual Present for the Ladies or a New and Fashionable Pocket Book, Carnan’s Ladies’Complete Pocket Book, The Court and Royal Ladies’ Pocket Book, The General Companion to the Ladies or Useful Memorandum Book, The Ladies’Companion or Complete Pocket Book, The Ladies'Compleat Pocket Book, The Ladies’Mirror or Mental Companion, The Ladies’Miscellany or Entertaining Companion, The Ladies’Museum or Pocket Memorandum Book, The Ladies’New and Elegant Pocket Book, The Lady's Own Memorandum Book, The Ladies’ Pocket Journal or Toilet Assistant, Lane’s Ladies Museum, Lane’s Pocket Book, The London Fashionable and Polite Repository, The Polite and Fashionable Ladies’Companion.ªº

The first coloured fashion print is dated 1771 and appeared in The Lady's Magazine described as ‘à fine Copper-plate beautifully coloured',“ but within a few years,⁴²when much greater elaboration had been attained and the circulation of such journals was far larger', whole teams of colourists (each member handling only a single colour) worked on assembly line principles passing the page along until it reached its multi-coloured completion.⁴³

These fashion plates were, in fact, trade plates, designed as commercial propaganda. Their intention was to stimulate demand, to spread new fashions, to encourage imitation of the taste-makers'. As the earliest editors assured their subscribers, they would no longer have to rely on the French fashion dolls, those puppets always inadequate and yet extremely dear, which give at best merely a hint of our new modes.'⁴

At the top end of the market was the flagship of them all, The Gallery of Fashion which ran from 1794 to 1803. It was deliberately exclusive, it cost three guineas a year to subscribe, and it offered only two plates a month. Vyvyan Holland has estimated that the total number circulated could never have been more than 450 copies.4⁵

Such was its quality that Heideloff's The Gallery of Fashion is inevitably celebrated in all histories of fashion, but although it played its role (so characteristic of the late eighteenth century as Josiah Wedgwood's promotional campaigns show, and Matthew Boulton's, and indeed George Packwood's,4⁶ and those of many others less well-known) in encouraging imitation and emulation from below, the provincial newspapers and the fashion advertisements were of far greater significance in effectively spreading the word further afield. Mary Ann Bell kept the Nobility and Gentry' supplied with a succession of novelties at her premises in Upper King Street called ‘The Fashionable Millinery and Dress Rooms', and advertised her triumphs to a wider audience in La Belle Assemblée every month.

La Belle Assemblée carried not only exclusive fashion news but a mass of other trade notices. Like Mrs. Bell, the advertisers might invoke the patronage of the great, but they were increasingly aiming at the rest of society. The World of Fashion which took over, in 1824, the right to publish Mrs. Bell's exclusive models claimed a circulation of 20,000 by the 1830s, and those advertising straw hats, artificial flowers, and paper patterns were in Doris Langley Moore's words assuredly not addressing themselves to the Nobility and Gentry'.47

Mrs. Bell held a fashion show for her novelties on ‘THE FIRST DAY OF EVERY MONTH’as the banner headlines of La Belle Assemblée announced it. Some mention of her approach is made in a later chapter,4⁸ but as the London source of a flow of monthly fashions which were taken up and celebrated in the provinces she was merely the culmination of a process typical of the eighteenth century. The stay maker of North Walsham who advertised in the Norwich Mercury of 1788 ‘that he is just returned from Town with the newest Fashions . . . in Stays, Corsetts and Riding Stays' knew what his customers wanted to hear. His assurance that ‘their Orders [will be] executed in a Height of Taste not inferior to the first Shops in London' offered to his female customers the confidence that even the least displayed part of their clothing would be in the latest fashion. What was invisible to the world at large would be seen by her maid, and, in the closely stratified society of provincial England, demonstrating the modishness of even one's underwear to one's maidservant was a sufficiently desirable event for the local tradesman to insist on the fashionability of each and every undergarment. And Mrs. Bell played a vital role in keeping the provincial world supplied with a constant flow of such London prototypes to copy.

In the last thirty years of the eighteenth century the fashion plate and the fashion magazine offered wholly new means of spreading fashionable contagions. Unprecedentedly accurate, they and the fashion doll in the last ten years, marked the culmination of the commercialization of fashion which had been developing so rapidly in the rest of the century. But their novelty at the end of the century must not distract us from other agents of commercialization and other manipulators of fashion which had been effectively at work earlier in the century.

## \* \* \*

There were many traditional agents of fashionable change operating throughout the eighteenth century, and even earlier. Many had been highly effective, and there is ample contemporary comment to testify to their powers. According to The London Tradesman of 1747 such was the power of the fashionable tailor that to some he not only makes their Dress, but ... may be said to make themselves'.49 Richard Campbell mockingly described fashionable Londoners' dependence on, what he called, their ‘Shape Merchant'⁵º in mid-eighteenth-century England:

There are Numbers of Beings in about this Metropolis who have no other identical Existence than what the Taylor, Milliner, and Perriwig-Maker bestow upon them: Strip them of these Distinctions, and they are quite a different Species of Beings; have no more Relation to their dressed selves, than they have to the Great Mogul, and are as insignificant in Society as Punch, deprived of his moving Wires, and hung up upon a Peg.⁵1

Such was the power of those who controlled fashionable dress that to some, Prometheus ... was really no more than a Taylor, who, by his Art metamorphosed Mankind so, that they appeared a new Species of Beings'.

In fact by 1747 The London Tradesman in its catalogue of ‘all the TRADES' had already recognized the pervasive impact of fashion on the most diverse employment. Trade after trade was said to require ‘a fruitful Fancy, to invent new Whims, to please the Changeable Foible of the Ladies’; or ‘a quick Invention for new Patterns ... to create Trade'; or the ability to create ‘a new Fashion'since he that can furnish them oftenest with the newest Whim has the best Chance for their Custom'.52 A Tradesman's Fancy must always be on the Wing, and his Wit ... a Fashion-hunting': he must be ‘a Perfect Proteus, change Shapes as often as the Moon, and still find something new';5ª for the continual Flux and Reflux of Fashion, obliges him to learn something new.almost every day'.⁵4 He must be ‘a perfect Connoiseur in Dress and Fashion'.⁵⁵

Campbell recognized not only the whimsical advantages of the introduction of the hooped-petticoat.

They are the Friends of Men, for they let us into all the Secrets of the Ladies Legs, which we might have been ignorant of to Eternity without their Help

but also their real advantages to the economy as a new fashion which will

encourage the Consumption of our Manufacturers in a prodigious Degree.⁵⁶

By mid-century most of the commercial benefit of fashion was felt to accrue to London: the shoes made in the provinces sold in the London ‘Saleshops',57 the cutlery of Birmingham and Sheffield furnished the ‘great Demand'for cutlery sold in the London shops who put their own Marks upon them and sell them as London made';58 and yet London was still regarded as being heavily dependent on Paris for new fashions in ‘Wigs, Perukes and Fans'.

It was to take longer for London to take over from Paris, for the provinces to adopt the fashions of London, and for the full battery of commercial practices designed to exploit fashion to be developed. Thirty years after Campbell wrote, Trusler was convinced that\_the fashionable contagion, or what he called ‘the infection of the metropolis',59 had spread. In his view, published in 1777,‘The great degree of luxury to which this country has arrived, within a few years, is not only astonishing but almost dreadful to think of. Time was, when those articles of indulgence, which now every mechanic aims to be in possession of, were enjoyed only by the Lord or Baron of a district.'60 As the result of the increase of trade and riches ‘men began to feel new wants'. They ‘sighed for indulgences they never dreamed of before'. The wish to be thought opulent . . . led them into luxury of dress. The homespun garb then gave way to more costly attire, and respectable plainness was soon transformed into laughable frippery' andevery succeeding year gave way to fresh wants and new expences'.61

The spread down the social scale was explicitly described: ‘the infection of the first class soon spread among the second’, a taste for elegancies spread itself through all ranks and degrees of men’. The influence of London was explicitly blamed: The several cities and large towns of this island catch the manners of the metropolis ... the notions of splendour that prevail in the Capital are eagerly adopted; the various changes of the fashion exactly copied’.62

The ever increasing speed of change was also widely noted. Mandeville had actually supplied a convenient contemporary index by which to measure the spread of fashionable change in the early eighteenth century. For he wrote in 1723 that Experience has taught us, that these Modes seldom last above Ten or Twelve Years, and a Man of Threescore must have observ'd five or six Revolutions of ’em at least.'6³ By the 1770s contemporary observers found the pace of change so accelerated that they regarded fashions as annual, and amongst the super-fashionable as monthly. As the pace of fashionable change stepped up, not everyone could keep up. The costume museums of eighteenth-century dress are very revealing as to the skilful feminine subterfuges that were employed to keep a single dress in line with the demands of fashion. For even the museum pieces show repeated signs of alterations as their wearers struggled to keep up with the short-lived modes of the eighteenth century. Not even the fashionable could always afford to buy new clothes when the whirligig of fashion was spinning as rapidly as it did in the reign of George III, and the rest of society had to make constant use of the needle and their own ingenuity. But however ingenious the changes they devised, the evidence of increased spending suggests that the eighteenthcentury fashion manipulators made them buy more than ever before.

Fortunately, contemporary comment has left a uniquely rich record of the chronology and nature of changes in fashion in the eighteenth century. Not surprisingly, those comments are dominated by a concern with contemporary costume. Fashion and dress are often used almost interchangeably. From Mandeville onwards special attention was given to the role of clothes in this process of social and economic change.

Fashion was the key used by many commentators to explain the forces of social imitation, social emulation, class competition and emulative spending. These were the motive forces which made fashion such a potent commercial weapon in the eighteenth century. Mandeville had specifically identified them as such in The Fable of the Bees. He knew that consumption occurred for motives very different from everyday utility. He knew that consumption could serve as the visible evidence of wealth. He knew that fashionable clothes could serve as, what Veblen later called, the insignia of leisure’.64 He recognized that elegant clothes could serve as an overt statement of social superiority.

In this he anticipated Veblen. For if, in Veblen's language, good repute rested on pecuniary strength, then one of the best means of displaying that strength, and thereby retaining or enhancing one's social standing, would be to indulge in conspicuous consumption of goods. The most obvious, the most socially visible way of doing this in early eighteenth-century society lay in displaying the clothes one wore. As Mandeville wrote, ‘People ... are generally honour'd according to their Clothes ... from the richness of them we judge their Wealth ... It is this which encourages every Body, who is conscious of his little Merit, if he is any ways able, to wear Clothes above his Rank.'6⁵ He even recognizes the way in which a growing and more mobile population, either congregating in, or merely visiting, more Populous cities’, would intensify the Veblen effect'. The desire to dress above one's rank would operate, he argued, especially in large and populous Cities, where obscure men may hourly meet with fifty Strangers to one Acquaintance, and consequently have the pleasure of being esteem'd by a vast Majority, not as what they are, but what they appear to be'.6⁶

Many other early eighteenth-century writers recognized, and made good use of, the powerful metaphor of fashion and consumption. Professor Landa has shown how literary form could be shaped by the climate of current economic opinion: Pope's Belinda, in her role as a consumer of imported luxuries, being seen as peculiarly a child of her time.67 And Professor Vichert, writing on conspicuous consumption, has drawn attention to the clothing metaphor which dominates A Tale of a Tub, and the glittering artifice of Belinda's dress in The Rape of the Lock.68 But Mandeville made brilliantly explicit the force which many later in the century were to see as the master springs of conspicuous consumption and fashionable excess. Much of what Mandeville so controversially described in The Fable of the Bees was to be played out in many areas of public consumption later in the century. But the process was inevitably demonstrated most obviously in the world of clothes.

Clothes were the first mass consumer products to be noticed by contemporary observers. It is often forgotten that the industrial revolution was, to a large extent, founded on the sales of humble products to very large markets—the beer of London, the buckles and buttons of Birmingham, the knives and forks'of Sheffield, the cups and saucers of Staffordshire, the cheap cottons of Lancashire. Beer was arguably the first mass consumer product to be mass produced under factory conditions and sold to the public for cash at fixed prices by pure retailers.69 But the sales of mass-produced cheap clothes understandably excited more attention. When The British Magazine of 1763 wrote that ‘The present rage of imitating the manners of high life hath spread itself so far among the gentle folks of lower life, that in a few years we shall probably have no common folks at all', it was the imitation of fashionable dress that it was complaining of.

Dress was the most public manifestation of the blurring of class divisions which was so much commented on. Social expectations rose with family income. The standards of what Veblen later called pecuniary decency'º rose too as succeeding layers of English society joined the consuming ranks. The effects excited much comment, It is the curse of this nation that the labourer and the mechanic will ape the lord', wrote Hanway;7 the different ranks of people are too much confounded: the lower orders press so hard on the heels of the higher, if some remedy is not used the Lord will be in danger of becoming the valet of his Gentleman'.72 Dibdin complained that ‘the Tradesman vies with my Lord'.7ª Tucker made the same point when he wrote that the different stations of Life so run into and mix with each other, that it is hard to say, where the one ends, and the other begins'.74 The London Magazine for 1772 reported that the classes were imitating one another so closely that the lower orders of the people (if there are any, for distinctions are now confounded) are equally immerged in their fashionable vices'.7⁵ In 1775 it complained more specifically that ‘whenever a thing becomes the mode it is universally and absurdly adopted from the garret to the kitchen, when it is only intended for some very few Belles in the first floor'.7⁶

Writer after writer notes the absence of those outward distinctions which formerly characterized different classes'. Somerville, writing in the early nineteenth century, reflects on the changes which had taken place in his lifetime. At that time various modes of dress indicated at first sight the rank, profession and the age of every individual. Now even the servants are hardly distinguishable in their equipment from their masters and mistresses." Davis, in his Friendly Advice to Industrious and Frugal Persons, drew attention to the same phenomenon: a fondness for Dress may be said to be the folly of the age, and it is to be lamented that it has nearly destroyed those becoming marks whereby the several classes of society were formerly distinguished'.78

All the historians of fashion record the change in fashion tempo in the middle of the eighteenth century. Significantly the books written by those invaluable and indefatigable recorders of the minutiae of fashion—the Cunningtons—suddenly double in size when they reach the eighteenth century.79 This, of course, is partly a reflection of the availability of evidence. The fashion prints, fashion magazines and newspaper advertisements inform the twentieth-century historian as well as they informed the buying public of the eighteenth. But this change of pace was real as well as better recorded. Most authorities place the turning point in the reign of George II and see the culmination of fashion frenzy early in the reign of George III. Fashion from this time has been described as ‘such a varying goddess, that neither history, tradition nor painting has been able to preserve all her mimic forms; like Proteus struggling in the arms of Telemachus, on the Phanic coasts, she passes from shape to shape with the rapidity of thought.8º All agree that fashion for the first thirty years of the century ‘moved with deliberation'. All agree that by the first two decades of the reign of George III a revolutionary increase in pace had occurred.

On every side contemporaries rushed into print to explain the phenomenon. It was the result, they all agreed, of the downward spread of fashion, and of the imitation by the poor of their social superiors. As early as 1750 Fielding complained that an infinite number of lower people aspire to the pleasures of the fashionable'. In 1755 The World complained of this foolish vanity that prompts us to imitate our superiors ... we have no such thing as common people among us ... Attorneys' clerks and city prentices dress like cornets of dragoons . .. every commoner ... treads hard on the heels of the quality in dress’.81

But whereas Fielding was full of admiration for the way the fashion leaders used their arts ‘to deceive and dodge their imitators ... when they are hunted out in any favourable mode',8² The World, writing five years later, saw the result of the perpetual warfare'as defeat for ‘the nobility'. For they who can aim no higher, plunge themselves into debt to preserve their rank'. They were ‘beaten out of all their resources for superior distinction; out of innumerable fashions in dress, every one of which they have been obliged to abandon as soon as occupied by their impertinent rivals. In vain have they armed themselves with lace and embroidery and intrenched themselves in hoops and furbelows; in vain have they had recourse to fullbottomed perriwigs and toupees; to high heads and low heads and no heads at all.

‘Trade has bestowed riches on the competitors and riches have procured them equal finery. Hair has curled as genteely on one side of Temple Bar as on the other and hoops have grown to as prodigious a magnitude in the foggy air of Cheapside as in the purer regions of Grosvenor Square and Hill street."83

Part of the increased consumption of the eighteenth century was the result not only of new levels of spending in the lower ranks, but also new levels of spending by those in the higher ranks who felt for the first time threatened by the loss of their distinctive badge of identity. At the beginning of the century Steele had written ‘each by some particular in their dress shows to what class they belong';8ª at the end of the century Wenderborne, in contrast, declared Dress is carried to the very utmost, and the changes it undergoes are more frequent than those of the moon . . . this rage for finery and fashion spreads from the highest to the lowest; and in public places ... it is very difficult to guess at [people's] rank in society or at the heaviness of their purse’.84

The situation was unique as well as novel. It had never happened before in Britain. It had not yet happened anywhere else in the world. As von Archenholz wrote, ‘in other countries the vulgar imitate the higher ranks, [in England] on the contrary, the great are solicitous to distinguish themselves from the mob’.85

Finally, as the pace of fashion changes accelerated ever more rapidly, we find the rich moving into subtleties of cut rather than competing (as they did in the 1750s and 1760s and even more so in the 1770s and 1780s) in ever greater extremes of fashion. And finally a kind of fashion truce was called. For the first time in our history the Gentleman began to adopt the styles of dress and the actual garments of the working man.'8⁶ It was, in fact, part of the change from ‘a crude to a subtle method of expressing social superiority'—a change which finally triumphed in Beau Brummel's doctrine that a gentleman's clothes should be inconspicuous in material and exquisite only in cut'. This process still -had a long way to go. Distinctions in dress, of course, survived—very marked ones to our eyes-but they were much less obvious, particularly in male costume, in the eyes of contemporary observers.87

Although fashions changed rapidly, there was greater social uniformity in the changes. All of which, of course, suited those producing and selling fashion. Demand could be controlled to suit their needs. A larger and more homogeneous market was the basis of mass-produced factory output.

As a result of this increased homogeneity, each year is seen as having a distinctive stamp, and experts can date fashion prints with almost the same certainty that one can read thehallmarks of Georgian silver. Fashion in hats and hair dressing changed so rapidly in the last quarter of the eighteenth century that ... dating offers no great difficulty'.88 The changes in colour, shape, material and style were immensely various, but the changes were sufficiently marked and sufficiently widespread to be dateable. Contemporaries even referred to the in-colour of each year. In 1753 purple was the in-colour—all colours were neglected for that purple: in purple we glowed from the hat to the shoe'. In 1757 the fashion was for white linen with a pink pattern. In the 1770s the changes were rung even more rapidly—in 1776 the fashionable colour was couleur de Noisette', in 1777 dove grey, in 1779 ‘the fashionable dress was laycock satin trimmed with fur'. By 1781 stripes in silk or very fine cambric-muslin' were in; by 1785 steel embroidery on dress was all the rage; by 1790 ‘the fashionable colours were lilac and yellow and brown and pale green'.89 So although at the end of the century men complained that fashions alter in these days so much, that a man can hardly wear a coat two months before it is out of fashion',9º the pattern of change was now more uniform, and more than ever at the behest, and for the convenience, of commerce.

## \* \* \*

One does not need to rely solely on contemporary writers to illustrate the story of a society in thrall to fashion and exhibiting an unprecedented capacity to pursue and to purchase consumer goods.

The pictorial evidence is as vivid and revealing as the literary evidence. Much of it tells the same story of social imitation and emulative spending penetrating deeper than ever before through the closely packed ranks of eighteenth-century society. Fashionable excess amongst the rich has long been minutely recorded by fashionable artists, and few satirized more effectively or more often than Hogarth. Even the pictures in his pictures mock fashionable excess. In Taste à la Mode the paintings on the walls underline the message of the foreground, being mostly devoted to caps, hoops, solitaires, wigs, muffs and high-heeled shoes and the other emblems of eighteenth-century fashion. Both the contents and the narrative message are the same: in one painting while a cupid makes a fire of discarded fashions, the Venus de Medici is made to submit to a voluminous hoop and highheeled shoes! Even the firescreen shows the absurdity of trying to fit current feminine fashions into a sedan chair. Hogarth even published engravings in the form of advertisements mocking the scholarship of the fashionable ‘taste makers’ with their rigid rules and orders as in his Five Orders of Periwigs of 1761, which not only mocked the headdresses worn at the coronation but satirized the exclusive and expensive imprint which men like Athenian' Stewart tried to impose on current taste.

Rarely, if ever, has the fashionable imitation of so much of the rest of society been so frequently mocked, so accurately recorded and so pointedly revealed in so many different art forms. Cartoons are always quick to mock contemporary habits and it comes as no surprise to find, along with those satirizing the excesses of the rich, cartoons which mock those who so assiduously aped their social superiors. Sometimes they managed to do both at the same time. Gillray's cartoon of a nursing mother of 1796, not only sends up his major target-—the nursing mother dressed in the height of Directoire fashion with two huge ostrich plumes two feet high, long drop earrings and slits in her elegant gown through which an eager baby grasps a breast and suckles; but he also more subtly depicts the flower buckle, the shapely slipper and the elegantly puffed-up mob cap of the maid who holds the baby to the breast. This insight is an incidental one, for the maid's dress is essentially homely in deliberate contrast to the exaggerated finery and extreme fashionability of her mistress, but verisimilitude made Gillray include, nonetheless, the odd give-away fashionable details in her dress too.91

More pointed and more deliberate was the engraving by Woodward of 1800 which shows a cook-maid dressed in a high mob cap with green ribbon, yellow neckerchief, and white dress with pink stripes in direct and obvious imitation of her mistress's clothes with whom she stands, the one almost a mirror image of the other. There are small differences in detail but the essentials are remarkably similar. It makes it easy to understand the common eighteenth-century failure to distinguish mistress from maid.9²

Little wonder that foreign visitors were so startled by this lack of social distinctions. Typical of many was J. W. von Archenholz who recorded his amazement in 1787, writing ‘The appearance of the female domestics will perhaps astonish a foreign visitor more than anything in London'. It was not simply that they were wel!'and tastefully' clothed, and that they were clad in gowns well adjusted to their shapes'and in ‘hats adorned with ribbons', but that they even wear silk and satin'dresses.9ª

Even more revealing are the engravings seeking to make no social point and free, therefore, of exaggeration. Straight descriptive prints attempting accurately to portray the different stations and positions of contemporary life record, even more precisely, how far highly fashionable costume could reach down the social scale. To take the cook-maid example again, there is a 1772 engraving by Caldwell, after a painting by Brandoin, of a cook-maid selecting her day's supply of vegetables. She wears a stunningly fashionable black hat over a white coif, an apron over a fashionable polonaise dress (i.e. with an overskirt bunched up behind), ankle-length under-skirt, and dainty highheeled shoes. Her blouse is prettily gathered and ruched in the sleeves. Around her neck she wears a velvet ribbon. She is a picture of fashionable elegance as she fingers her leeks, and looks over her cabbages and carrots. Significantly the social limits of fashion are indicated in the engraving by the man selling the vegetables—for although he is sturdily dressed with well buttoned coat cuffs, wide-brimmed hat and leather boots, there are no hints of high fashion about him; no hint of finery either. He is dressed in shabby adequacy.

Domestic servants will be suspect evidence to some since they might be taken more as an advertisement of their employer's property than their own. Those richly-dressed negro page boys in Hogarth's Harlot's Progress with their fancy turbans, fine feathers, silver collars and elaborate shoulder knots are obviously not evidence of negro prosperity in the mid eighteenth century. They are evidence (in a very pure form) of what Veblen labelled ‘vicarious consumption'—consumption by the poor on behalf of the rich.ª Servants are suspect as evidence, too, because they were notoriously the recipient of their employer's cast-offs. Such suspicions are understandable when one sees the 1772 engraving of High Life below Stairs’, showing the footman in a very stylish frock coat with a‘solitaire'of black ribbon round his neck; the housemaid in a day cap known as a‘dormeuse'which was all the rage in the 1770s and also wearing a ‘solitaire'of black velvet; the cook in her beribboned mob cap; the lady's maid most spectacular of all in a protective shoulder negligée, dainty high-heeled shoes, with a fan and a bergere hat with elaborately ruffled ribbons lying casually at her feet; the valet smartly dressed and complete with wig; and the humbly dressed laundry woman in a jacket bodice and modest mob cap.9⁵ But nevertheless the frequency of comment at the time and the insistence that the extravagance is novel eventually carries conviction: Now so fantastical is the age grown that it is common to see a puppy at an Assembly, perhaps who gets £50 or f60 a year, dress'd in his bag [i.e. his wig] and sword and the next morning you'll see him sweeping his master's doorway and taking down the shutters'.9⁶

That conviction is strengthened by the evidence of similar sartorial finery in other members of what contemporaries called 'the lower ranks'. For the pictorial evidence suggests that it was not just the increased money wages of domestic servants, with their access to passed down finery from their mistresses, which allowed fashionable costume to filter down the social hierarchy. The print of the POT FAIR, CAMBRIDGE' published 25 June 1777, shows (against the backdrop of King's.Chapel and a sprinkling of dons) the common pot sellers and their customers and the pottery they are selling. The pottery alone is a revealing comment on the many and the modest outlets through which even fashionable pottery reached the mass consumer market, for the pottery being sold on the open stalls is in the latest neo-classical style of Wedgwood's creamware with elegant sauce boats and handsome soup tureens mixed in with the cache pots, chamber pots and everyday tea ware; but the clothes on view are just as fashionable: elaborate mob caps are worn by seller and customer alike, as are the decorative ribbons, the high heeled shoes, the buckles, and bows. There is no suggestion here that the classes are indistinguishable-the female potseller has the musculature of a Neanderthal wrestler and the facial expression.of a ferocious fish wife; the buyer is refined in both feature and bearing. But the refinement is facial, the distinction one of bearing, for the clothes of the two classes are virtually identical in style, materials and fashionability.97

There can be no doubt, however, that servant girls were an important channel for spreading the new fashions. They provided a direct link between the upper and lower classes. They saw new fashions at first hand being worn by their employers, they brought word to the provinces of what was being worn in London; they quickly copied what their mistresses wore (she had not liv'd with me three weeks before she sew'd three penny canes round the bottom of her shift instead of a hoop-petticoat')98 even when they did not inherit it from her second-hand. Early in the century Defoe complained that when ‘requir'd ... to salute the Ladies, I kis'd the chamber jade into the bargain for she was as well dress'd as the rest.'99 She wore according to him high heels, silk stockings, silk skirt four or five yards wide'and of course, she must have her Hoop too' to turn plain Country Joan into a fine London Madam'. Others agreed with him, writing

Our servant wenches are so puffed up with pride nowadays that they never think they go fine enough. It is a hard matter to know the mistress from the maid by their dress; nay very often, the maid shall be much the finer of the two . . . it seems as if the whole business of the Female Sex were nothing but excess of Pride and extravagance in Dress.100

The same comments continued through the rest of the eighteenth century growing more frequent, more generalized and testifying to an even quicker turn round in the fashions worn. Increasingly servant girls are cited as symbolic illustrations of society's general addiction to fashion rather than as deplorable exceptions to their class and station. In 1782 C. P. Moritz marvelled that Fashion is so generally attended among Englishwomen that the poorest servant is careful to be in the fashion, particularly in their hats and bonnets which they all wear'.101

The expansion of the market, revealed in the literary evidence, occurred first among the domestic-servant class, then among the industrial workers, and finally among the agricultural workers. The servants were the most readily observed group seen by the articulate middle and upper class observers who dominate our records, but from the 1750s and 1760s onwards

the accounts of increasing luxury among the labourers—both urban and rural——were becoming much more frequent. These continued through the next thirty years and by the end of the century what had previously been looked on as a luxury for the worker was thought of in terms of being a decency or even a necessity.102

Contemporaries complained that more and more classes and more and more occupations were being sucked into the pursuit of fashion. Even the watermen of London were described as wearing silk stockings. Even the women labouring in the fields were described as succumbing to fashionable hats and other accessories. So surprising were some of the fashions that one contemporary complained After-ages, who perhaps may see this contrivance only in the painting of some great masters, shall with pain believe what the justness of the pencil presents.'1o3 This has certainly been the case with six of the finest paintings of late eighteenth-century England—the superb series of agricultural labourers by George Stubbs on the theme of haymaking and harvesting, called simply The Reapers and Haymakers first painted in 1783.

These paintings have greatly puzzled art historians who have both seen them as treatingthe everyday activities of the ordinary working men with a dispassionate objectivity which is unique in English Art',1ºª and also as the ‘most artificial images of the rural labourer that the century produced’.15 What particularly troubles many critics is that the women seem to be dressed well above their station'. So grand is their dress, so fashionable their hats that to deny that they are idealized seems ‘incomprehensible' to some. A simple solution to the problem is to argue that the painting far from being ... masterpieces of realism, are pictures of fancy ... the equivalent of the pastoralism of Marie Antoinette’.1º7

Rather than accept the evidence that the fashionable picture hats of the female farmworkers might be accurately portrayed, rather than accept the fact that their long skirts, their aprons and neckerchiefs, their frilled sleeves, even the rakish angle at which their hats are worn, fits so snugly with so many other contemporary sources both pictorial and literary, a great master of realism has to become a fantasist. It is a marvellous irony that Stubbs, who laboured so long to master exactly the musculature of the horse, should be so misdescribed. It shows how reluctant historians can be to recognize the significance of so much evidence, that they prefer so to misrepresent Stubbs' genius rather than accept it. Such was his undeviating pursuit of clinical accuracy that Stubbs started his experiences at the age of twenty-two on the corpse of a pregnant woman provided by graverobbers and finished by embarking at the age of eighty on a study of comparative anatomy which would have taken at least thirty years to complete.¹0⁸ Such was his devotion to realism that his pictures could be dated from their depiction of female fashion alone. Whether painting the hats of grooms or jockeys or hunters or servants or ladies of fashion, he is always precise and accurate. In fact he painted three pairs of pictures on the haymaking and reaping themes, the first pair in 1783, the second pair in 1784 and 1785, the third pair on Wedgwood creamware plaques in 1794 and 1795. Far from being idealized objects of social fantasy they are exact representations of the fashions of the years in which they were painted. The hats in the Haymakers of 1783 are strikingly different from those in the Haymakers of 1785, and even more strikingly different from that worn by the central figure in the Haymakers of 1795—and all are exactly in line with the prevailing hat fashions of those years: the sharp forward tilt of 1783,109 the immensely high soft crown worn over the mob cap of 1785,1º the enormous picture hat swept up at one side which was made ultra-fashionable by Gainsborough's portrait of the Duchess of Devonshire and which, in simpler forms, spread in popularity through the later eighties and early 1790s.111 In The Reapers, too, the hat on the central figure changes as fashion dictated that it should between the 1783 version and the 1784 version. As a fantasist Stubbs would seem to have limitations. As a precise observer of the social scene he scores very high marks for accuracy. Many foreign visitors had commented that in Britain knee breeches and perukes, bonnets and panniered dresses could be seen on the very labourers in the fields.11² Historians can be forgiven for overlooking obscure contemporaries, but it seems ungrateful to reject the evidence which Stubbs so famously and so superbly immortalized for them.

This is not, of course, to suggest that all agricultural labourers dressed in the height of fashion. Patently they did not. Most were still poor—many wretchedly so. Many of the poorer sort must have dressed like Rowlandson's Hedger and Ditcher. But one must remember that at harvest time many extra female workers joined the men. Women who earned their major income elsewhere were drafted in to join in the seasonal work and it would be entirely consistent with contemporary comment if they appeared in the clothes they had grown accustomed to as domestic servants or textile workers. The male workers in Stubbs' paintings who were far more likely to work in the fields the whole year present no such problems. Their pattern of dress is essentially that of the reaper in Blake's watercolour to Gray's Elegy', but it should be noted that the woman bringing his refreshment is also dressed in the latest fashion with picture hat and neo-classical silhouette."³

Stubbs was reflecting the popular fashion of these limited parts of the working class who were enjoying the benefits of rapid economic progress. He was not alone. Other pictorial sources of fashion intelligence of the same period tell the same story. Take the popular Staffordshire pottery plaques by Ralph Wood. These are earthy, rumbustious rollicking pieces, fulì of a coarse sense of humour, quite unlike the frieze-like precision of the Stubbs pictures. A typical example entitled Patricia and her Lover or Jack on a Cruise4 shows a young sailor in pursuit of a young woman dressed in the height of fashion. Jack's pop-eyes are firmly fixed on Patricia's fashionably padded buttocks, over which her blue dress is drawn up over her green underskirt in the prevailing short Polonaise style which revealed the ankle, emphasized the rump, and allowed the neckline to be worn encouragingly low. Jack seems oblivious to her ochre parasol, her velvet neckband, her spectacular hat piled high with ribbons, bows and padded flaps, but as a burlesque on extravagant popular fashions Patricia is a splendid example of the current vogue. Jack, too, in his plumed hat, his ochre waistcoat, his striped trousers, his wig, his casually knotted cravat and his short sword, is hardly an advertisement for sartorial restraint.

There are many such tributes to fashionable excess in the cartoons and prints of late eighteenth-century England. They offer further evidence in support of the potent power of fashion and the effectiveness with which it was promoted and spread by the many agents of the process of commercialization. For potent as the force of fashion was, it needed to be released and mobilized and exploited before it could significantly add to aggregate demand. The conditions making this possible grew steadily more favourable. Rising real incomes gave many families more to spend on consumables. Rising population constantly expanded the market. Rising production meant that the industrialists had more to sell. Improving transport meant that entrepreneurs could reach a wider range of buyers. But it still required active and aggressive selling to reach that market and exploit its full potential.

There were many minor satellites circulating round the great industrial centres and helping to keep up and extend the demand for their products. What contemporaries called ‘miniature manias'were induced and exploited with consummate skill by the hordes of fashion makers operating in the sale of hats and gloves, hairstyles and wigs, shoes and stockings. Annual fashion was insufficient to satisfy some markets. Every passing whim and every notable event (from a victory in battle to a royal wedding, from the triumph of vaccine to the Montgolfier brothers’balloon exploits) were gleefully pounced upon and incorporated into the ephemeral designs of high fashion. As a result the tempo of fashion reached such a pitch that in 1772 the London Magazine announced that there are at present three or four hundred methods of dressing the hair of a man in fashion’,11⁵ and some professional hairdressers claimed to be master of two hundred of them. Where for so much of human history a hairstyle would be ‘good for centuries’,11⁶ suddenly it could be out of fashion within months. The ultra fashionable went to prodigious lengths to keep ahead of the pack in the 1770s and 1780s. Live flowers—with concealed bottles of water to keep them fresh—large butterflies, baskets of fruit, caterpillars in blown glass, even models of coaches and horses sprouted from, or galloped across, or merely inhabited the mountainous hairstyles then in vogue. In 1778 even vegetables were in fashion as hair accessories. As one historian has written, when one reads the trade descriptions one begins to doubt whether the cartoons of the reign of George III were caricatures at all.117 Hannah More wrote in 1777 of the hairstyles of eleven young women who had just visited her,I protest I can hardly do them justice when I pronounce that they had amongst them, on their heads, an acre and a half of shrubbery, besides slopes, garden plots, tulip beds, clumps of peonies, kitchen gardens; and greenhouses'.118

To judge from what one fashionable London hairdresser offered, even they had not exhausted the possibilities available to them. Ivan Peter Alexis Knoutschoffschlerwitz offered to change their locks into a fine chestnut, blue, crimson or green according to the mode which might prevail'. He claimed to‘dress hair in every mode, and engages to make any lady's head appear like the head of a lion, a wolf, a tiger, a bear, a fox or any exotic beast which she should choose to resemble. He does not, however, confine himself to beasts, for anyone who happened to prefer the form of a peacock, a swan, a goose, a Friesland hen, or any other bird, he engaged to give a perfect likeness'.119

This was the fantasy land of the rich and the ultra fashionable. Its significance for other members of society is that they were now being publicly appealed to by professional hairdressers who publicly advertised their success with the nobility and gentry and the fashionable few. The extreme fashions are, of course, symptomatic of the lengths to which the rich were prepared to go to proclaim their wealth, their rank, their ‘insignia of leisure', but to those advertising them their significance lay elsewhere. They used these extreme fashions, and the exclusive clientele who adopted them, as promotional publicity to attract the custom of the less extreme, the more timid who wanted to be in fashion but needed a ‘lead' even to try a watered-down version of the current vogue. Like Mary Quant's famous recommendation of heart-shaped pubic hair in the 1960s, the value of these ‘exotics'lay in their publicity not in the numbers adopting the fashion. Most never seriously caught on, others never strayed beyond the tiny, exclusive nucleus of the most fashion-conscious of the London rich. But many others were widely enough adopted to give further openings for the inventive and adroit entrepreneurs in the fashion world. When the elaborate styles of the 1770s were at their peak and the mountainous structures required pads, wire and false hair mingled with lard and whiting, they could not be taken down every night (some sources quote some surviving for a month or more ‘unopened’). The Salisbury Journal of 1777 not only tells of the many melancholy accidents which have lately happened as a consequence of mice getting into ladies hair at night time'but advertises the proposed solution: a New Bond Street silversmith had promptly invented ‘night caps made of silver wire so strong that no mouse or even a rat can gnaw through them'. With selfcongratulation typical of eighteenth-century advertisements it was claimed that ‘the present demand for these articles is incredible. Sold at 3 guineas each, but the ton have them of gilt wire from 6 to 10 guineas'.120

Even the three-guinea market must have been tiny, but the commercial response of those involved in selling fashion did not like to neglect even the most restricted opening—especially when it gave them the opportunity to advertise all their more mundane goods at the same time. Such articles were analogous with Wedgwood's ‘uniques': not necessarily very profitable in themselves, not capable of ever becoming a worthwhile line of production, but worth it for their advertising value. There was always the possibility that a ‘sleeper'would catch on, like a scholarly book published for prestige purpose which suddenly takes off. Some seemingly small openings were to yield surprisingly rich pickings. Take the victory of the handbag over women's pockets. The pocket was a traditional part of feminine costume, worn under the skirt. So traditional that some thieves specialized in picking them—and taking a justifiable pride in their manual dexterity: ‘My chief dexterity was in robbing the ladies. There is a peculiar delicacy required in whipping one's hand up a lady's petticoats and carrying off her pockets'.121 But in the 1760s handbags were introduced as an extra receptacle to carry fans, purses and the ever-increasing tide of fashionable knick-knacks. By 1799 we read in The Times of ‘the total abjuration of the female pocket', and the popularity of the handbag can be judged not only from the fashion prints of 1799, but also from the fact that they were now called Indispensables'. A whole new fashion industry had been successfully launched.

Dozens of such tiny fashion decisions kept the market alive and its demand buoyant. Each one could have repercussions elsewhere. When the fashionable advertisements announced the ‘in colour'for stockings each year, the news sent tiny ripples through all the fashion-based industries—from the dye industry and the textile industries to all those making, co-ordinating and selling fashion accessories. Their trade cards still survive as evidence of the hundreds and hundreds of shops in central London alone dedicated to just such activities. The industrialist who told his spinners to devise methods of spinning ever-finer thread did so because he needed to satisfy the demand of this market and the needs of the mass market which trailed imitatively in its wake.122

As Braudel says, those who see the history of fashion as mere antiquarianism, or fail to read the significance of fashion changes can miss ‘evidence in depth concerning the energies, possibilities and demands of ... a given society, economy and civilization'.12ª The history of fashion is more than a history of anecdote. Its fluctuations can be as significant as those in production, supply and price. A sharp break in trend can be of even greater importance. For as long as the pursuit of luxury was limited to the few, it was more like an engine running in neutral than an element of growth'.i24 Once this pursuit was made possible for an ever-widening proportion of the population, then its potential was released, and it became an engine for growth, a motive power for mass production.. Explaining the release of that power, in terms of the release of a latent desire for new consumption patterns, goes a long way towards explaining the coming of the Industrial Revolution and the birth of a consumer society.

This process was not limited to clothes, and there is ample evidence of the increasing commercial importance of fashion outside the world of eighteenth-century dress. Some of these areas may seem surprising at first sight. But one can show that even flowers had to submit to the tyranny of fashion. Nature itself had to conform to the lust for novelty.

How Whimsical is the Florist in his Choice! Sometimes the Tulip, sometimes the Auricula, and at other times the Carnation shall engross his Esteems, and every Year a new Flower in his Judgement beats all the old ones, tho'it is much inferior to them both in Colour and Shape.'125 The seedsmen, nurserymen and bulb growers (with their printed, illustrated, fixed-price catalogues, their free offers, their immense range of stock, all well advertised) successfully adapted the commercial techniques of other salesmen to the needs of flowers and bulbs and fruits. Such was the potent force of fashion that it was even mobilized here. Imported exotics were quickly fed to the market and used to keep up consumer interest. The introduçtion of both the camellia and the fuchsia was later stage-managed as artfully as Boulton's ormolu or Wedgwood's jasper. Both were at first expensive (the fuchsia deliberately made so to make it more desirable), for both aimed to gain the esteem of being exclusive, but were later successfully popularized through auctions, lotteries and promotional campaigns. For the humbler end of the market the pansy, the pink and the auricula served a similar purpose. But the successful promotion of popular gardening is treated elsewhere.126 There are, in any case, much more important industries with which to illustrate the commercialization of fashion. Even the metal industries could be revolutionized by fashion in the eighteenth century. As William Hutton, the historian of contemporary Birmingham, wrote in 1781 'the fashion of today is thrown into the casting pot tomorrow'.127 And by 1801

Birmingham was regarded as being dependent on‘the moods of fashion'.128 Other historians of Birmingham were equally clear that the commercial exploitation of fashion was essentially the product of the mid-eighteenth century. Samuel Timmins wrote that the position of the brass trade between 1689 and 1760 was that of making only'. They had not yet started positively to sell. ‘The manufacturers remained at home and let the orders come to them.... The era of travellers and blue bags had not then arrived. Oak brass-bound boxes, filled with pattern cards on which are displayed samples of the articles made by the houses represented had not then been called into existence; and of pattern books, folio in size, with representations of the articles there were none."29 Timmins exaggerated slightly the novelty of aggressive selling, and certainly drew too sharp a line at 1760,1³º but his verdict is right in spirit, if not in detail, and contemporaries drew attention to the same dramatic change in commercial attitudes. Admittedly in 1744 (when carriers with instructions to collect their orders from Birmingham received directions no more specific than ‘in Warwickshire. N. B. Turn at Coleshill'i³i) Birmingham was still protected' by ruinous roads, but its industrial expansion was also restricted by its lack of any adequate commercial organization. As Hutton wrote in 1780 ‘The practice of the Birmingham manufacturer for perhaps a hundred generations was to keep within the warmth of his own forge'.12 This did not prevent him selling his products, did not prevent even foreign customers buying from him by dint of twice yearly applications. But by 1780 this age-old mode of business, although not totally extinguished', had given way to ‘a very different one'. The energetic commercial extrovert had taken over from the forge-bound manufacturing introvert; or, as Hutton put it: The merchant stands at the head of the manufacturer, purchases his produce, and travels the whole island to promote the sale; a practice which would have astounded our forefathers'.133

They sought to satisfy not just home demand, but foreign demand as well. The commercial spirit of the age has penetrated beyond the confines of Britain, and explored the whole Continent of Europe; nor does it stop there, for the West Indies and the American world are infinitely acquainted with the Birmingham Merchant."³ Timmins confirmed that Germany, Holland, France, Portugal and America were all in favour of Brummagen buttons'.1³4 By 1770 there were ‘Eighty Three Button Makers ... (producing) ... an Infinite Variety', plus Forty-Three Buckle Makers, Seven Candlestick

Makers, Ten Braziers, Three Brass Founders.1ª⁵ Other centres of the brass industry in Bristol, Bridgwater, Chester and St. Albans produced objects of equał quality, but Birmingham eclipsed them all. It was hailed as ‘the toyshop of Europe’.1³6

Many things had contributed to its success. The new canal opened in 1769; the technical advances, between 1769 and 1779, of John Pickering, Richard Ford, John Smith, Marston and Bellamy, and William Bell, opened the way for massively improved productions, but the wares still needed selling. To speak of the pattern cards and pattern books which tempted Dutch, Italian and French buyers in their own languages, and, of course tempted British and American buyers in theirs, is to take note of the spread of the market; to note that there was a special range of brass made exclusively for Holland, and pages in the pattern books devoted to fittings to suit the particular needs of the American market, indicates that different national tastes were accommodated (the ornate Rococo designs still produced for Dutch ċabinet makers were wholly unsuited to the prevailing English aesthetic, dominated after 1770 by the pure, simple lines of the neo-classic); to recognize that most English brass was unmarked so that it could enter, anonymously and therefore more easily, hostile markets at war with England, underlines the commercial desire to export widely; to quote Hutton on John Taylor reminds one that sales to the nobility could be combined with the mass sales which allowed Taylor to amass a fortune of £200,000: ‘To this uncommon genius we owe the gilt button.... In his shop were weekly manufactured buttons to the amount of £800 exclusive of other valuable products. One of the present nobility, of distinguished taste, examining the work with the master, purchased some of the articles, amongst others a toy of 80 guineas value, and while paying for them observed with a smile “he plainly could not affort to reside in Birmingham for less than £200 a day".’137

To quote the contemporary complaints that ‘tradesmen were aping their betters with myriads of gold buttons and loops, high gaiters, shoes and overgrown hats'reminds one that the products of brass were as much part of the market for fashion goods which was spreading down the social scale as were new fashions in clothes. That fashion was attended to is also made clear by the pattern books, for although they were usually undated, their watermarks show that brass could quickly respond to changes in styles even if those aimed at provincial or overseas markets often carried styles which would long have lost their selling power in London.1³8

All this is evidence of a new willingness assiduously to attend to fashion, accurately to inform the customer, actively to extend one's sales. It is also evidence that the new commercial attitudes were succeeding. But it does little justice to the quality of the new commercial approach which deliberately and consciously aimed at controlling the market, sustaining consumer interest, and creating new demand.

Yet the evidence of this qualitative change is as rich and as accessible for the Birmingham brass trade, and the Birmingham toy trade in general, as it is for women's fashions or Staffordshire pottery. For the Birmingham toy trade boasted the first great ‘Brass Baron'—Matthew Boulton—and his archive is a marvellously well stocked source from which to study the commercialization of fashion. It rivals Wedgwood's records of the commercial achievements of Etruria.

And yet just as in the traditional historiography, Wedgwood has been presented first as an artist, second as an industrialist (a master of division of labour and new methods of production), and finally as a man who having laboured to produce work of outstanding beauty and unquestioned quality was largely unconcerned with its methods of sale, so Boulton has been presented first and foremost as the manufacturer of steam engines, the great master of power, and hardly at all as the manipulator of fashion, the huckster extraordinary of the button trade'.139

Yet to ignore Wedgwood and Boulton's contribution to selling and to the commercialization of fashion is about as fair a reflection of what preoccupied their minds for much of their lives as it would be to ignore the concern with theology of John Donne and Isaac Newton. Such distortions produce biographical absurdities, and when the biographies are cited to illustrate the characteristic preoccupations of their day it produces an even greater historical absurdity. No one would wish to ignore Newton's science or Donne's poetry, and no one could understand Boulton and Wedgwood's marketing campaigns without understanding Boulton's contribution to steam power or Wedgwood's to ceramic invention and production, but to ignore the other concerns which dominated most of their lives—how to sell and how to extend the sales of their products—is to erect just as serious a barrier to our historical understanding. of them and their achievements. Most historians have, alas, been content to leave that barrier in place.

Posterity's opinion of Matthew Boulton is typical of the way in which the production side of the industrial revolution has won out in the traditional economic orthodoxies at the expense of the consumer and commercial revolution. Matthew Boulton is largely remembered for his role in the production of steam engines-—the characteristic invention of the industrial revolution. He is largely forgotten for his role in the Birmingham toy trade--arguably the characteristic consumer industry of the commercial revolution. And although in this case posterity's verdict is understandable and indeed justifiable in the sense that, in the long run, the importance of steam far outweighed the significance of toys, it has by largely forgetting the latter seriously distorted the historical record and unfairly diminished the role of the consumer revolution in the early industrial revolution. For Boulton was a major figure in the process of commercialization, a major example of how consumer demand was manipulated and satisfied with a range of commercial devices either unknown to previous centuries, or unused on anything like the same scale. As a salesman Boulton, the toymaker and toy seller, can stand comparison with Wedgwood, ‘vase maker general to the universe', and potseller extraordinary.

It is usually forgotten that to Boulton the choice between his two callings was not an easy one. As late as September 1778 he was still not certain ‘how far it may be prudent in me to stick to Engines or Buttons for I can consider Buttons as a Sheet Anchor'.¹⁴º Contemporaries like Mrs. Montague found it equally difficult to decide which was the more important side of this doubly endowed ... Genius' who combined ‘a happy turn for things of use' and ‘for matters of ornament'. As she wrote to him in 1778 I shall owe to you the richest and most beautiful part of my Furniture, and by a Fire Engine of your improved construction shall in time save money equivalent to the expence of these articles of elegant luxury’.141

Posterity has no such doubts, but by neglecting Boulton the manufacturer of fashion goods, most historians have deprived themselves of important insights into the nature and importance of contemporary economic change, and ignored a revealing case study into the role of fashion in the commercial life of one of the eighteenth-century economy's great figures.

Boulton, like his major rivals in Birmingham John Taylor, John Gimblett and the firm of Ingram and Duncomb, was operating in a highly competitive mass production industry which was the basis of Birmingham's spectacular growth and prosperity. It is not often realized how much of the new consumer market was satisfied by the products of Birmingham ‘small arms'. The Birmingham ‘toy'trade belittles itself by its very name. For although as Robinson says the foundation of Boulton's greatness was the button trade',1ª² the range of his products, and those of his rivals, was imense. His pattern books contain some 1,470 designs of cut steel buttons, buckles, chatelaines, watch-guards, sword hilts and suchlike,14³ but to appreciate more fully the number of goods Boulton and Fothergill manufactured, one needs to quote from the firm's correspondence of 1772, which listed

Men's and Women's Steel, pinchbeck, and Gilt Watch Chains—Steel pinchbeck Gilt and Teutenague, and Silver Buttons—platina, Sterling Gilt and plated Steel, Bath Metal and filligree plated Buttons on Box and on Box Moulds—gilt, Silver, plated Shagreen Tortoise plain and inlaid with Silver and Gold in 4 Colours, Snuff Boxes, Instrument Cases, toothpick Cases—gilt, glass and steel Trinkets, Silver filligree Boxes, Needle Books etc. etc.—All manner of plated Goods, as Tea Kitchens, Tankards, Cups, Coffee potts, Cream Jugs, Candlesticks—sauce boats, Terrines etc etc—Bronz'd Tea Kitchens and Tea Kettles as well plated as Tin'd inside, Saucepans, Cheese Toasters etc etc etc—Buckle Chapes of all Qualitys—platina, inlaid and Steel Links—Candlestick Vases with 2 to 6 Branches, Girandoles, Sugar Basons, Essence pots Clock Cases etc etc—and all manner of Chimney piece Ornaments, intirely gilt in Or Moulu, or of Radix Amethysti mounted in Or Moulu, such as we sell annually great quantities of to the Nobility and Trades men—plated Bottle stands Cruet frames Inkstands Teutenague Candlesticks—and a number of other Articles.¹4

The trade in these fashion goods was so highly competitive, that a London shopkeeper reported in 1762 that ‘Taylor, Gimblett, Ward and Rabone had been with him like so many wolves for orders'. To keep ahead of the pack required careful manipulation of the market.

Boulton like the others realized that there were favourable conditions to exploit. The potentialities of home demand were great, but it required skilful manipulation to take full advantage of that existing demand, to release the potentiality of latent demand, and by creating new wants and provoking new needs, to create new demand which would not have become economically operational without the requisite entrepreneurial skills to conjure it into existence. As Boulton said to Mrs. Montagu Fashion has much to do in these·things'.¹4⁵ Like Wedgwood, Boulton sought royal and aristocratic patronage to give a lead to the rest of society in the confident knowledge that social emulation would ensure emulative spending in the rest of society. Like Wedgwood, he knew that a product made fashionable at the apex of the social pyramid would rapidly spread through the closely packed layers of English society to the wider social base where the mass market he sought was to be found. This process brought an ever growing market to men like Boulton and Wedgwood, and their many imitators, who used the social effects of snobbery to their own commercial advantage.

Just as Wedgwood schemed to become ‘Potter to Her Majesty', sought out what he called ‘the Legislators of Taste' like Athenian’Stewart and Sir William Hamilton, courted ambassadorial introductions to foreign markets, and constantly attended to the needs of the fashionable social élite; so Boulton cultivated (in the pursuit of royal patronage) the King's architect, Sir William Chambers, the King's clockmaker, Thomas Wright, the King's physician,

Dr. Lind, as well as the King's cutler, Nathaniel Jeffreys, and the Prince of Wales' shoemaker. The cutler's role was to push Boulton buttons, the shoemaker was to push Boulton buckles within the palace, and so on.¹⁴⁶ Like Wedgwood, Boulton, too, sent presents to Lady Hamilton, and assiduously cultivated the diplomatic service in order to have the advantage of their puffing'their wares in foreign courts, and setting the fashion by wearing their presents.

Any possible openings for special productions were eagerly anticipated. Royal birthdays, for instance, were carefully prepared for: In future we shall take care to have something new in the Button way against every Birth Day of our Sovereign and shall present to such of the Nobility as we can make so free with ... some Setts to garnish their Cloaths with on that Day'.47 To extend the idea further, Lady Claremont was asked to persuade the men in her fashionable circle to wear new buttons on Her Majesty's Birthday, and so create another new opportunity for selling. The Gentleman's Magazine was giving special publicity to royal birthdays in the 1760s, just as La Belle Assemblée was publicizing seasonal sales and special gift days (like New Year's Day) in the first decade of the nineteenth century.¹4⁸ It was all part of the spread of the process of commercialization, the increasing attention to keeping consumer demand alive and buoyant.

Like many manufacturers in the eighteenth century Boulton used spectacular London sales to boost demand and to win the attention of the fashion leaders. The release of Boulton's newly acquired skill in the manufacture of ormolu (a technique which had cost him great difficulty, and even bribery, to acquire) paralleled very closely Wedgwood's release of his new inventions in pottery. When Boulton was ready for the world of fashion to see his new product he took elaborate care to ensure that it was appropriately publicized. Christie's were to conduct the sales in their auction rooms in Pall Mall, and Boulton told Christie 'I would have the Advertisement continued for a week together and in about 6 days after we will publish something else, and so soon as the day is fix'd for the Sale we will publish that: for tis necessary the Town should talk a little upon the Subject before the important week, and be brought into proper tune'. The advertisement was to be lavish, precisely timed, and to include all the familiar references to royal patronage of the manufacturers in order to milk the effects of social emulation and emulative spending. Boulton personally monitored the effects of his advertising campaign, and, not satisfied with the results, ordered the campaign to be stepped up. He ordered ‘the advertisement to be inserted in some paper on every other day’,149 saying firmly that he would rather have it appear in too many papers than too few'.150

His trust in advertisement never faltered. He and Wedgwood kept an eagle eye on the other to prevent one stealing an advertising march. In 1770 Wedgwood complained of a most famous puff for Boulton'in the St James's Chronicle and told Bentley to get aspontaneous article in praise of Wedgwood’ placed in the next issue.151 Wedgwood later denied that he ever advertised without affixing his name,152 but the puffs in contemporary newspapers tell a different story. As late as 1789 Boulton and Wedgwood were still competing and Boulton's correspondence reveals that his agents were not above bribery (in this as in other commercial activities) to keep ahead in this race. In 1789 he was informed by his London agent Richard Chippendall I have got Copys of the Advertisements out to 3 papers—the World—Herald and Diary—some of which will appear on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday—but I much fear their meeting them in time without a Bribe on Account of so much Advertising about this Confounded procession. I am the more anxious too on account of Wedgwood having something of the same sort to appear on Monday next."⁵³

Advertisement alone was not enough to ensure the success of his sales. Boulton wrote separate specimen letters for dukes, duchesses and the gentry and sat up until the early hours of the morning dispatching them ‘to the nobility'. Like a modern couturier Boulton and Fothergill insisted, as did Wedgwood and Bentley, that their major sales were initially to be socially exclusive. They issued tickets for ‘the Nobility and gentry'and took special steps to keep the common folks out'.14 Boulton insisted that his exhibitions should ‘be continued for 2 or 3 weeks for inspection and sale to the Nobility and Gentry only, as care will be taken to expell that class who do not come to purchase but expressly to incommode those who do'.¹55

But the mistake must not be made, as by some historians it unfortunately has, of assuming that Boulton and Wedgwood, in confining their attention to the fashionable social élite, were also intent on confining their ultimate sales campaign to them alone.

Just as Wedgwood took elaborate steps to develop and adjust his pricing strategy.so that the high prices ‘necessary’to make his goods ‘esteemed as ornaments in palaces’did not become a barrier to sales to a mass market,1⁵⁶ so Boulton's exclusive approach was merely the necessary prelude to gaining the custom of a mass market. Boulton's price policy was different from Wedgwood's. Boulton's choice was ‘to make great quantities with small profits’,157 but he was equally intent on using the patronage of the famous and the fashionable to draw attention to his goods, to make them seem more desirable by buying them. Having once made them fashionable in an exclusive circle, and therefore made them desirable to a socially emulative market, he then pressed home his advantage by making them accessible in price and place of sale to a mass market.

Boulton chose to have his sales at Easter, for example, for the same reason that many other astute manufacturers chose to have their most influential sales then. The London season lasted from October to Easter, and at Easter People of Fashion [were] preparing for their transmigration to the Countrey [sic]'.158 The great exhibitions would not only catch the attention of fashionable London (so much so that in Boulton's words to his wife in April 1771, I had made so great a bussle [sic] amongst the Nobility even to such a degree as to stop up Pall Mall with coaches'), but also ensure that those up for the season (and their retinues of servants) carried back to the provinces exciting news of the new fashions.

They needed to be exclusive to make them fashionable, they needed to be dispersed as widely as possible to make them sell. The arrival of the fashion leaders back from the London season with the latest news from the capital was the signal for provincial England of what was in fashion. Just as newspapers spread the word of how an exclusive new fashion idea had been received in the capital, so those who had actually seen it or better still bought it, could proudly display or excitedly describe its novelty, and its social impact. According to a writer in The Connoisseur of 1756 fashion in dress spread so quickly that I could trace their gradations in their dress according to ... the distance from London'. The return from a mere visit to London could bring novelties which stunned the locals and excited their eager desire to compete: At church in a populous city in the North the mace-bearer cleared the way for Mrs Mayoress who came sidling after him in an enormous fan-hoop of a pattern that had never been seen in those parts. At another church I saw several negligees with furbelowed aprons ... but these were woefully eclipsed by a burgess'daughter, just come from London who appeared in a Trolloppee of Slammerkin with treble ruffles to the cuffs, pinked and gymped, and the sides of the petticoats drawn up in festoons.'59

When he was fully in command of the situation, the manufacturer had introduced the fashion idea himself, made it desirable, and easily accessible, first in London, then heavily advertised it, and flooded his provincial outlets. The whole process had to be carefully monitored. Adjustments to design, like adjustments to price, were part of the succesșful businessman's constant effort to trim his sails to meet the slightest variation in the winds of change. The most ephemeral gust in fashion's fickle requirements could influence the demand for his goods—such as, for instance, a court mourning suddenly spoiling for a time our Button business’1⁶ for Boulton in 1765.

Other changes were of more significance. Throughout the 1770s and 1780s watches were the height of fashion. Source after source tells us that two watches, or one watch and one miniature, suspended from ribbons or watch chains, were the prevailing mode. ‘Two watches were universal unless a picture was substituted for one of them’said the Ipswich Journal of 1788. But by 1792 the Lady's Magazine firmly pronounced their death knell: ‘Watches, trinkets, etc. quite mauvais ton'.161 To the Birmingham toy trade advance warnings of such changes were vital. With that advantage production could be switched, and the favourable trade wind of the demand for the new fashion could be successfully exploited. With time for preparation it could be further puffed along by newspaper advertisements, new pattern books and eye-catching displays all fulsomely promoting the new fashion; while the products of the old production linesmuch seen and blown upon'could be rapidly switched to the distant provinces, or better still dumped abroad.

Wedgwood constantly begged Bentley for news of any new opening—Ise [sic] make you new Vases like lightning when you think we may do it with safety'62and thanked him warmly when it arrived—since your wants have been made known to us we have been at work night and day'.16³ Bentley not only had to decide ‘the time & way of ushering in the Grecian vases'.¹4 he also had to warn Wedgwood when a new fashion was imminent. He had to act as both social oracle and the barometer of fashion. Accurate social judgements and accurate fashion readings were both necessary if the correct decisions were to be made about the numbers that could be sold, and the price at which they would sell, and the designs chosen first to please the few and then to attract many. Such accurate fashion decisions were vital to prevent even the highest quality goods failing to sell, or remaining the concern of merely an exclusive aristocratic cul-de-sac which offered no opening into the beckoning mass market—and that alone could sustain the demand which could make full use of the assembly line production at Etruria. One reason why Boulton failed to prosper in fashion goods to the same extent as Wedgwood is that he lacked a partner of Bentley's commercial acumen and fine judgement of the potential of a given market.

It was Bentley who passed on to Wedgwood Sir William Hamilton's warning that the new taste for the antique amongst the fashionable aristocracy would make gilding increasingly unacceptable on his pottery. And although Wedgwood complained that he did ‘not find it an easy matter to make a Vase with the colouring so Natural ... & the shape so delicate ... seem worth a great deal of money, without the additional trappings of ... ornaments & Gilding’, Sir William, from the source of the revival in Naples, had deemed such decoration ‘offensive', and so Wedgwood had to obey and much to his dislike banish gilding from his vases—and the gilders from his workshops.16⁵ Indeed he took the advice so seriously that he wrote ‘as I shall expect the Golden Surfeit will rage with you higher than ever this Spring I shall almost tremble even for a gilt listel amongst your Vases, & would advise you by all means to provide a Curtain immediately for your Pebble ware shelves, which you may open or shut, (to) inlarge or diminish the shew of gilding as you find your Customs affected’.166

Wedgwood needed immediate information about any changes in consumer demand. He needed prompt news of market saturation lest Etruria's highly efficient assembly line should churn out more than could be sold, and thereby build up an enormous old stock [which would] Gorgon like, stir [sic] me in the face & chill me into activity'.167 He needed prompt news of any new fashion like women's craze for bleaching their hands with arsenic which gave such a boost to black basalt tea ware during the general down-turn in home demand in late 1772.168 Few knew better than Wedgwood that he could not rely simply on quality as a guide to what would sell. After one of their rare failures to read the needs of the market correctly, he sadly rehearsed the reasons for their failure with Bentley: ‘We will make no more Gorgons Heads—But these things being some of the finest things we have,  not knowing they did not sell, we ventur'd to make a few more of them when we did not know what to make. We stand in need of Negative as well as Positive orders, & it is always of the first consequence to us to know what does not, as well as what does sell."169

But once men like Wedgwood and Boulton had got first wind of a new fashion, or by careful stage management had whipped up a powerful demand for a new product of their own, they needed to push home their advantage if it was not to be wasted. When‘a violent Vase madness broke out amongst the Irish' Wedgwood took decisive measures to cherish the disorder and to encourage the contagion to spread. Wedgwood developed a whole battery of commercial techniques to exploit such openings. Boulton was the master of a similar array of aggressive selling devices. Like Wedgwood Boulton accepted special individual orders for the sake of prestige and publicity, offered free carriage of goods to London, and made flexible use of credit facilities. He too used a London showroom, spectacular sales and exhibitions, widespread advertisement and judiciously placed puffs, he too sought royal patronage and the support of the fashionable. He too gave gifts to ambassadors and their wives in the hope that ‘the prejudice of the Italian Ladies'to buckles would collapse at the feet of Lady Hamilton'if her ladyship were ‘to set the Example'.17º He too built a display room to attract aristocratic visitors to Soho where they could buy his latest inventions direct just as Wedgwood did at Etruria. The parallels are endless.

This is scarcely surprising since they faced so many similar problems in reaching out to the mass market they both sought for their goods. Sales to the exclusive tip of the social iceberg must be followed up with mass sales to that hidden part of the market, socially anonymous and not accessible to personal charm and individual attention. The unfashionable and the provincial markets needed to be actively pursued. They could not be bribed or flattered into buying, but they could be made to react to the prompting of fashion.

Boulton, like Wedgwood, had to tread a delicate path between supplying high quality introductions for the few which had of necessity to be expensive, and yet cashing in on the emulative spending those exclusive sales excited amongst the rest of society. Boulton was quite explicit that he wanted to sell to a mass market. His famous boast to James Watt that ‘It would not be worth my while to make for three countries only; but I find it well worth my while to make for all the world'71 is symptomatic of his commercial intentions. More informative about his commercial technique was his letter, written a quarter of a century later, stating authoritatively his reliance on a host of lesser allies to reach the mass market which was always his ambition:

We think it of far more consequence to supply the People than the Nobility only; and though you speak contemptuously of Hawkers, Pedlars and those who supply Petty Shops, yet we must own that we think they will do more towards supporting a great Manufactory, than all the Lords in the Nation, and however lofty your notions may be, we assure you we have no objection against pulling off our' Hats and thanking them 4 times a Year and must beg you will allow us to do it, without dictating when it should be done.172

This letter to his agent in London went on to spell out the message even more explicitly:

It is certain that Buckles of Gold, Silver, Plated, Steel, Pinchbeck, Gilt etc. etc. will sell, and therefore let it be understood, once for all, that we mean to follow the fashions of all Countries .. .

We have Agents in most parts of Europe, as well as in most of the great Towns in England, and we have considered London and its environs as your province; provided you take pains to supply every safe and reputable Dealer in Buckles from St James Street down to Wapping. 173

This was no inconsiderable shopping area to cover. A contemporary guide book for visitors to London gives us a simple description of the main shopping streets:

There are two sets of streets, running nearly parallel, almost from the Eastern extremity of the town to the Western, forming (with the exceptions of a very few houses), a line of shops. One, lying to the South, nearer the river, extends from Mile End to Parliament Street, including Whitechapel, Leadenhall Street, Cornhill, Cheapside, St Paul's Churchyard, Ludgate Street, Fleet Street, the Strand and Charing Cross. The other, to the North, reaches from Shoreditch Church almost to the end of Oxford Street, including Shoreditch, Bishopsgate Street, Threadneedle Street, Cheapside, Newgate Street, Snow-hill, Holborn, Broad Street, St Giles, and Oxford Street.

The Southern Line, which is the most splendid, is more than three miles in length; the other is about four miles. There are several large streets also occupied by the retail trade, that run parallel to parts of the two grand lines, or intersect them, among the most fashionable of which are Fenchurch Street and Gracechurch Street in the City of London; and Cockspur Street, Pall Mall, St James's Street, Piccadilly, King's Street, Covent Garden, and New Bond Street, at the West end of the town.174

I have quoted this in extenso to give some impression of the commercial extent of retail London. To reinforce that impression another near contemporary source tells us that Oxford Street shops alone included 153 catering solely for the whim-whams and fribble-frabble of fashion’.¹7⁵ This was the commercial shop window of England. Here fashion reached its apotheosis in splendour and variety. It was this which moved Robert Southey to enthuse 'If I were to pass the remainder of my life in London I think the shops would always continue to amuse me. Something extraordinary or beautiful is for ever to be seen in them ... There is a perpetual exhibition of whatever is curious in nature or art, exquisite in workmanship, or singular in costume; and the display is perpetually varying as the ingenuity of trade and the absurdity of fashion are ever producing something new.'176 According to Southey the shops were furnished with everything which would ‘tempt'the passer-by who would be irresistibly lured to what another contemporary called ‘the great windows of large panes exhibiting the richest manufactures'.17 On those windows were trained outside lights which were of infinite service to the rest of the inhabitants by their Liberal use of the Patent Lamp, to shew their commodities during the long evenings of winter'.178

Examples chosen from 1807 show to what extent London shopping had developed through the eighteenth century. Southey reminds us in that year that the great glass windows‘were seldom used in shops before the present reign’and even then they had not ‘universally come into fashion';179 and gas lighting was not invented until 1792. But by the reign of George III, the impact of London shops on foreign visitors was powerful enough to demonstrate that a dramatic transformation had taken place during the century. Compared with the rest of Europe the commercialization of London had moved at a revolutionary pace.

Take the ecstatic reactions of Sophie von la Roche in 1786:

Behind the great glass windows absolutely everything one can think of is neatly, attractively displayed, in such abundance of choice as almost to make one greedy. Now large slipper and shoe shops for anything from adults down to dolls, can be seen; now fashion-articles or silver or brass shops, books, guns, glasses, the confectioner's goodies, the pewterer's wares, fans etc. . .. There is a cunning device for showing women's materials. Whether they are silks, chintzes, or muslins, they hang down in folds behind the fine, high windows so that the effect of this or that material, as it would be in the ordinary folds of a woman's dress, can be studied.180

Sophie von la Roche was enthralled by what she called lovely Oxford Street'and she, too, confirmed that by 1786 the shops were brilliantly lit by oil lamps which illuminated the shops until ten in the evening. Her portrait of Oxford Street confirms the attractions which shops offered to the passer-by. Impulse buyers were surely tempted as

First one passes a watch-making, then a silk or fan store, now a silversmith's, a china or glass shop. The spirit booths are particularly tempting . . . here crystal flasks of every shape and form are exhibited: each one has a light behind which makes all the different coloured spirits sparkle. Just as alluring are the confectioners and fruiterers, where, behind the handsome glass windows pyramids of pink apples, figs, grapes, oranges and all manner of fruits are on show. We enquired the price of a pineapple and did not think it too dear at 6s. Most of all we admired a stall with Argand lamps situated in a corner house and forming a really dazzling spectacle. Every variety of lamp, crystal, lacquer and metal ones, silver and brass in every possible shape.181

Many others confirmed this dazzling impression made by London and its shops. When the Russian writer, Nikolai Mikhailovitch Karamzin arrived in 1789 he felt he was entering a new world. He was astonished by the pervasive evidence of prosperity: everywhere there are stone pavements for pedestrians'; everywhere great numbers of coaches, chaises and horsemen': everywhere crowds of well dressed people'; and everywhere ‘beautiful shops' and the wares exhibited in the shops as in a continuous fair'.18² What struck Karamzin was not splendour but general prosperity. The contrast with Paris was very striking: How different this is from Paris! There vastness and filth, here simplicity and astonishing cleanliness; there wealth and poverty in continued contrast, here a general appearance of sufficiency; there palaces out of which crawls poverty, here tiny brick cottages out of which health and contentment walk with an air of dignity and tranquillity—lord and artisan almost indistinguishable in their immaculate dress'.18ª Karamzin attributed such benefits to the life-enhancing consequences of trade--To the right, between green banks, lay the glistening Thames where countless shipmasts rose like a forest seared by lightning. This is the foremost port in the world, the focus of world commerce!’184 His pages are full of the praises of commerce; of ‘the richly stocked shops ... in which you can see, through glass doors, an abundance of wares of every sort'; of the lamps which lit up the shopping streets of London;18⁵ at the ease of travel, ‘the consequences of . . . widespread wealth'; at the ubiquity of the press,Here newspapers and magazines are in everyone's hands, not only in town but in small villages as well.'186

Karamzin's hymn of praise to commercial prosperity stretched from the country houses of the rich where attached to each house are vast greenhouses, where fruit and plants have been gathered from all parts of the world, and huge stables, where horses live better than many human beings', to housemaids in all their finery, in long dresses and bonnets, carrying fans'. But he admitted that beneath the decency'of ‘servants, artisans, salesmen, chemists' apprentices' and suchlike, there lurked ‘a vile rabble'. In Karamzin's eyes English society was‘good on the surface and in the middle, but do not look underneath'.187 And although Karamzin admired the ‘general spirit of trade' of the English, he did not admire their attitude to those who failed to prosper—If you wish to oppress still more someone oppressed by poverty, let him come to England. Here in the midst of wealth, of thriving abundance and heaps of guineas, he will come to know the agony of Tantalus.'188

Critics of English society often stressed the same point. The anglophobes drew attention to the same opulent display, the same excesses of fashionable change, the same spread of luxurious living but they interpreted it very differently from the admiring majority. At one end of the scale was the anglophile novelist and blue stocking Sophie von la Roche who was so impressed by the sight of Wedgwood's pottery that she felt moved to write It is not partiality but the simple truth that the Briton is born for all that is noble. For as soon as his spirit can go its own way and act independently it pursues in everything the path of greatness, simplicity and beauty."

At the other end of the spectrum is the Prussian preacher Andreas Riem, whose Travels, written between 1796 and 1801, found nothing to commend about the English but their landscape. He has been called the best example we possess of a good hater of this country'.190 He saw ‘the basic evil of the English character as materialism and the commercial spirit'.191 He, too, could not miss the signs of heightened commercial activity, the heightened wish to possess material possessions.

## \* \* \*

One type of evidence alone—the tradesmen's cards of eighteenth-century London¹9²allows us to do some justice to the charm and variety and commercial endeavour of the London shops. They show us that the visitor to London could satisfy a remarkable range of wants. If he wanted‘Venice treacle'or ‘elephants'teeth', a backgammon table or ‘artificial'eyes, then the trade cards would lead him to the specialist supplier. If he wanted asses' milk, Thomas Edwards'charming trade card advertised his service at the Ass and Foal at the bottom of Wigmore Street; while from James Jones, at the Ass and Foal in Wood's Cross, he could buy the milk or even rent the ass (offered at monthly rates).

Other specialist services were equally well advertised. If he needed a ratcatcher or, more bizarrely, a sow gelder, the appropriate experts were all at hand. Should he require fans, feather beds, fountain pens, fireworks or fishing tackle, all were easily available from a multiplicity of outlets. Should he want pineapples, perukes or pewter, they too were on sale. Should he want tea, tobacco or jewellery, there was massive competition to serve him. Should he want a trunk, he could have a hair one, a sumpter one, a portmanteau one, a gilded leather one, or a peruke box or a leather container to hold liquors, or a case for his plate: the trunkmakers offered all—and more—for his custom. Should he want to buy a toy for his children, he faced an embarassment of choice: at the cheap end of the market he could get a jigsaw puzzle from the original inventor, John Spilsbury, whose trade card of the early 1760s describes him as a ‘Map Dissector in Wood';193 if he wanted to go up market he could buy a portable printing press made for children of the rich by J. Sutter of St. Martin's Lane.194

Should a lady want her own honey supply, ‘The Honey Warehouse' sold ‘glass beehives contriv'd so the lady may have them on their dressing tables without the least danger of being stung'. Should she wish to restock with patches or cosmetics or hair shampoos or hair dye or toothpaste, should she need a new cork rump, or false breasts or false hips, they too were on sale. If she wished to promise even greater pneumatic bliss, there were springloaded false bodices on sale and even sprung rumps. The market in what were called artificials' or‘bosom friends' was as well developed as one would expect of the fashions prevailing in the 1770s and 1780s. To stay in fashion a man could require false calves, and a woman could even require a false front' when in 1783 the Duchess of Devonshire's pregnancy made that condition fashionable; while, of course, artificial teeth', fictitious hair'and false eyebrows' were widely available: A charming caricature of a shop front of 1782 advertised ivory teeth and mouse eyebrows as two of its main lines, and many sources made fun of both fashions: the eyebrows were made from strips of mouse skin and inevitably attracted as much attention from the satirists as they apparently did from the cats. There were even more extreme fashion devices on sale: even cheeks could be restored to a youthful roundness with cork plumpers'—Mrs Button wears cork plumpers in each cheek and never hazards more than six words for fear of shewing them'.195

More straightforwardly, makers of clogs, clocks and coach springs, of cricket balls, rocking horses, fish hooks, and bows and arrows were eager to satisfy the ‘most discriminating needs'and ‘all in the latest fashion'. A man could be purged, perfumed and taught by a prize fighter within the space of a few hundred yards. Food sellers tempted him with everything from portable soup'to icecream whip'. And, of course, clothes sellers proliferate everywhere. Hatters, haberdashers, hosiers, drapers and tailors offered a bewildering variety of garments in an astonishing variety of materials: Duffel Cloaks' and ‘Jeans' may have a reassuring ring for modern ears, and real-nine-times-dyed blue flannel for the Gout and rhumatism'explains itself; mecklenbergs'present no difficulty for those who know the details of Queen Charlotte's family; and ALLAMODES might seem obvious (in fact alamode was a light, glossy silk); but a knowledge of eighteenth century fashion is needed to decipher ALLOPEENS and FIGURED AMENS, BARRAGONS and CHERRY DERRYS, GARUCKS and HUGA-BACKS, PEELINGS and PELLICOATS, ROCCELOES, RASDEMOR-RAS, SHALLOONS, SAGATHYS and SHAGGS, or TIFFANYS, TABBIES and TABBYNETS—and these are only a sample. To the eighteenth-century market, familiarized with trade cards and newspaper advertisements and illustrated prints, the message of MANCHESTER COTTON (a textile with stripes of cotton and wool) or PARAGON or NORWICH CREPE was as clear as gingham, poplin, plush, mohair and hessian (all widely advertised then) are to us today. 195 Mrs. Cowley, The Belle's Stratagem (1780).

And, as many trade cards made absolutely clear, many of these were now sold ready-made. The message informing the market of the ready availability of these goods ‘ready made, for ready money, and at a fixed price' was being loudly proclaimed. Source after source tells us that it was a rare exception to bargain in a London shop by the end of the century. A greater commercial uniformity spread as commercial practice grew more sophisticated, and as the scale of sales increased the fixed price inevitably established itself.196

The Londoner could now be clothed from birth to death at a fixed price in ready-made clothes: even the shrouds were advertised ready-made. In this the dead were as well served as the living, with ready-made coffins to match the ready-made shrouds and all the other conveniences belonging to funerals'. Even the dead's more specialist needs could be satisfied from a variety of sources: one undertaker advertised with splendid economy‘SAFETY FOR THE DEAD ... THE RIGHT TO INTER IN IRON (a fashion which Wilkinson, the great ironmaster, had tried so hard to popularize); while another more wordily offered

## IMPROVED COFFINS—THE FASTENINGS OF THESE IMPROVED RECEPTACLES BEING ON SUCH PRINCIPLES AS TO RENDER IT IMPRACTICABLE FOR THE GRAVE ROBBERS TO OPEN THEM. THIS SECURITY MUST AFFORD GREAT CONSOLATION AT AN AERA WHEN IT IS A WELL AUTHENTICATED FACT THAT NEARLY ONE THOUSAND BODIES ARE ANNUALLY APPROPRIATED FOR THE PURPOSE OF DISSECTION.

If those in search of anatomical knowledge were thwarted by the improved coffins there was a skeleton seller advertising a simpler substitute.

London commerce in the shape of its shopkeepers had ensured that most of the easily imaginable wants of a consumer society could be met. Those wanting to use the services of an archill (a man who sold dyes made from lichens) or an aquarellist (a man who sold aquatints) would find one; and since Paul Sandby was the aquarellist it is not easy to disparage the quality. Those whose trade cards also survive include Hogarth, who advertised his engravings, Sheraton, his designs for cabinets, and Wedgwood, his pottery. The trade cards were not simple statements of place of sale—they informed the public of the chimney sweeps who operated a satisfaction-or-money-back policy, crisply advertised as ‘NO CURE, NO PAY'; and they informed it that Josiah Wedgwood delivers his goods safe and carriage free ... as he sells for ready money only'. The second part of this was not true for his fashionable customers, who were allowed credit, but it was true for the market he wished to reach with his trade cards. He eventually banned them from his really fashionable showrooms in London and Bath—their role was to attract a much wider public.

Their purpose was unequivocally to advertise; to draw attention to any special quality or any distinctive patronage, even if it were only inherited like Eleanor Brainiff's, who advertised herself as Daughter and Successor to her late father George Bridges, BUGG DESTROYER TO HIS MAJ-ESTY' and even if the patronage was only to the lesser royals' or even more humbly to ‘several of His Majesty's offices', or not royal at all—the only maker of Sir Hans Sloane's Milk Chocolates'.

The historian's understandable predilection for the picturesque must not mislead one into thinking that the market was solely one in fashionable fripperies. The demand for such accessories was, of course, amply met, but there are endless examples of the sales promotion of more mundane household goods as well: advertisements for pots and pans, pins and needles, copper kettles and brass scuttles, knives and forks, candles and candlesticks, curtains and blankets, lanterns and firegrates, shoes and stockings, spades and garden forks, prints and picture frames, books and wallpapers, baskets and bedcovers, razors and scissors, buckets and brushes, flower pots and dog collars, and, of course, chairs and tables and stools and boxes in their infinite variety. Even shops offering to match curtains with wallpapers and upholstery were not uncommon.

And although much fun has been had by historians quoting Addison's mockery of inappropriate shop signs inherited by newly moved shopkeepers—A cook should not live at the Boot, nor a Shoemaker at the Roasted Pig'—the trade cards make clear that such incongruity was shortlived and rare. In fact when in 1762 the elaborate shopsigns were ordered to be removed, having become too numerous and too dangerous, the trade cards advertised their new street numbers and the old signs,197 which they incorporated into the advertisements. They were designed to imprint their commercial message and the signs served as a valuable mnemonic; so that musical instruments were sold at the sign of the Horn and Trumpet', brass and copper at the sign of the Frying Pan', upholstery at the sign of the ‘Three Covered Chairs', breeches at theBoot and Breeches', perukes at the White Peruke', and so on. Long after the signs were gone such trademarks were used to advertise the place of sale and the distinctive character of a well known product. Some were even used in national chains of provincial shops, as Packwood's use of the Naked Truth' as the name for the provincial shops which sold his wares makes clear.198

The trade cards backed up by newspaper advertisements were to the shopkeepers what the fashion doll and the fashion print were to the fashion designers. It is no accident that trade cards had hardly come into existence before the eighteenth century, that specimens dating from 1700 to 1730 are exceedingly rare, that their peak of collectable elegance was reached between 1730 and 1770, although they continued to proliferate after that date. It is no accident either that they were known to contemporaries as ‘shopkeepers' bills’.199

In an increasingly competitive market the cards were an important part of the shopkeepers' promotional efforts. Aggregate demand might be rising but to keep it growing, and to keep and increase one's share of it, required both commercial vigilance and ingenuity. Above all it was felt to require advertisement, and the trade cards allowed the shopkeeper to advertise the quality of his shop as well as his goods. The booksellers Lackington Allen and Co., boasted on their trade card that their premises constituted the finest shop in the world being 140 feet in front', and they displayed their fourteen, tall, round-headed windows on one card and their Lounging Rooms', where buyers could comfortably browse, on another. Other trade cards reveal in marvellously precise detail the methods of display which filled Sophie von la Roche with delight, and which, as Dr. Johnson and Southey realized, made impulse buying so hard to resist even for onewho is resolved to buy no more'.200

They also draw attention to the distinctive architectural forms which historians have seen as part of the new aggressive attitude to business'01 and to methods of selling. Indeed, the rectilinear simplicity'of shop fronts of the 1790s has been described as ‘surprisingly prophetic of the typical shop front in today's cities’.2o² The modern note was a real one, the break with the past was very apparent. These new shops were in size, in appearance, and in scale of operations, the true precursors of their commercial escendents which serve our present society of high mass consumption. These were not the mere hutches or mere stalls which so many contemporaries described as shops in the seventeenth century. The contrast between the spacious elegance of George Dance's plans for shops in Leadenhall Street in the 1790s, and Inigo Jones' plans for the New Exchange in the early seventeenth century is a stark and revealing one. When one first reads of the plans for the New Exchange with its hundred new shops arranged on two floors, it sounds immensely impressive, but when one learns that many were little more than booths five and a half feet deep and described by their tenants as suffering from‘a want of Stowage for their wares ... the shopps being, as it were, small chests rather than shopps’,20ª one is considerably less impressed.

When one reads of the takings of London shopkeepers one is forcibly reminded again that there are shops and shops. Five years after the opening of the New Exchange, for instance, a contemporary offered this estimate of a shopkeeper's turnover: It may well be supposed but an ill-customed shop that taketh not five shillings a day, one day with another throughout the whole year'.²4 It is this kind of evidence which casts doubt on the economic significance of the Mighty Torrent’ of shopkeepers said to be pouring over the kingdom in 1684, and on the view, from the same source, that ‘every country village' with ten houses has a shopkeeper dealing in many substantial commodities’.20⁵ Even if some of them did have, as The Compleat Tradesman claimed, a stock worth ‘no less than one thousand pounds', it pales into insignificance compared with the developments at the end of the eighteenth century. Commercial practice was moving so rapidly then and the scale of change was so dramatic, that what James Lackington had tried to introduce in 17802⁰⁶\_fixed prices and no credit—was regarded as being established by 1800,2º7 and by 1821 a single fixed price ‘NO ABATEMENT’ linen draper was reported to be taking £500 a day and employing up to thirty assistants.208 All these figures are of course open to doubt, but the change of scale is·unmistakable. London had long been regarded as the centre of conspicuous consumption but such was the qualitative change in the nature of commercial enterprise in the eighteenth century that London was now the centre of a new scale of commerce, the undisputed leader in the commercialization of fashion which had helped to bring about unprecedentedly high levels of spending. The watershed is nicely symbolized by the arrival of many commercial names still famous in London retailing. Fortnum and Mason arrived in Piccadilly early in the eighteenth century, Flint and Clark (later Clark and Debenham) arrived in 1778, Dickins and Smith (later Dickins and Jones) arrived in 1790, Heal's arrived in 1810, and although it was not until 1812 that Swan and Edgar opened their shop in Piccadilly, they had both been selling separately in London before that date.

In stressing London's importance, one must not forget that there were many other unsung heroes in the spread of fashion to a new market of consumers—the new class of itinerant salesmen and the provincial shopkeepers. It is hardly surprising that historians have so largely overlooked the lesser agents of the commercializing process—the pedlars, the ‘Scotch drapers', the ‘Scotch hawkers'or the ‘Manchester Men'. They did not serve the gentry or the more literate middle class. They operated in the depths of the provinces. They were not seen by visiting foreigners doing their Great Tours of England (to London, the great houses and the great industrial centres). And as Hoskins said of them they have no annals', not even ‘that sad passport to immortality' a tax assessment. In consequence, as Dorothy Davis has written, Among so many obscurities and uncertainties in the history of retail trade, nothing is so obscure and uncertain as the role of the pedlar'.

Yet they served a vital if often concealed role in the further spread of consumer goods through provincial society. Some indication of how vital came in the 1780s when the Exchequer proposed first a Shops Tax to raise money from an obviously growing and prosperous source, then, to soften the blow to the shopkeepers, a Bill proposing to make all peddling illegal. The Bill was revoked as a result of a storm of protest, not from the customers, who were too poor to have any effective voice, not from pedlars themselves, who were equally insignificant politically, but from ‘the manufacturers of linen, wool and cotton, the millowners of Glasgow and Lancashire and Yorkshire, many of whom objected that they would be driven to close down their mills without pedlars—and\_ in particular Scotch drapers—to market their goods’.209 They raised a storm of protest. The petitions to the Commons all stressed the absolute necessity to the major manufacturers of the hawkers, pedlars and Scotch drapers. They all stressed their role in extending the market for their goods and ‘introducing them into Parts of the Country where they could not otherwise have been sold'. They all stressed the important part these men played in developing new markets among the working class: one petition to the Commons claimed that the Scotch Drapers in the neighbourhood of Halifax were owed about £40,000 by ‘labouring Mechanics and manufacturers in the small villages of the West Riding'. They stressed, too, that the total trade conducted by the itinerants was far greater than ‘may have been apprehended’.210

The case stating ‘the many great and important Advantages' which derived from this ‘useful and industrious Class of Tradesmen’ was set out very clearly in a petition from Whitehaven, that pointed out that

the Quantity of goods bought and disposed of by them was considerably more extensive than had been generally conceived, and the Mode of Sale which is wholly confined to small Villages and Places remote from general Markets tends very greatly to diffuse the Manufacturers of the Kingdom in general and is a source of great convenience to those Inhabitants who live at a Distance from the principal Towns, great Quantities of goods of almost every description being vended in detail, which the remote Inhabitants could not find leisure to seek and when Necessity might compell them to go from Home, the Expense of the Journey would frequently be às great as the Object of his Purchase.211

Exactly how many of these itinerant salesmen there were we do not know. When they were said to be declining in Victorian England, the 1851 Census gives a figure of some 30,000, while in the eighteenth century, when they were at the height of their importance, only 2,000 licences were taken out each year. But since the country pedlars were said toavoid the plate', this tells us little, compared with those urgent petitions from so many manufacturers in the 1780s.

The pedlars they were defending were not the pedlars of the traditional sort. These Scotch Drapers, or Scotch Hawkers, were not like the pedlar who had tramped England for centuries bringing delight to distant hamlets with his purses, points, gloves and ribbons as he travelled from fair to fair with his small pack of goods. The contents of Autolycus's pack as painted by Shakespeare in The Winter's Tale (1611) sound beguiling enough but the contents of an actual pedlar's pack when he was arrested in 1657 were pathetically small—3 hankes and 4 bolts of yarn, 1 candlestick, 1 measure, an old pistol and some tobacco'.21² The total value was six shillings. According to Samuel Bamford the Scotch Hawkers carried huge and weighty packs four feet in length and two or more in depth'i³ but the more significant difference from the traditional pedlar was his method of sale. First, he specialized in the products of the new industrial centres; second, he sold on credit; third, he had his special area in which he called on his customers every week for cash by instalments.²¹4 He offered the ideal service for the families of factory hands he typically served. He brought direct to their door the latest products of the mills and factories, he would accept a small weekly sum on account, and as soon as the total was paid off he was ready to interest them in something new. The prevailing fashions announced in the advertising columns of the provincial press-or at least an adequate approximation to them-could be produced for his remote customers by the Scotch Draper. He was a new kind of genuine retailer—a cross between the London tallyman and the traditional pedlar.

The manufacturers had another major new ally in the spread of consumer goods to the country at large. For the Manchester Man was a genuinely new type of wholesaler. The Manchester Man dealt not with individual households, but with individual shops. He was the wholesale version for provincial shopkeepers of what the Scotch Draper was for the working-class housewife. He too brought his goods direct to the retailers'doorstep where they could judge and choose their stock for themselves. He too sold often on credit. He too brought a range of goods previously obtainable only from London. But the scale was altogether bigger. For although some had only a single pack animal, others had long trains of several laden packhorses and stock valued at thousands of pounds. As a type they signalled the arrival of an early version of the commercial traveller, and they ‘gradually transformed the resources of the provincial shops’.2i⁵ They speeded up the process of distribution and smoothed the way for a quicker transmission of the prevailing fashions.

There can be little doubt that without the service of these new itinerant salesmen much of the provincial market would have been stifled for want of opportunity to buy. Its latent demands could not have been satisfied. National aggregate demand would have been the loser. There was still, of course, no truly national market. Regional consumption could still be dominated by a local producer, which is why in the normal way you had to go to Burtonon-Trent if you wanted a tankard of Bass or Worthington, and had to limit yourself in London to brands like Truman's or Whitbread's’.21 One could still be cut off from luxuries in the provinces. Sydney Smith characterized his banishment to a remote country parish in Yorkshire with the immortal description that it was ‘so out of the way that it was actually 12 miles from a lemon'. A century earlier he could have faced more serious problems. The daughter of Judge Fell who lived near Ulverston was 278 miles from a lemon! And the same distance from an orange! And the same even from a larding needle! Perhaps even more telling than the fact that she had to send to London for these goods is the fact that she had to travel 18 miles to Kendal or 25 miles over the sands of the tidal estuary to Lancaster for any manufactured goods. She made these arduous journeys every few weeks, for bellows, pans, soap, shoes, nails and garden tools. That she sent to Newcastle for her cheese might simply be the result of personal preference, but that can hardly explain the fact that she had to send ten miles in another direction for salt!217

The solution to the problem of consumer isolation was the provincial shop. Where the Scotch draper brought his goods to the door of the working class home, the provincial shop was to offer a permanent outlet for the whole of provincial society. Where the traditional pedlar offered an unpredictable, if welcome, opportunity to spend, and the annual fair a regular, but all too brief, opportunity to see a larger range of goods, the provincial shop could offer a permanent, regular outlet which, if well served by London and the major industrialists, could satisfy the provincial appetite for fashion.

Fairs, of course, continued. In some parts of the country they even increased,218 but in the words of Eric Jones ‘shops were really the coming thing'.219 They offlered fixed premises, with fixed prices. Backed by the services of newspaper advertisements informing the public of its latest attractions, its array of fashions and its links with London, its ultimate victory as the main retail outlet was assured. Even some village shopkeepers could afford to be philosophical about the hurt to trade' caused by the arrival of an itinerant salesman. As Thomas Turner wrote in 1764, ‘This day came to Jones's a man with a cartload of millinery, mercery, linen-drapery, silver, &c., to keep sale for two days, which must undoubtedly be some hurt to trade; for the novelty of the thing (and novelty is surely the predominant passion of the English nation, and of Sussex in particular) will catch the ignorant multitude, and perhaps not them only, but people of sense, who are not judges of goods and trade, as indeed few are; but, however, as it is it must pass'.22º With booming demand there was trade for all, and the town shopkeeper with his special offers, seasonal sales, the latest fashions, and the promotion of particular manufactured goods found their own ways of appealing to the prevailing passion for novelty'. Mr. Parsons and Mr. Price of Leicester advertised in the press the latest line in Wedgwood & Bentley's Fountain Ink-pots on 16 October 1779;221 and Mr. East advertised not only a full selection of Wedgwood's wares in 1796, but also advertised his ability to supply the country shops.222

Individual studies of provincial shopkeepers are rare. We know that the great industrialists like Wedgwood built provincial warehouses and supplied hundreds of provincial shops. We know that men like Packwood kept many provincial outlets supplied with his distinctively advertised products. We know from the newspaper advertisements that thousand upon thousand of such provincial shopkeepers advertised their ability to provide the latest fashion. But the few detailed case studies which are known to us support the sense of marked commercial change. For if one compares the commercial techniques and scale of operation of Roger Lowe, who ran a village shop in Leigh, and William Stout the famous Quaker grocer of Lancaster (and one has little other choice in the seventeenth century) with, say, Mr. McGuffog of Stamford in the 1770s or Elizabeth Towsey of Chester in the 1780s or John Watt's Manchester Bazaar of 1819, then the qualitative change is undeniable.

Roger Lowe's village shop was little more than a shed. If he ‘kept shop all day'223 he thought it worth special mention, for day after day he left the shop shut up while he went off to try to buy some stock to sell, or collect in some debts to buy it with. The conclusion is unavoidable that Roger Lowe's shop was ‘a lock-up premises of negligible value, stocked with a hetereogeneous collection of any cheap goods the man could lay his hands on, open for trade intermittently and unpredictably, granting credit as a matter of course to all and sundry, and run by a man heavily dependent upon a sideline ... to make a bare living'.224

Compared with Roger Lowe and his like the much quoted operations of William Stout look more impressive, but the scale and methods of operation were still very primitive. He still lost between one third and one half his profits in bad debts, and he still had difficulty in getting an adequate supply of goods: cheese for funerals and smuggled tobacco and brandy being notable highlights in his sales. Again in Dorothy Davis's words ‘to get the goods and to get the money, those were the arts of shopkeeping. Merely selling the stuff was child's play, and very often children, or at least young apprentices were left to do it’.225

The contrast with Robert Owen's early master Mr. McGuffog is immediately apparent. He made a considerable fortune from his fine shop in Stamford. According to Owen's enthusiastic account ‘The articles dealt with were the best, the finest and most choice qualities that could be procured from all the markets of the world’.22⁶ The shop became a meeting place for the local nobility in the 1770s with some six or seven carriages at a time often waiting outside.

Browns of Chester provides further detailed support for the ability of eighteenth-century shops to provide provincial England with the latest fashions. These shops still depended on London for high fashion and contemporaries claimed that they could trace the gradation of dress in distant parts of the country according to the distance from London'. In the middle of the century the outward spread of fashion was still limited to the squire's wife and the vicar's wife in the villages, but in the larger cities and towns, where the newest fashions are brought down weekly by the stage-coach or waggon, all the wives and daughters of the most topping tradesmen vie with each other every Sunday in the elegance of their apparel'. At this date in the mid-fifties the fashion contest lay between mercers'daughters and grocers' wives, and a burgess's daughter could ‘eclipse'the local competition by appearing in the latest London fashion—a Trolloppee or Slammerkin’ or a Nun's Hood’ or ‘a new fashion’d cap called a Joan’.227

In the next few decades the competition increased, as the provincial shops with the support of the provincial press spread such behaviour both geographically and socially.

The provincial newspapers of the eighteenth century which carried fashion news—such as Boston Newsletter, Cambridge Journal and Flying Post, Chelmsford Chronicle, Chester Chronicle, Ipswich Journal, Leeds Mercury,

Northampton Post, Salisbury Journal, York Chronicle and Weekly Advertiser, York Courant—make it clear that every detail of London fashion was eagerly reported to the readers throughout the country. Gloves, hats, shoes, pockets, parasols, buckles, buttons and all the paraphernalia of fashion were described in detail. When bosom bottles came in mid-century—small containers to hold water to keep fiowers worn in women's cleavages fresh—the Boston Evening Post carried an advertisement announcing Bosom bottles, pear shaped, flat, 4 inches long, of ribbed glass for bouqets'.228 For those who liked extra reassurance that their bottles would not spill, the same paper carried an advertisement for both gold Breast hooks'and plain stay hooks.229

Fashions changed with kaleidoscopic speed—high heels are much more the rage'announced The Times in 1796, when only a year or two before flat heels had been in. But it was not only the unmistakable changes from the high heels of the mid 1750s, or the flat heels of the early 1780s and back to high in the mid 1790s; there were endless other adjustments to colour, shape, material, and accessories. Toes went from sharp pointed to round pointed to square toed, as remorselessly as they do in the twentieth century, and at roughly the same speed. The size of buckles could change dramatically almost overnight: she used ‘to fasten her shoe with a circle scarcely larger than a bird's eye, and since, she has fastened it with a parallelogram as large as the buckle of a crack-spring'.2³0 And there were moments of fashion indecision, such as when the London Chronicle reported in 1762 that ‘as to their shoe-heels, ladies go just as they did, some as broad as a teacup's brim, some as narrow as the china circle the cup stands on'.

As the provincial press now kept the country so accurately informed, the provincial shopkeeper had to keep in touch. Such rapid changes did wonders for sales and constantly boosted demand. What hard work did too slowly, fashionable obsolescence could do in a trice. It could turn over stock more quickly, extend sales more widely and create demand which would otherwise not have existed. Women trembled for news of a changing hemline, a change in the shape of a shoe or the style of a bonnet. A prized garment could become unwearable almost overnight and the provincial shopkeepers, if up to date with the latest fashion and provided with a suitable stock, could replenish their suddenly outmoded wardrobes.

It was for this reason that Jane Austen expected even her village shopkeeper to‘go to town'to lay in fresh stocks of the materials then in fashion to satisfy the local customers.2³1 It was for this reason that Mrs. Gaskell's shopkeeper in Cranford—a mere cheesemonger-cum-milliner—claimed that he always went straight to London to buy the latest fashions. While in the early 1780s

Elizabeth Towsey, who kept a little millinery and haberdashery shop in Chester, travelled regularly to London to buy the very latest fashions and immediately announced their arrival in the local newspaper. Since the journey took six days each way it shows an impressive belief in the hold of fashion even over distant Chester. Mrs. Towsey's letters and bills survive to show how widely and discriminatingly she shopped in London, with different suppliers for gloves, ribbons and ‘modes of all sorts'; her forewoman had to sample the goods on sale in dozens of London suppliers just to get something particularly pretty in the ribbon way’.232

For want of the required research little is known about the individual techniques of the smaller shopkeepers. We know of course that many advertised their royal patronage as eagerly and prominently as Wedgwood and Bentley. Many used local newspaper advertisements, others used their own colourful personalities as an advertisement to attract trade. Martin von Butchell, one time pupil of John Hunter, earned himself an ‘enormously lucrative' practice (as a doctor-turned-dentist and seller of medicine) by advertising himself—the eccentricity of his manners and his extraordinary costume. We are told by contemporaries that he ‘astonished all beholders' by his methods of self advertisement. It was ‘his custom to ride on a white pony which he sometimes painted all purple and sometimes with spots'.233 In Hogarth's Execution of an Idle Apprentice of 1747 one can see another individual salesman who used his own extreme of fashion to advertise his wares. To attract attention to the gingerbread he was selling he appeared in an imitation of court dress, lace ruffled shirt, gold-laced and feathered hat. These were little more than individual exploitation of the traditional street cries or the public advertisement of age old skills—like the ratcatchers and itinerant gelders who advertised their services with special shoulder sashes (ornamented with rats for one and horsehoes for the other)²³4 to make sure they were not overlooked.

Many shopkeepers did better than this, inundating their customers with specially printed trade cards, shop bills and individual advertisements of surprising ingenuity and imaginative quality.²³⁵ Not all sales techniques were as obvious as the use of a purple pony. Some of the more subtle ones were meant to be concealed from their customers and have as a result all too often remained hidden from historians—even those which were practised very widely. Even the humble eighteenth-century shopkeeper can be shown to have been the master of methods of boosting sales which are, all too often, confidently attributed to the ingenuity of twentieth-century commerce.

The concept of the loss leader, for example, was well established amongst eighteenth-century shopkeepers. As Campbell wrote in 1747A custom has prevailed among Grocers to sell Sugars for the Prime Cost, and [they] are out of Pocket by the Sale'.The losses were not inconsiderable: ‘The Expence for some Shops in London for the single Article of Paper and Pack-Thread for Sugars amounts to Sixty or Seventy Pounds per Annum’, and there was also the cost of ‘their Labour in breaking and weighing it out'.236 The intention (as it still is today) was to attract customers with this loss leader and then induce them to buy ‘other Commodities'(thereby boosting the shop keeper's turnover) on which they would have topay extravagant Prices'³7 (thereby boosting the shopkeeper's profits). Many of the lesser known advertisers used money-back-if-not-satisfied policies which was for long attributed to the commercial ingenuity of American businessmen in the nineteenth century.

The greatest entrepreneurs were, of course, the masters of a greater range of commercial techniques. But the fact that self-service schemes, inertiaselling'campaigns, product-differentiation policies, market segmentation and massive advertising schemes are primarily associated with the entrepreneurial élite does not mean that the mass of eighteenth-century traders had not mastered some surprisingly modern commercial techniques themselves. When one recalls for how long the salesmanship and the marketing techniques of even the great much-studied masters of eighteenth-century business were neglected, and even denied, there is little room for complacent dismissal of the likely skills of what Defoe called ‘merchants, shopkeepers, employers of others in trades', a group which Defoe regarded as far larger than those employed in actual manufacturing. England was already a commercialized society by 1800. But like its twin the consumer society, which was born and recognized (if not formally christened) in the eighteenth century, it was to continue to grow and expand in the nineteenth century. The actual number of shops in the provinces was to grow dramatically between 1820 and 1850, as Dr. Alexander has shown, but the pattern of retailing methods for a consumer society was already established.2³3

## \* \* \*

The results of their commercial endeavours were easier to recognize than the commercial techniques they used to bring those results about. When von Archenholz argued that no other nation in Europe could match the English in luxury of dress and apparel’³9 he was voicing a common opinion. The tumult of late eighteenth-century fashion was difficult to miss. Contemporaries were in no doubt that ‘a fondness for Dress'was the characteristic ‘folly of the age'.24 This Folly’was described as ‘so epidemic’that many spent all they earned on Ribbands, Ruffles, Necklaces, Fans, Hoop-Petticoats and all those Superfluities in Dress'.241 As the century progressed such accounts became more and more numerous. Whether they complained of fashions being retailed out' to industrious tradesmen in 1773, or of ‘a spirit of extravagance'being diffused among the lower orders’in 1782, or of ‘the contagion of luxury’being ‘spread by example among the lower ranks of society'in 1785;²⁴² they all agreed that a process of ever-widening social diffusion was spreading the ability to follow the latest fashions. Apeing the fashions’ of the social elite was held to be ‘as infectious by Example, as the Plague itself by Contact’.²43

Arcadius described the general process in 1773 as ‘even the lower class, both in town and country are so much infected with this preposterous ambition that all ranks and degrees of men seem to be on the point of being confounded'.⁴ Vicesimus Knox described the detailed effects on fashion in 1782 as ‘The lower ranks will imitate (the new modes) as soon as they have discovered the innovation. A hat, a coat, a shoe deemed fit to be worn only by a great grand-sire is no sooner put on by a dictator of fashion, than it . . . is generally adopted from the first lord of the Treasury to the apprentice from Houndsditch.’45

Source after source informs us that the rural poor in 1782 pant to imitate' the London fashions, that ‘the girls in the country'were inspired in 1791 with ‘the most longing desires'to participate in them; that ‘the plough boys’ and ‘the cowherds ... desert their dirt and drudgery and swarm up to London (to) wear fine clothes', that ‘the wives and daughters of low tradesmen are infected by the same rage of displaying . . . absurd extravagance'.24⁶ Other sources spell out the fashionable consequences, marvelling at such ‘poor, awkward, clumsy creatures' as Nanny Ginger being transformed by London fashions and appearing ‘all bedizened over from top to toe with silks and sattins and laces, and fine cloaths, as grand I warrant you, as any princess in the land’.²47 As Soame Jenyns wryly put it ‘the valet de chambre cannot be distinguished from his master, but by being better drest, and Joan, who used to be but as good as my lady in the dark is now by no means inferior to her in the daylight'.24⁸ As Von Archenholz wrote later in 1791, As to a Lady's Maid, the eye of the most skilful connoisseur can scarcely distinguish her from the mistress. The appearance of a waiting woman is that of an opulent and fashionable person’.249 The complaints about the disappearance of ‘those becoming marks whereby the classes were formerly distinguished' were legion. Those looking back over the changes which had taken place in their lifetime almost invariably stressed the great change in fashionable consumption.250

The phenomenon was, of course, most marked and most noticed in London, and after London in the provincial towns, first the fashionable spas and then the rest, until it penetrated even into the villages and the farmhouses of Georgian Britain. The speed of the geographical spread of fashion, as well as its range, had increased dramatically. Whereas Addison could write in 1711 that the rural beaus are not yet out of the fashion that took place at the time of the Revolution', and that in the West Country the fashions of Charles II's reign were still worn', by the end of the eighteenth century the time-lag between London and the provinces was being measured in weeks and months rather than in decades. The excesses of fashionable behaviour were, of course, most spectacularly demonstrated by the rich, and after them by the middle class, but again I hope I have displayed enough evidence to show that it could penetrate even further than that. One does not have to believe that the costly perukes worn by even the meanest day labourers at their work, which so astonished the Swedish observer Pehr Kalm,2⁵1 were common, or that most agricultural workers dressed like those portrayed by Stubbs, or that every ‘man pushing a wheelbarrow ... has his white underclothing’and hardly a beggar can be espied who doesn't wear a clean shirt under his tatters'as Carl Moritz claimed in 1782,2⁵² to realize that the consumption of fashion had risen to quite unprecedented levels. The general evidence makes it difficult to ignore, the statistics of aggregate demand make it difficult to deny. The concern to explain it in terms of social emulation and class competition and emulative spending points persuasively towards the downwards spread of fashion and the social extension of the market. That much has been conceded. David Landes, as always in the vanguard of perceptive comment, said in 1969 of the imitation of city consumption habits by those in the country:‘This internal “demonstration effect" has been probably the most important factor—more important than the increase in income—in developing a market of high consumption .. . that is a body able and willing to buy above the line of necessity'.25³ But his text is still dominated by the traditional preoccupation with the technological side of the Industrial Revolution.

Many answers remain unsupplied o important problems in the nature of demand. Theories of demand routinely accept that ‘consumer tastes are socially determined'.254 Sociologists from Veblen onwards have long been eloquent on the significance of fashionable wants as an incentive to increased expenditure. But the traditional historical response is still to see the expansion of the market as little more than an automatic reflex action in response to the increase in supply. Historians have been far more interested in explaining how and why supply increased than in explaining how and why the products of that rising tide of industrial production were absorbed by the market. Preoccupied by the aggregate statistics they have given too little attention to the qualitative and behavioural changes which underlie them and indeed partly explain them. As Eric Jones has perceptively noted, ‘Analytically there is no difference between income-induced and taste-induced increase in consumption; in either case the demand curve shifts outwards. Historically there is a world of difference; if changes in taste affected only the form or construction of commodities and not their value, they would still be crucial to understanding the configuration of economic history.'55 If one believes, as I do, that the taste-induced changes provided a substantial boost to the size and value as well as the character of demand, then they assume an even greater significance.

Professor Jones poses a series of important unanswered questions in this field. Did demand automatically absorb all output with every rightward shift of the supply curve?'‘Did this taste for former inessentials prove ineradicably attractive so that they were built into the pattern of consumption?'‘Were manufacturers automata who kept on producing because output could always be sold at a profit and who needed to take no thought for sales promotion?'‘Could aggregate consumption be induced to grow by the manipulations of fashions?’5 In deploying some of the detailed evidence of the commercial manipulation and exploitation of fashion in the eighteenth century I have tried to suggest some answers to these questions.

I have tried to show how inertia-selling campaigns created demand for English goods which would otherwise have remained unreachable; how new methods of display excited not only occasional impulse buying, but more sustained and regular buying than could possibly have occurred without them; how new methods of advertising excited a new eagerness to consume, and made known and desirable goods which would otherwise have languished unbought. I have tried to show how the manipulation of fashion made many consumer goods obsolete long before mere use would have made them so; how the exploitation of social competition created demands which would otherwise have remained dormant; how new aggressive methods of selling penetrated into areas of demand previously untapped. I have tried to show how the many new places and agents of sale brought goods within the reach of classes never before offered such opportunities for buying, and made available a greater range of goods than ever before; how the manipulation of social emulation made men pursue luxuries'where they had previously bought ‘decencies', and ‘decencies’ where they had previously bought only 'necessities'; how, in fact, fashion and its exploiters raised men's levels of pecuniary decency'.

The fashion doll, the fashion print, the fashion magazine, the fashion advertisement, the fashion shops, the great manufacturers making fashion goods and the hordes of those selling them were all agents in pursuit of new levels of consumption from an ever-widening market.

Those manufacturers who produced goods for mass consumption needed to reach markets never previously tapped. One must not forget that the prosperity of Lancashire cotton manufacturers, London brewers, Sheffield cutlers, Staffordshire potters, the toy makers of Birmingham—and the fortunes of the woollen, linen and silk industries—were based on sales to a mass market. Fashion was an essential, if not sufficient, key to open up the necessary access to that market. As such it deserves more detailed attention than economic historians have chosen to give it. As Braudel has realized, fashion is too important to be left to the antiquarians. Costume is a language. It is no more misleading than the graphs drawn by demographers and price historians'.257

If we follow Braudel's advice and see fashion as an important key to understanding both society and the economy, then a study of the tumult of fashion of late eighteenth-century England may help to unlock some of the mysteries still surrounding that period's remarkable economic growth. Certainly those concerned with selling and marketing and distributing their goods gave it their concerned and concentrated attention.‘Fashion'was seen by many of them as being ‘far more important than merit'. So it commanded as much of their time and energy as did the traditional preoccupations with capital, labour and production. They were fully convinced of the commercial potential of fashion and they were determined to exploit it in their sales campaigns. Perhaps the only way fully to demonstrate the quality of those convictions and the quality of their commercial manipulation of fashion (and to demonstrate its economic importance in both the large-scale industrial concern and the small scale commercial one) is to examine in detail some individual case studies. In that way the general process of commercialization can be more precisely exemplified and explained, and the full flavour of the English experience of that process be appreciated.

At first sight Josiah Wedgwood and George Packwood could hardly be more different in terms of the demands they have made on historian's time, but there are hidden similarities. For while Packwood's extraordinary advertising flair has been completely ignored, Wedgwood's extraordinary capacity as a salesman has also been neglected, even denied, by the traditional historiography. Yet they both provide wonderfully vivid illustrations of the commercialization of England in the late eighteenth century—as the next two chapters attempt to show.

By demonstrating the level of commercial skills involved in that process, and by exemplifying the eager and pervasive consumer response to those skills, their careers help to explain why Sir John Hawkins could write, of late eighteenth-century England, that ‘a new fashion pervades the whole of this our island almost as instantaneously as a spark of fire illuminates a mass of gunpowder’.258