# MR. PACKWOOD.

## SIR

The celebrity of your New Invented Strops, induces me to send the following Parody of Hamlet's Soliloquy, which I trust you will think worth the postage.

‘To shave, or not to shave? tat is the question.'—Whether tis better for a man to suffer the grisly beard to grow upon his chin, or cut it off at once? To shave with ease, to clear the stubbled face—tis a consummation devoutly to be wished.—To shave with ease; to shave! Perchance to tear; aye, there's the rub; for while we shave the thick rough hairs away, the razor's edge will pluck them by the roots, or checked turn inward on the tender flesh: then trickles down the blood, and the sharpe pain smarting the face, makes cowards of us all.—But who would bear these rubs and ghastly cuts, when he himself might his quietus make with PΛCKWOOD's New Invented Strop.—Hail London Town! Hail Gracechurch-Street! and No. 16, hail! That makes my healthful face both clean and fair. DEVIZES, MAY 5, 1796. A.S.63

The readers of the Evening Star were served much rougher fare. The only Shakespearian echo in their Packwood advertisement was the title of their ANECDOTE: All's well that ends well', but the tone was heavily rustic, the accent more heavily Somerset, the pun on the phrase Mark me well’even more heavily obvious. But nevertheless Packwood conveyed his essential message clearly enough, which was ‘never buy a common Razor strop, when you can get one of Packwood's superior'kind. That sensible advice came from a country gentleman. That the lower orders could appreciate the sense of it (and the rewards it could bring) was spelt out by the country bumpkin: ‘Aye, aye (says the boy) ... I know Will Thrush cou'dn't get Moll Skim with her hundred pounds’ until he acquired the aid of Packwood's invention.

To mov'the scrubbing-brush of Will's face, I vaith he sent all the way vor un to 16 Gracechurch-Street, Lunnon, and Will lends it my grandmother zometimes to shorpen her old knife to trim her whiskers, and cut her quirns, and the old woman is as pleased with it as punch.’64

The readers of the Publican's Morning Advertiser were offered an appropriately drunken set of CROSS READINGS’ to puzzle over.

Short crops are now in fashion all over the country—When his lordship ordered the price of bread to continue as before.

Coals sold from forty-five to fifty shillings in the Pool—A number of villains was concerned in this black affair.

On Wednesday last a young man cut his throat with a razor—This is the Strop that Packwood made.

A tradesman's wife put an end to her existence-The lucky office is near Holborn Bars.

Yesterday a gentleman shot himself at his house in Piccadilly—N.B. One small pill is a dose.65

But whatever the chosen literary form, the message was undeviatingly adhered to. When Packwood's strop played the central role as the schoolboy's friend in a narrative advertisement in the Star, not only is the story punctuated with lines such as Packwood for ever—my master likes to be in fashion', but the dénouement leads inevitably to a last act in which

The master applied to PACKWOOD, Strop-maker to the whole World, No. 16, Gracechurch-Street, London, for a Strop, and a box of Paste to keep it in order. The fact being clearly proved, a free pardon was announced, and the youth now is the greatest favourite in the school.6

When True Briton readers are offered more praise of Packwood in verse, the verses are footnoted, and an asterisk leads one to the vital information—

\*PACKWOOD, Razor Strop Maker to the Whole World, No. 16   
Gracechurch-Street, London.⁶

When the Publican's Daily Advertiser is offered A New Song on Razor Strops’to the rousing tune of Dicky Gossip’with an even more rousing chorus which culminates in the line

‘Spread the fame of Packwood's Strops, he's your man'

repeated five times over, and extending Packwood's market range by including the tools of barbers, joiners, carpenters, tailors and doctors and anyone wanting an edge, the noisy tumult ends with firm directions to proceed

To Mr. PACKWOOD, superior Razor Strop Maker to the Whole World, No. 16, Gracechurch-Street, London; and his Agents, at the sign of the Naked Truth, in different quarters of the globe.68

When on the rare occasion that Packwood was willing to indulge in mild self-mockery of his characteristic self praise and advertising hyperbole, as he did in the pages of the London Chronicle, he cannot resist a give-away reference to the Naked Truth'in an otherwise anonymous piece:

Fame has been more liberal to one individual, than ever was expected could come to the share of any one man. I will give you one instance of her modest information: it was communicated to me in detailing the virtues of the new-invented Razor Strop: says she, the bashfulness of the Proprietor prevents him doing justice to himself, when he only speaks of its good effects, such as taking notches out of carving knives, &c. By keeping so much within the bounds of moderation, he has neglected to inform you of a gentleman, soon after he had purchased one of the superior Razor Strops; the gardener complaining his ragstone was insufficient to whet his scythe, the Strop was produced, and by giving it two or three touches, he not only found it cut the grass with facility, but he also cut down six elm trees that stood in his way. This was declared in the presence of the Naked Truth.69

For all the variety of his method, all customers were directed to the sign of the Naked Truth’, all readers were reminded that Packwood was “the Razor

Strop Maker to the Whole World;" all potential buyers instructed that16 Gracechurch-Street' was the place to order from.

As to the value of his products he constantly hammered home the view that they were‘worth their weight in gold'. Whatever the chosen audience Packwood insisted on the same valuation. The readership of the Times was offered as

## A FACT

The Public opinion on the power of Packwood's superior Razor Strop, agree that it is worth its weight in gold, and acknowledge their face to be cleaner in the evening (by the use of the Strop) than it used to be immediately after shaving in the morning.ªº

Overseas merchants were offered the following shipping intelligence in the

Bengal Shipping Intelligence to different parts of the Globe, as well as the East and West Indies, America.

Merchants, Captains of ships, and the different traders will find it a valuable acquisition to be put in mind of articles the most useful such as will tell to the best account, and take up little room in stowage. What say you for a venture of PACKWOOD's Paste and Razor Strops which are acknowledged to be worth their weight in gold."1

The nobility, gentry, and ladies in particular were offered, under the title ‘Money Matters'in the Sunday Monitor, the fact that Packwood's products were acknowledged to be worth their weight in gold'.72

## \* \* \*

By 20 June 1796 Packwood had succeeded so triumphantly that he was not so much advertising his products, as advertising his own business history. In the Telegraph he related the story of his rapid success under the title

## The GENEALOGY of the RAZOR STROPS

PACKWOOD first thought of this excellent invention in July; communicated his intentions to some intimate friends in August; received their decisive approbation in September; was determined in the object of his pursuit in October; purchased materials in November; set persons to work in December; made some promising experiments in January; founded the public inclination in February; found it would do in March; brought it to perfection in April; submitted it to public decision in May; and finally established it in June. This diary of a year, cannot fail of being highly satisfactory to all who are convinced that the discovery in question is one of the greatest comforts of the age.ª

He wrote not only his own business history, but also his own autobiography in the form of an advertisement. Both were of necessity skeletal versions but the ‘short sketch of my origins and present situation’ran to nearly 2,000 words. It is an extraordinary example of an advertisement disguised as, at once, a life story, a revelation of his own psychology, a diverting narrative, an extended proverb, a commentary on contemporary manners, a theatrical farce, and an essay on social behaviour and the consciousness of rank in eighteenth-century England. Only in the first sentence is there the slightest hint, and in the last sentence the final confirmation, that the whole elaborate performance is a dream.

The social nightmare takes the form of the humbly raised Packwood (apprenticed as a barber and for sixteen or seventeen years ‘a knight of the comb or more vulgarly speaking a hair dresser') trying to overcome his appalling shyness and social gaucherie after he has risen in the world as a celebrated businessman. Despite lessons in deportment ‘from a professor who teaches grown men to dance', his acceptance of a Baronet's invitation to dinner is a spectacular disaster: first he treads on the gouty toe of his host, then he inadvertently reveals that his host's learning is counterfeit, and in so doing pulls down a false set of sixteen volumes of Xenophon, which falls onto a Wedgwood inkstand, the ink from which streams from an inlaid table top onto a Turkey carpet with Packwood frantically but unavailingly mopping with his handkerchief. Disaster succeeds disaster. He bows so low that he spills scalding soup into his lap. He spills a sauce boat. He knocks down a salt cellar. Even worse is to follow. When asked to pass Miss Louisa Friendly a pigeon whilst holding a piece of pudding on his fork, poor Packwood ‘in my haste, scarce knowing what I did, I whipped the pudding into my mouth hot as a burning coal, it was impossible to conceal my agony, my eyes were starting from their sockets; at last in spite of shame and resolution I was obliged to drop the cause of my torment on my plate'. Wine was advised to draw out the heat, but the butler gave him brandy‘with which I filled my mouth ... Totally unused to every kind of ardent spirits, with my tongue, throat, and palate, as raw as beef ... I could not swallow; and clapping my hands upon my mouth the liquor squirted through my nose and fingers, like a fountain over all the dishes’. To add absurdity to indignity he then wiped his face with the ill-fated handkerchief ... still wet from the consequence of the fall of Xenophon, and covered all my features with streaks of ink in every direction'. At this the scarcely suppressed hysteria of the company could be suppressed no longer, and Packwood fled the house to the sound of the whole household's laughter. His humiliation was complete, his lower parts ‘almost boiled’, his tongue and mouth grilled' and bearing the mark of Cain on his forehead' and covered in everlasting shame.

Any reader, whose enjoyment of the farce was being marred by the psychological cruelty of this social torture, was then instantly released from embarrassment by Packwood awaking from ‘a vision of a dream' and finding himself safe, and successful and happy ‘in the midst of my warehouse, famed for Razor Strops &c. at No. 16, Gracechurch-Street, London’. The whole elaborate performance was merely the prelude to yet another advertisement Courier, 16 April 1796.

It scems that there were no lengths to which Packwood was not willing to go to amuse and divert and astonish’⁵ his readers and potential customers. A string of anecdotes in praise of Packwood's superiority kept his name in the papers, and, he hoped, his product in the news. Thirty year old rusty razors were so transformed by his incomparable razor strop that a village barber ‘always saves one ... to shave Mr. Quiteright, the man-midwife, in cases of particular hurry" Mr. Nimrod of Kent was in an even greater hurry. He had such a partiality for hunting he could scarce find time to have his beard taken off; by the use of the superior Razor Strop, he now shaves himself on horseback, full gallop, without the least fear, loss of time, or hindrance of business'. Dr. Packwood printed such ‘well authenticated cases’(the result of the amazing powers of his antiobtuse Razor Strop’) along with the expression of his extreme’ pleasure ‘in being the means of stopping the unnecessary effusion of hurnan blood by the superlative power of his superior Razor Strop’."7

So proud indeed was Packwood of his Diverting Advertisements'that he could not bear that they disappear with the other ephemera in the daily press. He decided to re-use them, to squeeze further advertising value from them by republishing a collection of them. This publication is itself a milestone in the history of advertising. Newspaper advertisements were not always cheap. Daniel Stuart, whose brother bought the Oracle in 1795 and who together with his brother bought the Morning Post that year, (both papers used by Packwood), wrote that as ‘advertisements flowed in beyond bounds, and each was desirous of having his cloud of advertisements inserted at once ... I charged enormously high ... when a long advertisement of a column or two came."8 So not surprisingly Packwood saw advantage in republishing his expensive long advertisements. There were other advantages too. Although each newspaper had its own class of readership and were known for their particular class of advertisements, such differences could be exaggerated and many of their readers enjoyed the chance to see another's papers'characteristic style.79 Packwood's collection would give them the chance to do so. Some newspapers had a very select readership. In 1795, for instance, the daily circulation of the Oracle was a mere 800 and the Morning Post a mere 350 and although both then rose rapidly, these were too small to enjoy a monopoly of the advertisements Packwood placed in them. John Christie, the auctioneer, was sufficiently alive to the different audiences

reached by different newspapers, to go to the lengths of not only buying a part ownership in the Whig newspaper The Morning Chronicle, but also buying a part ownership of the Tory newspaper The Morning Post which started in 1772.

By republishing his advertisements Packwood could reach an audience unconfined to the special readership of particular newspapers. By ensuring that his own publication took advantage of every promotional trick he could think of, he made every effort to extend its sales. From title page to printers acknowledgements, Packwood's book of collected advertiseınents bristles with commercial intent.

Even the printer's postscript recognized the need to advertise---and to do so in an entertaining, eye-catching fashion. The acknowledgement to Walkinshaw, the printer, offers attractive confirmation of the comnitment to the power of advertisement, of the belief in the need to capture a potential customer's attention, of the clear recognition that mere' inforination, routinely offered, risks being ignored. To make sure that the requisite facts were noticed, and to heighten the chances of their being absorbed and remembered, the usual acknowledgement to the printer employed several typical Packwood techniques—the question and answer format, the nursery rhyme jingle, the use of negro slang and rhyming doggerel:

‘Who drew the Plate in the front of this book? I, says the Engraver. Who was the Engraver? I, says the Copper Plate Printer. Who was the Printer? I, says the—stop and read.

Now critics, no doubt, will find out a flaw,

A juvenile hand, nam'd A. Walk-in-shau,

In Finch and, Cornhill, he lives 'tis true,

And will for de pay—do as much for you.

FINIS.’80

Packwood's offering ended as it began with a deliberate effort to advertise through diverting and intriguing the reader. 'The title page of his booklet was characteristic of the whole. The title itself--Packwood's Whim: The Goldfinch's Nest; or the Way to Get Money and Be Happy—was a typical mixture of a prominent display of the Packwood name, an intriguing metaphor which echoed one of his standard advertising phrases, and the kind of promise exploited by contemporary How-to-succeed' literature.8 ‘The Way to Get Money' part of the title was an advertisement masquerading as financial advice: it consisted of no more than the caption ‘THE WAY TO GET MONEY' in bold capitals, defined in the words--is to sell a useful article that will do credit and sell to a good account, such as Packwood's Razor Strops and Paste; or his Goldfinch's Nest.'82 Catching the reader's attention and imprinting the Packwood brand name were clearly valued far more than honouring the promise in any more than a token fashion.

To further incite customer interest the title page carried the following intriguing inducement to buy—To Make this Publication worth your Money, that there may be NO GRUMBLING, AN HALF CROWN is placed in the Middle of it.' Since the price of the booklet was A GOOD TOWER SHILLING’ the route to a quick profit beckoned as invitingly as Packwood's subtitle, and just as deceivingly. The promise is honoured, but only after the whimsical manner of the whole publication, by a story entitled AN HALF CROWN’placed as advertised in the middle of the book. It is a simple device and an old one. The deception, so quickly revealed as such, was clearly regarded as venial, and well justified by its advertising power. For even the morally improving fable that appeared under the half-crown caption included a hearty plug for Packwood—appropriately enough in a morality tale of this kind, this particular plug was for Packwood the benevolent employer,8ª but it did not fail to include a footnote pointing out what Packwood manufactured and where his products could be bought.

To complete the title pages there is a handsome engraving of Packwood himself surrounded by shelf upon shelf of his celebrated razor strops and pointing to the box of paste which gave rise to the distinctive brand image of The Goldfinch's Nest.

Further tricked out with a Latin tag from Horace, and the warning that when you have perused this Book and assert you were neither Excited to Cry, Laugh or Grin—you must not expect to be Ranked among the most Favourite Customers', the title page closes characteristically with a sample of outlets where the book could be obtained in London, Edinburgh and Dublin, and the advice that a further list would be found at the back of the book.

This longer list of suppliers is entitled A few of the Names among many hundreds appointed for the Sale of Packwood's Razor Strops and Paste and Goldfinch's Nest'. It includes fifteen separate outlets in London and six in the country. These are clearly Packwood's more important outlets. The London outlets include three ‘Perfumers to the Prince of Wales', one Perfumer in ordinary to her Majesty', another 'famed for Restoring of Beauty' and there is even a cross reference complete with a page reference to the verses published in Packwood's Whim singing jointly the praises of Packwood's Razor Strops’and ‘British Shaving Paste'. This joint advertisement, masquerading as ‘Verses written extempore by a Gentleman immediately after Shaving'finished with the maxim

'If you would shave with ease and taste Usé PACKWOOD'S STROPS and BRITISH PASTE’.8ª

The provincial outlets listed are the ones which Packwood's provincial newspaper advertisements had introduced and backed. They too included a Perfumer to the Prince of Wales'—-yet another instance of the eighteenthcentury advertiser's reliance on social emulation and emulative spending—and Packwood reinforced his trademark by adding that his products ‘may be had at the sign of the Naked Truth, in different parts of the three kingdoms'.

Packwood's Whim, in fact, ends as it began with its insistent advertising message. But the ending is factual and repetitive compared with the whimsical beginning. For Packwood's Whim is more than a mere collection of published advertisements. It is like a miniature monograph on the skill of late eighteenth-century advertisers, and the variety of ways in which they exercised that skill. It is also a self-congratulatory business history signalling unmistakably the particular commercial skill its founder wished to be remembered for.

The book opens with an extended allegory entitled ‘THE GOLD-FINCH'S NEST, How discovered in the YEAR 1794'. Being intent on making his success story palatable to his readers, Packwood produced a most engaging piece of advertiser's copy masquerading as an historical account. Like a child's story, the narrative is simple, the events easily visualized and the chief characters (the commodities to be sold) are given the straightforward appeal of cartoon cut-outs, but the intention is plainly and insistently commercial. The economic intent may be playfully disguised, appealingly camouflaged, but only to the extent that a modern commercial uses animals to sugar its bid for the attention of its chosen market. The consumers are lulled into listening, amused into staying, cajoled into buying, and imprinted with an easily identifiable brand image so that they will buy and buy again. To help them remember the product and its image, its virtues and its distinctive character are repeated over and over again.

Because Packwood's circular boxes of razor paste, and the yellow balls of actual paste inside looked, as his illustrated frontispiece makes clear, like a nest of yellow eggs, Packwood based his introduction on the image of the goldfinch's nest. This allows him to advertise the site of the nest [his shop in Gracechurch Street, next door to the Cross Keys Inn',] allows him to date the arrival of his invention ['the first egg was deposited on the 23rd July 1794’], and allows him to describe its triumphant colonization of the market as a series of migrations: first to Brighton, then to London [Mr. Love in the Haymarket'], then to Scotland and Ireland, and beyond. The method allows him to give a particular plug for his best provincial outlets, such as Mr. Raeburn of Edinburgh and Mr. Simmons of Dublin who particularly witnessed the attachment of these birds, the latter having acknowledged that he had disposed of ten thousand in ten months after he had taken a fancy to them'.85

The metaphor is further.utilized to show how much they were valued, how universal was the spread of their sales, how their efficiency survived in different climates, how to sell them was to put oneself on a route to a rapid fortune, and of course where they could be bought from.

The introduction ends with the words: Indeed so much store was set by them, half a guinea has been known to be given for a single feather.8⁶ These birds can live in any part of the Universe, many of them having ventured as far as the East and West Indies, where they are in fine song and feather, notwithstanding the difference of the climate; such favorites [sic] are they in every part that those who take them under their care and will honourably return a part of the produce to the original Nest, may consider themselves on the eve of making a rapid fortune; such is the history of the discovery, rise, progress and present condition of the celebrated Goldfinch's Nest, the original of which may be seen to the entire satisfaction of the curious, at the sign of the Naked Truth, No. 16 Gracechurch-street London’.87

Tricked out with proverbs, anecdotes (improving, entertaining and defensive),88 self-congratulatory verses, mocking stories told against himself®9 and detailed directions on how to get the best out of his product, Packwood's Whim ends with a further self-commendation—

The Proprietor himself has stropped a notch out of his own common six-penny knife, and shaved himself dry (though a hard beard) without a lather,much cleaner and smoother than he had done for many years back.

To give you a faint idea, permit the Proprietor to observe, that a diamond or flint will cut glass, and this Strop will have as powerful an effect on steel by way of polishing;

and then some final advice on further reading:

Gentle Reader—if your patience is not exhausted in perusing the different serious and comic, prósaic, and poetic advertisements on the good properties of Razor Strops, and you have a desire for further information—by referring to the Tatler, by Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq. in 12mo. No. 224, there you may find Strops for Razors advertised with much more violence.º

Having published a book to advertise his advertisements, Packwood then published an advertisement to advertise further the book advertising those advertisements. To economize a little on his inventive powers, this last shot in this particular advertising campaign consisted of a single sheet of selected samples from the original advertisements which he had republished in Packwood’s Whim.

It consisted of three dialogues and two songs celebrating Packwood's products, and was distributed under the following description:

Just Published Price 1s

PACKWOOD'S WHIM: or the GOLDFINCH'S NEST

Including his different Advertisements on his celebrated RAZOR STROPS and PASTE, sold WHOLESALE or RETAIL for the author G. PACKWOOD, 16 GRACECHURCH-STREET, LONDON, by Mr. SIMMONS, Perfumer No. 120 Capel St. DUBLIN, and Mr. RAEBURN, Perfumer to the Prince of Wales, No. 13, North Bridge Street, EDINBURGH; also may be had of the different News Carriers in Town and Country, and of the Shop keepers appointed for the Sale of his Razor Strops and Paste.91

It was the culmination of a remarkable advertising campaign. Packwood could congratulate himself on having won the market of fashionable London, of having extended it through Brighton, Bath, Bristol, Gloucester, Dublin, Oxford, Edinburgh, Norwich, Northampton and the rest of the provinces, of having reached as far afield as the East and the West Indies, and having sold as many as ten thousand of his products through a single outlet in ten months. Since each step of this campaign is recorded in his newspaper advertisements, since each provincial outlet is registered in the advertisements in the appropriate provincial newspaper, and since the remarkable variety of his promotional ploys have survived for posterity in the sixty different types of newspaper advertisements he used in less than two years, his publicity campaign is a remarkable testimony to the effectiveness of a planned commercial assault on the consumer market by one of those much derided lessermen of business' who operated so successfully in the late eighteenth-century economy, but who have failed so signally to be appreciated by twentieth-century historians. Packwood does not deserve the anonymity which has been thrust upon him.

His achievements as a writer of advertising copy were too memorable to merit being overlooked. For by selling under ‘the sign of the Naked Truth', under the brand image of the Goldfinch's Nest', and backed by the insistent drum beat of the Packwood name repeated over and over again in his newspaper advertisements, Packwood succeeded in the twin aims of all advertisers—to hammer home his product's distinctive values and virtues, and its superiority over all rivals, and yet, by the novelty and invention with which essentially the same message was ceaselessly conveyed, to prevent interest in his product from flagging. So although the basic message remained the same, this theme song was presented in almost endless variations. Interest was never allowed to grow stale, the campaign was never allowed to lose momentum.

As a result he could afford, in Packwood's Whim, a deserved note of self-congratulation. He published it deliberately on 23 July 1796—two years to the day since, as he whimsically described it, ‘the first egg was deposited’.92 To have so quickly and effectively, by his own estimation, captured a chosen market as a result of a deliberate advertising campaign is further evidence of the high levels of commercial skill being deployed by late eighteenthcentury entrepreneurs. To demonstrate the case in all its depth and variety requires that the campaigns of individual businessmen be painstakingly picked out and collected from the advertising columns of eighteenth-century newspapers. For it must not be thought that Packwood did not have many rivals busily manipulating consumer demand in other fields. Many a Packwood lies undiscovered—or at least uncelebrated—in the advertising sheets of late Georgian England.

The self-congratulatory, whimsical tone of Packwood's advertisements invite the suspicion of an elaborate literary spoof on the advertisements of the day, but no such understandable suspicions can be cast on the welter of advertisements from a myriad other sources—many of them equally whimsical in tone, equally baroque in their use of imagery, equally ornate in their use of language, and undeniably serious in their commerciaì intent.

No more than an illustrative sample can be cited here but they should suffice to give some more general flavour of the nature of contemporary advertisements than Packwood alone can give. What his advertisements illustrate in detail about the process of commercialization is confirmed in general by the full range of products which were enthusiastically promoted in the newspapers and advertising sheets of the day.

Few experiences more vividly convey the sense of a consumer society than a sustained diet of late eighteenth-century advertisements. In content, in commodities promoted, even in psychological approach, sometimes even in style, and certainly in the human compulsions they pandered to, they remind one irresistibly of the rampant commercialism and the uninhibited materialism of American television advertising. Like present-day commercials, eighteenth-century advertisements were insistently preoccupied with food, drink and health, with fashion and cosmetics. Preserving one's health, improving one's appearance, and enhancing one's status and happiness through the acquisition of material possessions—these were, and indeed are, the obsessions which they exploited.

To complete the sense of déjà vu [or rather déjà lu in the case of the wordy advertisements of Georgian England], they were laced with lotteries offering golden prizes for the fortunate just as American television programmes are increasingly laced with panel games, the major interest of which lies in the cash prizes won, and the simple technique of which is little advanced on the lottery.

The language was inevitably slightly different—teeth were artificial rather than false, waves were not yet claimed to be permanent, hair was frankly dyed rather than genteely colour-rinsed. The dominant approach was still verbal rather than visual. The claims were unhindered by even the loosest code of advertising ethics—they were even less on oath than the authors of epitaphs, so superlatives abound and the most remarkable combinations of virtues co-exist in a single product. The knocking copy of rivals was more direct-usually straightforward warnings of deceit and commercial theft. But the similarities were greater than the differences. There was the same insistent propaganda, the same constant repetition of brand names, the same exploitation of snobbery and social emulation, the same use of the famous and the authoritative to promote their products—royalty used their hair dyes, doctors recommended their medicines, dentists sanctioned their tooth pastes, fashion leaders enthused over their new clothes styles. They even used eminent engineers to give authority to their cements and Parker and Company published in 1796 a long encomium by Thomas Telford, the famous engineer and road builder, in recommendation of their Roman Cement and Artificial Terras and Stucco'.93

Not all the recommendations were as dignified or as scientific as Telford's. Those urged to buy Prince's Cherry Lotion—the more firmly to secure their teeth—were assured that A Lady of Distinction has declar'd that most of her teeth became loose and some dropped out quite sound, but after using four bottles of Cherry Lotion the remainder of her Teeth became quite firm. Ask for Prince's Cherry Lotion. ½ a guinea a bottle, or one dozen bottles Five Pounds’.4

In a monthly publication such as La Belle Assemblée or The Universal Advertising Sheet—a magazine wholly devoted to advertisements—one gets a concentrated impression of the major products offered for sale through advertisement to the fashionable market of Georgian England. Where the provincial press carried a far higher proportion of lost and found advertisements, adverts for local schools and local sales, for flower seeds and vegetables, for wetnurses and flea-killers, The Universal Advertising Sheet was uninhibitedly up-market, designed for the capital and reflecting London taste. It was the original source of many of the advertisements for consumer products that filtered rapidly through to the provinces by way of domestic servants' talk, by way of handbills, trade cards, provincial shops and warehouses, and of course, the provincial press which increasingly diluted its advertisements for pigs and poultry with the products most in demand in the capital

But the overwhelming first impression which one gets from the pages of The Universal Advertising Sheet is of the dominant place occupied by face-creams, toothpastes, hair dyes, soaps and shampoos, by patent medicines and convenience foods, of hats and gloves, and corsets and dresses (indeed of the full panoply of female fashion). The major fare offered (as in present day advertisements whether in women's magazines or on television) was concerned with cleaning and beautifying the human body—in particular, the skin, the teeth and women's hair; and then in dressing it fashionably; and then in satisfying its appetites, and curing its ills. Furnishing the home with furniture, curtains, clocks, carpets, table clothing, pottery, cutlery and such like played a less prominent role than in the less grand publications.

Those unversed in late eighteenth-century commercial techniques are often surprised at the prominent place occupied by advertisement for convenience foods. Whereas in the 1720s separate books and pamphlets were written explaining in elaborate detail how to choose, store and prepare one's coffee—having first chosen your Nuts'and stored them in a garret (cellars were too damp, kitchens too warm) you were required to roast them slowly over a clear charcoal fire, then crush them between polished Porphyric stones acquired specially for that purpose;9⁵ by 1800 one was being offered instant coffee by Hawkins and Dunn. This advertisement under a banner headline COFFEE MADE IN ONE MINUTE’assured their customers that ‘a small teaspoon full ... put into ... boiling water ... instantly makes a cup of strong clear Coffee',9⁶ and pointed out that it was now distributed throughout the country and could be purchased from both ‘Grocers and Chemists &c.’97

Other convenience foods figure prominently—such as ‘Tomata (sic) Ketchups', ‘Portable Soups and Gravies'and a whole battery of ready-made sauces. Under the title SAUCE EPICURIENNE Jasper Taylor tells us that his sauce is available in bottles in London, Kingston, Bath, Cambridge Portsmouth, and Greenwich, and adds that

The very high esteem in which this invaluable Sauce is held by the Nobility and Gentry, as well as for its exquisite flavour, as for its general application to all the purposes of Cookery, calls forth the grateful acknowledgement of JASPER TAYLÒR and SON, the Înventors, for the liberal patronage afforded them; and induces them to take this public method of apprising such of their friends, and the Public in general, as have not yet had an opportunity of trying its unrivalled excellence, that it is the best Sauce for Steaks and Chops, Fish, Hashes, Ragouts, Soups, Hot and Cold Meats, ever invented, and is generally approved of in almost every preparation of the culinary art. And they have the further gratification to add,'that it will keep good in any climate, and for any length of time.98

There was plenty of competition for this market. In the same periodical AVELING'S SAUCE A LA RUSSE’was advertised ‘for Fish, Game, Steaks, Chops, Cutlets, Stews, Hashes, Harricoes (sic), Curries, Made Dishes, Cold Meats, or any Dish that requires a fine flavour'. Mr. Aveling cautioned his customers that ‘the wellknown excellence and high estimation of the first Families and most curious in Fish Sauces in the Kingdom, with the increasing demands for Aveling's Sauce a la Russe, has induced many Shopkeepers to offer for sale a Composition of their own, under the same name. The Proprietor begs leave to caution the Public against such deception.'99 [Such constant warnings give some impression of how quickly any fashionable product was copied and reproduced. It was a major preoccupation of every tradesman—whether a great manufacturer like Josiah Wedgwood or a modest purveyor of Razor-Strops like George Packwood.]

Other forerunners of modern products are provided by advertisements for such products as TRENTS DEPILATORY for the greater beauty of women's arms, or ATKINSON'S ORIGINAL CURLING FLUID [a chemical article as innocent as new milk'], or MRS. SASS’ FEMALE AGENCY [even temporary assistants provided’], or WITMER'S SICIL-IAN BLOOM OR YOUTH BEAUTY, or John Ogilvy's POMMADE DIVINE, or TROTTER'S ORIENTAL DENTIFRICE, or PEAR'S TRANSPARENT SOAP, or the music publishers who produced their own lists of the current ‘top twelve'songs with Miss Matthew's ‘The Indian Maid’and ‘The Nightingale's Club’occupying first and second place, and Miss Edgeworth's songs at three and four.

Less surprising is the welter of proprietary brand medicines, such as Dixon's Antibilious Pills, Dr. Fothergill's Female Pills, Godbold’s Vegetable Balsam for Asthma, Butler's Restorative Tooth powder, Hackman's Pills for the Gravel and Stone. They were not modest in their claims. Dr. Fothergill's Nervous Cordial Drops were ‘the most powerful Restorative both for preventing and curing all Cases of Lowness and Nervous Affections, Hypochondriacs, Hysterics, Spasms, Palsy, Apoplexy, loss of Appetite, Bilious Complaints, Convulsions and Fits attending Pregnancy, Stomach Complaints, Heartburn, Sick Headache, &c.'º In view of the range of specific cures, not to mention the etcetera, the price at 4/6 a bottle could scarcely be held to be excessive, but if the drops were too specific in their cure or something less expensive was needed Dr. Fothergill's Female Pills offered a cheaper and more general palliative for the Ladies: We would beg leave to observe that Beauty loses its lustre without the possession of Health, and cannot be supplied by the roseate tint and artificial hue; on this account we would recommend to their attention DR. FOTHERGILL'S FEMALE PILLS, a medicine unparalleled in the cure of different Complaints incident to the Female Sex at particular periods of Life, and for preserving the Female Constitution at all times in a regular healthy condition, these Pills uniting the highest tonic and invigorating powers for only 2/9 a box."01

Such advertisements for proprietary medicines have, of course, a long history and as early as 1710 Addison was complaining in The Tatler of the polemical advertisements of the several Proprietors of Dr. Anderson's Pills:¹º2 by 1730 the newspapers themselves were attacking the exaggerated claims of Prolifick Elixirs’(which cured ‘barrenness in women, or imbecility in men', and ‘even seems to keep back the effect of old age itself' by promoting the cheerfull curricle of the blood and juices', by raising all the fluids to one more florid and sparkling', by evidently replenishing the crispy fibres of the whole habit with a generous warmth and balmy moisture’),10ª saying of this remarkable piece of copy-writing ‘The author of this great Secret means no more than by putting so many nonsensical phrases together, to make one Fool or another believe it is worth 5 shillings a bottle';¹4 and by 1741 the Publick Register was self-righteously declaring that‘whereas one fourth part at least of all the Papers that are now extant, is filled with Quack advertisements; to prevent the like in this and to give room for matter of importance no Advertisements will be admitted, but such as relate to Books and Pamphlets.'105

Historians of advertising have understandably made good use of such quotable examples,1º⁶ and it is important that we do not forget that advertisements for most products have a literary pedigree which reaches back far into the distant past. Graffiti on the wall of the Street of Abundance in the Pompeii of the first century A.D. have been listed in some histories of advertisement, and it is certainly not difficult to find examples of early commercialism in England before the eighteenth century.

An early, if rather primitive, form of product differentiation’can be seen in the same cloth being sold as durances, durettos, damazines and damazellas ... as it is conceived the same might vent or sell the better'under different names.¹7 And in Houghton's Collections at the beginning of the eighteenth century there are many examples which have an anachronistically modern ring to them. To cite, for instance, the description of a liquid soap . . . which for its sweetness and delicacy in washing the finest laces, muslins, cambricks and other fine linens preserving their strength and beauty and making them curiously clear and white will be of great use and benefit to Your Majesty's subjects’,108 might seem to offer clear evidence of the soapmaker William Coupland effectively selling his liquid soap by advertisement. In fact he was seeking a patent for it, and the Commissioner of Excise heard the case in 1718 and turned Coupland down.

The early advertisers—John Houghton and his Collections, Edward Lloyd and Lloyd's News in the 1690s, and Charles Povey, General Remark on Trade of 1705, or The General Advertiser of 1707 or the Useful Intelligence of 1711—deserve to be remembered as pioneers, but their importance must not be overstated. Those who call Houghton the ‘Father of Advertising' should make clear that although he may have sown a seed, his child was to require a healthy period of gestation before it was safely delivered and could announce its lusty presence in the eighteenth century. Houghton's A Collection for Improvement of Husbandry and Trade was only incidentally a vehicle for advertising—starting with his coy advertisement for his own chocolates in issue No. 12. Although he went on to advertise all sorts of things that are honourable', his papers remained essentially a useful means of spreading knowledge on husbandry to the farming community. In the same way Lloyd's News carried only the occasional advertisement, and, to judge from the few copies which have survived, Povey's advertising sheets were given away free like handbills and carried notices mainly about quack medicines.

They were part of the first stirring of the commercialization of the eighteenth century. They were the forerunners of the Daily Advertiser and the London Advertiser of 1731; the General Advertiser of 1744, the Public Advertiser of 1752, the Morning Post and Daily Advertising Pamphlet of 1772, and the Morning Advertiser of 1795. Many of those earlier titles are testimony to the short life and kaleidoscopic changes of title from which early eighteenth-century newspapers suffered. But some of the later ones showed an impressive ability to survive and prosper in the favourable demand conditions prevailing later in the century, and it is worth remembering how many famous and successful newspapers began their lives as advertising sheets or Trade organs in the reign of George III—the Public Ledger (1760), The Morning Post (1772), The Times (1785) and The Morning Advertiser (1795)—as indeed did famous auctioneers who advertised in them like

Christies and Tattersalls. Fhey were part of the ever increasing tide of commercial activity. It was in the 1740s that Fielding wrote ‘Totus mundus agit Pufstrionem', and although he was satirizing mainly politicians and writers (the chief Art of Book-Puffing’) he also noted as part of the pervasive puffery that “tis this gave the Tradesmen the first notions of Signs, Handbills, fine shops . .. etc.'.19 Certainly by mid-century the advertisements for ready made gowns’, for pewter, copper, brass, silver and furniture and such like were beginning to rival the quack ımedicines in the largeness of their promise and the space they occupied in the press. By the 1770s the multitude of fine manufacturers and trinkets of which the shops are full', which according to Hanway provided so much entertainment and expense for the domestics', were announced widely in even provincial newspapers."º Since one third of many of those newspapers was given over to advertisements they had ample room in which to compete.

By the end of the century the spread of advertisements and the quality of some of the practitioners had developed to such a level that it is difficult to deny 'that in this aspect of marketing and salesmanship a commercial revolution had occurred in the course of the eighteenth century. England was increasingly taking on the appearance and the behaviour patterns of a consumer society. It was not, of course, a society of the high mass consumption type which prevails in so many countries today, but many of the infant features characteristic of those societies were unmistakably present in the world of newspaper advertisement. The consumer society conceived in the 1690s was certainly born by the 1790s, and the process of commercialization had penetrated an impressive array of consumer industries.

Those who looked back on this period from the mid-nineteenth century spoke of it as a period in which the British public developed ‘a remarkable appetite for puffs and swallow[ed] then of all sorts and sizes, and in all sorts of places.'"1 For every new publication and newspaper, and the walls and windows of every city, town and village, teem with the multiplicity and variety of some of their advertisements'.11² Not every one approved but the process of commercialization was widely recognized.11³

One does not need to search to find illustrative advertising material by 1800. There is by then an embarrassment of riches and a remarkable range of products. In Bell's Monthly Compendium of Advertisements there were advertisements for Windsor Chairs, the Encyclopaedia Britannica, Handel's Vocal Works, Hogarth's complete works, and Vandyke's Portraits of Illustrious Persons. There were advertisements for periodicals such as The

Repository of Arts with fifty-one plates which carried articles on Patterns of British Manufacture', Ladies Carriage Costumes, Ladies Morning Walking Dress, Ladies Opera Dress', ‘the Comforts of Houses', and Cottage Ornée Styles'. Cooke's Elegant Editions offered selected poets, from Shakespeare at 2s. to Dryden at 6s. 6d.; selected novels (from Zadig for 1s., Candide for 1s. 6d. to Tom Jones at 8s., Don Quixote at 10s., and Pamela at 11s. 6d.); and a collection of British classics.

Instead of universal elixirs the market now carried specialists like Mr. Laidlaw the Chiropodist dealing with Corns, Callosities and Bunions', and Mr. Macarsie who dealt with ‘the Diseases of the Female Organs' and never fail[ed] to impart the desired effect', and specialist products such as Mucillage of Marshmallows (a remedy for the Gravel), or CHING'S PATENT WORM LOZENGES for children (which carried the approving testimony of the Earl of Exeter, the Bishop of Carlisle, the Duchess of Leeds and Rutland, and four Countesses, and which could be bought in bulk ‘for charitable purposes’), or ‘BUTLER'S AROMATIC PECTORAL LOZ-ENGES for Coughs'. Cures increasingly carried an impressive testimony of expert support: William Lewis who listed five London outlets for his Rheumatism Pills, and suppliers in twenty seven provincial towns (some of which, like Bath, needed four sellers to cope with the local demand), called on the support of the great Boerhaeve', the truly illustrious Cullen' and the writings of Bergius to ‘sanction the propriety, safety and efficacy of the medicine now offered'. Mr. de Chamant's IMPROVED MINERAL TEETH carried an even more impressive list to prove the superiority of his teeth ... over those taken from dead bodies, or those fabricated of any other animal substances which are always corruptible and occasion a very offensive smell'. The mineral teeth carried the opprobation of all the learned societies of Europe and that of the most eminent Medical Gentlemen of Europe'. For those who needed more detail there was a list including Dr. Jenner, Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Baillie, Dr. Hooper, Sir Henry Halford, Bart., Sir G. Blane, Bart., Sir W. Farquhar, Bart., Sir James Earle, Ashley Cooper Esq., H. Clyne Esq., R. Keate Esq., J. Heaviside Esq., W. Blair, Esq.

Similar lists appeared in support of soothing syrups for gums, cures for teething babies, cures for ticklish coughs and troublesome colds. Improved dentifrices, better soaps, more effective hair shampoos or quicker-acting depilatories all received the support and recommendation of either the authoritative or the fashionable, the former dominating the advertisements for medicines, the latter presiding over the sales of cosmetics. The claim that Colley's depilatory' would ‘remove superfluous hair from faces, necks and arms in 2 minutes', or that Mrs. Vincent's Gowland's Lotion for the Skin adds lustre to even the perfect beauty' and for the less fortunate cleanses the skin of all deformities'was often not enough to sell them without the additional facts that they were used by royal or aristocratic or at least fashionable women recognized and admired by their potential female markets.

There were specialist advertisements forCamphorated Matches for producing instantaneous Light': forChapman's Patent Pocket Lanterns', for Hill's Permanent Ink for Marking Linen'and his rival Scott's for the same purpose, for ‘Table Covers’, Furniture Cloths’, for Portable Shower Baths’ (complete with curtains), for ‘more Economical Air Stoves’(may be seen constantly in use in Ludgate Hill’), for‘Henry Marriott's Improved Patent Kitchen Range’, for Portable kitchens of various sizes convenient for Fishing, Sailing and Shooting Parties, and also for Camps, or to be used in the open Air', or even, at the extreme range of the market for portable objects, Small Portable Fire Engines'. Other specialists advertised their‘Treble distilled Lavender Water', or their ‘Chronometers', their Snuff boxes, tooth picks and pencil cases, their opera glasses, their thimbles, combs, their ‘egg spoons which do not lose their colour in the Eggs as Silver does', and all sorts of jewellery. Watches, any faults in which will ‘be rectified free of expense during the course of a whole year'were sold by many advertisers.‘To All Who Value Their Sight' Bradbury's patent spectacles were strongly recommended

‘The Sight of the Aged is restored

The Weak Sight Strengthened

And the Perfect Sight preserved

Upon unerring principles'.

‘Scott's Original Liquid Dyes'had not only been sold for thirty years, not only carried an impressive range of specialist colours which would dye any article of dress, as Silks, Muslins, Laces, Cottons, Linens, Feathers, Flowers &c.' but their advertisements kept the public informed of the rapidly changing fashions, and even specified which colour was in for what garment—‘The Pink and Lilac are the present Fashionable colours for Silk Stockings'. Special Sales, Reductions in price, New Years Gifts, Special Autumn and Winter offers were all well advertısed. New patents for anything from a new shape in a parasol or a new style in Ladies' Grecian stays received impressive promotional coverage. The examples are legion.

This sample is deliberately kaleidoscopic, and alì these advertisements are deliberately chosen from a single source—Bell's Monthly Compendium of Advertisements in the first decade of the nineteenth century—to give a representative sample of the range of goods being assiduously and repetitively advertised by the turn of the century. But such advertisements were the satellites to the real stars of the fashion magazines—the silks, linens, cottons and all their fashionable concoctions provided by such as Mrs. Bell. The latest fashions from Paris, the latest colours, the latest designs were paraded each month before an expectant audience. Mrs. Bell was attentive to the needs of all ages. She was assiduous in solving the problems of the pregnant or the merely obese, she produced new inventions for the dress of nursing mothers; she invented her ‘impervious Chapeau' as a substitute for the Parasol in March of one year and had the unequivocal approbation of all

Ladies of taste by September’, and she promoted an endless stream of new ideas.114

Mrs. Bell was an advertiser of Packwood's quality in her perseverance, ingenuity and imagination. By tracing the full range of her advertisements one could build up a portfolio of promotional literature to match his. She too gave her inventions blanket coverage in order to ensure success.

But if George Packwood and Mrs. Bell were the stars of the advertising world there were many others recognized by their contemporaries as equally highly skilled and equally effective. The English Review of 1825 carried a retrospective piece entitled ‘The Art of Advertising Made Easy' which singled out for praise Lawton's Patent Lock advertisement which offered one hundred guineas to any Artist who can pick it’; Prince's Original Russia Oil, a well advertised hair dye; and Rowland's Toilet preparations which were commended for the sheer persistence with which they were promoted. Other famous advertisements included Robert Warren's advertisement for boot blacking which not only carried a long poem in the Packwood style but carried a Cruickshank woodcut of a cat astonished by its own reflection in a boot polished with Warren's product—this single advertisement was credited with making Warren's fortune.115

## \* \* \*

This chapter has concerned itself with one aspect of the process of commercialization—the art of advertising. It has concerned itself particularly with one man's manipulation of consumer demand through one aspect of that art—namely newspaper advertisements. With a varied sample of contemporary advertisers drawn largely from one further source it has attempted to illustrate the extent of the commercializing process through the quality, the ubiquity, the variety and the pervasive nature of the advertisements with which so many entrepreneurs launched and sustained their assault on the new consumer market of Georgian England. To demonstrate how far the process had developed by the turn of the century, special attention has been focused on the years of the Napoleonic Wars.

By casting a wider net over the sales campaigns of more businessmen, by including the promotional techniques involved in other aspects of selling-auctions and shops and showrooms, markets and fairs, pedlars and travelling salesmen, loss leaders and inertia-selling campaigns (to mention only a sample); by choosing one's advertisements from all available newspapers; and by including the whole century within one's canvas, one could dramatically widen the evidential catchment area in support of the process of commercialization. But there are advantages to be found in the discipline of these self-imposed limits which would be lost by an historian trawling for evidence over a less restricted area and timespan.

By focusing on a single businessman one can demonstrate more conclusively just how advanced and varied, and how important to his business strategy, advertising in the late eighteenth century could be. By concentrating on an individual advertising campaign one can demonstrate in more convincing detail its characteristic quality. By limiting oneself to little more than a decade one can give a more concentrated flavour of the prevailing advertising practices. By eschewing the full range of newspapers one can show how wide and varied a diet of advertising copy could be directed at a single readership. By concentrating on Packwood and his advertisements, one can draw attention to the impressive extent to which a small businessman could master at least one aspect of business skills, and by implication draw attention to the hordes of contemporary small businessmen whose contribution to the process of commercialization has been ignored, or more likely, completely overlooked.

In overlooking the collective importance of these forgotten men of business, historians all too often seriously distort the historical record, and greatly over-simplify the process of economic change.

All too often when one argues the case for a qualitative change in business practice and commercial techniques of eighteenth-century entrepreneurs, the standard rejoinder, from those who remain unimpressed, is that not every businessman was a Wedgwood'. Now few would wish to challenge such a view less than I would, but I would wish to take issue with some of the conclusions drawn from it. For all too often in conceding quite properly the primacy of the entrepreneurial giants, the sceptics (sceptical, that is, about the general level of business skills that prevailed in the Industrial Revolution) imply that the gifted few existed in lonely isolation, practising their highly developed, but atypical, business skills so far above and beyond the comprehension, and the practice, of the hordes of lesser businessmen that they should be regarded as the glamorous exceptions who prove the mediocre rule.

Paradoxically the importance of the few can be diminished rather than enlarged by their present isolation. For rather than being seen as the undoubted leaders in a surge of entrepreneurial energy, as part of a widespread change in commercial attitudes and technique, they can be presented as unrepresentative men of genius whose commercial brilliance helps to explain their own individual success but casts little light on the habits of their lesser business contemporaries, or on the general process of economic change. For if they can be established as atypical and unrepresentative, their achievements can be presented as of little general significance.

Professor Payne, writing of the entrepreneurs of the Industrial Revolution, states that the names which have become famous ... were not typical',116 and goes on to say ‘that it is not inconceivable that more representative were [those] whose concerns suffered from serious entrepreneurial shortcomings coupled with gross mismanagement'.117 Clearly this is not inconceivable. But the choice of representative businessmen does not have to lie between the brilliant and the grossly incompetent. There are places on the spectrum of business skills for many more types than that. Many who would fail the requirements for the former category were very far from fitting into the latter. Many like Packwood might find that one commercial skill developed to a sufficient level was more than adequate to bring about and explain his distinctive achievements. After all if one posits a sufficiently exacting definition of entrepreneurial excellence, most businessmen will fail to meet it. According to J. K. Galbraith, Henry Ford had exceptionally comprehensive shortcomings as an entrepreneur'.118 Looked at from a suitable eminence of individual achievement the lesser fellows inevitably look in Robert Owen's dismissive phrase like the plodding men of business"9 that the great many clearly were. These men were not the human prototypes for Schumpeter's heroic definition of the entrepreneur as a creative destroyer, they were not entrepreneurial polymaths, but by their mastery of a single skill they could often make a significant contribution to rapid economic progress. If sufficient numbers practised that skill at a sufficiently high level, their collective importance could be as great as, or even greater than, the heroic individuals.

In the present state of entrepreneurial studies conclusive answers are not possible. One does not need to labour the point that the archives which have survived are few, that those which have been systematically and critically researched are even fewer, and that since business success both favoured archival survival and attracted historical attention, the favoured few consists largely of the great and the glamorous and the archivally well preserved. It is not the prominence of the great which should cause concern. That is inevitable and largely deserved. Our concern should be for the sea of ignorance over which their prominence looms, and the effects which this has on our judgement concerning the overall importance of their individual achievements.

For those who wish to present the Wedgwoods as unquestionably exceptional, and yet also as representative of a larger scale movement made up of countless imitators and, in some branches of business skill, emulators like Packwood, there is an evidential problem in the lack of supporting case studies.

116 P. L. Payne in The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, vol. VII, Part I, ed. P. Mathias and M. M. Postan (1978), p. 187.

See ibid., and P. L. Payne, British Entrepreneurship in the Nineteenth Century (1974), p.

118 J. K. Galbraith, The Liberal Hour (1960), pp. 141–63.

19 Robert Owen, Life of Robert Owen: Written by Himself, (1857), p. 31.

This study of George Packwood is a modest attempt to start filling the evidential gap, to show that Packwood in his own more limited sphere was as alive and as responsive as Wedgwood was to the possibilities of manipulating and satisfying demand, and to demonstrate that in his own chosen speciality—the art of advertising—he far surpassed the great potter.

Packwood and his retailers selling his goods under the sign of the Naked Truth were essential agents in the process of commercialization. Such men provided the network of commercial outlets which helped to make possible the emergence of a consumer society. Without their assiduous advertising, without their persistent promotion of their product image, without their remorseless repetition of their brand names, aggregate home demand would have lost a vital sustaining element in its growth and its social and geographical diffusion. They spread both news of their products and the product themselves. They made them both fashionable and accessible. They made them both more desirable and more easily purchasable. They were, in H. G. Wells’ phrase, the true propagandists of consumption’.120

For·Packwood was but one of an unsung chorus of such men. They may be unsung and uncelebrated by historians today, but they certainly made their collective voice heard in their own society as they incessantly proclaimed their commercial message. Their advertisements were so ubiquitous and so insistent in late Georgian England that contemporaries complained that one could no more avoid their presence than one could resist the blatant appeal of their commercial promises. It was the commercial imagination and promotional creativity of Packwood and his like which help to explain why Flora Tristan wrote, after visiting England four times between 1826 and 1839,‘The puff is so much a part of English life that one encounters it everywhere'.121†

PART II

Commercialization and Politics

by John Brewer