# CHAPTER FIVE

## Commercialization and Politics\*

Eighteenth-century politics have traditionally been interpreted as the exclusive preserve of a patrician elite. Only the maiming of deer and the savage slaughter of the fox, it is argued, were a match for politics as the sport of gentlemen. Institutionalized politics, like game, was a highly prestigious, restricted multiple use-right. In a nation conveniently divided into the two classes of patricians' and plebeians', the former monopolized both the hunt and the benches of Parliament, while the latter were—with varying degrees of efficiency—excluded from both. To a remarkable degree Namier's view of Hanoverian society accords with that of recent social historians: we now have a peculiar consensus, uniting those whose political ideologies are often diametrically opposed, on the state of Hanoverian politics and society.

But the danger of this emerging orthodoxy is that it tends to ignore the considerable body of evidence for a growing group—the middling sort or bourgeoisie—who were numerous—as many as a million of the nation's nearly seven million citizens—and who began, during the course of the century, to distinguish themselves socially and politically from the patrician élite and the labouring poor. We should not regard these men of moveable property, members of professions, tradesmen and shopkeepers who inhabit the pages of the trade directories published in growing numbers from the 1760s onwards, as one-dimensional men. They were not simply a service sector for the aristocracy, a client economy' catering to the whims of the rich and helping them in their appropriation of the wealth of the poor. Though there were many such people amongst their number, ranging from the blind musicians who played at aristocratic orgies to the land stewards, lawyers and estate agents who frugally managed their masters'estates, not every member of the middle ranks of society was tied to the coat-tails of the aristocracy. Neither were they simply stout captains of industry and enterprise, ruthlessly intent upon opening up mass markets, a bourgeois vanguard striving through the ideology of entrepreneurship to produce the industrial revolution.

Yet these two types—the client of the aristocracy and the entrepreneur in the free market—are important expressions of a tension or duality that can be found within the eighteenth-century middling sort of people. There does seem to have been a first, measured move—led by sprinters such as Wedgwood and Boulton—away from the cosseted and constrained world of the client economy and towards the exploitation of a broadly based and socially heterogeneous market. Even the many, many small enterprises of the period felt this change. The broadening of the market involved a change in social and economic values; a transformation of the relationship between producers, distributors and consumers. Of course the patricians were still a vital part of the clientele—producers like Wedgwood were well aware of the value of a spectacular sale to a princeling, potentate or peer: those, after all, were the men who created fashion'—but, increasingly, the aristocracy constituted the top end of a large market rather than the market tout court.¹ They could no longer exercise such complete control or command through their purchasing power and patronage.

The problem, however, is to explain how this shift came about, Moreover, if, as seems probable, it was accompanied by a change in values, can we see any connection between this development and any particular eighteenthcentury political viewpoint? I want to suggest a number of reasons why the client economy and the sort of politics that went with it should have seemed increasingly unattractive in the eighteenth century, and why a more broadly based market and a more equitably grounded politics should have been seen as desirable and mutually reinforcing replacements for the old order. The objections to the client economy were simple enough: the dependence of the tradesman on aristocratic patronage placed him in a highly vulnerable, occasionally humiliating and certainly weak position vis-à-vis his customer. The political influence that the patrician commanded either in the locality near his country seat or at court if he were in the metropolis could be used with crippling effect against the recalcitrant or uncooperative tradesman. Though Namier has reminded us that this iron fist was often clothed in a velvet glove, the mere prospect of retribution was often sufficient to enjoin deference. Clients in the client economy were not free'but tied, no matter how discreetly, to their patrons. Moreover the client economy compounded one of the greatest problems that faced the eighteenth-century tradesman, namely that of credit and debt. The patricians simply passed on their own indebtedness to the trader by taking credit and failing to pay their bills promptly, or, sometimes, not at all. No grievance was felt more strongly than this hidden subsidy to aristocratic wealth.

The client economy was an integral part of aristocratic and courtly politics.

It formed one of the main buttresses of a political structure superintended with consummate skill by a succession of Whig oligarchs who established an efficient patronage system, a firm executive and a governmental financial structure based on deficit spending. Here again there was much to provoke the resentment and hostility of the tradesman, small merchant and shopkeeper. The douceurs of government—contracts to supply the armed forces, government loans—were not distributed liberally but reserved for the privileged few—the moneyed interest in the City and a few merchant fat-cats. As the century progressed, so it appeared that the middling sort were paying an increasingly large part of the tax burden that supported what they saw as a system of graft and corruption. Taxes on commodities—tea, sugar, tobacco, spirits, corn, beer, salt, glass—in the form of customs and excise duties subsidized, so it was claimed, the Hanoverian court, aristocratic pleasure-seekers and the venal transactions of stockjobbers and financiers. Indeed, the hostility to public credit was not an objection to credit per se—most bourgeois were all too familiar with the practical necessities of borrowing and lending—but to its abuse for the aggrandisement of unscrupulous and idle individuals through speculation, peculation and graft. (Beckford's language in a parliamentary speech of 1761 evokes this attitude: he criticized the aristocracy who receive more from the public than they pay to it. If you were to cast up all their accounts and fairly state the balance, they would turn out to be debtors to the public.')² This issue grew as a matter of public and especially bourgeois concern throughout the century as more and more traders were affected by fluctuations in national business confidence. Though there was not to be another disaster of the magnitude of the South Sea Bubble of 1720, the fear of an unsavoury reprise was never far from the tradesman's mind, and he was only too ready to blame the metropolitan financiers for the tremors that periodically shook the nation.

Many of the objections that tradesmen and urban groups made to the Whig patronage system and the client economy were, of course, shared by country gentlemen and Tories. But the bourgeois use of country ideology was highly selective, and its preoccupations were somewhat different from those of its allies. The urban element, dominated by the city of London, was much more likely to connect the problem of dismantling the spoils system with those regulating credit and of achieving independence from the client economy. The bourgeoisie's notion of independence reveals their difference from the country gentlemen. Traders and merchants saw independence not as freedom conferred by landed property but, as comments in the press show, as freedom from the economic political control of the patricians.

Yet before any alternative to clientage could be considered, and before the free market could even appear as a remotely attractive alternative, certain conditions had to be fulfilled. Economic freedom was only possible if there were alternative resources: a change or shift in the structure of wealth was a necessary condition of such a social transformation or, at the very least, it involved the recognition that existing sources of wealth could be newly exploited. Bourgeois consumerism, the democratization of taste, the emergence of a more broadly-based market for goods and services were the preconditions. Without growing home demand the desire to escape the clientage system would remain a pipe-dream. But, of course, it did not. Eversley, John, Jones and McKendrick have provided a considerable body of evidence to show that a broadly-based home market burgeoned in the eighteenth century, even if the extent to which it touched the poorest members of society is still a matter of contention.3 Though several explanations have been advanced to explain this development, we are still some way from understanding how and why it occurred. There were many major obstacles to overcome. Crucially, there was the question of credit in an era when the bulk of the assets of most enterprises was in circulating capital. How could you educate a populace which included aristocrats who found it insulting to have to pay bills promptly and a labouring poor trapped in an erratic seasonal pattern of borrowing and spending, to the difficult task of accepting a strictly regulated credit system? Much of the first section of this essay is devoted to this problem and to the expedients designed to overcome it. In particular I stress the importance of two developments: the growing amount of accurate information disseminated throughout England by the press, which made more precise calculations of business risk possible; and secondly, the emergence of voluntary associations—particularly masonic and pseudomasonic orders—which cushioned the bourgeoisie against the difficulties associated with indebtedness and acted as vocal protagonists of values which would have regularized credit.

Clubs and lodges were also important in organizing subscriptions and raising capital for business ventures and civic improvements which furthered commercial interests. Collective action through voluntary associations conferred on these organizations a degree of power as well as financial and political independence which their members had not previously enjoyed. Association became a way of escaping economic clientage whilst providing protection against the vicissitudes of the open market; it also served to free citizens from the constraints of patrician political patronage and control. The opening up of politics and of enterprise went in tandem; in the eyes of predominantly urban and bourgeois groups, the two were seen as interconnected problems whose solution was mutually reinforcing.

This link is made quite explicit in the second part of the essay which focuses on a number of political and social aspirations associated with the career of the radical politician, John Wilkes.⁴ The political issues raised by Wilkes—freedom of the press, the rights of electors, and the libęrties of the subject—might seem to be only obliquely connected with the economic and social aims of the commercial classes. In many ways Wilkes was all things to all men, and he certainly enjoyed a heterogeneous following which included country squires and urban artisans as well as tradesmen, merchants and shopkeepers. But the impetus of the movement was very largely sustained by the middling sort, employing means that paralleled and, in some cases, overlapped the methods of voluntary associations. The clubs and lodges, originally established for convivial, commercial and civic purposes leapt to Wilkes's defence: they subscribed money for his cause, organized demonstrations in his favour, and raised a wide range of issues which, when aggregated, would have added up to the end of aristocratic clientage and its replacement by a social order whose values would have conferred considerable power and prestige on the men of moveable property.

I have chosen the Wilkite affair to illustrate the connections between commercialization and politics for several reasons. First, the events surrounding Wilkes's career were more than a single incident (such as the opposition to the Excise Bill of 1733) and were concerned with a wider range of issues than the (admittedly important) industrial lobbies like the General Chamber of Manufactures. In consequence, the movement was of sufficient duration and complexity to allow the radicals to articulate their views fully, and to elaborate their schemes for reform. Secondly, the very same clubs which pursued bourgeois social and economic aspirations turned to Wilkite politics: the link between radical politics and commercialization, forged by voluntary associations, could hardly have been stronger. Moreover, these clubs formed the nucleus of an expanding market for politics and political artifacts, a market of the sort which the associations themselves approved. The creation of a radical political culture' complete with its own forms of dress, types of food, and modes of celebration was not merely the creation of alternative means of political expression, but the expansion and diversification of a market for politics as a cultural commodity or product. This, in turn, was exploited by a number of occupational groups from amongst the men of moveable property—I have taken publicans, potters and printers as my three case studies—which helped generate and expand this market, by using marketing and advertising skills of remarkable ingenuity.

The question of the motives of these groups is a tricky one. It is most clear-cut in the case of the printers where there is an undoubted connection between their radical politics, desire to reduce business risks, and their commitment to a broadly-based market. The experience of the publicans and potters is, however, somewhat more complicated. Though all three groups sought, in their different ways, to shape the market itself, there were powerful consumer pressures which the producers found very difficult to tame. Slowly but surely the constraints of the client economy were being replaced by the rather different controls of thé open market. The producer and distributor found that they had a new and more impersonal master with whom to struggle for success.