# CREDIT, CLUBS AND INDEPENDENCE

Distressed tradesmen in general form a connection in keeping open their shops, by drawing bills upon one another, in being bail for each other, and having an attorney to defend all actions brought against them'.

(Edward Farley, Imprisonment for Debt Unconstitutional and Oppressive (London, 1788), p. 38.)

‘Box and tradesmen's clubs which, according to their several conveniences, meet at taverns, inns, coffee and ale houses, wherein they have their respective orders for their better government, whereby during the times of their several meetings, virtue is not only promoted, and vice punished, but likewise a good correspondence cultivated, for the mutual improvement of their respective business, by dealing with one another'...‘Though these societies consist of the meanest and rudest of the citizens, yet by their admirable regulations and constitutions (of their own making) they are kept in the best order and decorum.'

(Williām Maitland, The History and Survey of London from its foundation .. . to the present Time (London, 1739), pp. 682–3.)

In the eighteenth century Britain's public indebtedness was put on a sound footing. The emergence of ‘public credit', government deficit finance, a national market for securities, together with the birth of the Stock Exchange not only gave Britain a firm financial base, but facilitated political stability and enabled her to acquire the largest empire since the fall of Rome. In recent years, these crucial developments in the national economy have attracted historians as strongly as they fascinated—and sometimes repelled —Augustan Englishmen.⁵ Private indebtedness, however, has received much less attention from historians despite the fact that it was a persistent and indeed ubiquitous source of anxiety in Hanoverian England. For the greatest weakness of private credit and debt was that the rules and conventions that governed their use were insufficiently clearly defined, and that the mechanisms that did exist for their regulation frequently exacerbated financial uncertainties rather than relieved them.

In part this was attributable to the burgeoning growth of new forms of borrowing and lending. Extending credit and obtaining loans had, of course, been an enduring characteristic of village life. Widows, ‘kulak' peasants and local landlords had all lent to fellow parishioners, tenants, relatives, friends and neighbours. Indeed this ‘face to face'credit persisted throughout the eighteenth century and, arguably, was the dominant credit relationship in the society at large.⁶

But we cannot afford to overlook a number of important developments that occurred even prior to the growth of provincial banking in the second half of the eighteenth century. The increased use of the mortgage-and the concomitant growth in property insurance—the rapid growth in the number of inland bills of exchange, and the widespread entanglement of almost all tradesmen in the snares of trade indebtedness not only facilitated business but created a new set of economic and social problems that had to be tackled if the merchant economy was to be put on a firm footing. As more and more men—even small producers—acquired credit, so the gravity of the problem increased. The ease with which credit in its different forms could be obtained exacerbated the situation.

Mortgages, for instance, were made more widely available. The growing mortgage market was not merely the way in which sybaritic aristocrats avoided the financially prohibitive consequences of dissipation but, rather more aptly, the means by which small masters such as builders, printers and cutlers obtained loans to expand and develop their businesses. Too often the mortgage has been portrayed as·a safety-net for crashing landed fortunes. On occasion it certainly performed this function just as it served to raise capital for agricultural improvement. But more generally the mortgage was a highly flexible and widely used means of borrowing, often though not invariably superintended by the provincial attorney who would match up' those with idle savings and those needing ready capital. Borrowing was not difficult, as leasehold or personalty could act as collateral—a master might mortgage his tools, a printer his fonts of type—and loans may have been that much more attractive because legal process through the Court of Chancery against the mortgager could be tiresome, time-consuming and expensive for the mortgagee.

The precise extent and importance of mortgaging through ‘blind investment' via an attorney is a matter of some controversy.8 But, as a result of the masterly researches of B. L. Anderson,9 there can be very little doubt that, quite apart from the financial activities of the metropolis, there was an institutionalized regional credit market in such expanding areas as South Lancashire. There local attorneys ran a credit system in which, partly by dint of professional cooperation, they brought together creditors and debtors from throughout the area who were not previously acquainted. The specialized legal knowledge necessary to arrange a mortgage helped the attorney assume a financial role not unlike that of the later banker. Men such as Thomas Ball, attorney of Ormskirk, relied on a local reputation as a ‘very careful, substantial honest man' to obtain clients as both investors and borrowers. Regional webs of credit began to grow.¹º

These regional networks were interconnected through the widespread use of the negotiable instrument of inland bills of exchange. They were the customary means by which tradesmen, middlemen, manufacturers and shopkeepers paid for commodities, goods and raw materials, especially when they came from outside the region. They were certainly far more common, and generally treated as being far more reliable than the promissory notes which were also in use. A bill of exchange drawn on a third party was an order to pay off a debt at a certain future date. A provincial purchaser of London goods would draw the bill on a Londoner with whom he had credit; conversely, a metropolitan businessman buying from the provinces would draw his bill on a Liverpool, Leeds and Birmingham merchant with whom he did business. Because they were frequently not due for presentation for as long as forty or sixty days, bills could be remitted (after endorsement) and used as a medium of exchange. Most merchants seem to have stockpiled bills for this purpose. All endorsers were legally liable for the bill, and its reliability (and thus value) was affected by the number and quality of those who endorsed it. Not surprisingly a trade in the bills themselves developed and a discount market emerged centred on London. Like mortgages, bills were a highly flexible means of giving and obtaining credit: the laws governing their use were based on a series of ad hoc judicial decisions that sustained merchant custom, the number of bills in circulation varied according to the state of the economy, postponement of their payment was common, and they were sometimes drawn on those who were unaware of the transaction. Bills might even circulate before they were accepted by the drawee. Yet, despite this seemingly haphazard state of affairs, the bills usually served their purpose successfully."

Bills of exchange, promissory notes, the mortgage, all of these credit mechanisms were not nearly as important as the trade debt or simple financial accommodation. Masters lent money to their apprentices so that they could establish themselves in an independent business; suppliers of raw materials gave credit to merchants and manufacturers who extended it to tradesmen who, in turn, gave credit to their customers; substantial merchants propped up their lesser brethren by providing them with loans. Producers, distributors and consumers were linked not only by the products of the market, but also by a highly elaborate (and extremely delicate) web of credit.¹²

Such a situation was almost inevitable in a society which suffered such an acute shortage of specie. On the one hand, the demand for cash was on the increase. Perks such as ‘chips', ‘sweepings’ and ‘gleaning’together with payments in kind slowly·but inexorably gave way to cash assessments and wages.1³ Economic specialization, especially in the south of England, meant that subsistence production of such basic requirements as bread and simple clothing was being replaced by the purchase of these items. Money was needed to buy from the baker and shopkeeper what had formerly been cooked and crafted in the home. Overall, the number of cash transactions seems to have been on the increase.¹ Unfortunately, however, the supply of specie—especially in small denominations—was far from adequate. The decision to base the recoinage of 1696 on silver and not to reassess its value against gold meant that internationally British silver coin was grossly undervalued. As a result there was àn extraordinary and rapid outflow of specie, particularly to the Orient but also to other European Countries. Good coin found its way into the melting pot and out of the country, leaving a residue of battered, clipped and worn currency. It was estimated that by 1762 total silver circulation was only £800,000. The exiguous remnant of silver coin was in such a sorry state that it was frequently valued by weight rather than denomination. Shop and innkeepers acquired scales to test the value of their customers' coins (both silver and gold), thereby defeating the very purpose for which a standardized currency was established. This situation was compounded by the Mint's failure to issue adequate amounts of coin. At no point prior to 1759 did the Mint issue more than £900,000 worth of gold coin per annum and the amount of silver minted was derisory. Moreover the mint paid its moneyers for the value and not the amount of coin that they produced. It was therefore far more profitable to manufacture coins of gold rather than silver and of high rather than low denomination.¹⁵

Copper coin was also in a terrible state, consisting of counterfeits, blanks and private issues of coin. A Mint inquiry in 1787 found that 43 per cent of all copper in circulation was ‘blatantly inferior'to the King's coin, and that a further 37 per cent could only be described as ‘trash’.¹⁶ In sum, British coinage in the eighteenth century was a mess: overall, there was a specie shortage that led to such consequences as the extensive use of foreign coins—Portuguese moidores, for instance, were far more common in the West Country than were guineas—while the currency that did actually circulate was underweight and in appalling condition even when it was counterfeit—which was as often as not.¹7

The shortage of coin, especially small coin, had grave social consequences. Cash for wages, especially during harvest time when the demand for small coin for paying labourers was at its height, was hard to obtain. As a result employers paid their employees infrequently (and often irregularly) with coins of a high denomination. A number of men involved in piece-work might all be paid with a single, high-value coin or given a bill which needed to be discounted. One way of facilitating matters for the benefit of the employer was to deposit payments with a local innkeeper or tradesmen who then extended credit to the workforce. Labourers, however, would often have already contracted debts to such retailers precisely because of the infrequency of their wage payment. This, it would appear, was the origin of the egregious practice of ‘truck'; it was also the way in which even the humblest of men found themselves enmeshed in the web of credit.18

Credit and debt, therefore, were almost universal. Local credit networks interlocked with those of a particular region, and regional credit, largely as a result of the financial activities of the middleman, merchant and shopkeeper overlapped with that of other regions. If for much of the eighteenth century Britain was a collection of regional economies, then one of the most important ways in which those economies were linked was through the circuit of credit—a route that was interregional even if its journey was often via the capital market and mercantile metropolis of London.

One example should make this point clear. Abraham Dent was a shopkeeper in Kirkby Stephen, a town perched on the edge of England in the county of Westmorland, halfway between Kendal and Barnard Castle. Not by the most extreme stretch of the imagination could Kirkby Stephen be described either as a throbbing urban centre or as a nodal point in the national economy, but Dent's activities linked the town to national circuits of credit. The wide variety of goods that passed over Dent's counter came from many parts of the country. Apart from Kendal, the most immediate source of most of his supplies, commodities came from Newcastle, Gateshead, Lancaster, Manchester, Leeds, Wakefield, Halifax, Norwich, Coventry and London. Most of these were paid for by bills of exchange, many drawn on Dent's London creditors. Local customers seem to have had little difficulty in obtaining credit from the shopkeeper, especially if they were reasonably respectable members of the community. About 50 per cent of Dent's sales were credit transactions, to a clientele that included parsons, schoolmasters, attorneys, doctors, an apothecary, innkeeper, tinker, tailor, mason and slater, carpenter and glazier, bleacher and dyer, and a carrier. Some customers’ debts were still outstanding five years after the original purchase had been made. In addition, Dent supplied loans: his books reveal some forty-two in all, varying in amount from as little as one shilling to as much as seven guineas. Transactions were conducted in a bewildering variety of ways: apart from cash and bills of exchange, Dent used barter and bank notes on the Bank of England and northern country banks. Inextricably enmeshed in this network of credit, acting, as it were, as the spider at the centre of a complex web, he took full advantage of his situation, and eventually became a major discounter of bills.19

Clearly, the widespread and very largely informal credit system that existed throughout eighteenth-century England brought with it many advantages. It seems to have been relatively easy to borrow, and, because of the number of outlets and means of investment, savings, on the whole, do not seem to have lain idle. Provided an individual could demonstrate his probity, sobriety and reliability within a given community and as long as he had some assets to begin with, were they ever so small, he was generally deemed a sound risk. Equally the creditor had a considerable range of options open to him in investing savings. Indeed, a rich widow, such as Elizabeth Parkin of Sheffield, could play a considerable part in stimulating the local economy through her loans, mortgages and investments. For the purposes of most business enterprises——and most of them, it has to be remembered, were quite small—local or regional capital or credit of the sort provided by Elizabeth Parkin was more than sufficient. It was very unusual for any borrower to go further afield.2º As the century progressed so, despite temporary fluctuations in the rate of interest, money became more readily available. Apart from those occasions when war drove up the cost of borrowing, the secular trend of interest rates was downwards: in 1700 one paid 6 per cent, in 1750 a mere 3½ per cent.²1

The working debts of tradesmen, as opposed to the availability of capital through mortgage and the like for business expansion, was not so much advantageous as absolutely necessary. As Guy Green complained to Wedgwood: ‘The very long credit taken by most of my customers, tho' contrary to agreement makes it difficult to fix a price where a profit will arise worth one's while—and without credit I am in doubt if any considerable business can be carried on'.2 In the face of such a terrible cash shortage, commerce could probably not even have continued, much less prospered without working credit. Indeed, it has been suggested that the flexibility and ingenuity of credit arrangements in England is largely explicable in terms of the extraordinary difficulties created by the lack of specie.2³

Yet, despite the obviously beneficial role played in the British economy by a very adaptive credit system, the means of borrowing and lending also served both to create and to exacerbate financial crises. A substantial proportion of the assets of nearly all eighteenth-century business enterprises, especially those of merchants, middlemen and retailers, was in the form of short-term credit which had been extended to customers and clients. Thus when Revel Humfray the printer went bankrupt, the bulk of his assets—84 per cent in fact—were out with other people.⁴ Short term credit was often four or five times greater than fixed asset indebtedness or costs. As Peter Mathias has pointed out, the analyses of capital structure of firms ... show how small a proportion of their total assets, even for the most capital intensive business such as a large iron-works, a London porter brewery, lay in fixed assets'.2⁵ The firm of Truman, Hanbury and Buxton in Spitalfields with total assets of £130,000, had only £30,000 in fixed capital, but £74,000 in good trade debts and £24,000 in stocks of materials and beer in casks.²⁶ In both the humble printer's backroom shop and the large brewery short-term credit and debt were endemic.

Such a situation, the direct consequence of a shortage of cash, was perfectly tolerable as long as business and the market were buoyant, but any hint of individual financial insecurity and, a fortiori, the merest indication of a slump could bring the whole edifice crashing down. In good times credit was easy, there was a marked proclivity for holding goods and securities, and the number of bills drawn would multiply, thereby facilitating an increased volume of transactions. So-called bills of accommodation could be drawn to increase the funds available to an individual, commodities and securities would change hands as part of an accelerating speculative boom, and overall indebtedness would increase sharply. However, when the bubble burst—and it was almost certain to do so as long as there was a ceiling on interest rates, which meant an eventual check on credit of a rather unsatisfactory kind²7——a major liquidity crisis ensued. Speculators, bankers, merchants and tradesmen alike, they all tried to realize their assets: to convert from commodities to cash, from bills to specie, and from trade credit to hard currency. Credit became almost impossible to obtain precisely when it was needed most. Cash, silver and gold were at a premium because of the sudden and substantial demand for them. Simultaneously nearly everyone was demanding payment of their outstanding bills and being asked to pay off their own extant debts.2⁸ As Anderson puts it: ‘when expectations changed resort to liquidity was difficult in the short run, the way back from commitment was crowded with individuals of the same mind, crisis quickly followed’.29 Such a sudden high liquidity preference might well be the death-knell of a small master's or shopkeeper's business, and could lead to insolvency and the debtors' prison. These crises were not entirely intrinsic or monetarist; they might be provoked by international speculation (the root cause of the South Sea Bubble), domestic conflicts such as the rebellion of 1745, or by the outbreak and fortunes of a foreign war.³º Yet, whatever their cause, they were exacerbated by the credit system as it was constituted in the eighteenth century.

In other words the price that eighteenth-century Englishmen paid for easy credit and ready access to money was a concomitant insecurity which stemmed from the volatility of both business and the money market. Steeped in Victorian novels, we tend to think of indebtedness, the dark side of credit, as a Micawberesque, nineteenth-century phenomenon, but to the eighteenth-century shopkeeper and middleman it was no fiction but a daily threat to their livelihood. There is hardly a single account of a Georgian tradesman or merchant, and not very many that flowed from aristocratic and genteel pens that does not make reference to the frightful prospect of indebtedness. The bum-bailiff, the spunging-house (Francis Place's first home), Newgate, Marshalsea, and the King's Bench were the frightful prospect for the many unfortunates ensnared in the judicial process surrounding lending and borrowing. Casanova fled from England not, as we would like to think, because of some delicious sexual scandal, but because of some extremely shady financial dealings. His old mistress and mother of one of his children, Mme Cornellys, who, by all accounts, gave the most lavish parties and masques in the whole of London, junketings that were attended by princes and prime ministers, never went out, except on Sunday, because she feared arrest for debt.³1 Families upped stumps, packed their furniture in the middle of the night, and fled to the rules of the city's prisons in order to obtain immunity from arrest; others hastened to relatives in the country to win time to put their affairs in order.³2

The spectre of debt was all the more horrific because of its complex and highly unsatisfactory legal position. One could be arrested for debts of 40s. or more merely on the oath of the creditor. If the debt could not be paid immediately, or if there was not money forthcoming for bail, then the offender was imprisoned for a period that might be as long as twelve months before his trial.³³ In these circumstances the scope for malicious proseçution was considerable. To be in a man's debt was to be in his power, for it was he, in effect, who determined when the credit that he had extended transmuted itself into a debt for which one had legal liability. A rival, a disagreeable client, begrudging partner or personal enemy could all be hamstrung or even driven out of trade altogether by an action for debt. For even if the debtor could meet the immediate debt which he was legally required to pay, the news of his prosecution would, as often as not, bring all his other creditors rushing forward, clamouring for the payment of their bills and loans. The least hint of unreliability could produce a debtor's collapse as his creditors unceremoniously competed with one another to ensure the security of their assets. Thus in 1716 William Nost angered his fellow printers by leaking information to the Secretary of State; they, in turn, revenged themselves by burying him beneath an avalanche of actions for debt.³4 Mr. Micawber's ‘vengeful bootmaker' had many eighteenth-century allies.

If the law was harsh on the debtor, it was hardly a great help to the creditor. While the debtor was in prison his creditors could not recover their money. Even if the appropriate writ of fieri facias was taken out by the lender, he could not seize freehold property, bills of exchange or notes to obtain satisfaction.³⁵ The situation was a stand off, which satisfied neither party. The creditor found it difficult to obtain financial redress, while the debtor languished in prison unless, somewhat improbably, he was able to find the requisite resources.

Imprisonment itself was a hazardous and expensive experience. Fever was rampant and life was only tolerable if one could pay for the necessities of life. Many found themselves even more deeply in debt because of the expenses incurred in gaol. Garnish, gaolers’fees and room rent all ate away the meagre resources of the unfortunate and the impecunious.³⁶ Such was the lot of debtors who made up the majority of prisoners in eighteenth-century gaols. Howard estimated that in 1776 there were 2,437 Englishmen in prison for debt,³ and most of these were not rich merchants (who could use the more satisfactory procedure of bankruptcy) but tradesmen, shopkeepers, small masters and retailers: the men who stood at the centre of the web of credit and who, in a liquidity crisis, found it most difficult to realise their assets by cajoling their customers into paying their bills. This group bitterly resented the way in which gentlemen used their social standing to delay the payment of their debts. Much of the tradesman's wrath against the client economy was a direct consequence of the hidden'loans that they were forced to extend to their social superiors, and which often jeopardized an otherwise sound business venture.

A number of points need to be stressed about the tradesman's dilemma. First and foremost, eighteenth-century economic fluctuations, unlike their nineteenth-century counterparts, were not part of a regular, predictable cycle. Crises occurred with greater frequency than later, were usually shorter in duration, and might well end abruptly.3⁸ They seemed just as arbitrary and cruel as a death, flood or plague and, indeed, in some cases they were the direct consequence of such natural disasters. But slumps could not always be shrugged off with the sort of providential explanation that so frequently accompanied bad harvests, inclement weather or the outbreak of disease, for some of the nation's economic crises were clearly of human agency. Shopkeepers and tradesmen hated stockjobbers and speculators not merely because they were the bêtes noires of contemporary country ideology, but because they seemed to be directly responsible for the vicissitudes of the trader during a squeeze or liquidity crisis. Though a slump might be triggered by a bad harvest, a foreign war or foreign investors, it was thought-—and often with good reason—that the speculator exacerbated the situation. His profit might well prove the trader's downfall, and it was for precisely this reason that the men of Change Alley were denounced with a passion that occasionally swelled to hysteria.³9 The effects of the South Sea Bubble were not felt solely by aristocratic and genteel investors in the metropolis who had their financial fingers burnt, but by provincial tradesmen and middlemen who were driven out of business by the sudden and catastrophic run on hard cash.

The victims of crises such as the Bubble were not necessarily those tradesmen who were careless in their business dealings or prodigal in their ways. Frugal, prudent retailers, as well as those who squandered their resources, were the likely or possible victims of such slumps for they were forced, whether they liked it or not, to extend credit and incur debts simply in order to carry on the day-to-day dealings of business. It was this which made such crises seem both exceptionally cruel and arbitrary. Of course the idle apprentice deserved his come-uppance: this was as it ought to be. But for the thrifty, the industrious and the sober to suffer was a threat to the very moral basis on which the work-ethic was built.

In fact traders of known probity enjoyed only one real and actually very slender advantage over their weaker brethren, namely their ability to maintain their credit-worthiness during a crisis. Local reputation', creditworthiness, reliability: these were the vital if intangible bulwark against financial disaster.“º But, as Anderson has remarked, ‘trade credit, depending in the end upon one man's measure of another's worth, was inherently unstable'. There was no real guarantee, no formal process, that regulated the mechanisms of credit. Even good standing provided very little protection in the free-for-all of a financial crisis. In consequence the debtor was remarkably vulnerable and enormously dependent upon his creditors. One might assume that this would have led to a very cautious attitude towards business, but the exact opposite seems to have been the case. Precisely because of the difficulty of making accurate bets on the long-term future, and because of the ready availability of money, men tended to be daring, speculative and ambitious rather than prudent, penny-pinching and wise. Overall, the entire credit system engendered a highly speculative and volatile economy, full of enterprise and initiative, open to an extraordinary degree to the vagaries of fashion and fad, encouraging quick returns and setting a premium on highly flexible and imaginative business strategies.

Contemporaries were well aware of the gravity of this problem. Take, for example, the following extraordinary description of trade by that great aficionado of commerce, Daniel Defoe:⁴²

Trade is a Mystery, which will never be compleatly discover'd or understood; it has its Critical Junctures and Seasons, when acted by no visible Causes, it suffers Convulsion Fitts, hysterical Disorders, and most unaccountable Emotions— Sometimes it is acted by the evil Spirit of general Vogue, and like a meer Possession tis hurry'd out of all common Measures; today it obeys the Course of things, and submits to Causes and Consequences; tomorrow it suffers Violence from the Storms and Vapours of Human Fancy, operated by exotic Projects, and then runs counter, the Motions are excentrick, unnatural and unaccountable-A sort of Lunacy in Trade attends all its Circumstances, and no Man can give a rational Account of it.

The problem as envisaged by those such as Defoe was that trade depended on credit, and that credit was a fickle system, random in its operation. What was needed was a system for fixing and rationalizing it. In part this might be achieved by developing stronger bonds of trust and confidence between debtor and creditor, but, for this to occur, regularity and punctuality based on some fairly strictly defined set of conventions were absolutely necessary. (Credit, personified by Defoe as a fastidious but fickle woman, lost all good humour if she were not attended to punctiliously and promptly.⁴³) But it was scarcely sufficient to regulate the credit nexus internally when the relationship was so frequently affected by developments beyond the immediate influence of debtor and creditor. The state of credit was a reflection of financial confidence, and this buoyancy depended, in turn, upon opinion, an ineffable and intangible notion that seemed, to many eighteenth-century Englishmen, to have a will and life of its own. As long as opinion was based on whim, hearsay, fantasy and rumour, it would exacerbate the capriciousness of credit; but, if it were founded on experience, intelligence and sound information, there was some hope of obtaining financial stability.⁴ Accurate knowledge, it was recognized, was essential not only to prevent the system's abuse and exploitation by sharpers, tricksters, and con-men—the parasitic breed who lived off gentlemen, tradesmen and the poor alike—but also to avoid the absurd and highly unstable speculative frenzies that were so easily triggered by rumour and financial intrigue.

How, then, did eighteenth-century Englishmen deal with the difficulties engendered by indebtedness and a volatile economy? Clearly the problem was too generalized to admit of any single or simple solution. Contemporaries fumbled in their efforts to find an answer, and usually they came up with a series of expedients and accommodations rather than with any coherent or overall strategy. A number of these tactics need not detain us here though they are worthy of mention. It seems probable, for instance, that a concern for the credit-worthiness of oneself and of others affected the personal characteristics and qualities that one valued highly. Reliability—to all his promises there needs no other bond but his word'—candour and affability—piety, good humour ... a plain dealer'—and, above all, fairness and generosity—he is ... so very generous to those that live in his debt, that none but a villain would wrong him': these were the qualities most highly valued. One needed to be or, at least, needed to appear to be a man with such characteristics in order to carry on trade: to ‘keep up your reputation' preserve your integrity', maintain your credit'.4⁵ Whereas the language of personal trust had originally provided the metaphors for borrowing and lending, now, in a curious transposition, the language of finance was employed metaphorically to depict moral and social worth. Thus such phrases as to give a person credit for something'acquired their standard usage in the mid-eighteenth century. Presentation of self as sober, reliable, candid and constant was not merely a question of genteel manners, but a matter of economic survival.

The connection that eighteenth-century Englishmen so frequently made between commerce and civilization should, therefore, not surprise us. Foreign visitors to Hanoverian London remarked on the extraordinary civility of the shopkeepers and tradesmen; (they also, it must be conceded, were struck by the rude, undeferential independence of the labouring poor).⁴⁶ Affability, courtesy and reliability were all qualities that went to make up a business character and a trade ethic. Such attitudes oiled the wheels of commerce and enabled men to make greater profits: they had, in other words, their positive side. But they also served as a check or constraint, a means of ordering and regulating the trading community in such a way as to protect its members by reducing the risks involved in credit and debt. In sum, the mannerly conduct necessary to improve business and secure credit was as much a form of social discipline as those values connected with work itself. Indeed the middleman and retailer had a strong vested interest in persuading all those with whom he had dealings—and this included the aristocratic and gentleman customer of the client economy as well as fellow tradesmen and plebeian employees—of the values that underpinned prompt payment and regular transactions. This is a subject as yet unexplored, but it might well prove that the values espoused to obtain a creditworthy society may have had just as significant a social impact as those intended to secure an industrious and compliant labour force.

This subtle strategem—and its success, of course, is extremely difficult to estimate—was intended to rationalize the establishment and execution of credit transactions, but it did not deal with the equally tricky problem of the relationship between opinion'at large and the overall workings of credit. What did affect that relationship was the growth of the provincial newspaper, the first means by which regularly transmitted, reasonably reliable intelligence was disseminated throughout much of provincial England. It has always been something of a puzzle to scholars to explain why so much of the provincial newspaper was taken up with extremely detailed descriptions of wars and battles in far-away places, and with the minutiae of international treaties and diplomacy.

One explanation for the preponderance of foreign news is that their coverage was less hazardous for the printer than the controversial issues of domestic politics. It was unlikely that the description of a siege or a treaty, culled from that impeccable source, the London Gazette, would alienate or anger a particular section of the paper's readership, nor would it, in all probability, provoke legal action on the part of those in authority. In sum, the reporting of domestic politics was hazardous and difficult; the subject of foreign affairs was both safe and accessible.⁴7

There is some truth in this view, but it fails to take into account the importance of war, diplomacy and foreign affairs for the provincial newsreader. All of these mattered to the local shopkeeper, like Abraham Dent,4⁸ because they affected business confidence and credit. No doubt there were patriotic souls in the provinces who were interested in international politics for its own sake, and the concern with foreign affairs of an overseas merchant, an investor in stocks or the East India Company is perfectly understandable. But we must not omit that growing number of men who were involved in local business and whose interest in international diplomacy, colonial war and politics generally was stimulated by the realization that they affected their business interests in a direct way. As long as the prospect, outbreak and course of a war affected interest rates, the availability of credit, and the degree of confidence in the economy, there was good reason for the local trader to keep himself politically informed. Commercialization—especially the growth of credit—encouraged political involvement and gave political events an economic portentousness they had previously lacked. The newspaper catered to a curiosity that had already grasped that politics, commerce and credit were all part and parcel of the same problem.

The tradesmen and printers who set up and ran local papers had the same preoccupations and anxieties as their readers. They were middlemen and retailers themselves, not merely purveying news but also selling stationery, pamphlets and patent medicines to their readers. Like every other eighteenth-century tradesman, they extended credit to their customers, many of whom lived far away from the printer's shop. Printers had more than their share of tradesmen's misfortunes, many of them going bankrupt or spending time in debtor's prison. They understood only too well the worries about business confidence, credit-worthiness and reliable information. Papers like the Northampton Mercury prided themselves on their accuracy, the precisest exactness' of their commercial news. All aspects of the provincial newspapers’coverage improved as the century progressed. The growing concern in the society at large for specific, precise, weighed—often actually quantified—data was mirrored in the pages of the press. Even before the emergence in the middle of the century of such trades papers as Williamson's Liverpool Advertiser which was jam-packed with business information, the provincial press began to include shipping news, Lloyd's lists, import and export data, regional prices, and news of stocks and bankruptcies.⁴9

Naturally not every newsreader was a trader or merchant, nor were all papers directed chiefly at a mercantile audience. Most provincial papers deliberately catered to gentlemen, merchants and traders alike. Though the first number of the Liverpool Chronicle not surprisingly gave pride of place to the reporting of commerce and navigation—our interest as a commercial State, being so nearly and so importantly concern'd'—the proprietors did not neglect to ask ‘gentlemen of learning and leisure’to contribute ‘essays as have a tendency to extend and promote the improvement of Agriculture, Arts, Manufactures and Commerce, or the practice of the religious and moral Virtues'. In this way the editors hoped to provide news, serve as an advertising medium, to entertain and instruct their readers, promote commerce, encourage conversation and, as was somewhat blasphemously suggested, to instil religiosity amongst the thousands of the people .. . ignorant of the discipline of the common-prayer book’.⁵0

Though the proprietors of the provincial newspaper sought a heterogeneous audience, their papers were usually informed by a common outlook. In the paper politics, social morality and commerce were not seen as encapsulated entities. Diversions and entertainment, in the somewhat unexpected form of algebraic problems, sharpened the reader's mathematical skills; the moral instruction provided by the essayist had secular as well as spiritual purposes. Even the tales of crime and gore served their purpose by helping define conventional morality, and by sermonizing on the terrible fate of the deviant. The newspaper, therefore, served not only as a business seismograph, informing merchants, middlemen and traders of tremors that could lead to a financial earthquake, but also taught precisely those virtues and values which were necessary for survival in an economically expansive though debt-ridden society. Clearly, there existed even more compelling reasons than that of social emulation for thumbing eagerly through the news.

Accurate, regular and punctual news could at least forewarn those who were about to suffer financial misfortune, but such information could not, however, ward off disaster. Some rather stronger remedy or succour was necessary, and this many found in that most distinctive of eighteenth-century British institutions, the club. Dr. Johnson was not alone in noticing that almost every Englishman belonged to a society, lodge, fraternity or club, and that many of his fellow citizens belonged to several such voluntary associations. Today the term ‘club’ conjures up the impression of a venerable, neo-classical edifice filled with leather armchairs, musty volumes and antediluvian males. But in the eighteenth century the term club'was understood as a verb, rather than as a noun: to club together'to pool one's financial resources for almost any collective activity, automatically created a club.

Some of these societies were as transitory as their definition suggests; many more, however, endured. There were clubs for every class of citizen: aristocratic clubs such as the Mohocks and Sublime Society of Beefsteaks, merchants' clubs such as the Half Moon Society, farmers’societies like the spending clubs' or ‘drinking clubs'of the Hertfordshire market towns, and the Free and Easies’for the tradesmen and artisans of the cities. Every taste was catered for: societies were established for literati, the ugly, gamblers, politicians, homosexuals, rakes, singers, art collectors, and boating enthusiasts.⁵1

These clubs were organized with varying degrees of formality. Often a club would be started merely because a group of sympathetic or like-minded men (there were few distinctively female societies) found themselves at the same tavern table. But others enjoyed a much greater degree of organization. This was the case with the burgeoning number of masonic lodges and pseudo-masonic societies. By 1768 291 British masonic lodges had been founded, including sixty-one abroad, several in the army and navy, and eighty-seven in London.52 Though each lodge was a discrete entity, the Moderns and the schismatic Ancients both gave the masons a modicum of national coherence.5ª Formal constitutions were printed, and secret ceremonial became perhaps the best known masonic characteristic.,The London Grand Lodges superintended the activities of the affiliated societies. Thus, when members of the Ship Lodge of St. Ives, Cornwall failed to contribute to the national Grand Fund of Charity organized by the London Grand Lodge, they were warned that their constitution was in jeopardy.⁵⁴ Equally well organized was the so-called Lumber Troop, for which Hogarth designed a coat of arms. It had between eight and nine thousand members in London and the Tyneside area.⁵⁵ Similarly the Bucks was a nationwide society, having thirteen lodges in London together with branches in Liverpool, Birmingham, Cambridge, Bath, Plymouth, the Isle of Man and (somewhat less predictably) Bombay.⁵⁶ These pseudo-masonic orders had regulations constitutions, regalia and printed song books: they were well on the way to becoming established institutions.

Such societies may seem to have only the most oblique connection with the vicissitudes suffered as a consequence of a volatile economy. It is the colourful aspects of club life that are most striking and which have attracted historians in the past. The entertainment—gargantuan eating, drunken stupors—the ritual—epitomized by the arcane and inscrutable ceremonies of the masons—-and the violence perpetrated by young, aristocratic rakes who slit watchmen's noses and rolled old ladies down hills in barrels full of nails: this is the stuff of which so many club and society histories are made. But there was a much more serious side to club activity for, though it is perfectly true that feasting, drinking and conviviality were central to every club's existence, the club also performed important social functions as a protection against adversity and as an elaborate system of reciprocal obligation. This was as true of the genteel societies and masonic lodges as of the more demotic organizations like the friendly society and the ‘free and easy'. To a quite remarkable degree clubs drawn from all social groups—with the possible exception of the very rich—performed these apparently mundane but very necessary tasks.

Joining a club in eighteenth-century Britain often—though not always—involved the recognition and acceptance both of responsibilities towards fellow members, and of their reciprocal obligations. The resulting society often transcended traditional social, economic and religious boundaries. Although there were clubs comprised exclusively of a single class, or of only one occupational group, a large number of societies—and this was as true of the masons and pseudo-masonic societies as of some friendly societies—boasted of the way in which they united Anglicans and dissenters, men from different trades, merchants and gentlemen, whigs and tories, in a common association, promoting unanimity and harmony where only conflict had previously existed.⁵7

Clearly, one could not, as it were, enter a club ‘cold’, adopting a ‘take it or leave it' attitude. Clubs were a form of social bonding explicitly established to encourage ‘mutual benevolence and friendship', ‘union and friendly feeling', and the type of friendship and mutual aid dispensed within the society was often of a very tangible and direct sort.58 The success, even the continued existence of the club depended to a very great extent on the willingness of members to participate to the full: only in this way could all those involved enjoy the society's benefits. Malingering could only encourage divisions.

What forms did this much vaunted ‘mutual benevolence'take? First and foremost, it was a protection against adversity. Because of the arbitrary nature of misfortune—the way in which even the thrifty, sober and industrious as well as the prodigal, debauched and idle could suffer financial crisis and economic destitution—it was vital to establish some means of protection, some type of insurance, against unforeseen calamities. Equally, it was important to provide for the sick, the old and the unemployed. Many clubs, including the friendly societies so beloved of Sir William Eden, were explicitly established for this purpose. The society founded in Shrewsbury in 1768 was typical, both in its formation and in its functions.‘There is a clubb formed here', wrote one anxious onlooker,59

among the lower sort of burgesses who meet every Wednesday night, their number does increase from time to time as they meetThey spend some money, & put some in a box which is gradually to raise a fund for relief and support of their bretheren when reduced and past labour, they give out that they will be unanimous in voting on all occasions.

The format adopted by the citizens of Shrewsbury was the one employed almost everywhere. At a club gathering members contributed a fixed sum to a common pool or kitty which paid for the evening's entertainment of victuals or drink. The remaining cash, when the tariff had been paid, became part of the society's capital, available for whatever purpose the members thought fit. In many cases the money was deposited with the landlord of the hostelry where the club met. The large London brewers encouraged this activity by paying interest at 4 per cent on the sums so invested. In 1770 Samuel Whitbread was paying interest on what was, in effect, a loan of £3,135 from these tavern societies; Truman, in the same period, held sums between £1,000 and £6,000. These were a significant, because regular source of capital for the brewers, even though the contribution of individual societies might be as little as a few pounds. Such ale-house groups as ‘the Sick Mans Friend’, ‘Thoughtful Sisters’, ‘Sons of Prudence’, and ‘General Funeral’ not only served their members in ways which their names so vividly describe but were also a means of mobilizing savings and providing some capital for one of the nation's most important industries.6º

Masonic lodges and pseudo-masonic societies also helped cushion their members against indebtedness and social misfortune. The solid burghers and respectable tradesmen who made up the bulk of masonic membership had to protect themselves in ways similar to those used by the labouring poor, even if the reasons for mercantile adversity often differed from those that brought about the miseries of the day labourer and the apprentice. Masons would rally round a brother whose creditors threatened to foreclose on him. The knowledge that substantial friends, as well as kith and kin, would stand by a tradesman increased his creditworthiness and the confidence that both he himself and others had in his business. Sudden, short-term expenses could be met by a collection within the lodge or by drawing on the society's funds. Thus the Ship Lodge in St. Ives—consisting of some three hundred members-helped one of its brothers, a comedian, to pay off a creditor who was demanding immediate payment for a recently purchased suit of clothes.61 The incident may seem inconsequential to us but for the hapless comedian masonic membership meant the difference between freedom and the horrors of the debtors' gaol. The advantages of being a mason, therefore, far exceeded the privilege of being initiated into a complex ritual and secret ceremonial, for it meant that the mason was cushioned, in a way that non-masons were not, against financial discomforture or even ruin. It was an essential part of the folklore about masons—appearing in their own songs as well as in the anti-masonic literature—that they stuck together through thick and thin.6² And, although some unfortunate masons such as Mozart had reasons for regarding this tradition somewhat sceptically,6ª there is no doubt that it was one of the greatest attractions of masonic membership.

The selfsame functions were performed, of course, by trade and professional societies. Clubs of cordwainers, handkerchief makers, silk· weavers, and coalheavers all helped accumulate savings for their members, just as the provincial law societies late in the century acted not merely as pressure groups for the profession, but gave charitable relief to lawyers' widows or to lapsed members of the profession such as John Moxen, attorney of Leeds, who found himself in the local workhouse in 1789.4 Once money had been collected by a trade society, it conferred on members a degree of power and independence. Mutual benevolence'might well mean the funding of a strike as well as the paying of a widow's pension. Indeed, it seems to have been for this reason that employers were so reluctant to help their labourers establish any such society or club, and when they did so, like the Newcastle hostmen who established a society for the Tyneside keelmen, they fought tooth-and-nail to retain control of the funds.6⁵

Similarly local electoral magnates frowned upon burgesses'clubs beyond their influence. They knew that the box clubs that emerged in such towns as Shrewsbury and Worcester in the 1760s and 1770s could beused to support independent political action, even to the extent of providing financial backing for an independent candidate. The parish clubs of Worcester that supported the radical candidacy of Sir Watkin Lewes tried to rely entirely on their own members. Two voters described how

they belonged to a Club, at which a number of people subscribed according to their abilities, and that the men who attended (Lewes) in the Hall, and belonged to the Club, received two shillings each day out of the stock so subscribed; and Moore (a voter) declared, he had paid more money into the club than he ever received out.

The object of such societies, according to another of their members, was ‘to support their independency'. Lewes himself, it was emphasized, never contributed money to the clubs, though he visited them as their guest.6⁶ A new type of relationship was deliberately fostered between the parliamentary candidate and his supporters. The usual treating was foregone to be replaced by entertainment and celebration which was funded by the voters themselves.

In this way they established their independence of the traditional system of largesse and patronage: the voters—and their votes—were free. The Worcester clubs, therefore, helped liberate their members from traditional clientage—the political equivalent of the ‘client economy'—just as the funds collected by the trades clubs strengthened their hand when dealing with employers and helped them counteract the influence of the rich. Such collective endeavours at self-support gave the employee, burgess and trader far greater power than they were capable of commanding individually.

Clubs and societies, then, were not merely defensive organizations, warding off the all-too-frequent social and economic ills of their members; they were also positive and constructive, seeking to improve the lot of their fraternity. At the most obvious level this included mutual benefits in trade. Societies that were not a single trade frequently contained the rule that no two persons of the same trade could be members of the same club. Joining the society would therefore give unrivalled access for each member to a substantial number of potential customers, especially as it was conventionally understood—and was sometimes included in the club rules—that trading would, in the first instance, be among members. Thus the Spectator's Twopenny Club included the rule that, ‘None of the Club shall have his Cloathes and Shoes made or mended, but by a Brother Member.'67 Rather more dramatically, the 45 Club that met in Temple Street, Bristol, dissolved in 1769 because of the animosities generated by one tradesman who refused to buy sugar from a fellow member in order to sweeten one of the club's feasts.6⁸ The same convention of society trading operated in the masonic lodges. Even the masons'most strident critics conceded that merchants and tradesmen at lodge meetings had the opportunity of winning aristocratic customers as well as of enjoying the social pleasures of rubbing shoulders with the rich.69

Much of the conviviality and junketing that took place in these societies had, therefore, a rather more serious and business-like purpose. Joining a club enabled the tradesman to extend the ambit of his acquaintance, to meet potential customers, creditors and partners in a highly convivial, amicable atmosphere. The backslapping bonhomie, the brimming glass, the boisterous songs and the roasted side of beef were all intended to promote unanimity, harmony and friendship, not only in the context of the club-room, but also in the commercial world outside. A regular gathering of the like-minded helped reinforce the values that they held; business could be conducted informally amongst friends; the bibulous atmosphere would encourage openheartedness, candour and honesty.

The time-honoured communal rituals of eating and drinking served to reinforce this camaraderie. As the Spectator pointed out: ‘Our modern celebrated clubs are founded upon eating and drinking, which are points wherein most men agree, and in which the learned and the illiterate, the Dull and the Airy, the Philosopher and the Buffoon, can all of them bear a part'.7º It was understood that all participated equally in what was essentially a group activity: drink was served from the communal punchbowl which so many societies purchased, the drinking vessels of the club were almost always of exactly the same size and shape, often decorated with a common symbol or inscription. It was the proud boast of many societies that the union that they encouraged helped commerce, industry and civilization'. The inscriptions on society medals and cups, together with the traditional club songs all attest to these exalted aspirations. Be merry and wise', urges the inscription on the mug produced by John Sadler for the Bucks, Industry produceth wealth, we obey Freedom with Innocence, Unanimity is the strength of society'." Many of the clubs were, in effect, vehicles for the promotion of a morality and outlook conducive to successful trading.

It would, of course, be foolish to pretend that all clubs managed to conform to this exemplary model. There are plenty of examples of tavern discussions escalating into brawls and of club members being found in a gutter or a wayside ditch when alcoholic stupefaction successfully triumphed over their desire to return to house and home. The sad tale of the neglected wife and child appears too often in the anti-masonic literature for it to have been totally bereft of truth.² We are still in the age when drinking, at least of Portuguese wine and British beer, was a patriotic, convivial and socially desirable activity rather than the bane of nineteenth-century temperance societies or the evil spirit that haunts the novels of Emile Zola. Yet, despite the undeniable excesses, club life undoubtedly became less debauched and less vicious as the eighteenth century proceeded.7ª Indeed, in some cases it became increasingly difficult to differentiate a convivial club from an actual business partnership or association.

Such a development is hardly very surprising. Transactions amongst tradesmen were very often sealed over a mug of ale in the local tavern, and the clientele of a coffee house was frequently dominated by one particular trade or business. The tavern or coffee house served as a business address, a rendezvous for clinching deals, and as a place where the latest trade gossip and business information could be obtained. A group within the trade would meet and club together in order to raise money for a collective business enterprise. This was how the famous Chapter’of booksellers meeting at the Chapter Coffee House financed their more ambitious publishing enterprises. Later in the century James Lackington, that remarkable if somewhat ruthless founder of the London book emporium, belonged to a similar society called, in good Mandevillian fashion, the Busy Bees.7⁴ Money was sometimes raised through a subscription in an existing society, or the subscription itself gave birth to a new club. Thus the fishermen of Cromer formed themselves into an association and raised a fund in order to organize the marketing of their catch in London.7⁵

The fund or, as it was more usually called, the subscription was probably the most common way of raising money for a particular project in eighteenth-century England, and, as often as not, it was organized by or centred on a club or society. To subscribe is, of course, to club together, and this is how contemporaries thought of subscriptions, even though there were a substantial number of occasions when a subscription was public and therefore did not necessarily involve the social and convivial aspects of clubbing.

The subscription has a great many advantages. It was a highly flexible form of fund raising which permitted the small saver to participate. Even the man with a few shillings or a pound or two would feel able to invest, and any given project was not dependent upon a large contribution from some enormously wealthy individual whose share in the enterprise would therefore be disproportionately grand. Though it is undeniable that aristocrats and men of considerable means were frequently members of a subscription, the typical investor or donor was far more likely to be a merchant, tradesman, tavern proprietor, or member of a profession. A tradesman with a relatively small sum of money to invest could nevertheless diversify his resources by making modest contributions to several subscriptions. And as these were frequently regarded as loans on which he would be paid interest, rather than as shares in a partnership, he was protected from the terrible responsibility that the absence of a law of limited liability put on the tradesman who combined with others in any business venture.7⁶

The subscription, therefore, was primarily a tactic of the middling sort, that group whose incomes fell between approximately £50 and £400 per annum. It enabled them to exercise collectively an influence in the community far beyond that conferred by their individual incomes. Like the club, the subscription could liberate men from the client economy. There was less reason to turn to the local aristocrat or big wig for financial aid, charity or entertainment when a combination of local bourgeois could organize such projects for themselves, thereby acquiring not only local status but the pleasureable sensation of acting independently. The author who wanted money to publish a book and the builder who sought capital for constructing houses no longer needed to go cap in hand to a patron or sponsor, but could launch a public subscription through the newspaper. This did not mean, of course, that such men made an immediate leap from the client economy to the mass market, but the subscription helped facilitate the transition; it provided a degree of security in a period of change, enabling the small tradesman or producer to move outside the protected realm of patrician patronage without being totally at the mercy of the open market's vagaries and whims.

Much has been written in recent years of the importance of a middlingsort in stimulating home demand during the eighteenth century." Perhaps rather more attention ought also to be addressed to the role of the small investor in stimulating the economy. The extraordinary number of subscriptions, many of them organized by clubs, lodges and societies, helped unlock the savings of merchants, tradesmen, and those in the professions, thereby ensuring their use not only in business projects but in the equally important spheres of charity and leisure.

For, although a great many subscriptions were used to fund entrepreneurial activities such as house-building, the sale of books and prints, and the erection of turnpikes,78 even more frequently the subscription was employed to effect civic improvements and to provide community charity. Clubs and societies that had previously provided support and relief to their own members extended the ambit of their activities to those outside the charmed circle of club membership. The building of local assembly rooms and theatres, the erection of bridges where fords or a ferry had previously existed, the provision of street lighting and of night-watchmen, the opening of regional hospitals and the foundation of agricultural improvement societies were all effected through subscriptions.7ª In the forefront of this fund-raising were the masons. They seem to have been especially interested in the foundation of almshouses and hospitals, and it was because of their wide range of charitable activities that the Free and Accepted Masons sought legal incorporation in 1772.8º

Λ certain amount of this charitable activity was carried out on an ad hoc basis. Thus the misfortunes of Pasquale Paoli and his fellow Corsicans at the hands of the French promoted English sympathizers to subscribe over £3,000 for their relief.81 In 1731 the members of the Falcon Club in Cambridge organized a subscription for the victims of the terrible fire that ravaged the nearby village of Burwell.8² Similarly, it seems to have been common practice to raise subscriptions for the relief of the poor during times of dearth. In Wisbech in 1740 and Bury St. Edmunds in 1772 there were subscriptions amongst the local traders to purchase grain for the country folks who had rioted about inadequate provision. T’hese funds very often had a dual purpose: they were intended, in the first instance, to permit a magnanimous gesture that would encourage the voluntary restoration of order, but they could also be used to justify retributive action against the rioters if they were inappropriately ungrateful for the charity of the local burghers.8ª Some of these attempts to provide relief went to extraordinary lengths. In 1772 subscriptions to lower the price of meat and other foodstuffs were stàrted by the booksellers of the Chapter Coffee House and London's silk weavers, at the New Lloyd's Coffee House and the King's Arms Tavern in Cornhill. Within a month nearly £7,000, it was claimed, had been collected, and, thanks to extensive publicity in the newspapers (many of which were owned by the booksellers), the scheme was copied in Bristol, Gloucester, Worcester, Leicester and Norwich. Subscribers either lent money free of interest for the purchase of meat, or tried to negotiate cheap, bulk orders from country butchers.4 Such expendients were clearly necessary when economic fluctuations were so sharp and unpredictable, and when a bad harvest or prolonged period of bad weather could place the 30 per cent of the population which was at risk' below the poverty line.8⁵ The ease and rapidity with which a subscription could be raised made it an ideal means of providing some short-term response—-no matter how unsatisfactory--to the spectre of extreme poverty.

Ad hoc charitable subscriptions sought to relieve or, at least, alleviate poverty and misfortune, but the majority of the enduring charitable societies sought to prevent them by providing schooling, employment and apprenticeship schemes. The Neptune Society of Liverpool, the Marine Society of London, the Naval Society, and Bristol's Anchor Society all provided training and relief for the children—-often orphans—-of men in the merchant marine, or took vagrant boys and prepared them for naval service.8⁶ A sizeable proportion of the nation's charity schools were organized and financed through subscriptions.87 Most large towns seem to have had societies for apprenticing poor boys, such as that at Bristol, and the numerous county societies also paid for children from their locality to be trained in a particular trade. Thus the Gentlemen Natives of Hereford held monthly meetings in Bristol to raise money for the apprenticing of Hereford lads in that city, while in London the Gloucestershire society, with its annual subscription of 12s. a year, paid for the apprenticeship of 171 poor boys.88 Such organizations linked the country and the city; young men who tramped their way to a regional centre or the metropolis could hope for the help of such a society in finding them employment in a strange town.

It should not be imagined that this charitable activity was totally selfless. As a great many critics of charitable activity, including the most acerbic of them all, Bernard Mandeville, pointed out, membership of a charitable society could confer considerable status on an individual. The organizers of charities, it was recognized, were often men of insufficient rank to occupy civic office but could nonetheless enjoy the sensations of power and control over others via the charity society. This opportunity to lord it over the unfortunate was all the greater because the charity dispensed was usually selective rather than indiscriminate. Unlike traditional forms of largesse such as the open house, common table or the tradition of throwing money or food to a scrambling crowd, club charity prided itself on its decorousness and chose its recipients carefully. They had to demonstrate that they were worthy of and justly entitled to relief, and were also compelled to show appropriate gratitude for the magnanimity shown towards them. On occasion a ticket system was employed whereby subscribers could dispense tickets redeemable on a tradesman or retailer (often a member of the society himself) to whoever they thought deserved relief.89

Power and status were not the only pay-offs. Charities and civic improvements meant jobs and patronage. A new bridge needed a tollmaster, schoolmasters were wanted for charitable educational establishments, a hospital had to be staffed by doctors and attendants. These were employment opportunities for precisely the social group which had funded the enterprise in the first place. Friends and relatives might be provided for, or appointments dispensed as patronage. Just as the bridge provided income through its tolls, and the lighting schemes and watchmen protected tradesmen's property, so the charity schools and apprenticeship schemes provided their patrons with future servants and employees, educated in the appropriate values of industriousness, sobriety, thrift and punctuality.9º No wonder subscribers so carefully attend the accounts of local improvements, and overlooked, with a zeal that surprised all but the cynical Mandeville, the individual progress of the students in their charity schools.

Clubs, lodges and subscriptions, therefore, brought many and considerable benefits to those who participated in them. Members were provided with a measure of security that was almost impossible to obtain outside the comforting confines of one's association. Trade and business were facilitated and made more reliable, for one came to know intimately the men with whom one was dealing. The club provided a cushion against a member's more aggressive creditors, made borrowing money much easier, and provided the organizational base from which to raise larger capital sums.

Clubs and societies were organizations which made men ‘free': members were free and easy' or Freemasons. Free, of course, of the cares and worries that non-members suffered, but also free in the sense of being independent. Collectively the society determined its own activities; members governed themselves directly or through representatives who were regularly elected to offices that were usually rotated within the society. Within the group all were equal. Indeed, the eighteenth-century club closely approximated to the classical republican ideal so beloved of contemporaries yet so rarely realized in political society at large. Naturally oligarchs emerged in some clubs and lodges, just as they were apt to emerge at Westminster, but if a particular group in a club tried to monopolize power, the association tended to loose its unanimity, and to disintegrate.91 Free and independent amongst themselves, club members were also free of others: they had the collective power and financial strength to support themselves, to avoid dependence on others. They could use this power, as I have argued, to free themselves from the constraints of the client economy and of the political control of their superiors.

Lodge and society membership also brought with it status and influence. Many clubs became powerful enough not only to aid themselves but to bring succour to others, though usually such help had its price. In order to enjoy the benefits offered by the burghers who ran clubs, subscriptions and charities, a man had to show that he was willing to embrace their tradesmen-like, bourgeois values. Charity was a means of converting the idle and unfortunate to the creed of industry; it acted as an evangelizing means of improving the social environment, making it a better place in which to trade, sell, borrow and lend.

The benefits that accrued from club membership attracted so many applicants that the more prestigious societies grew increasingly selective. Since joining a lodge increased a new member's credit-worthiness, societies needed to be reasonably sure of the reliability of those they admitted. As one master put it, he accepted ‘none but men of good principles and capable of acting upon the square, and living in obedience to the most excellent system of Morality and Good Fellowship delivered to us in the science of Freemasonry'.92 A man's trade, his religious or political beliefs were not the relevant criteria for admission to a society—indeed, many clubs tried to overcome such distinctions—but an eager applicant would have to subscribe to the conventions, codes and practices of bourgeois probity and virtue.

Let us take stock of the argument so far. The problem of credit and debt operated at two levels in eighteenth-century society. First, changes in the scale of business, creating an extensive inter-regional credit structure centred on London, linked the fortunes of the local tradesman and of the London money market. The vicissitudes of the metropolis were now also the misfortunes of the commercial nation at large. The risks that the provincial businessman faced changed, altering in such a way as to increase his concern with events both in the metropolis and abroad. This, in turn, stimulated an interest in national politics. Reliable information from the centre was, of course, crucial, and was being provided with increasing exactitude by the provincial press, but a precise description of an incompetent policy, financial disaster or speculative mania was small compensation for those who had to suffer the consequences of political and economic policies whose formulation lay beyond their control. Hence the growing hostility towards a system of politics epitomized by the placeman and the stockjobber, and the desire to replace political clientage by a system that would give a greater say to men of moveable property.

Secondly, widespread credit and debt created comparable problems of regulation on a much more intimate scale. The relationship between borrower and lender was far more fraught, and a far more serious commitment than that between buyer and seller. The creditor's concern about the debtor extended far beyond the transaction of the loan itself. The fortunes of the lender were tied to those of the borrower: the debtor's indolence or adversity was the creditor's loss; the former had, quite literally, a vested interest in ensuring that the borrower conducted his business or employment precisely and successfully. Conversely, the debtor had to ensure the trust and confidence of the creditor, he had to accept that those who lent him money would make moral and social judgements about his worth over and beyond the immediate transaction. Otherwise it would be impossible to procure a loan, or the creditor, if a loan was obtained, would foreclose. It is the on-going intensity of the credit nexus that made local borrowing and lending such an important issue and which encouraged regulation of the relationship.

Clubs and lodges—voluntary associations—were one short-term and frequently local means of regularizing credit arrangements. But the attempted regulation of credit which, given the universal practice of trade borrowing and lending, amounted to the regulation of business, was only a single aspect—though undoubtedly the most important one—of the efforts of voluntary associations and the social groups which they represented to establish their own, fairly complete control over their business activities. This aspiration must not be conceived of too narrowly. It was never simply a question of the internal ordering of trade and commerce. It involved the aggressive adoption of ‘work ethic' values, attempts to enlarge the local power of mercantile groups through involvement in charitable projects and schemes for civic improvement, and a deliberate attack on the client economy and all it stood for. Reducing one's dependence on aristocratic clientage was analogous to escaping the impotent dependence that came from borrowing and lending. Naturally, neither could be entirely dispensed with, but both could be changed in such a way as to favour the tradesman and merchant: his direct control of the situation could be increased and, in consquence, his business risks reduced. But in order to bring this situation about, a number of important social and political changes had to be effected: the bonds between men had to be transformed, raising a major question about the exercise of power in the society.

Eventually the political issue had to be confronted, but it was not until the emergence of Wilkite radicalism that the clubs, lodges and societies firmly committed themselves to a political group or cause. It is the pseudo-Masonic societies, the lodges and trading clubs which link the economic and social to the political aspirations of the middling sort. For it was these voluntary associations which provided Wilkes with an aggressive and effective political organization, simply switching or extending already well-established economic activities into the political sphere. They were also the chief market for the many radical artifacts which were produced to exploit the emergence of John Wilkes as a shaper of fashion in the period. Voluntary associations lay at the heart of the Wilkite affair.

## CLUBS, COMMERCIALIZATION AND POLITICS

Remember, that a free state is only a more numerous and more powerful club, and that he only is a free man, who is a member of such a state. ( (Sir William Jones), The Principles of Government; in a Dialogue between a scholar and a peasant, written by a Member of the Society for Constitutional Information ((London), 1783), 14.)

O all ye people praise ye WILKES, bless him,

and huzza him for ever!

O ye printers of the land, praise ye Wilkes,

bless him, and huzza him for ever!

O ye printers devils and your agents of

whatsoever denomination, praise ye Wilkes,

bless him, and huzza him for ever,

O all ye booksellers, pamphlet stitchers, and

bookbinders, praise ye Wilkes, bless him,

and huzza him for ever ...

O ye glaziers of the city, praise ye Wilkes,

bless him and huzza him for ever

O ye chandlers of grease, praise ye Wilkes,

bless him, and huzza him for ever ...

O ye ballad singers, hawkers and pedlars, praise ye Wilkes, bless him and huzza him for ever!

Honour be to thee, O Wilkes!

(Britannia's Intercession for the happy deliverance of John Wilkes, Esq (London, 1768), 5.)

As we have seen, clubs, lodges and societies conferred on their members a whole series of economic benefits, including a degree of independence from the client economy, that was possible chiefly because of the power and financial strength derived from association. Such societies were a useful means .of organizing men, accumulating savings and mobilizing wealth. These advantages of group organization were not lost on those eighteenthcentury politicians who sought to mobilize political movements that did not depend on the traditional resources of clientage and patrician patronage. Political clubs, of course, were no new phenomena, especially in London where such societies had flourished at least since the Restoration.9ª But a distinction, albeit a rough and ready one, can be drawn between those societies like the Green Ribbon Club, or the Mug House clubs of the period of the Hanoverian succession, which were essentially extensions of a fairly well articulated party organization run by aristocrats,4 and the sort of societies which could be found from the mid-eighteenth century and which tried to build an independent political movement, and express independent political initiative. Radical leaders such as John Wilkes cribbed from the tradesman's copybook, establishing societies, clubs and subscriptions whose organization was very largely derived from the example of bourgeois charities, lodges and trading associations. At the same time already existing voluntary associations of merchants, tradesmen and artisans leapt to Wilkes's support. The degree of unanimity these societies expressed is truly remarkable. There are almost no examples of clubs and societies which deliberately opposed Wilkes, and though many associations undoubtedly remained politically neutral throughout the Wilkes affair, there were nevertheless a substantial number of clubs which played an active role as Wilkite protagonists.

What united these societies with Wilkes was the notion of independence'. The autonomy and self-reliance sought by clubs of shopkeepers, retailers and tradesmen was readily expressed in the radicals' pursuit of freedom from clientage. The radical stereotype, as portrayed in their literature, makes this connection quite explicit, and self-consciously unites political independence with financial autonomy. As we have seen, this independence was not of the sort traditionally associated with the landed wealth of the gentleman. Rather it connoted freedom from the pressures that a patrician employer, patron or client could place on his workmen, tradesmen and creditors. Thus, when Wilkes was released from gaol in April 1770, the newspapers contrasted the joyous celebrations amongst the independent trading interest in the town of Gosport with the sullen silence of the local naval officers who were described as the kept, corrupt employees of the government, too fearful of their employer to express their honest political feelings.9⁵ Similarly, in radical propaganda, a distinction was always drawn between the intrepid, independently minded tradesman, like the poulterer William Edridge who defied the pressures of his aristocratic customers to support Wilkes, and such businessmen as the Westminster churchwarden who tried to prohibit Wilkite celebrations because he wanted to enjoy preferment and obtain aristocratic patronage of his grocery and small wares business.9⁶ Stories about independent yet poverty-stricken voters appeared repeatedly in the radical journals. The impecunious yet independent bricklayer, the decrepit, blind old man, the poor man from Brentford who shouted Let your duke bring a waggon load of money, we will throw him and all his money into the river': they were all vividly contrasted with the toadying footman, the venal customs official, the cruel bum-bailiff and the favour-seeking tradesman who were taken as stereotypical courtiers and conservatives.97 When radical politicians complained about corruption and patronage, they did not confine their criticisms to the presence of government employees in the legislature, or of tidewaiters and excise officers in the localities. They were fully aware of the extent of the client economy and how it could be used politically; indeed, they numbered it as one of the cardinal sins of the Hanoverian spoils system.9⁸

The club members' desire for freedom from economic clientage went, therefore, hand-in-hand with a desire for political independence: the conditions necessary to obtain the one were also essential for the other. In consequence trading clubs and friendly societies very readily transmuted themselves into political associations. Of course a political crisis such as that surrounding the career of John Wilkes spawned many new clubs and societies, ranging from the rowdy and demotic Anti-Caledonian club in Wapping or the ‘Free and Easy' under the Rose in Cursitor Street to the politically sophisticated and very orderly Retribution Club, Liberty Beefsteak Club, and Society of the Supporters of the Bill of Rights (SSBR).99 But the majority of the clubs that did stalwart service for the Wilkite movement had existed prior to the emergence of the radical cause, and had deliberately decided to tack their colours to the mast of political independence. Wilkes himself did not choose to join many of the clubs; they determined to ally themselves with him. This was true of the Albions, the AntiGallicans, the Brethren of the Cheshire Cheese, the Bucks, the Colts of the City Lands, the First of August Society, the Hiccobites, the Leeches, the Free and Accepted Masons in their many branches, the Lumber Troop, the Mussel-Court Society and the Society of Old Souls.1¹º0

At first sight this support for Wilkes seems somewhat strange. Many of the societies which supported Wilkes stressed, as we have seen, the virtues of unanimity, harmony and good fellowship; they also professed to be above party squabbles and sordid politicking. This hardly seems to square with their support of one of the most notorious and controversial figures in eighteenth-century politics. But, for the clubs, masons and pseudo-masonic orders that backed Wilkes, their hero was above party and, in a sense, above politics. He was not obviously allied to any aristocratic group in parliament, and it was also apparent that his cause transcended the usual party boundaries. In fighting for liberty--or independence-Wilkes was pursuing a higher value; one that promised to create a commercially freer, politically self-reliant body politic which, in turn, would produce national unanimity, harmony and good feeling. Precisely because Wilkes promised to change the rules of politics in this way, he appealed to tradesmen, shopkeepers and members of the middling-sort. The numerous presents that Wilkes received in gaol, so many of which were especially splendid examples of local industry or agriculture, as well as the frequently reiterated statements in radical meetings that only Wilkite success could restore the nation's commerce and wealth attest to the connection, firmly made in the minds of most of Wilkes's merchant and trading supporters, that right-thinking politics and prosperity were two sides of the same entrepreneurial coin.¹º1

The support that the societies gave Wilkes was vital. Their experience in raising subscriptions, staging celebrations and co-ordinating political activity gave the radical movement a solid organizational base both in London and some of the larger provincial towns. Fund raising was probably their most important function. The Society of the Supporters of the Bill of Rights (SSBR) is usually portrayed as the first major extra-parliamentary political association—which it was—but it should not be forgotten that the society was originally established to handle the growing number of contributions which were pouring in from clubs and societies who wanted to give tangible proof of their political feelings. The SSBR, in other words, was at the top of a hierarchy of associations which supported Wilkes. Club subscriptions came from the West Indies and North America, Kent, Surrey, Sussex, Huntingdon, Worcestershire, Cornwall and Buckinghamshire, as well as the towns of Exeter, Oxford, Trowbridge and Bradford in Wiltshire, and Newcastle where several clubs combined their efforts.¹² In London, public house subscriptions were common. Even the poorer tavern associations of the East End managed to raise over £200 to help pay off Wilkes's debts just before his release from gaol. The Sons or Friends of Freedom who met at the Standard Tavern in Leicester Fields, and whose secretary Blair, was a haircutter, raised £150, while the Antigallicans, it was asserted, put up the enormous sum of £3,000 for Wilkes's election as sheriff.1º³ Most of these societies used the traditional method of raising money: usually they held a dinner or feast and saved the remaining cash for Wilkes and Liberty'. This, indeed, was what the radical journals exhorted them to do. The Middlesex Journal in an open letter to ‘the laudable Societies of Free and Accepted Masons, Antigallicans, and all Independent Societies and Public Meeting in the British dominions'(dominions because money was sent from North America and the West Indies) suggested that they provide immediately a box at each of your societies, with a slit in the top, to receive the free contributions of all the friends of liberty and the constitution'.¹4 After a fixed period the money was to be counted and remitted to the SSBR in London.

Such strategies were clearly sufficiently successful to fund the many Middlesex elections and also to pay off the enormous debts that Wilkes had accrued.

Equally important was the organizational role that the clubs played during Wilkite demonstrations and festivities. They were responsible for renting rooms in taverns, buying butts of ale, and arranging firework displays, illuminations and celebratory music. The Forty-five Society and the Mussel-Court society staged elaborate celebrations for Wilkes's birthday, which the Standard Tavern society wanted to make into an annual jubilee. Wilkes's repeated re-elections for the county of Middlesex and his eventual release from the King's Bench Prison were marked by similar club festivities in Somerset, the North-East of England, and the environs of London. The Antigallicans at the Greyhound Inn in Greenwich, for example, commemorated Wilkes's release with fireworks, transparencies (very much a fad of the time), and rollicking music. In Newcastle the Cappadocians held a feast that was illuminated by a curious candle with 45 branches; they were sent Wilkite tobacco pipes by a local trader, and funded a special performance of Addison's Cato as a warning to those who had been responsible for Wilkes's confinement. Time and again we find local clubs and societies feasting and drinking on the dates of Wilkes's birth (28 October), his four re-elections to his Middlesex seat (16, 28 February, 16 March, 13 April), and his release from prison (23 April). Some even celebrated the twentyeighth day of every month because so much of importance for the Wilkite movement happened on that day: it was Wilkes's birthday, the date of his entry into the King's Bench prison, and the occasion of one of his reelections.105

Local societies had the expertise, experience, and could mobilize the funds to demonstrate their support for Wilkes on these occasions. They ensured that every Wilkite victory or radical triumph went off with a bang not a whimper. Sky-rockets, fire-crackers, bell-ringing, even gun salutes accompanied each celebration. The clubs quite literally kept the radical cause in the public eye, providing a powerful physical presence, a spectacle which reminded the public of the radicals'crusade. Yet in doing so they were drawingon techniques that had their roots in the social, economic and convivial traditions of the lodge, the trading club and the friendly society.

Not all club activity was so boisterous. Some societies were less centres of carousing and merry-making than places of political education and serious discussion. Many lodges held lectures before the drinking began. There was at least one London club whose members spent their time composing letters to the press exposing political and social evils.10⁶ And, of course, there were the debating societies. The Robin-hood society in Butcher Row, famous for its free-thinking religious views and candid discussion of the political issues of the day, raised such questions as‘what good has a certain popular gent. [Wilkes] done to his country?’ and Can a people be free, whose representatives are nominated by representatives, instead of constituents?’ Over in Newgate Street at the Queen's Arms similar issues were being publicly discussed.‘What', the members debated on 14 April 1769, ‘is the proper definition of the word Liberty?'. The society concluded that liberty was ‘the power of acting agreeable to laws which have the sanction of the people's consent'. The Middlesex elections, the administration of justice, and the value of instructions to MPs were all other topics of vociferous debate.¹º7

Clubs and societies, therefore, were the foci of Wilkite organization: they were as prominent during the Middlesex elections where their banners led the serried ranks of radical supporters às in the King's Bench prison where masons, pseudo-masons and tradesmen's clubs gathered, bedecked in their society regalia, in order formally to elevate Wilkes into their fraternities.¹08 They saw, with singular clarity, that Wilkes's politics coincided with theirs, and that it promised to achieve the economic and social goals that these societies had always pursued.

The symbiotic relationship between the radical politicans and the tradesmen's clubs created a powerful pressure group for improvement and reform which went to considerable lengths to expose the ills and inadequacies of court politics and the client economy. A fairly systematic muck-raking campaign was begun, spearheaded by the radical Middlesex Journal. The misuse of public funds, whether in parliament, a charitable bequest or at the parish officer's feast, was one of the paper's favourite grievances, as were trading malpractices of all kinds from selling short weight and measure to the speculative manipulation of commodity prices. The names of jurors in famous, especially political trials were printed in order to encourage public accountability, as were the names and addresses of those whom the paper regarded as especially miscreant and venal.¹09

The perennial question of indebtedness, so keenly felt by members of voluntary associations, was also taken up. Aristocratic and genteel customers of tradesmen were berated for failing to pay their bills promptly; bumbailiffs and spongers were attacked for the way in which they lived off the misfortunes of others; and the reform of the laws governing debt was often advocated. Writers in the Middlesex Journal complained of the ways in which the rich merchant could use bankruptcy to escape the full horrors of indebtedness, while the smaller businessman—the shopkeeper or tradesman—had to languish in gaol. Such inequalities, together with the failure of the existing law to satisfy either creditor or debtor, were usually discussed specifically from the viewpoint of the retailer and small master."1º There was even an advisory service for readers of the Middlesex Journal who had problems with debt and credit, run by the former turnkey of the King's Bench Prison, William Penrice.

Members of the SSBR such as Sir Watkin Lewes, Thomas Butterworth Bayley and George Grieve—the friend of both Franklin and Marat—were all involved in schemes for local improvement, including the building of hospitais and schools, the establishment of agricultural societies, and the introduction of street policing."1 When the radicals had effectively established themselves in London's city government, they were similarly attentive to the interests of traders and shopkeepers. There was a serious attempt to keep hawkers off the streets, because they interfered with and undercut shopmen's trade, just as there was a campaign to remove the streetside fruitsellers (many of whom were prostitutes) who distracted potential shop customers near the Exchange and St. Pauls."² At the same time many radicals— especially the young lawyers such as Serjeant Glynn and John Reynolds —were concerned about anomolies in the law. Considerable attention was paid to the administration of justice which, broadly speaking, the radicals thought should be more equitable, even though rigorous."³ Such sentiments certainly appealed to many of the middling sort who joined clubs and supported the radicals: they would have helped trade, institutionalized and regularized the retail business, helped reduce the theft that was so often directed against shopkeepers, and also furthered the trading interest in city government. Naturally enough, the apprentices and journeymen who bawled Wilkes and Liberty' on the streets and rioted in his favour did not have such reforms in mind; indeed, they would probably have resented them quite strongly. But the traders and merchants who were both the middle ranks of society and the middle ranks of the Wilkite movement looked upon such measures with heartfelt approval.

The Wilkites, therefore, united with trading clubs and societies, organizations that had originally been social and economic in intent and which had sought to foster commerce and the values compatible with good trading, and used them for political purposes. This never involved any abrupt transformation of purpose for these clubs because their politics and their economic concerns were inextricably linked. Such societies could hope to benefit from the sort of reformist proposals that many of Wilkes's followers so ardently supported. But we must also recognize that politics, especially radical politics, was open to commercial development and exploitation. If the Wilkites used the technique's and methods of organization derived from the world of business, so the tradesman and entrepreneur treated politics as a commodity whose purchase could bring him profit.

Naturally, as we shall see in the ensuing discussion, those who engaged in the commercialization of politics sought to capture as broad a market as possible, to appeal to both the affluent and the humble; equally, they were never slow to exploit the transitory, calendrical occasions--the celebrations of victory and demonstrations of loyalty-—which were such important expressions of political sentiment. But·the centre, the hard core of the market for politics, and one which provided continuity between periodic expressions of jubilation which often proved enormously profitable to the potter, publican and printer, were the clubs and societies. These organizations were the chief purchasers of Wilkite commemoratives, of Wilkite ceramics for their club room, and of Wilkite regalia and bunting; they were the best customers of the publican, for not only did they meet, week after week, in the tavern upstairs or back room, storing their savings with the landlord, but they also organized and orchestrated the celebrations which involved the massive consumption of beer, the giving of gifts and public dinners.

Without the clubs there would have been no solid centre, no reliable, steady market for politics and political artifacts. Moreover, many clubs included in their fraternities the very producers of Wilkite artifacts. The concrete symbols of the Wilkite movement, therefore, were both instances of commercialization, and examples of the mutual support and club trading that were intrinsic to voluntary associations.

First and foremost among the Wilkite artifacts were the ceramics. Like nearly all Wilkite objects they ranged from the highly expensive to the relatively cheap, appealing to the entire range of radical supporters. The famous porcelain figure of Wilkes, usually ascribed to John Bacon, the Worcestershire porcelain tea-pot inscribed with the no. 45 under the spout, and the exquisite snuffboxes decorated either with portraits of Wilkes (taken from a contemporary engraving) or with the resplendent figure of Liberty were all well beyond the pocket of the patriot's humbler supporters." Doubtless there would have been rather more purchasers of Wedgwood's creamware teapots-in both small and large sizes--which were transfer printed by John Sadler with a portait of John Wilkes, Esq. The Patriot’, and of the very similar Leeds teapots inscribed on one side with Wilkes and Liberty’ and, on the other, by the ubiquitous no. 45’.115 Yet the great majority of Wilkite ceramics were not even in the newly-fashionable creamware but in humble English delft. The typical Wilkite piece was the club mug, punchbowl or plate, usually decorated with a curtain'portrait of Wilkes, together with one of the political slogans of the day. Let not liberty be sold/ For Silver nor Gold/ Your votes freely give/ To the brave and the bold' is the motto of one such mug, while another has the rather more pithy inscription,Wilkes for ever'. The patriot and his enemies were regularly contrasted with one another in the delftware decoration:‘Wilkes & Liberty no Bu[te] 45’was easily transformed into‘Wilkes and Honest Juries No Ma[nsfiel]d 45’. Indeed one piece, a Chinese export bowl, actually reproduced a contemporary cartoon,‘The Arms of Liberty and Slavery’ depicting the virtuous Wilkes and the heinous Lord Justice.116

Similar sentiments appeared on the large number of medals and medallets. These, like the ceramics, catered for those of all incomes. Many of the medals, including the most famous produced by James Kirk, the friend and drinking partner of the radical Thomas Hollis, were cast in gold, silver and base metal. The larger medals were for display at home or in the appropriate cabinet, while the medallets, like Masons' badges, were frequently worn around the neck as a token of allegiance to the radical cause.¹7

Equally popular was Wilkite clothing which enabled the radicals to display their political sentiments publicly. There were Wilkite coats with specially embroidered buttonholes, radical buttons, cuffs, rings and handkerchiefs, together with a Wilkite wig that had 45 curls.18 Brooches or badges of the number 45 could be purchased in both gold and base metal. It was possible, if one so wished, to equip oneself almost entirely in Wilkite clothing and regalia, though few were as sartorially exuberant as Mr. Scott, the patriotic newscarrier', who wore a suit of blue and gold (the radical colours), a silver medal of Mr. Wilkes on his breast, and sleeve buttons and a breast buckle all marked with the number 45.19

There was virtually no end to the number of artifacts that were produced as Wilkite items, or transmuted through the addition of a symbol such as the number 45 into a pro-radical commodity. Tobacco pipes and papers, candlesticks and candles, pewter pots, flagons and tankards, cakes and confections were all tailored for the radical market.120

In exploiting the Wilkite phenomenon there seem to have been three particular tactics of note. The first was the use of the admittedly transient but very large market created by the Wilkite crowd. A tallow-chandler produced special blue candles in bundles of 45 for radical illuminations; over 3,000 blue cockades were sold to Wilkites by a city haberdasher; brewers cut the price of their ale on the days of Wilkite celebration; ballad singers were said to be making profits in the region of 18s. to 21s. a day on the occasions of radical demonstrations, using such ingenious ploys as selling blank sheets of paper, crying out ‘Hallifax's speech'when the alderman failed to say anything on the platform of the 1772 mayoralty election.121 The fate of the hats of Colonel Luttrell in 1769 and William Meredith in 1771 illustrate the extraordinary eye for the main chance that contemporaries had. Both were seized by the crowd and cut into pieces during Wilkite demonstrations. Almost immediately fragments appeared on the market, advertised as from the real hats of Luttrell or Meredith, and which could be purchased as radical trophies or souvenirs. A Luttrell hat button was said to fetch 2s. 6d. while Meredith's headwear was obviously less prestigious, costing only 6d. or 1s. a piece. As one wag remarked, there was almost as many pieces of Luttrell's hat in London as there were bits of the true cross in Rome.122

Entrepreneurs were equally adroit at changing their marketing techniques to exploit the Wilkes cult. Even the fair fruithawkers in the West End cried out that they were selling ‘Wilkes's cherries', though it is hard to see how they would have tasted any different if they had been the fruit of King George and his ministers.1²³ Cakes and confections, too, were simply radicalized' by marking with the number 45 or selling them in batches of that number.1²4 Some such tactics were of remarkable ingenuity. John Seally, for instance, inserted an advertisement in the Middlesex Journal ‘To the Sons of Liberty and Encouragers of Penmanship'—not a connection that was immediately obvious even to his readers. But he offered them an engraving of the word Liberty ‘in German text capitals carefully engraved .. . from the design of John Seally, writing master and accomptant, author of the Universal Tutor etc., and master of the academy in Bridgewater square, Barbican, where the curious may have them on plaister of Paris by paying the extra expense'. He had a plaster impression put up in the Royal Exchange on public view, and offered to send his clients Liberty’ through the postal service. 125

Another popular variant of this tactic was to obtain publicity and advertising for one's product by presenting Wilkes with an especially fine example of one's workmanship. This seems to have been at least part of the plan of the London sugar-baker who gave Wilkes a 45lb sugar loaf, and of the staymaker from Worcester who presented Polly, Wilkes's daughter, with stays of 45 pieces or quarters, ... 45 holes and the no. 45 beautifully worked on the stomacher'. Even more improbably a mangle maker near Grosvenor Square' gave Wilkes an elegant mangle out of mahogany, on a construction entirely new, which, for its masterly and curious workmanship far exceeds anything of the kind that hath hitherto appeared before the public eye ... in order to furnish him [Wilkes] with an article so necessary and useful for housekeeping'. Whether or not Wilkes was enamoured of this particular gift we do not know, but it served, as the language of the newspaper item vividly conveys, to publicize a product which claimed to be the very latest thing in household accoutrements. Joseph Leech of Romsey, Hampshire, used the same technique in advertising his wigs, including ‘my new-invented Cork Peruke of 45 curls'which he had posted to Wilkes. His advertisement even included an ecstatic ode of his own composition which waxed lyrical on the patriot's pate and its elegant covering.126

Such tactics were widely used by all those who employed their entrepreneurial skills to commercialize politics. Three groups, however, stand out in their commercial involvement with Wilkes and the radicals of the clubs and they repay closer attention. Those involved in the drink trade—brewers, innkeepers and tavern proprietors—the manufacturers of ceramics, and the printers and booksellers who disseminated newspapers, pamphlets, songs, prints and cartoons all contributed towards the growth of a radical political style or culture centred on the club, tavern and coffeehouse while simultaneously reaping considerable, albeit short-term profits.

The tavern proprietor, the keepers of coaching inns and even the master of the public house were, of course, no strangers to the sort of organizing, entertaining, treating and celebrating that were an essential part of politics. No group had a stronger vested interest in encouraging a hotly contested election in which rival candidates would have to pour forth money to keep or win votes. The cash expended on the food and drink that was guzzled by greedy electors ended up in the pocket of the publican. In the Hertfordshire election of 1784, for instance, the Grimston interest paid out nearly £3,000 to 31 different taverns and inns, while Sir Beauchamp Proctor, in his efforts to defeat John Glynn at the Middlesex election of 1768, ran up bills totalling over £1,000 in the fifteen hostelries in Old and New Brentford that he patronized.127

Publicans knew perfectly well that contentious politics and heated debate meant bigger receipts and more custom. They made very little distinction between the crowds that they could draw on political occasions and those that congregated at the same hostelries for auctions, debates, florists'feasts, club meetings and concerts.128 Doubtless the latter would often have been more respectable and more sober, but the profits from the former—provided no damage was done—would have been greater. All such activity was to be encouraged because of its commercial value to the tavern proprietor. Equally the experience that the innkeeper gained in organizing spectacles and public entertainments could be employed politically. The Southwark inns which staged the theatrical performances during the Southwark and Bartholomew fairs could readily switch their resources and expertise to more overt political activity.129 Indeed, this is exactly what happened on 1 May 1769 in Lime Kiln Dock in Bristol, and on Whit Monday of the same year at St. George's Fields, where traditional May Day and Whitsuntide activities were transmuted into Wilkite fairs and festivities.130

Undoubtedly the clearest example, however, of the way in which publicans saw politics as a marketable commodity was in their extraordinary exploitation of the traditional election of the Mayor of Garret. Garret, a small community south of the Thames near Wandsworth, had elected a'‘mayor' to lead their struggle to defend their local commons against encroachment and enclosure. A subscription—needless to say—was raised, a lawyer hired, and the case won. Thereafter a mayor was elected whenever à parliamentary election occurred. But the practice lapsed until it was revived by the publicans at Wandsworth, Tooting, Battersea, Clapham and Vauxhall' as a way of selling more ale. They put up the money for the candidates who were usually well-known figures of London low-life ‘dressed like chimney-sweepers on May Day, or in the mock fashion of the period'. One of the earliest mayors so elected, a retailer of brick-dust, found that his success in the election helped stimulate his business. As a result, new candidates came forward, seeking to advertise their trades. In 1781, for instance, Mr. Cock, a basketmaker, appeared at the poll in a carriage made entirely of wicker. He was accompanied by Thomas Cracknell, the proprietor of the Wilkes Head in Brentford, who played the handbells with an eye to business, as well as a disposition to waggery'. Other candidates included a seller of second-hand wigs, who was both witty and deformed, a Thames waterman, a muffinseller and a carpenter. The victor in 1768, John Gardiner, was transported in 1769 for stealing lead coffins. During the 1760s the election became enormously popular: the road within a mile of Wandsworth was so blocked up with vehicles, that none could move backward or forward during many hours'. Booths and stalls were set up with entertainment and provisions. On one occasion there were so many visitors that all ordinary beverages [were] exhausted, and water was sold at twopence a glass'.1³1

Much of the popularity of the election was attributable to Foote's play The Mayor of Garret which was first performed in 1764 and which appeared regularly thereafter, usually being staged together with The Beggar's Opera. Foote fully recognized the motives that brought men to Garret. His characters range from a trading justice, who arrives with ready made-out warrants and mittimuses, hoping to make money·from all the swearing that will occur, to Master Lint, the potter carrier’who wants to sell his services as a pharmacopolist' [sic] and chirurgon'together with patent medicines to those who are injured during the proceedings. It was asserted that Foote, together with Wilkes and Garrick, actually wrote some of the addresses for the candidates, including in the material popular and radical grievances. William Bingley, who published the later numbers of the North Briton, used an account of the election to moralize on the social and political ills of the nation.1³² The Garret election, therefore, was a manufactured political event, revived and revamped by members of the victualling trades to create the sort of market and trade that usually occurred only when a parliamentary election took place.

It therefore comes as no surprise to find that publicans were pivotal figures in the Wilkite movement. 'They sold cheaper beer on Wilkes's birthday—over a hundred public houses were open specially for the event in 1769—at the Middlesex elections, and on the occasion of Wilkes's release.1³3 Publicans had their pots melted down and inscribed with the slogan ‘Wilkes and Liberty' or purchased special cups and tankards to display to their customers.1³4 Mr. Ashley of the Marlborough Head, Bishopsgate, for example, had a gallon silver tankard made:

Mr. Wilkes sits on the top of the lid, his right hand holds a staff with a cap of liberty on the top, and in the other, is a scroll with the inscription Liberty is the great Charter of the free born sons of Britannia.' On the front, is Britannia in the Temple of Liberty, ornamented with columns of the Ionick order enriched with a canopy over them. The handle is a cornucopia, with fruit and flowers flowing about the tankard.135

Not every proprietor was able to afford such an elaborate commemorative—Ashley paid £60 for it—but many publicans purchased similar artifacts in pewter or oak for the use of their regular customers and for the societies that meet in their taverns.

At the same time Wilkes Head hostelries sprang up in Brentford, the county town of Middlesex, in severaì provincial towns and in London at Kent Street, in Rotherhithe, Shoreditch and Shugg Lane. Wilkes's lawyer John Glynn, gave his name to a public house near Holloway, and Wilkes, Glynn and Horne Tooke were the ‘Three Johns’or the ‘Three Patriots' who hung on the inn-signs of five London taverns. Equally famous was the Forty-Five Tavern'in Gray's Inn Passage, Bedford Row, Holborn. This hostelry was run by Mr. Keys, Beckford's former cook, and had a special illuminated sign at its door inscribed “The Arms of Freedom".136

The purpose of such signs was to attract custom. One West Country inn-keeper started life as the proprietor of the Nags Head. This sign he had changed to ‘The Queen of Hungary’ and then, following the diplomatic revolution, to ‘The King of Prussia'. ‘Every victory that was afterwards gained by that Prince gave an increase of custom to his house; his defeats were ever consoled over a pot of beer, and better success must be drunk to him another time.'With peace and increased beer prices, the publican's fortunes flagged, until ‘by a little Alternation of the Drapery, and a cast given to one of his eyes, the Prussian monarch was converted into the Patriotic author of the North Briton'. Such a tactic not only restored the inn-keeper's custom, but increased his business to new heights.1³7

Taverns such as the Globe on Fleet Street, the Half Moon in Cheapside, the King's Arms in Cornhill, the London Tavern in Bishopsgate, the Prince of Orange in Jermyn Street, the Queen's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, the Standard Tavern in Leicester Fields, the Swan on Westminster Bridge and the Mermaid at Hackney were all essential parts of Wilkite radical organization. These houses were where the radicals met, plotted and planned. They were the homes of the clubs and societies which allied themselves with

Wilkes, the centres of distribution and for advertisements for the Middlesex Journal, and the regular venue of public meetings of merchants, common councilmen, city companies and even the city livery.1³⁸ But even as the taverns were important to the radicals, so the radical clubs were important to the taverns. They wanted the substantial trade and business that these groups brought.

In fact the position of the brewers and publicans vis-à-vis the radicals was a fairly complex one. For some reason there were persistent rumours when Wilkes was in gaol that he would set himself up as a brewer when he was released. The proprietor of the West Ham waterworks even offered to supply him if he did set up in trade.¹³9 Possibly this was a threat to undercut the main London brewers, for they had achieved a certain notoriety because of the first increase in the price of strong beer within living memory to 3½d. per pot. Though this was largely the consequence of increased taxation on beer, the measure had been concerted with the brewers, and had provoked considerable popular outcry.¹⁴ It was still a sufficiently bitter grievance for publicans to make great play of their reduction of the price of beer on special Wilkite occasions to the traditional 3d. per pot. It is possible that some publicans—though not the brewers—were united with their customers in opposing the rise, and that they were using Wilkes to voice their objections to the tax. Some Wilkite medals seem to refer to this issue with their three pence'markings, and the giant vat built in Tooley Street was emblazoned with the slogan for beer at 3d. per pot' as well as with Wilkite inscriptions.¹1 (Similar sentiments had been expressed about the cider tax in 1763. When Wilkes was in the Tower in that year he was sent a hamper of cider ‘free from excise'.)¹⁴² The landlords, therefore, may have been engaging in some politicking of their own, and they were supported by some of the radicals on the grounds that a direct tax on an essential commodity—such as beer—hurt the poor, while many of the (foreign) luxuries of the rich went unassessed.¹4³

At the same time, landlords and brewers were under a certain amount of pressure from the radical societies to support the Wilkite cause. Thrale, the friend of Dr. Johnson and M.P. for Southwark, had voted against Wilkes in the Middlesex election and was in favour of his expulsion from the Commons. As a result, there were a number of attempts to persuade his landlords to change their brewery. Boycott was threatened if the proprietor failed to comply, and it is possible that there was also the threat of the removal of club savings from the brewer. This was a serious matter: loss of trade was bad enough, but withdrawal of society savings might run to hundreds of pounds. It is hardly suprising that Ben Truman was careful to let his signature of the Middlesex petition be known, and that he made a £50 donation to the SSBR.¹44

It is perfectly possible, of course, that Truman had radical sympathies. A great many publicans—though rather fewer brewers——seem to have been only too willing to take an active political role in the radical movement. Take Lord Mills', a publican in Fleet Market, for example. He attended the London parliamentary election of 1768 in the hackney carriage no.45 which he had hired especially for the occasion. In April 1769 he went to Brentford in a magnificent coach and six and paid for the transport of forty-five others to vote for Wilkes. In the following August at Barnet Races he put on a similar display arriving in a coach and four, on top of which sat a man with a blue flag in his hand, with “Magna Charta" and “The Bill of Rights"marked on it. On each of the four corners of the coach was a small blue flag with the same words, and on the front of the horses' head a blue paper was fixed with number 45 painted on it’.14⁵ These activities, of course, could simply have been a form of self-advertisement. But it was also 'Lord Mills' who, together with William Penrice, a former turnkey in the King's Bench, and landlord of the Surrey Tavern, rented the coffins which were used in the ceremonial execution on Tower Hill of effigies of the nation's political leaders on 1 April 1771.¹4⁶

Nearly all publicans and vintners, regardless of their political affiliations, could see the manifest benefits that could be obtained by encouraging Wilkite celebrations and radical junketing. The landlord who sold ‘Wilkes's eyewater'—so strong it made you cross-eyed—-the tavern proprietor in Southampton who donated a bull for baiting at his door, and the publican who treated his regular customers to a side of beef on the occasion of Wilkes's release were all attempting to generate continued interest in their business and the radical cause.¹⁴7

In some ways these efforts seem excessive: why try to exploit what was apparently a transitory phenomenon, likely to bring only short-term benefits? But the evanescent event, the special occasion, can, provided it is celebrated with sufficient panache, and made remarkable by its extravagance and pageantry, become a fixed addition to the calendar. The eighteenth-century market was not merely seasonal but calendrical. Holidays, as every publican, confectioner, baker, chapman, pedlar and hawker knew, were occasions of popular conspicuous consumption and traditional present giving. New Year's Day, for instance, was the date for giving books (usually almanacks), gloves, cakes and confections, pins, written verses and many sorts of produce.¹48 Whit Monday and the dates of harvest festivals were important stimuli to popular spending. A special festival or celebration such as the Bicentennial of Shakespeare's birth organized by Garrick in Stratford in 1768 was very often justified in terms of the economic benefits it brought to local traders.¹49

In a similar fashion, politics was essentially a calendrical market. Far too little attention had been paid to the emergence during the eighteenth century of a Hanoverian political calendar, designed to inculcate loyal values in the populace, and to emphasize and encourage the growth of a national political consensus. Nearly every English market town celebrated the dates which were considered the important political landmarks of the nation. They can be found in most almanacks of the period, barely distinguishable from the time-honoured dates of May Day, Plough Monday, Twelfth Night, Shrove Tuesday and the like. The relevant dates were: the current monarch's birthday (28 May, 30 October, 24 May for the first three Georges); 29 May, Charles II's birthday, and the date of the Restoration, when it was customary to wear a sprig of oak on ‘Oak Apple Day'; 1 August, the date of the Hanoverian succession (the First of August Society was one of the clubs which supported Wilkes); 4 November, William III's birthday and the occasion of his landing at Torbay; 5 November, Powder Plot; and finally, less frequently, Queen Elizabeth's Day, 17 November.150

In the early eighteenth century, these dates, together with the occasion of the Pretender's birthday, were occasions of conflict. The year of the Jacobite rebellion, 1715, was especially contentious, with Hanoverian Mug House clubs fighting it out in the streets with Jacobite apprentices and artisans. On October 30, frequenters of a Jacobite alehouse on Ludgate Hill were beaten up by members of the Loyal Society who were celebrating the birthday of the Prince of Wales, the future George II. A Jacobite attempt to burn William III in effigy on November 4 was thwarted by the same Whig clubmen who the next day tried to cremate effigies of the Pretender and his supporters. On 17 November further clashes ensued and two Jacobites were shot dead.151

By mid-century, however, these anniversaries were more commonly marked by the breaking open of a hogshead of beer then by the breaking of heads. Feasting, entertainment and present-giving replaced rapine and violence. Republican whigs continued to attend their Calves-Head feasts on 30 January and to drink to Old Noll' while the rest of the nation fasted, and

Jacobite drinking clubs persisted, but by mid-century unanimity seems to have emerged. The Hanoverian calendar was strongly monarchist and loyalist: hence its inclusion of the Restoration as well as the Hanoverian succession. Any indication that the calendar was declining provoked controversy and criticism. As was pointed out, if, through the decline of the festivals, the populace failed to realize where their true loyaity lay, the English political heritage would lapse together with its much vaunted liberties.1⁵2 The Duke of Northumberland had the Prince of Wales's birthday celebrated in Alnwick by collecting together local children born in the same year as the Prince who were examined on their catechism. The most proficient youth was rewarded with a garland while the occasion concluded with such innocent rejoicings as may strongly impress their little minds, and inspire them with sentiments of loyalty, as it were, from the very cradle'. No wonder that Thomas Percy remarked, 'did all the nobility as strongly interest themselves in inspiring proper sentiments among their dependents as our good Duke and Duchess do, we should see a very different spirit prevail amongst the lower orders, from what we do at present'.153

Though they placed greater emphasis on the self-funding of independent celebrations and tried to avoid the treating and indiscriminate largesse of loyalist commemorations, the radical societies of the 1760s, in their turn, were implacably devoted to the establishment of a ritualized Wilkite calendar. Wilkes's birthday, the anniversary of the St. George's Fields Massacre, the numerous Middlesex elections, the release of Wilkes from the King's Bench, each of these occasions was feted not merely as a celebration but as a means of impinging upon the popular political conscience in à way that the government had employed for over a generation.1⁵4

For those who tried to commercialize politics the Wilkite calendar meant more than this: it provided them with an even greater number of celebratory occasions which could be transformed into profitable ventures. The activities of the pottery industry illustrate this admirably. Wilkes was not the first political figure, nor was the radical crisis of 1768-72 the first political upheaval that the potters had exploited. Ever since the Popish plot, when delftware tiles, based on a design taken from contemporary playing cards had been marketed in London,1⁵⁵ there had been specialized political ceramics. These fell into a discernible pattern. Nearly all the cups, mugs, punchbowls and plates were designed either to commemorate a particular individual, or to celebrate a particular occasion—whether it be an election, a royal birthday or a military victory-or as a special order for a club or society. The individuals were frequently opposition heroes: clearly the category in which Wilkes belonged, but which also included Sacheverell—portrayed on delftware plates—the elder Pitt and Admiral Vernon. Vernon, of course, was celebrated not simply because of his politics but because of his· victories against the Spanish. Together with Cumberland, Wolfe and Frederick the Great he occupied the ceramic pantheon of military heroes. Monarchs, including the Pretender, were also strongly in evidence. The occasions celebrated by ceramics closely paralleled the heroes that were portrayed. Royal birthdays, weddings and coronations were all represented, together with the Hanoverian political calendar and military victories such as Portobello, Culloden and Quebec. The Popish Plot, the Act of Union, the Excise Crisis, the 1745 Rebellion, and a great many elections (a speciality of West Country potters) were similarly commemorated. Finally, there were the clubs: the innumberable masonic lodges with their insignia, drinkingware and badges decorated with the arms of the order; the pseudomasonic Bucks, AntiGallicans and Albions; charity and reforming associations such as the Marine Society and the Abolitionist Society; and the tavern clubs—some of them Jacobite—that met in hostelries like the Butcher's Arms in Hereford or the appropriately named Royal Oak.1⁵⁶

What exactly are we to make of this phenomenon? The parallels between Wilkes and some of the other individuals are clear enough: they were popular heroes who enjoyed an enormous amount of publicity and who provided a short-term opportunity to sell ceramic wares. (It is noticeable how many of the standard products of potters were either painted over or transfer printed to cater for these temporary novelties, though not all potters were as cynical as those in early nineteenth-century Liverpool who produced a Hunt and Liberty Cup' by printing the slogan over one of their standard pictures of American naval heroes.)¹⁵7

The careers of Sacheverell, Vernon, Pitt and even Frederick the Great prefigure the experience of Wilkes. Sacheverell was the proximate cause of rioting, had confections, fighting cocks and children named after him: exactly the same was true of Wilkes.158 There were commemorative medals struck to celebrate Vernon's victories, he gave his name to the prize flower at a florists'feast, his birthday and the anniversary of his victories were all occasions of jubilation, and his praises were sung in many contemporary ballads and broadsides. There was even an Admiral Vernon's Weekly Journal.159 Pitt, of course, enjoyed a comparable popularity, while Frederick the Great—the first political figure to be commemorated on a transfer printed ceramic¹⁶⁰enjoyed quite extraordinary notoriety. As Horace Walpole remarked:161

All England kept his birthday: it has taken its place in our calendar next to Admiral Vernon's ... the people I believe think that Prussia is a part of Old England. ... It is incredible how popular he is here: except a few who take him for the same person as Mr. Pitt, the lowest of the people are perfectly acquainted with him: as İ was walking by the river the other night, a bargeman asked me for something to drink the King of Prussia's health.

In fact both Frederick and William, Duke of Cumberland were celebrated in more ceramic pieces than was Wilkes.

In dealing with heroes, celebrations and clubs, the potters had isolated a rather more complicated market than might at first appear. The ceramics that wère decorated with the features of individuals or slogans in their favour were also those used on special occasions. A mug with the portrait of the Duke of Cumberland would be purchased for the special celebration and subsequent anniversaries of the victory of Culloden. Patriot whigs could toast the Duke and heap imprecations on the hapless Pretender and his Scottish allies. Thus one such vessel reads In remembrance of the Glorious Victory of Culleaen [sic] April 16 1746' while another punchbowl declares Confusion to the Pretender 1746’.162 Ceramics of Vernon frequently include the actual date of his triumph at Portobello, reminding their purchasers of the appropriate date to celebrate his patriotic victory.¹6³ Royal ceramics were used for royal birthdays. The medium was the message: one punchbowl reads, Now friends are mett/Lets drink and sing/A health to George/Our British King'.¹⁶4 Rather more fancy wares were produced for royal coronations or weddings, because they could be given as gifts to friends as part of the celebrations associated with such special occasions.15 The potters were exploiting the Hanoverian calcndar—and some dissident variants of it—in precisely the same manner as the brewers and publicans.

Ceramics made for special occasions were, in turn, used for club feasts and to vaunt the praises of specific individuals. Electoral pottery, such as that produced in Bristol for elections in Devonshire, Tewkesbury, Taunton, Barnstaple, Wooton Bassett and Bristol itself, very often served this purpose. At the Taunton election of 1754 Sir John Pole held an electoral feast at which the guests ate off plates inscribed ‘Sir Jno Pole for ever', and which they were allowed to take home with them to commemorate the occasion.¹66 Club ceramics were also produced to praise their heroes: Jacobite clubs bought punchbowls of the Pretender or of the famous Oak Tree—used to celebrate the Restoration and the Pretender's birthday--while John Sadler, the transfer printer, decorated an entire series of masonic mugs with the mason's arms flanked by William Pitt and the Marquis of Granby.67

But perhaps the best example of the interlocking nature of this market was the relationship between Frederick the Great and the Bucks. The famous transfer of Frederick, produced by John Sadler, taken from a contemporary engraving, and loudly praised in rather bad verse in the Gentleman's Magazine, was probably produced to celebrate Frederick's birthday. But the King of Prussia, as Sadler's own paper, the Liverpool Chronicle, reminded its readers, was not only a brave soldier, a patriot and a friend to Britain, but also a brother freemason. For all of these reasons, lodges of the Bucks and masons regularly celebrated Frederick's birthday, just as they celebrated that of the English king. Though it is not possible to demonstrate conclusively that the Bucks and masons were the first or chief purchasers of the transfer artifacts of Frederick, it is clear that they were the customers that Sadler had in mind. They had organized celebrations, saluted Frederick as their hero, were numerous and had the wealth and wherewithal to guarantee Sadler a reasonable sale. They were not, in any sense, a mass market, but as a group they offered a larger potential sale for customized items than any individual. So that, when Sadler advertised an enamelled portrait of Frederick in the Liverpool Chronicle, he was also careful to include an announcement about the production of his latest Bucks'and Freemasons’medals.¹68

It was Sadler who really developed the transfer printing which was such an enormous boon to the production of custom-made ceramics. Transferring was both far quicker and far cheaper than hand-painting as a means of producing distinctive items, and it meant that bulk orders could be handled more easily. The finished artifact was often more finely exccuted than by the craftsman's brush and produced a more standardized product. And, undoubtedly, one of the most important of Sadler's markets for transfer-printed wares were the masons and pseudo-masonic societies. Transfer-printed items for the Bucks included membership medals on enamel, tiles, mugs, jugs, teapots and bowls, all decorated with the society's arms. The patriotic Anti-Gallicans also ordered transfer mugs and badges. Quart, pint and half-pint mugs decorated with masonic symbols were a staple part of the trade of Sadler and his partner, Green, for well over a decade. They wrote regularly to Wedgwood requesting pottery ranging from coffee cups to milk jugs which they inscribed for their masonic customers.169

For the politician the ceramics played an important part in the expression and development of a political culture. For men like Wilkes, they were a vital prop in the ritual performances of political allegiance and solidarity, giving forceful expression to political sentiment. Their inscriptions were often the actual toasts of those who drank from them and they thus acted both as a slogan-bearer and a prompt sheet. Ceramics were, in a very real sense, cartes d’identité. The Mug House Clubs at the Hanoverian succession were so called because of the drinking vessels that were hung in the taverns which they frequented. The traditional convivial sentiments associated with drinking—Fill me Full of Licker that is Seet for/ for it is Good when friends do met'—were given political meaning. Thus a white earthenware jug of 1807 declares on its side: He that calls here/ Shall have this full of beer/ That gave Milton/ a Plumper'.17º The suitably inscribed drinking vessel was just as much a part of the political proceedings as casting one's vote or burning Lord Bute or Don Blass (the stereotypical Spaniard) in effigy. Political allegiance, equality and unity were given tangible expression by the pottery itself: supporters all drank from the same punchbowl—they shared it communally—mugs and drinking vessels were usually of equal size and bore the same inscriptions. Just as the club ceramics expressed the bonds within their society, so did the pottery produced for a special celebratory occasion.

For the potter, however, the political artifact represented a means of diversifying his product-a move greatly facilitated by the development of transfer printing—as well as a way of exploiting temporary fads. Like the publicans, they saw the chances created by this calendrical market and, in doing so, made an important contribution to the evolution of distinctive political styles. We should not, of course, exaggerate the importance of political pottery and commemoratives for the trade as a whole. They might serve, as no doubt Sadler hoped, to draw attention to particular businesses and to advertise relatively new processes. But the marketing of potters and transfer printers does illustrate, once again, the power of the lodge and club. Groups of men, not individuals-except for the occasional aristocrat, were the predominant purchasers of political artifaċts in pottery.

The contribution that publicans and potters made to the Wilkite movement was enormously facilitated by the activities of the most important entrepreneurial group to the radicals, namely the printers and booksellers who published and sold newspapers and political propaganda. By the 1760s London had four daily papers, five or six tri-weekly evening papers—which circulated extensively in the provinces—and innumerable evanescent weekly and fortnightly political essay papers.171 The Metropolis lay at the centre of a large information network which reached out through most of provincial England. Each week thirty-five provincial papers, in locations as diverse as Newcastle and Sherborne, crammed their pages with news gleaned from the London tri-weeklies which arrived with the posts.17² The press—newspaper and pamphlet, cartoon and song—put Wilkes and his followers on the national political map. Newspaper readers throughout the nation learnt not only about Wilkes's activities in London, but of the demonstrations in his favour in cities and market towns as far apart as Berwick-on-Tweed and Penzance. Radicals such as Sir Watkin Lewes and John Glynn were welcomed in the provinces because of the news coverage of their strenuous efforts in the cause of liberty.17ª At the same time, the press gave the congeries of grievances that made up the radical cause a coherence and unity that it would otherwise have lacked. Local grievances were compared and seen as part of a national problem. But, above all else, the press shaped and moulded the radical political culture. It was the advertising medium forWilkite artifacts and, by reporting the highly elaborate radical demonstrations, as well as devoting considerable space to the enormous number of gifts that were sent to Wilkes in gaol, it encouraged others to emulate these expressions of support. Without the press Wilkes and his followers would never have achieved notoriety, nor have become more than a metropolitan phenomenon.

The printers and booksellers who directly supported Wilkes were not a cross-secion of the publishing world, nor a haphazard collection of printers; they were a clearly defined group. Such coherence was symptomatic of the organization of a publishing industry which had reached a high degree of specialization by the accession of George III. Individuals, partnerships and collectives—known as congers—each developed their own area of expertise: the partnership of J. Cooke and J. Coote, for example, concentrated on jest books and chronicles of crime; Johnson and Payne, on the other hand, tended to publish religious and theological works, especially those that appealed to dissenters.174 Not surprisingly, therefore, Wilkes's allies in the printing trade were usually specialists in the field of polemical political literature, and many of them—such as Isaac Fell and Meres, the proprietor of the fiercely anti-government London Evening Post¹7⁵—had been leading luminaries of the opposition press long before Wilkes became a cause célèbre.

Very few of the printers aņd booksellers who published Wilkite propaganda seem to have been members of the most powerful group in the trade, the Chapter Coffee House ‘Chapter' which published such works as Gibbon, Hume and Dr. Johnson. Most of this establishment group were at best lukewarm and more usually overtly hostile to Wilkes. Strahan, with an income of about £10,000 a year, and the post of royal printer, was part proprietor of the London Chronicle, one of the very few papers which tended to favour the government. His close friend and partner, Andrew Millar, refused to publish the North Briton when asked to by Wilkes, while Millar's successor, Cadell, marketed anti-radical material including Dr. Johnson's acerbic False Alarm. W. Nicoll, another member of this group, was one of the chief publishers of pro-government pamphlets in the early years of George III's reign.¹7⁶ Only Henry Sampson Woodfall was a member both of this powerful group and of the coterie of radical printers. Of course, many of these important booksellers held shares in newspapers in which they had invested to facilitate the marketing of their books, periodicals and pamphlets, together with the patent medicines which were such a lucrative sideline of the publishing business.¹7 But even if for political reasons they had wanted to exclude Wilkes from the newspapers, they knew that to do so would have been commercial suicide. They were therefore grudgingly instrumental in reporting Wilkite activities, even though they failed to lend active support to the movement.

The most ardent protagonists of the Wilkite cause were not, therefore, at the pinnacle of the publishing trade, though they were the most experienced publishers of oppositionist propaganda, specializing in the hazardous but very profitable enterprise of vilifying the all-too-vulnerable patricians who ran the nation. Many were old acquaintances, drinking partners and dining companions of Wilkes. John Almon had been one of Wilkes's chief contacts in London while he had been in exile and had plied him with advice and (rather more reluctantly) with money. T. Baldwin and the Davises—father and son—were Wilkes's dining companions. T. Becket's premises were used by Wilkes as a mailing address and he kept the patriot supplied with the latest political magazines and journals. Meres, in turn, had his house at the Old Bailey consigned to Wilkes so that he could qualify for the aldermanic election of Farringdon Without. Several of these printers and booksellers extended their radical activities beyond the press and the pamphlet shop. Almon proposed the vote of thanks after the pro-Wilkite Westminster petition was drafted in August 1769 and lashed out at those who claimed that the likes of mean booksellers should stick to their trade and keep their noses out of politics. The Davises were both active members of the SSBR. Dryden Leach, one of the original printers of the North Briton, used his influence in the ward of Farringdon Without to increase Wilkes's power in the City. Oppositionist printers did not hesitate to come forward for Wilkes's cause.178

This was also the group that displayed the greatest ingenuity in marketing pro-Wilkite printed material. John Williams, the bookseller who published many Wilkite tracts and cartoons and who had stood in the pillory for publishing the North Briton, was the inspiration behind English Liberty Established, the most remarkable of a number of single sheets and handbills dedicated to Wilkes. Each of these had its individual selling point: one would include Wilkes's speeches, another a miniaturized portrait of him which could be cut out and used ‘for a Watch Paper'.179 But English Liberty Established was the most elaborate of them all. It displayed on one sheet a portrait of Wilkes holding the Bill of Rights, a portrayal of his interrogation by the Secretaries of State, a depiction of his carriage being dragged through the streets by a joyous mob, an extract from his letter to the Duke of Grafton, his speech in favour of liberty in the Court of Common Pleas, an address to the Middlesex freeholders, and a speech in the Court of King's Bench. A tidy encapsulation of the whole radical cause, and all this for 6d., though it would not, according to the usual Custom of Trade, be fixed at less than a shilling, but the price is put low, so that every one who has a regard for Mr. Wilkes may purchase it'. The print was advertised in a great many provincial newspapers. Readers were urged to buy quickly in order to get a copy of the first impression. Every patriot, the Worcester Journal urged, ought to have one in his home. The Newcastle Journal advertisement was accompanied by a story designed to win the sixpences of even the humblest of men:

The following, which is a real matter of fact, may serve as one instance to shew the prodigious regard the populace have for Mr.Wilkes—One of them passing by a shop, where the print of Mr. Wilkes entitled, English Liberty Established, hung up in the window, ey'd it attentively for some time, and then going into the shop purchased it; on which a gentleman that happened to be in the shop said, I imagine you are a Wilkite; that I am, replied the other, and perhaps more than you; for this is the only six-pence I have in the world, and it shall go for this Print: Will you do as much for the cause?

It was this sort of appeal and the careful distribution of the print which accompanied it which explains why Williams and the printer Lee were so successful with this enormously popular item.1⁸0

Old acquaintances and allies of Wilkes were behind the serial publication of his works and correspondence. These ‘part books’, sold a few pages at a time, were, of course, a very popular technique for a whole range of publications from the Bible to medical and gardening dictionaries, but their first use for political literature seems to have been during the Wilkes affair. John Baskerville, japanner, freethinker and friend of Wilkes, printed a serial edition of Wilkes's works, with subscriptions in seventeen different locations in the Midlands as well as in London. Baldwin and Woodgate also published serials of Wilkes's works, promising that In the last number will be given a beautiful engraved frontispiece of Mr. Wilkes's Head; a view of the Massacre of St. George’s Fields; the murder of Clarke by Balfe and Macquirk at Brentford ... with a complete index and patriotic dedication'. Another serial appeared in 45 parts, stitched in blue paper (the Wilkite colour), and was distributed throughout the nation together with the tri-weekly papers. Its first number could be had on loan for two days for those who were interested: surely one of the earliest examples of inertia selling.181

One of the chief characteristics of Wilkite publications was their broad appeal: they were tailored to attract all those interested in politics, whether rich or poor. One of Woodgate's other projects illustrates this admirábly. He produced the New Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving for the Happy Deliverance of John Wilkes. This blasphemous rendition of the creed went through nine editions in a year, became a popular street song and was established on both sides of the Atlantic. It appeared in three different versions: one, in chapbook form, was intended for the poorest of Wilkes's supporters, while. the quarto and folio editions catered to bourgeois and genteel taste.182

The printers and booksellers who were most imaginative in their selling techniques were often the most radical in their politics. Quite possibly their political ardour led them to feats of greater ingenuity and to take greater risks than was customary. A number or radicals even risked starting new publications. Almon established the Political Register, the most sophisticated radical periodical, and one that invariably included its own political cartoons and prints. William Bingley began the Freeholders Magazine and the short-lived Independent Chronicle, while Fell became the first printer of the radical tri-weekly, the Middlesex Journal. These papers and journals all began with the most pious of sentiments: we undertake to vindicate the cause of depressed liberty, by exhibiting, in full view of the people, every measure that has already been taken ... upon that great charter of our laws, the Palladium of English liberty', promised the Middlesex Journal.183 The Freeholders Magazine and the Independent Chronicle began in the same vein. Deprived of freedome, for contributing my Mite to the great cause of Liberty', read Bingley's advertisements, the only service that I can perform for my Country whose welfare I prefer to my own, is to introduce to the public the sentiments of those bold and intrepid patriots, who are determined to oppose the torrent of arbitrary power and corruption'.184 The Middlesex Journal, indeed, became the English muckraker and constitutional watchdog par excellence: sexual malpractice amongst the aristocracy (the Cumberland/Grosvenor correspondence, Luttrell's illicit affair with Miss Bolton—both of which were announced in the best ‘shock! horror!' fashion), abuses of the client economy, bakers who sold underweight, crooked lawyers and trading justices, malicious prosecutions were all exposed in the paper which issued dire warnings to the transgressors.185 Such copy was very popular. Though the Middlesex Journal was accused by its critics of riding a political wave and of being a party paper—and both accusations were correct—it was also a huge success. Copies of the first number of the paper were reprinted again and again, and back numbers were sold in the form of complete sets.1⁸⁶ Bingley, however, was rather less fortunate. He tried to titillate his audience with engraved heads of Wilkes (by this time a must for every self-respecting radical paper), Sawbridge, Glynn and Horne Tooke in the Freeholders Magazine, but by the third number he was forced to announce that,In compliance with the request of many of our customers, the political part of our Magazine shall, for the future, be confined to a certain quantity; and the rest be devoted to miscellaneous articles for general instruction and amusement'. His fellow proprietors as well as the readers could not stomach so much political stodge.187

Bingley, no doubt, had overreached himself: he went bankrupt in 1771 when the schism that developed within the SSBR led his creditors to foreclose on him. But the efforts of zealots such as he, Almon and Fell, together with Wilkes's own activities generated a ‘bandwagon effect'. So much controversy, so much polemic led others with less idealistic motives to try to exploit the burgeoning interest in politics. The period 1768–74 saw a tremendous growth not only in the volume of the press, but also in the number of new publications trying to seize the opportunity created by the radicals. The London Packet, the London Museum, the Gentleman's Museum, the Cambridge Magazine, the Court Miscellany, the Patriot, and the British Oracle all appeared for the first (and often the last) time in these years. As J. Bell, the proprietor of the famous circulating library in the Strand, put it: It is no less surprising than true, that the Vegetation of Newspapers within the last six months has been of the mushroom kind; and many of them, no doubt enjoy full as precarious an existence'. Yet Bell, like others, was not averse to leaping on the bandwagon himself. Some of the essays in these papers, he argued, were worth preserving, and for this reason he planned a serial compendium of the the best materials.188

Even the traditional press had to respond to the craze for politics. In 1769 and 1770 joke books, an enduring and profitable genre in the publishing industry, had to have political titles or, at least, certain political jokes. Wilkes's Jest Book or Jemmy Twitcher's Jests were the wit and wisdom of the hour. Similarly the well-established magazines had to pander to the new, radical sensibility. The London Magazine, still eager to outstrip its indubitably superior rival, the Gentleman's Magazine, ran engravings of Catharine Macaulay, the radical historian, Junius, who naturally presented no problems of representational accuracy, Pasquale Paoli, the Corsican Patriot, and Wilkes himself. The last engraving, it was claimed, was more valuable than the cost of the magazine itself. The same sort of tactics were adopted by the Oxford Magazine. Even the shadiest of publishing ventures acquired a radical tinge. Memoirs of the Amours of the Duke of Grafton succeeded, in five numbers and a copper plate, in combining sexual prurience with political moralism.189

Most these projects were symptomatic of the printers’ and booksellers' eagerness to seize the main chance, and to respond swiftly to changes in taste and fashion. Politics was popular, the order of the day, and was therefore provided. Indeed, frequently there seems to have been little concern with thé actual content of the material, very little sense of the message conveyed. Those who leapt on the radical bandwagon, as opposed to the identifiably radical printers themselves, were simply out to make a quick buck, though not all were as transparent about their intentions as Pine and Roberts, the proprietors of the new tri-weekly London Packet. Their advertisement is worth quoting in full as an attempt to justify the founding of a new paper for no higher motive than sheer profit:190

Nothing is more customary with the Proprietors of newspapers, at their first setting out, than Professions of Candour, Integrity and Benevolence. Their works are not undertaken with any sordid view of private gain, but established wholely from the most exalted desire of public benefit. They have no despicable self interest to advance, but are stimulated entirely by a generous solicitude for the welfare of their fellow citizens; besides these arguments they always find auxiliary reasons for troubling the world with a new paper in the dulness or partiality of their rival news writers.

The proprietors of the LONDON PACKET, however, neither pique themselves on their disinterestedness, nor presumtously sit down to censure the productions of their neighbours: so far from being without their lucrative ends on this occasion, they candidly confess that their chief, nay their only, Inducement, is a hope of profiting by the Success of the Work.

But the payoff for the radical printers who supported Wilkes was never simply pecuniary. They engaged in a business that had always involved considerable risks. In particular, there were the hazards of the libel laws and state prosecution. The legal armoury available to the Attorney-General for combating the excesses of the press was truly formidable. He could use general warrants as a catch-all means of arresting those suspected of involvement in some libel. In 1728, for example, twenty-two people were taken into custody for a libel in Mist's Weekly Journal.1ª1 Printers were roughly tumbled out of bed, frog-marched away, locked up and often eventually released (there were many more warrants than persons brought to trial) without ever knowing why they had been apprehended in the first place.192 If the Attorney-General applied for an ex officio information he could, in effect, have a printer incarcerated or bound over without trial. Sureties for good behaviour were often deliberately punitive: in 1723 Mist paid over £1,400, a crippling sum.193 And once in court the cards were stacked against the accused for it was not the jury—usually, though not always sympathetic-——but the judge who determined whether or not the material was libellous. In short, the laws governing libel, especially libel against the state or government, were severe to the point of being draconian, a situation attributed by contemporaries to their derivation from the practice of Star Chamber.194 The law was a serious business risk for those who specialized in oppositionist publishing, especially as a prosecution often provoked the creditors of a printer to demand immediate payment of their bills.195

The debt the printers owed Wilkes, therefore, was not simply a financial one, for he showed the booksellers and publishers of papers a legal means of striking back at the government and of diminishing the threat of prosecution. Wilkes and his lawyer allies such as Serjeant Glynn were the inspiration behind a series of prosecutions brought against the government officials who had apprehended those suspected of involvement in the North Briton no.45. The decisions in Leach v. Money, Wilkes v. Wood, and Entick v. Carrington effectively put an end to general warrants and were a sharp reminder to the Secretary of State and the Attorney-General that the courts of law could be used against them.19⁶ This lesson was not lost on printers and booksellers. William Bingley, for example, launched an attack on all of the special powers used by the Attorney-General and, when prosecuted, steadfastly refused to recognize the legality of interrogatories upon attachment.197 The nub of the radicals' case was that libel cases should be treated like all others and proceed via the Grand Jury to a petty jury trial in which the twelve citizens rather than the judge decided whether there had been a breach of the law. Such arguments had been used in Rex v. Almon in 1765 and were the entire tenor of Glynn's impassioned appeal to the juries involved in the trial of the printers and publishers of Junius's Letter to the King. The tactic was an enormous success: of the defendants in the Junius trials only Almon was found guilty, because the juries, reminded so forcefully by Glynn of their supposed rights, refused to convict.198 The effective power of the court was diminished.

Similar gains for the radical printers were achieved over the publication of parliamentary debates. Once again Wilkes and his lawyers were the inspiration behind the printers'defiance of authority. They used the jurisdictional and judicial power of the City of London to oppose the privileges of the Commons. When the lower House tried to take action against Wheble—-the printer of the Middlesex Journal-—and R. Thompson, the newspapermen failed to appear before the Bar of the House. Attempts to apprehend them only resulted in the arrest of a Commons'messenger, who was promptly charged before the city magistrates with assault and false imprisonment. It became impossible for the Commons to take retributive action against those who published their proceedings.199

This particular radical conspiracy, hatched at the Queen's Arms Tavern in St. Paul's Churchyard, vividly demonstrates the common interests of radicals and printers. The radical politicians wanted parliamentary reporting and a free press because they wished to ensure the accountability of the representative of the people; they sought a means of keeping the public informed so that the idea of on-going consent in government could be realized. For the printer the removal of legal constraints or, at least, a drastic reduction in their effectiveness made the task of reporting much easier and reduced the risks involved. By 1770 the public's demand for parliamentary news was such that the newspaper printers could ill-afford to omit reports of debates; failure to do so could effect sales adversely. There was clearly a growing market for such political news. If the printers were to exploit this successfully, and at minimum cost to themselves, they needed the help of the radicals who were the body most likely to protect and succour them.

The commercial exploitation of the Wilkite agitation, and the commercial pressures that the movement put on such producers as newspaper printers and proprietors, touches upon one of the paradoxes or ambiguities that was never truly resolved by the radicals. Many of the calendrical celebrations and much of the feasting designed to publicize the radical cause and to demonstrate its hold on the nation at large was very much in te mould of traditional politics. True, there was greater emphasis on self-support and less on largesse, but all too often work came to a stop on a Wilkite holiday or election, and the populace gormandized and drank themselves into a stupor. The very potters who produced the custom-made eiectoral ware—punchbowls, mugs and the like—also complained bitterly of the difficulties they had in getting their employees to work while the rest of the community was out junketing. The paradox—that of using old methods for a new cause, one of whose aspirations was to undermine and destroy the old methods—was never really resolved, though a rough and ready compromise was worked out. The celebrations and demonstrations continued, but more and more emphasis was placed on the orderliness, discipline and self-control of the participants. Independent men, made free through association, and educated through the rules, ritual and constitutions of their own clubs and societies, sought to control their more enthusiastic and frequently more disruptive associates.

This tension reflected a basic difference within the radical movement. Wilkes and his immediate circle of friends were little concerned with effecting the basic social changes that were so strongly supported by the clubs and lodges. They saw the value (and profit) of using recently refined marketing and advertising techniques to publicize their cause, and perceived how the interests of the politicians could be harmonized with those of certain commercial groups. The use of a large carrot (profits) and the very occasional threat of a big stick (tavern boycotting by clubs, for example) kept the radicals and producers (when they were not one and the same person) working together. But the question was, working for what?'. Was the Wilkite movement to be merely a brilliantly orchestrated and skilfully advertised radical soap-opera (only one remove from the election of the Mayor of Garret), or did it have a coherent set of social and political objectives over and beyond the furtherance of John Wilkes's career? The Wilkite movement, of course, was many different things to different men: the views of the country gentlemen who signed the county petitions, and of the artisans, day-labourers and wage earners who rioted and demonstrated were a far cry from the opinions of the mercantile and trading supporters of Wilkes. Yet within this last group there was a hard core of radicals—-centred on the clubs—who saw radical politics as a vehicle for creating a polity in which moveable property would play a new and more powerful role. Parliamentary reform, including a redistribution of seats based on all tax payments (not just the land tax), the increased enfranchisement of moveable property, the removal of placemen from the Commons, the inuroduction of the secret ballot (a stab at the heart of the client economy), together with legal and moral reforms would have changed British politics—and the distribution of power within the society—quite fundamentally.

The political culture from which these aspirations emanated deserves closer investigation. Can we, for example, find a comparable interest in mutual benefit and voluntary association amongst later radical groups? Do the issues of indebtedness, credit and reciproćal trading recur? Can it be argued that commercialization and a certain type of politics continued to work in tandem? Such questions must at present remain open and unresolved, though there is much suggestive evidence that could be elaborated. In the 1832 general election, for example, Acland, the radical candidate for Hull, opened a shop, the Anticorporative Castle, where he sold Anticorporate tea, public opinion coffee and Radical tobacco.2ºOther continuities can be found amongst the Chartists. As Gammage remarked, ‘The members of the National Charter Association were ... to earnestly recommend each other, by precept and example, to the practice of temperance and uprightness, to cultivate the intellect and moral feelings, to fulfil the golden maxim, ‘Do unto others as ye would they should do unto you', to trade with each other, and to assist each other in case of sickness or distress, and in finding employment'.201 The precepts, attitudes and organizing principles of Wilkite radicalism undoubtedly endured well into the nineteenth century.

## PART III

Commercialization and Society

by J. H. Plumb