## CHAPTER SIX

# The Commercialization of Leisure in Eighteenth-century England

Leisure is commonly purposeful and usually it requires the expenditure of money as well as time. Indeed, leisure is at present one of the greatest industries in the world, employing millions of workers and involving immense capital resources. It is surprising that both economic historians and social historians have scarcely paid attention to the early history of commercialized leisure. And yet one of the distinguishing features of capitalistic development in the West during the last twò and a half centuries has been not only accumulation, which has received more than its fair share of attention, but also consumer expenditure. To spend has been the rising chord of Western European capitalism; saving has increasingly meant delayed expenditure. However, it is not my concern to stumble blindly into the arcane problems of economic growth or to get entangled in the economic and social problems of emerging industrial society, or even to attempt to tilt the balance between home and foreign demand. Here, I hope to draw attention to what seems to me to be one of the incontestable signs of growing affluence in eighteenthcentury British society—the commercialization of leisure. This can be discerned in the 1690s, and by 1750 and 1760 leisure was becoming an industry with great potentiality for growth.¹

Our own experience should teach us a little about the social signs of affluence—increased consumption of food, particularly beef, increased expenditure on houses, increased pre-occupation with fashion, a boom in books, music, entertainment and holidays: and the rapid growth of leisure towns. There are, of course, far more, but these are clear and obvious. The acquisition of increased leisure, combined with a modest affluence in a rising social class, has usually led to a desire for self-improvement. The emergence of the lower-middle class in our own day is reflected both in the pressure for increased education and in the demand for books, which has been met by the paperback revolution, as well as in the sale of recorded music and the astonishing growth in visiting country houses and museums. In any consideration of leisure it would be quite wrong not to put cultural pursuits in the foreground.

I do not wish to discușs the complex class stratification of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth-century English society, which undoubtedly helped to foster social emulation, or the economic structure that encouraged upward moblity; I assume we all accept that these conditions existed. I do want, however, to draw attention to one aspect of what one might term intellectual technology which is rarely stressed. Two inventions—printing combined with the alphabet—possessed explosive social possibilities that only began to be exploited to their fullest extent in the eighteenth century, firstly in the Netherlands, then in England and to a lesser extent elsewhere.

The Chinese had, of course, invented printing long before Europe either learned the technique or discovered it anew; but the effects on Chinese society were limited. Printing obviously made the examination system, although already established, more sophisticated and its application to a wider segment of the Chinese gentry possible; it created paper money, rendered taxation more systematic and indeed eased administration in every way. But outside the scholar-gentry it did not increase literacy very much. For this reason. To be literate in Chinese one must learn at least 4,000 characters; to be able to read the sophisticated literature of the classics, far, far more, which requires prolonged education and ample leisure. Although there was, it seems, some literacy outside the scholar-gentry class, it was never widespread. Elementary literacy led to very little in China because the complexity of the written language was so great. Leisure could not be used for self-improvement in the same say as in Europe.²

However, the Western alphabet made a perfect marriage with print. Print provided the possibility of a large audience; the simplicity of the alphabet made learning to read easy. Also, once reading was mastered, the whole of literature in the language read was open, or at least potentially open, to anyone with reasonable intellectual energy and dedication. Also the alphabet had this further advantage, it allowed for a very easy systematization of knowledge in dictionaries, encyclopaedias, gazetteers and the like, again aiding self-education. Once the tools were available, anyone sufficiently dedicated could teach himself to read and write: those who had been given modest schooling to the age of nine or ten could build easily on the foundations which they possessed, had they the will to do so. It is no surprise to us that Josiah Wedgwood, who left school at ten, was reading Voltaire and Rousseau in middle age. But it should amaze us. This could rarely have happened outside the Western World. There was very little possibility of any Chinese manufacturer or craftsman teaching himself to read, to write and to study the classics. From the Renaissance onwards, as soon as the elementary primers and simple dictionaries were available, there could always be the possibility of self-education. Leisure could be turned to profit. And, indeed, we find this where we should expect to find it first-—in religion. Printing combined with our alphabet system made self-education possible, making therefore, as never before in the world's history, for a steady cultural seepage: ideas adumbrated in narrow élitist groups might, and often did, permeate society.³ No knowledge was necessarily the arcane possession of a limited class once printing and publishing had got into their stride and-—most important of all, once the lower classes were in a position to purchase cheap books. And the growth of the market in printed materials is the first aspect of the commercialization of leisure with which I want to deal, for reading implies time to spare and money to spend.

The full exploitation of printing was curiously slow, largely because in the sixteenth century the books that were produced were mainly theological or classical, usually if not uniformly printed in large folios or quartos, and the books were expensive and so bought mainly by lawyers, clergymen, gentry or prosperous merchants. Only in the great upheavals of the 1640s and 1650s did printed materials-pamphlets, ballads, handbills and the like-—begin to reach anything approaching a large audience in London: nor should we exaggerate its size; editions were extremely small.4 However, in spite of the attempt of Charles II to suppress political comment, this pamphleteering never quite died out and, of course, revived sharply at moments of national crisis——the Popish Plot and Exclusion Crisis and the Revolution of 1688, all produced outbursts of ephemeral political literature. The importance of this for my theme of leisure is secondary, but important. It helped to create the conditions by which freedom of the press was won in the 1690s and without such freedom, combined with moderate affluence, the full extension of the possibilities of printing would not have happened. One has only to contrast England with France.

Let us glance at the London of Pepys, which I shall be taking as my base for comparison with the 1760s and 1770s.⁵ There was only one daily newspaper-The London Gazette-—which contained official matters relating to the Court—proclamations, decrees, promotions and the like, and a little very stale foreign news. Pepys had to go, and almost every day he went, to the Royal Exchange to pick up gossip from foreign merchants to learn what was happening in Europe. Similarly he would spend half an hour or so at Westminster Hall in search of news of the happenings at Court or in Parliament. He haunted taverns, not only because he loved wine, but also because he was avid for news which was often to be found there. If you happened to live out of London, of course, the situation was worse. A rich man, such as Simon Le Fleming, could subscribe to a manuscript newsletter sent to him by a journalist who, like Pepys, did the rounds and then summarized what he learned for his country correspondents.⁶ In consequence, it was a world of surprising ignorance, alive with rumours, wonders and marvels. For Pepys, as for most of his dilettante friends, books were semiprecious objects as much as they were tools—carefully and beautifully bound, they were stored in handsome locked bookcases. Still, books were available; large liraries, such as the Earl of Sunderland's, not uncommon, and reading as a pastime, as well as a scholarly pursuit, was well established—but confined largely to the affluent. Even if one had the leisure to read a newspaper, only the Gazette was regularly available.

Also the dissemination of printed materials was equally backward. There were no circulating libraries, very, very few public libraries, no book clubs, no specialized publishers in music, which indeed was not frequently printed; no magazines, no books designed to attract children, and few elementary or cheap dictionaries for self-education, although a few dealing with bookkeeping, surveying, arithmetic and navigation were beginning to appear in the 1660s and 1670s, but in not very significant quantities. Engravings and prints were produced in very small editions, often for subscribers; usually the prints were of the Court. There were very few satirical prints except those directed against the Pope during the hectic days of the Plot. There were some ballads and handbills, but as many circulated in manuscript as in print.? The bulk of publishing indeed was still theological or classical and was still enshrined in massive and expensive folios and quartos.

A hundred years later this had totally changed and print had been exploited in all its possibilities and was reaching out and responding to an ever widening market and in so doing was, as we shall see, constantly stimulating the market in leisure.

Accelerating growth, never even surely, began in the 1690s. In that decade the first two London non-official newspapers were successfully established—the Post Boy and Post Man: in 1702 the Daily Courant gave London its first daily newspaper. There were frequent attempts to start magazines—one of the most successful for a time was the Athenian Mercury, which invited customer participation'. But it was only in Queen Anne's reign that the magazine, which consisted entirely of essays on manners, social morality and self-improvement, found the right mixture for the'new and growing middle-class audience. The Spectator was a triumph. It had subscribers in Sumatra as well as New England and was a daily magazine.8 The most important aspect of The Spectator is that it found the market and taught others how to exploit it. Addison and Steele discovered the new and growing middle-class audience, an audience which longed to be modish, to be aware of the fashion yet wary of its excess, to participate in the world of the great yet be free from its anxieties, to feel smug and superior to provincial rusticity and old world manners, above all to be deeply respectful of the world of commerce: an audience in which a hunger for culture could easily be induced and one which had both the leisure and the affluence to indulge it.

The size of the audience must not be exaggerated. No more than 3,000 copies of The Spectator were ever printed.º The Craftsman at the height of its popular attacks on Sir Robert Walpole rarely reached 10,000¹——the same figure given by Dr. Johnson for the most successful of all eighteenth-century magazines—the Gentleman's Magazine. We know too that newspaper editions, both London and provincial, were quite small, but by 1760 the whole country was covered in a network of newspaper distribution; furthermore, new institutions had developed to give these editions an even wider distribution. Coffee houses and taverns kept racks of newspapers and pamphlets and sometimes ballads for their customers——and there were 2,000 coffee houses in London by the reign of Queen Anne.1² By 1700, there were newsrooms in London where newspapers could be read for a fee or borrowed for an hour or two by depositing the full price. Circulating libraries, in which bound volumes of magazines prominently figured, were established in the provinces and in London by 1720. George Barton was running three circulating libraries at his shops in St. Ives, St. Neots and Peterborough in 1718. By 1750, circulating libraries were established in a considerable number of provincial towns (119 towns in 37 counties for the eighteenth century as a whole) and London, of course, possessed many, some of them, like Fancourt's, running to thousands of volumes, and requiring therefore a considerable capital investment. Fancourt was a dissenter and a close friend of Isaac Watts. His venture was strongly opposed by London publishers who placed an embargo on Fancourt's attempts to advertise his library in the newspapers which they controlled. Fiction, often trashy and ephemeral, was borrowed more frequently than any other subject, but all libraries in London had 80 per cent non-fiction on their shelves, even though they were borrowed less frequently. They consisted of a wide variety of literature, including often the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, as well as dictionaries and grammars of foreign languages. They possessed considerable holdings in science and the useful arts. But even the trashiest fiction had its economic and social uses in stimulating appetite for the fashionable.¹³ As well as circulating libraries, there were private subscription book clubs about which we know too little. Tamworth, which cannot have had a population of more than 2,000, if that, had several by the 1770s, mainly associated with the local taverns. All of these devices extended the market and indicated a considerable audience with leisure to read.¹

But with the entrepreneurial ingenuity which is such a hallmark of eighteenth-century commerce, printers and publishers pushed their wares to the very limit of the market. They devised the part-book'—a device which has had a renewed vogue in Britain these last five or six years. The partbook has two great advantages. The price of a bit of a book can be kept within the means of the poorest section of the market. On the other hand, the profit is enormous, for the total cost of the book soars well beyond what it would be if sold in a single volume, (often as much as 1,000 per cent profit). In a desultory way, it had been tried for ballads and poems in Queen Anne's day (a dreadful poem entitled A Journey to Hell' had struggled through three parts in 1705); but the boom time came in the twenties and thirties when histories, encyclopaedias, gazetteers and even the Bible were produced in penny and twopenny parts.⁵ The avidity for knowledge to which this was the commercial response caught the eye of the provincial newspapers which were being established at this time and more often than not at their wit's end for material—and they too started serial publication of useful knowledge.

The diffusion of printed material was combined with a much more sophisticated publisher's knowledge of the market. New interests were rapidly catered for. For example, before 1700 cook-books were comparatively rare and usually they were of a quasi-medieval nature: the books being a hotch-potch of household recipes from soap-making to simples. The eighteenth century saw the cook-book as we know it, many of them ran through several editions and even regional cook-books appeared: in 1758, Thacker, the Dean of Durham's cook, produced the Art of Cookery, principally for the Northern Counties.¹ The boom in gardening produced a spate of gardening books and gardening journals." Publishers who limited their production to musical·scores and books kept pace with the increased delight in music. Again the 1690s is the watershed, when Thomas Cross, John Hare and John Walsh applied high pressure methods to the publication of musical scores—large cheap editions, wide-scale advertisement and considerable surreptitious puffing in the newspapers. In twenty-five years Walsh produced over 600 musical works. Between 1740 and 1800 over four hundred publishers are known to have been involved in musical publication.18 And, of course, the eighteenth century witnessed not only the rapid growth of fiction but also of theatrical publications, which were second only to novels in the demands made on the circulating libraries. All of these things are, of course, associated closely with other leisure activities which were absorbing more and more capital and to which I must shortly turn. But there are two other features of publishing which also need stressing—one of the growth of the primer, the educational aid, whether it is the exceptionally valuable encyclopaedia, such as Harris's Lexicon Technicum, or the simple books on arithmetic, geometry or the art of writing which were produced in very considerable quantities at increasingly modest prices—enabling any earnest apprentice to struggle up the ladder of self-education in his leisure hours.19 More important, perhaps, was the development of specialized children's literature. Indeed middle-class children themselves became leisure objects in eighteenth-century England. More money is poured on their schooling and on their social accomplishments and their health.2º They began to develop distinctive clothing; often they are put in semi-fancy dress as sailors, soldiers, highlanders or even gardeners—on the way to specialized children's clothes. Toys are mass-produced for the first time—dolls with interchangeable clothes, doll's houses and, of course, forts and soldiers (the latter, as one might expect, not an English but a German invention—otherwise England led the way in toy manufacture).2¹ But the changing attitude to children arises because parents had more leisure and more money to spend on them, as well as a stronger desire for social emulation. However, that is by the way. The production of children's books is a reflection of the growing sophistication of publishing and it began with a singularly adroit entrepreneur: John Newbery, who had launched himself by marrying his employer's widow, obtained thereby the direction of the Reading Journal: naturally he started a circulating library. With an eye to the main chance he bought a half share in Dr. James's fever powders which, of course, he puffed in his children's books. The first of these, A Pretty Little Pocket Book, was designed to teach the alphabet. It was beautifully produced and illustrated and as a sales gimmick, for an extra twopence you could buy a pincushion for your daughter or a ball for your son. The book was 6d. Newbery was good at sales gimmicks. He gave books away free—so long as you bought the binding. Nevertheless, the Pocket Book enjoyed a prodigious success—the Art of Writing and the Art of Arithmetic soon followed. He tried a children's magazine—The Lilliputian, but that failed. This specialized publication indicates a large growing class of people with leisure to buy and money to spend.²2

The most important function of print, however, in the sophisticated exploitation of leisure was, almost certainly, in the advertisement and information carried in the newspaper. Very early, by the 1720s if not earlier, horse-races were advertised, cricket followed soon after; naturally theatres and concerts were prominent in criticism as well as advertisement. The presence of London salesmen—particularly of fashionable London goods—was always well reported in the press. Naturally, too, balls, assemblies, routs and pleasure gardens used the local press increasingly. At the beginning of the century advertisements in newspapers rarely contained more than the books and articles the publisher himself sold. By the middle of the century, advertisements had become exceptionally diversified and there was scarcely a leisure activity, apart from fox-hunting and yacht-racing, which was not widely advertised. And it must be stressed that every aspect of leisure that I touch upon in the rest of this chapter is aided in its developent and commercial organization by print, whether it is the circus or landscape gardening, horse-racing or concert-going.2ª

I do not have sufficient time to discuss the increasing professionalism, the increasing commercialization of leisure in all its manifestations. I intend, for example, to ignore the mania for gardening and planting which affected the middle-class city merchant—indeed special gardening manuals were written for himas much as it did the country gentleman or the stimulus this gave to horticulturists, seedsmen and nurserymen.²⁴ Indeed I must leave to another occasion what is perhaps the most seductive of all leisure activities—casual shopping, for which the eighteenth-century tradesman devised the bowwindow and the display cabinet.2⁵ Nor have I time to deal with the growth of interest in the visual aesthetic experience from the highly profitable print shops on which Hogarth, that great entrepreneur, had so remarkable an effect,2⁶ to the organized viewing of country house collections of new and old masters. At some famous houses, such as Holkham, it was not unusual to queue for an hour before being shown the house.27 I must ignore, alas, many sports—social activities of great importance that still wait an historian of merit; but developments in fishing, in yacht-racing, in prize-fighting all fit the pattern of increasing systematization, more exact rules and greater participation, and in prize-fighting, as with horse-racing, the development of a paying audience.28 Perhaps even more regrettable, because totally ignored, I have not time to discuss what can only be described as the petindustry—the comnmercialization not only of dog-breeding, which became highly specialized, but also of bird-breeding—canaries, finches and racing pigeons, which became well-established and widespread in eighteenth-century England, beginning, as with so many commercialized aspects of leisure, about London and rapidly spreading to the provinces.29 However, I will confine myself to the theatre, to music and to horse-racing,³° all of which underwent dramatic development between 1670 and 1770, and to what can only be described as festivals of leisure, which brought all of these activities together in the county towns.

Although quite popular, the restored theatre of Charles II was povertystricken—indeed there were only two good theatres-Drury Lane, rebuilt in 1673 for the modest cost of £4,000 and the Dukeof York's in Lincoln's Inn Fields,³¹ and afterwards in Dorset Gardens. New plays were rare, most were badly acted and vilely produced. Addicted as Pepys was to the theatre, he was rarely pleased by ¯what he saw.³² As with literature, there was a steady expansion of the audience after 1689: theatres became more numerous and old theatres were improved or rebuilt. At the Drury Lane, which was entirely rebuilt in 1673, there were alterations and improvements in 1715, 1762, 1765 and 1775. By 1762 the box office potential had risen to £354 per performance and in 1780, further improvements provided an audience capacity of 2,000. In 1792 the old theatre was pulled down and a new one designed by Henry Holland, with a capacity of 3,611, was built at a cost of £150,000—a very considerable capital investment. Also the average audience per performance doubled as did the takings in the same period.³³ Taken with

Covent Garden the audience capacity steadily grew from 14,016 a week in 1732 to 22,182 in 1762.³⁴ As with publishers, theatre managers discerned that there was an audience for their plays amongst the lower-paid workers, so they put on ‘after-hour' performances at cheaper rates at the end of the regular performance and the Covent Garden account book shows that this development was very successful, earning the theatre an extra £200-£300 a week.3⁵ Minor theatres, such as the Theatrical Booth in Southwark, began to accommodate themselves entirely to this type of audience, not opening their doors until 6 pm.-usual performances began at 5 pm.—and promising to conclude by 9 pm., which suited better the working hours of the lowerpaid audience.³6 This ever expanding passion for the theatre is further reflected in the number of new plays written between 1700 and 1800: in the first half of the century 1,095 new plays were produced: in the second half 2,117, more than one a week during the theatrical season.³7 As well as straight theatre, the eighteenth century witnessed the establishment of pantomime under Rich in the 1720s, comic opera begins with Gay's Beggar's Opera in 1728; ballet and mime and puppet theatres were all well supported by the 1720s.³⁸ Philip Astley established his equestrian circus at the foot of Westminster Bridge in 1770. He quickly added wild-animal trainers, conjurers, jugglers and trapeze artists and indeed began the professionalization and stabilization of the individual performers who had wandered about London and the provinces, picking up what contribution they could from their audiences—often performing in the street, or in an inn yard or between plays at the theatre. Astley was a brilliant entrepreneur. He started the circus parade through the streets to attract audiences: indeed he was never at a loss for a gimmick. He himself was a brilliant trainer, teaching his horses, much to Horace Walpole's amazement, to dance the horn-pipe: perhaps more astonishing was his favourite horse's trick of making tea—the horse lifting the kettle with his teeth from the blazing fire.³9

In Pepys's day there had been no provincial theatres of any kind. A band of players obtained a royal licence and then wandered from town to town setting up their stage in inn yards or in barns to astound the yokels with melodrama or acrobats.⁴º A hundred years later, every town of any pretension had a well-built theatre, a regular company and often enjoyed the visits of the best London companies during the summer when the theatre was closed in London. A theatre was built in Bath by subscription in 1705: by 1730 York had a modest repertory company which, instead of sharing the profits, was employed on a salary basis—a revolutionary development that was to spread and, of course, to give increased profits to managers and shareholders. The theatre established at the county-town usually served by the middle of the century the surrounding area. Norwich had a well-established theatre by the 1740s (a large new theatre was built in 1758) and a resident company. They played in Norwich from January to May and returned for three weeks during the assizes in July and August. They performed usually five times a week, but only three in Lent, but outside Norwich they cut their performances to three times a week, but added others for special requests. In June they were in Dereham, in July Ipswich, in August Beccles; they spent two months in Bury (September, October) largely for the fair (later in the century Bury established a very fine theatre of its own) and for the last three months of the year (October to December) they played at Colchester. In addition to the straight theatre at Norwich, there was also a puppet theatre and a theatre of varieties—the ancestor of the Victorian music hall. These were filled by touring companies which, at times, drew very large audiences indeed.4¹ Nor was Norwich exceptional. During the eighteenth century fourteen theatres were established in Lincolnshire, usually regarded as one of the backward rural areas, in Alford, Boston, Bourne, Brigg, Gainsborough, Grantham,

Grimsby, Horncastle, Lincoln, Louth, Market Deeping, Market Rasen, Spalding and Stamford: one or two were small and attached to inns, for some of these market towns were little more than villages, but most were long-lasting.² This does, 'however, illustrate not only the passion for the theatre, but also the entrepreneurial excitement which it attracted. By 1770 England was better equipped with theatres than it is today. (Even Wisbech had a theatre.)⁴³ In London and the main provincial centres, capital investment was considerable and profits in general good, if very liable to be dissipated by an over-ambitious manager. The shareholders of the Theatre Royal, Liverpool, drew a regular 5 per cent interest and saw the capital value of their shares steadily, if not dramatically, rise.⁴

As with the theatre, so with music. In Pepys's day London was full of musicians--mainly amateur, although of course there were professional performers and teachers. There was good Church music, occasionally there were fine musical interludes at the theatre, and Matthew Locke provided some excellent incidental music for Macbeth, The Tempest and Shadwell's Psyche.4⁵ For those who were lucky enough to have the entrée to the Royal Palace, Charles II kept a French orchestra, having found the English band unsatisfactory.⁴⁶ Those not so lucky had to go to a tavern or coffee house where there might be a girl with a good voice singing ballads or traditional songs, and some inns employed a fiddler from time to time. The provinces were, of course, worse off as far as secular music was concerned. Either one made it oneself or waited, as Sir Robert Walpole's father did, for the visit of a strolling fiddler.4 Sometimes for a dance it was possible to hire the services of a local amateur. And, of course, music lovers got together and made music, and this audience, modest in London and small in the provinces, was catered for by the publication of song books such as Playford's.

But in the 1660s there was no true opera, no ballet, no musical festivals, no specially designed concert halls of any kind, although John Bannister the violinist gave a few public performances between 1673 and 1676 in London.⁴⁸ Again by 1760 all was changed, aided of course by the rapid increase after 1690 of musical publication, in which primers for teaching were very prominent. Blow produced his primer for the harpsichord in 1704. The first primer for the flute was printed in 1721, both published by Walsh, who specialized entirely in music. Indeed, he started the first specialized monthly magazine, The Monthly Mask of Vocal Music, which ran from 1702 to 1724.49 Equally important was the rapid development and specialization of musical-instrument makers to meet the ever-increasing demand. The development of musical entertainment both amateur and professional was extremely rapid, ranging from the greatest Italian, German and English composers to popular music of the most traditional kinds. The Threee Choirs Festival, which linked Hereford, Gloucester and Worcester Cathedral choirs in a yearly fiesta of music which drew large audiences from the West Midlands, was inaugurated about 1713.5º Indeed, so large were the crowds that gathered for this festival that the Bath theatre company usually played at the cathedral town where the Festival was being held: much, of course, to the delight of the tradesmen and inn-keepers. Public concert halls became well established at the turn of the century. A primitive one was started in the 1670s by Thomas Britton—a musical coal merchant who cleared out the loft of his warehouse and organized concerts, at first free, but afterwards at 10s. a year, including coffee. He was one of the first to introduce Corelli and Vivaldi to the London public. As Sir John Hawkins loftily wrote in his History of Music, ‘This mansion, despicable as it may seem, attracted to it as polite an audience as ever the opera did!’⁵1 More important, however, was the opening of Thomas Hickford's rooms in St. James's Street, Piccadilly, in 1713 which, after a move to Brewer Street, lasted until 1779. For over sixty years brilliant concerts by leading English and continental musicians were given there.5² Hickford was overshadowed in 1775 by the opening of the Hanover Square Rooms where Bach, Mozart and Haydn were first performed in England. Many inns, particularly the very large Crown and Anchor in the Strand, not wishing to lose custom, built or set aside a concert room, where usually a wide variety of music was to be heard, traditional as well as modern.5ª Much to the horror of a foreign visitor sacred music was also played and indeed one tavern set up a church organ.⁵⁴ The Crown and Anchor was also the home of the Academy of Ancient Music which ran from 1726 to 1792, a club for the study and practice of vocal and instrumental harmony.⁵⁵ As with the theatre, concert-going spread rapidly in the provinces. Manchester had a series of subscription concerts in 1744 which were suspected of being a cover for secret Jacobite sympathizers.⁵⁶ According to Paul Henry Lang, toward the middle of the century almost every town, castle, University and Church had its orchestra and many musical associations gathered for weekly musical exercises'.⁵7 Just as they could not possibly collect Old Masters, but had to content themselves with prints, so too the middle class could not behave like the Duke of Chandos and keep a full scale orchestra at Cannons, along with a resident composer such as Handel or Pepusch.

Neither could the middle class afford to run a racehorse or to support a cricket team, but both games fascinated them for they provided excellent opportunities for gambling. All societies gamble, but affluent societies gamble most. Football pools, bingo halls, betting shops are a clear indication of the affluence of the working class of the middle decades of the twentieth century—the development of horse-racing which became an industry in the eighteenth century similarly points to the affluence of both the gentry, the pseudo-gentry and the upper middle class.⁵⁸

Some regulation and order had taken place in racing in the reigns of Charles II and James II: rules for particular races such ās the Town Plate at Newmarket had been laid down, and professional jockeys were permitted for the first time in the reign of James II and the first professional trainer, Tregonwell Frampton, was employed at Newmarket by William III and later by Queen Anne and the first two Hanoverians.5ª But by the standards of 1750, horse-racing in 1700 was still rather primitive—-there were conventions rather than rules, the man who owned the horse usually rode it and, more often than not, races were between two horses for a wagerbetween the owners. And there was little control of the jockeys when employed. There was a very rough programme of meetings——conventional times at Newmarket and Doncaster and at some of the large county towns which organized races to coincide with their assizes.6º The courses were traditional or arranged on the spot.

Changes began, however, early in the century and the newspapers played a vital part in the development of racing. Very early indeed race meetings were advertised,61 and by the 1750s London newspapers were carrying advertisements of all the major meetings in the country and often too carrying news of the results. By 1722, 112 cities and towns in England were holding race meetings.6² Indeed the spread of racing for small stakes led to Parliament attempting to regulate the sport in 1711 and again in 1740—they tried to check the growing demand.6³ The introduction of Arabian bloodstock by Lord Godolphin improved breeding dramatically and involved greater expenditure: and the more spirited and nervous horses required more professional skill in training and riding. The establishement of the Racing Calendar in 1727 helped not only to regulate meetings but also to increase both competitors and attendance.6⁴ No longer was it merely a matter of owners, their followers and friends and a few neighbouring gentlemen farmers, but crowds were gathering at all race courses. Indeed the population of the sport became so great that more and more race-courses were specially laid out for racing. At Richmond in Yorkshire the city fathers laid out a new course near the town (formerly races had been held on a wind-swept plateau some fives miles from the town) and they built what may have been the first grandstand for which a charge was made for seats.6⁵ The Jockey Club, established by 1725, quickly brought order into the betting and began to reform the rules of racing.6⁶ By the 1770s Tattersalls had come into existence and betting no longer had to be man to man.67 Steadily the important race meetings began to distinguish themselves and draw enormous crowds. The St. Leger was founded in 1776, the Oaks in 1779 and the Derby in 1780, the 2,000 Guineas just after the turn of the century in 1809.68 By then racing was a complex industry involving thousands of workers and an investment that ran into hundreds of thousands of pounds.9 England exported the industry, first to France and then to America. Racing was the first sport to become a highly organized, nationwide social activity, run as much for profit as for fun. But other sports were not far behind. Cricket had developed to the full elaboration of its rules by the end of the century and had also become stabilized in special grounds which charged admission, again drawing large crowds, both for the betting and the sport.7º

Theatre, music, dancing, sport-—these were the cultural pastimes for which the prosperous gentry and the new leisured middle class hungered. But their houses were not large enough for private theatres, for private orchestras and private concerts, nor had they money to lavish on such conspicuous aristocratic consumption as a string of racehorses. And so it is not surprising that market towns began to build subscription Assembly Rooms, where the social élite of the county and the county town could meet for balls, for music, for improving lectures and, of course, for dramatic performances. Some Assembly Rooms, such as those at York, designed by the Earl of Burlington and paid for by public subscription, were magnificent in conception and design; others were one or two great rooms attached to the leading inn and could double up on occasion for Masonic meetings. Often the subscription was quite high, which at least kept out the minor shopkeepers and traders." These Assembly Rooms mark the transitional stage between private and fully public entertainment. As culture seeped through to the masses, and so became more commercially viable, these subscription rooms fell into desuetude. Many, however, remain to remind us of the elegance and sophistication of upper class provincial life in eighteenth-century England.7² They were, of course, the provincial equivalent of those two wonders of London—Vauxhall and Ranelagh Gardens, where one could, dine, listen to music, look at excellent pictures--indeed buy them-and of course dance (sometimes masked, sometimes not), and above all partake in that favourite eighteenth-century sport of sauntering to ogle the girls.7ª

A similar transitional stage can be seen in the growth of towns dedicated entirely to leisure or retirement--a phenomenon which is now so commonplace in the western world that it is difficult to remind oneself how recent and how significant this development is. Like the readers of The Spectator or Pamela, eighteenth-century men and women, eager for a holiday, liked to have a sound moral excuse for their enjoyment. And so the first holiday centres grew up at Spas—Bath and Tunbridge Wells, quickly followed by Scarborough, Bristol Hot Springs, Cheltenham, Harrogate, Matlock and the rest. Brighton, where one took the sea water internally as well as externally, got off to a slow start, but roared ahead under the patronage of the Prince Regent towards the end of the century, when the spas themselves began slowly to decline and men and women began to accept frankly the idea of a holiday for holiday's sake. Also men and women may have become healthier as personal and social hygiene improved, for there can be no doubt that the majority of those who went to the spas in the middle of the century usually had some ailment, major or minor, frequently due to over-eating and drinking, which they hoped the hideous waters might cure. But the main business of spas was amusement—-dancing, theatre, music and reading and, of course, flirting and making love, just as it was a little lower down the social scale at Islington or Sadlers Wells, the spas nearest to London to which the townsmen flocked.

Islington had been languishing until the proprietor secured the visit of two young princesses (Caroline and Amelia). Takings then shot up and Pinchbeck, whose entrepreneurial eye glinted as sharply as John Newbery's or Josiah Wedgwood's, produced a medallion of the occasion in the base metal, faked to look like gold, to which he gave his name.7⁵

All the activities that I have so far described point to the growth of a middle-class audience—-not a mass audience by our standards, but so large and so growing that its commercial exploitation was becoming an important industry, involving considerablecapital. It was also a market that had enormous potentiality for growth.

The.middle-class culture which this commercialization of leisure brought about expanded greatly in the nineteenth century, modified maybe, but not essentially changed, and lasted until our own time. The collected Spectator, for example, was reprinted over and over again, and Addison was the model essayist in thought as well as style when I was a boy at school; equally persistent were the ‘tea-gardens'modelled on Islington or Sadlers Wells. Although the growth of this leisure industry has had considerable economic effects, these were partly the result of social effects equally profound.

In the early eighteenth century, culture and sport slowly ceased to be élitist and private and became increasingly public. The more public cultural and sporting activity becomes, the more it provokes social emulation-one has only to think of Covent Garden, the Private View at the Academy or Ascot to realize how socially competitive human beings may become—even in their pleasures. And social emulation usually leads to increasing consumption and expenditure. And it encourages the entrepreneur to exploit and extend his market. Furthermore, the media of communication of the eighteenth century—literature, particularly the novel, the theatre, and the opera-—all helped to diffuse, in a way never before experienced by Englishmen, social attitudes and social criticism—that seepage of ideas which is the distinguishing mark of leisure in western society.

And, finally, to be a little reckless. It has always been my view that the situation which gives rise to the early beginnings of the industrial revolution arose from an affluent society wanting more goods than the labour force, as then organized, could produce. After all, the new industrial methods began in the consumer industries—textiles, pottery, the buttons, buckles and pins of Boulton and Watt. And I hope this all too rapid survey of leisure, its increasing professionalization and commercialization between 1670 and 1770 points to an affluent and growing middle class which was willing to spend for the sake, not only of prestige, but also for enjoyment and self-improvement: neither, may I add, necessarily uncomplementary.

I have only had time to skid across the surface and I am indebted to a host of admirable antiquarians and a few literary historians of distinction, but I have been surprised to find so little good professional economic and social history written on these topics. There is no good history of any sport, other then cricket. Excellent histories of the Crocus and the species Dianthus, but no history of horticulture.7⁶ One useful book on toys by Lady Antonia Fraser. No history of meat or of food in general, apart from Sir Jack Drummond's, which is superficial.7 No professional economic and social history of Bath or any other leisure town. Although nearly seven thousand books and articles were written on the theatre from the Restoration to 1800 between 1900 and 1968, they are almost entirely antiquarian, literary or factory-made Ph.D. exercises.78 We have the Jew in Eighteenth-century Theatre, the Quaker, the Rake, the Reformed Rake, the Cuckold and a host of other stock figures analysed at length in thesis after thesis, but there are only a few chapters in one short monograph that deal adequately with the theatre's economic history.79 These and many other subjects await the attention of trained professional historians.

And yet the way man enjoys himself and the way his enjoyments are exploited—surely both are of considerable importance for economic as well as social history.

7⁶ George Maw, The Genus Crocus (1886); Ernest Thomas Cook, Carnations, Picotees and the Wild and Garden Pinks: a History of the Genus Dianthus (1905).

" J. C. Drummond and Anne Wilbraham, The Englishman's Food: A History of Five Centuries of English Diet (1939). It is worth noting that Richard Leveridge, a powerful bass singer, made The Roast Beef of Old England’ the popular hit of the 1720s. Šee Grove, Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Eric Blom (5th ed. 1954), v, pp. 152–3.

78 See Restoration and Eighteenth Century Theatre Research: Bibliographical Guide, 1900- 1968, ed. Carl J. Stratman, David G. Špencer and Mary Elizabeth Devine (Carbondale, 1971), passim.

79 Van der Veen and R. S. Harm, Jewish Characters in Eighteenth Century English Fiction and Drama (Groningen, 1935). Ezra Kempten Maxfield, ‘The Quakers in English Stage Plays before 1800', Publications of the Modern Languages Association, xl (1925), pp. 874–80. Donald Clark Wall, The Restoration Rake in Life and Comedy, unpubl. Ph'D. thesis, University of Florida (1962); Lemiel N. Norell,"The Cuckold in Restoration Comedy, unpubl. Ph.d. thesis, University of Florida (1962). The volume in question is Harry W. Pedicord, The Theatrical Public in the Time of Garrick (New York, 1954). There aré also some perceptive paragraphs in the introductions to The London Stage (Carbondale, 1965–8).