# 1 Objectifying Gender: The Stiletto Heel

Lee Wright

This essay will focus on the notion of gender in relation to design. One reason for selecting the stiletto heel as a case study is that as an object it is seen as being exclusively female.¹ Even when worn by men it is with a view to constructing a female imageGender specificity in object design exists on many levels. This essay attempts to equate the process of making with the construction of meaning. I will be discussing the stiletto heel in terms of its manufacture and production process alongside ideas concerning representation from its inception in the early 1950s to its demise as a mass fashion item a decade later.

The stiletto heel of the 1950s marks the culmination of an historical continuum: the high heel as representative of the female in footwear. At the same time it heralds a new era of shoe production and design. By focusing on this particular moment in the history of the high heel, this article identifies many of the issues concerning industrial manufacture in the 1950s, which, together with the particular social context of the period, explain the emergence of the stiletto as a new fashion item.

The stiletto is a particularly contentious case study in view of the interpretations which have caused its boycott since the 1960s. Feminists, in an attempt to express their reaction against traditional female roles, have often cast the stiletto as an object of exploitation, along with other items of clothing which appear to be inherently feminine. In the rejection of certain items belonging to the women's sartorial code, adoption of those thought inherently masculine has been sought: examples of the 1970s are flat-heeled shoes and dungarees.²

Using the stiletto as a focal point this study is part of a more general review which looks at how and why certain meanings become attached to objects and whether these meanings are inherent in the design criteria. An alternative reading of stiletto' may now be necessary in the light of a wider discussion in current fashion design of the manipulation of masculine and feminine aspects in clothing for both sexes. This reworking seems to centre on trying to redefine meaning rather than changing the form of clothes.³

The stiletto has been widely accepted as symbolising female subordination. It seems that this sort of theory is widely applied to female-gendered objects but not to those that are resolutely male It would appear that the more female' an object, the more it is devalued. This implies that meanings are often based on an association already determined: that is, that meaning is subject to stereotyping, which results in the perpetuation of particular perspectives. With reference to gender it seems that all too often objects construed as male are equated with ‘masculine' and are therefore active and assertive, while defining female is equivalent to feminine', indicating passivity and subservience.

Since the early nineteenth century conventional criteria of styling based on gender difference have been established in footwear. Before then, male and female fashions were closely allied in style.⁴ The heel is the component of the shoe which has become the most visible expression of gender in that, in the nineteeth century, high heels became ‘female'footwear and were disallowed in a male sartorial code.⁵ Therefore, the high heel established itself as a part of female iconography and has since become a useful tool in the construction of a female image. The stiletto heel has evoked the most potent symbolism because, in design terms, it managed to reach the ultimate dimensions of its genre, combining thinness and height in a relationship never before attained. The stiletto is the peak of the career of the high heel, fulfilling all requirements of feminised styling at the same time as it literally reached its highest point. The extremity of such styling demands precipitated the technological innovation necessary to manufacture such shoes. In other words, the idea for the stiletto predated any means of producing it.

The stiletto was one of several objects created in the aftermath of the Second World War as deliberately feminine,6 at a time when the role of women in society was particularly polarised. Much discussion has centred on the way women consumers were constructed' by specific traits in the design of clothes and other products. One can speculate on whether this was a conscious attempt to cast women in a more feminine mould or part of a less conscious social movement which objectified its ideals in a reinforcement of femininity.

Footwear cannot be isolated from fashion: it is an intrinsic element in the creation of a total look'. In this instance, the New Look launched by Christian Dior in 1947 provided the keynote in the design. Generally regarded as the most important fashion event in the immediate post-war period, the Corolle line, as the New Look was originally christened, became the fashion paradigm of the shoe industry. The high-fashion magazine Harpers Bazaar commented in May 1947:

The New Look is a new shape and that shape follows the lines of the best possible figure, emphasising every feminine charm.

This reaction was one of many which stressed the expression of femininity as the prime motivating force in shaping the fashion of the time. Moreover, it stressed that the feminine' was determined by the female form itself rather than by an artificial form. It is obvious that the clothes were meant to be an extension of the female figure and emphasise it rather than distract from it.

The other essential ingredient was the need to appear contemporary. The creation of a ‘new' design of a feminine nature was in contrast to the design philosophy of the Utility system, which was in operation during the war and for some time afterwards.7 The Utility scheme was a system of rationed items specially designed to be functional and to save raw materials. Clothing had to be practical and durable and this led to forms of dress for women being based on menswear, which, since the nineteenth century, had tended to place novelty and fashion second in matters of design. Footwear manufacturers now used the stylistic guidelines of the new Paris fashions as a contrast to those of the Utility scheme.8 This scheme emphasised function above any other design criteria, equating ‘good design'with a non-ornamental style. A product which was lighter in weight would counteract the chunky practical Utility style, but the dilemma remained of how to oppose austerity plainness when new fashions were also demanding simplicity based on lack of ornament. However manufacturers resolved this, they were ultimately concerned with a concept of form rather than function in the late 1940s and early 1950s. The main issue was how to follow the French fashion dictate; as one journal put it in 1947,

. . . whether heels should reach a new extremity of height or a new low; which is the most flattering line for the ankle and interprets best the revival of flourishing femininity which characterises the recent fashion change.9

A year later this was stil under discussion: Everything points to an even greater development of femininity . . .'10

Footwear manufacturers started trying to produce shoes that met these criteria, but it was a number of years before they finally came up with a satisfactory solution. Discussions centred on a tailored, refined shoe which gave the impression of lightness by means of a slender form.11 The approach adopted was typical of the fashion industry. In order to appear ‘new’the design had to be not just different from previous styles but a complete contrast to them.12

The new spring shoes will be more delicate, more ladylike, more flattering than ever before. The heavy bulky shoe is definitely OUT.13

In contemporary language the term ‘stiletto' is often used to describe a type of heel and the type of shoe to which it is attached – the court shoe. The two have become synonymous. The name originally given to the heel has, since 1953, become a generic title often used to describe this particular style and heel type. The reasons for this are basic to an understanding of the making and the meaning of the heel. The court shoe suited the New Look concept in that it was a tailored shape which followed the natural line of the foot. This slim-fitting form indicated and determined a lighterweight product than Utility styles. It was not a new style, but its reintroduction after the war coincided with a refinement in lastmaking,¹⁴ so it appeared updated even though it was a pre-war design. The plain court shoe shape, therefore, both followed and broke with the concepts of Utility footwear design. Just like the whole of the New Look the modernising process' was in some ways based on pre-war values. More importantly, its graceful’ qualities apparently suited the new ethos determining what femininity looked like. While it moved sufficiently away from 1940s' styling to appear new and modern, it also inherited enough 1940s' characteristics to be seen not to break completely with tradition. A degree of continuity was important in helping the style to establish itself as market leader. By June 1951, the journal Footwear concluded that courts dominate the shoe market.’

In retrospect, we think of the stiletto as being of one type – a thin, tapering heel. In fact, this is the stiletto as it ultimately became rather than the one invented in the early 1950s. It was not a static design but a whole series of variations over a ten-year period. In these crucial ten years its design attempted to reconcile the demands of the dominant design philosophy, which emphasised simplicity above all, with the New Look femininity, which concentrated on styling. In order to answer the demands of fashion the heel changed in shape and construction from 1947, but by 1953 it had managed to establish a degree of resolution in its design (see Fig. 1.1). The court shoe shape, resolved prior to the heel, demonstrated the way in which femininity and modernity could be objectified. From 1953 the heel and toe took priority. The heel began as a two-inch thick but tapered shape which, by 1957, was gradually refined to the slender form we now rccognise as a stiletto heel. The toe of the shoe underwent similar stylistic changes. The rounded toe of 1953 and before became sharper and eventually developed into an arrow-like point.

The choice of stiletto', the thin-bladed knife, to christen the heel is often thought to have originated from the invention of its metal core. The naming of a shoe from the style of heel was perhaps partly due to the fact that the shoe itself was very plain and the heel was therefore the focus of interest. When the Daily Telegraph published a photograph of a new heel called the Stiletto' on 10 September 1953, it was one of a number of terms denoting the stylistic characteristics and not an aspect of its manufacture.1s The metal backbone' of the heel had not yet been invented! The heel of 1953 still used wood, the traditional material for heel construction. The 'spike’,needle’ and ‘spindle’ were all attempts to conjure up a name for a heel which was more tapered than ever before. Following the precedent set by the court shoe shape, the manufactures took elements of the Louis' heel, which was standard for a court shoe, but elongated and refined it.16

This produced a style of footwear which was impractical in a number of ways (see Fig. 1.2). The relative fineness of the heel meant that it would be difficult to walk on and that, with the pressure of walking, it could easily snap. Furthermore, the cut-away top of the shoe implied that it might not cling to the foot. But it was precisely this appearance of impracticality that made the 1940s' Utility styles look totally outdated.

As this shape of heel had never been seen before, a new name helped to identify it. Of all the names mentioned, some implied fragility, some implied strength and all suited the stylistic qualities. The stiletto seems to have prevailed at first because of its Italian association. Italian-ness' was a fashionable trend in the midfifties17 and; along with the acknowledged traditional skill of Italian footwear manufacture in general, this helped to sell the product.

The problem for British manufacturers was how to make a commercially viable heel, one which would live up to its name and which looked like the fashion sketches. The initial experiments used wood as the reinforcement required to withstand prolonged pressure without breaking. By building a heel of interlocking pieces of wood, strength could be gained by a judicious use of the grain. Paradoxically, the heel which had consumer credibility in terms of wear was too heavy and clumsy to warrant the title of stiletto, while the one which did warrant the title by successfully reproducing the fashionable form did not stand up to wear. Pressure to produce the stiletto at this point seems to have come from the fashion industry, which continued to promote this airy, streamlined shoe. The demand was so great that in 1957, four years after the initial appearance of the stiletto in the Daily Telegraph, the perfect solution was still being sought.

problem which the shoe trade has had to face in recent years has followed the trend in ladies' shoes towards even more slender heels.18

The motivation to continue with this seemingly impossible task was linked to the persistence of the idea of the stiletto. It was in the interest of the manufacturers to interpret the demands of fashion and the female consumer in a single, universal style which had the potential to dominate the market. In the 1950s a universal style was still possible, although the emerging youth commodity culture was beginning to break down such a dictatorial code of fashionable dressing. Perhaps the success of the stiletto was that its design allowed for variations. These variations were adopted by different consumer factions, but as a new product it was most popular with teenagers and women in their early twenties, anxious to ensure they looked modern and fashionable in a post-austerity era. It therefore became increasingly important to the shoe industry that a suitable method of production be found, which would be cost-effective and result in a heel which could endure protracted use and still look like a stiletto.

The pressure to create such a design caused shoe manufacturers to join forces and sponsor the Shoe and Allied Trades Retail Association (SATRA) to carry out research into the ergonomics of the stiletto heel. It had become clear that the wooden spindle heel would never be strong enough. A European solution pre-empted SATRA: in 1956·a plastic version with a metal strengthening core was shown at an Italian trade fair. Within a year a British heel component company puchased the UK rights and imported the machine process, which was based on the technique of injection moulding. From this point, the term stiletto' became the leader in the title stakes. The pointed shape that could now be achieved, together with the internal metal pin to sustain it, made the true meaning of the word directly pertinent.

In a sense, the plastic version can be seen as the second stagein the history of the stiletto, as it was only then that the concept for the design could be properly put into practice. It was four years since the shape had been created as the perfect solution to interpreting the feminine in shoe design, and ten years since the image had been drawn on paper. Now the manufacturing problem of combining style and form was finally solved. The new manufacturing process reinforced the newness of the product and gave the stiletto a permanent place in fashion vocabulary.

The plastic heel introduced a completely mechanised system of production in 1957 and ensured the stiletto's success by bringing it within reach of the lower end of the market. Ironically, this move created its own problem: how to produce a heel which could withstand any amount of wear. In high fashion the stiletto was a novelty item and, as such, worn only occasionally. The phenomenal retail"success of the mass-produced version indicated that it was being worn far more, and in many situations not forecast by the manufacturers. What had previoůsly been thought of as an evening shoe was now being subjected to much more rigorous use: women were wearing stilettos at work, when driving, running and catching a bus and for other everyday activities. The wide acceptability of the style did not mask the fact that the product still fell short of customers’ expectations. While-you-wait heel repair kiosks appeared on every high street to service heels at a moment's notice. The volume of customer complaints encouraged SATRA to continue its research into what was then the relatively new field of plastics technology and chemical engineering.

It was not just the wearer who had cause for complaint: the minute heel-tip concentrated the wearer's weight so much that floors were often damaged beyond repair. The stiletto made news with stories like: The spike heels that English girls wear are ruiņing floors in factories, offices and dance halls. . .'19 and 'Women's Stiletto heeled shoes are blamed for breaking up roads in Carshalton, Surrey .. .'20 It was calculated that an eight-stone girl in stilettos exerted heel pressure of one ton per square inch.21 This caused not only the banning of stiletto heels in various places from dance halls to aircraft, but also the redesign of floor surfaces. Bus platforms were altered: wooden boards were replaced with solid rubber matting in order to avoid the heels getting caught²², and aircraft designers had to find tougher materials for flooring.23

In 1959 the plastic heel was evolving into its most exaggerated form – up to six inches high with a tiny heel-tip. This development parallels the sharpening' of the round toe into a point (see Fig 1.3). The arrow-like form of both heel and toe reinforced the idea of harmony of style between the shoe and heel, giving further cause for the title of stiletto to be used for the whole shoe. However, its antisocial reputation increased as it became more pointed, and worsened when the medical profession, confronted by an enormous increase in foot and posture problems, pronounced against the wearing of such footwear on medical grounds. SATRA investigated the effect of the stiletto on the body and found that continued wearing of the extreme form over a period of time could cause a variety of medical problems. Any style of stiletto caused the protrusion of chest and bottom and the development of calf muscles. The higher the heel, the more exaggerated the effect on posture thus increasing back problems; the more pointed the toe, the more pressure was put on the foot to follow an unnatural shape. This inspired as much moral as medical denigration: the body shape imposed by the stiletto was associated with an obvious display of female sexuality. In the early 1950s when the stiletto shape was being established, it was not seen as representing anything other than conventionalfeminine' attributes. Once the aspired-to shape was a reality, the meaning had changed, though the ideology of form had remained the same. It was more aggressive and seemed to be breaking with those early ideas of femininity rather than conforming to them. It seems that the stiletto in its various forms was by now so firmly installed in women's culture that no diatribe could prove strong enough to dislodge it. Indeed, its very notoriety coincided with an increase in sales in 1958 until 1962. One can speculate whether the new meaning was mapped on to the form or whether the form was continuing to be a representation of social relations of that era.

This is not to suggest, however, that all women wore stilettos of the more extreme variety. These were mainly worn by the younger generation in an attempt to break away from the style popular with their mothers. The wearing of winklepickers'(as this extreme variety was known) was often a defiant gesture against the establishment. Female youth culture was partly redefining itself on its differences rather than its similarities. As Angela Carter recalls in Nothing Sacred:

When I was eighteen, I went to visit her rigged out in all the atrocious sartorial splendour of the underground high style of the late fifties, black mesh stockings, spike-heeled shoes, bum-hugging skirt, jacket with a black fox collar.²⁴

The implication is that the stiletto was used by some women to represent dissatisfaction with the conventional female image and to replace it with that of a modern' woman who was more active and economically independent than her predecessors. The paradox is that, in retrospect, it has been labelled a ‘shackling'instrument which renders women immobile and passive. It has also been stressed that the heels gave added emphasis to breasts and bottoms, which were features of the 1950s' cinematic female stereotype. While this is undoubtedly true, I consider it a more important factor that the stiletto did not symbolise the housewife. From 1957 the stiletto was associated with glamour, with rebellion: it represented someone who was in some way‘modern' and ‘up to date', and, above all, someone who inhabited a world outside the home – a go-getter! Therefore, it may be more accurate to suggest that this stiletto symbolised liberation rather than subordination, despite the fact that high heels of any form were part of a stereotyped framework of what women wore. I suggest that stiletto-wearing in the fifties was part of a broader discussion of how to express thenew woman' – one who was not content with pre-war values and traditional roles. In this sense it could be seen as progressive rather than retrogressive. The stiletto did not break with all the traditions of what is female in footwear, but it certainly took those traditions to their furthest point, especially when, in its most extreme form, it was used to symbolise a rejection of convention. It used what was acceptable to create non-acceptance.

The early stiletto could be said to represent traditional values. It was only as the shape changed that the meaning shifted and it therefore came to represent something other than its initial values. A crucial point to make is that the meaning became more radical at the same time as the style itself became more exaggerated. This reinforced its value as a commodity which represented women who were in the process of breaking with established female roles. The fashion industry of the fifties promoted the stiletto but the difficulties of production were such that the shoe industry would have welcomed a change in fashion dictates. However, consistent and increasing sales persuaded shoe manufacturers to continue. In this sense women were using consumer power to demand the production of the stiletto.

This exploration of an object which signified female' in the 1950s is not an attempt to prove that women were subordinate; it is rather a way of looking at how design works to objectify those characteristics which emphasised femaleness within the social context of that era. In a wider context, the objectification of gender traits of that decade seems to segregate the sexes rather than indicate the similarities.In later years, baggy clothes are an example of de-emphasis of the female form, disguising femaleness sometimes to the extent of making it look male. It has been said that this was a reaction against the fifties' stereotype which exaggerated those parts of the body which are female, and of course the stiletto played a part in this. Women have accepted too readily the notion that stilettos exploit women. By using male forms of clothing we are perpetuating the dominance of masculinity. Perhaps assertion of gender difference challenges the power relationship more effectively than any attempt to emulate what is seen as male. I am suggesting that power can be, and has been, represented in women's clothes if one explores ways in which femaleness’has been denoted.²s

The exaggeration of gender attributes and an open display of gender difference has been labelled as exploitative when part of the female sartorial code. However, the physical changes imposed by the wearing of the stiletto need not be seen as an expression of submission. On the contrary, it exaggerated the existing physique by giving prominence to certain parts of the body and adding height. The body shape the stiletto creates depends on the shape and height of the heel. Again, the more extreme the stiletto, the more extreme physical prominence it gives. Given the suggestion that an overt representation of femaleness equals assertion, the most acute stiletto heel represents the most power. This is one example of the interdependence of form and meaning. The counter-argument, which says that the stiletto makes women less powerful by restricting their mobility, is secondary to the main issues concerning the stiletto in 1957. 'The stiletto put women on the edge of the dominance versus submission argument, but the fact that a fashion item could raise and explore those issues is significant and crucial to an understanding of women's role in the late fifties. I believe that from 1957 to 1962 the stiletto signified some liberation from traditional female values in object design. The sexual connotation was already established before the stiletto was invented, once high heels had come to symbolise the transition from adolescence to adulthood and had become the prerogative of women. The stiletto as the ultimate in high-heel styling served merely'to crystallise what had already come to mean ‘womanhood'. The purchase of a girl's first high-heels is often a signal of puberty and the onset of sexual maturity. The heel is used as a female rite of passage,26 where the height of the heel indicates gradual progression towards maturity. The Kitten' stiletto of the early 1960s was devised for this purpose; the one-inch heel was the first step towards graduation. At the opposite end of the scale the stiletto could be so high that any pretence of function in terms of walking is lost. One symbolised sexual immaturity and a certain innocence, the other total maturity and sexual prowess. (Because the plastic construction of stilettos allowed for all these variations, the meaning became more strongly attached to the stiletto rather than any other type of high heel.) This is the point at which gender and sexuality become allied and the heel becomes an indicator of both female' and sex'’. An example of this can be found in films of the fifties and sixties, where removal of stilettos was often used to imply a sexual encounter.

The stiletto is a grown-up' shoe in many senses of the word. By literally reaching new heights, combined with extreme thinness, it broke with the traditions of gender and form which initiated its production. That is, at first the stiletto was based on conventional interpretations of femininity. It was only later, when the basic form underwent certain stylistic changes, that a new set of assertive meanings was established. It seems, then, that in one form – the stiletto – there are different meanings, which originate from the polarities of the design. Therefore, at the·point of design or production, not all meanings are set. In the case of the stiletto, some were in-built'. For example, the notion of femininity of the late 1940s was ‘built' into the heel's design, but five years later both the meaning and the design had changed. I am unsure whether the object – the stiletto – came to represent particular ideologies or if representation created the need to change the object. In Decoding Advertisements Judith Williamson suggests the latter: Material things we need are made to represent other, non-material things we need . . . The point of exchange between the two is where 'meaning" is created.'27 Certainly, the stiletto in its more extreme manifestations went beyond the bounds of what was deemed acceptable' in that era – a crucial factor in the ability of the style to convey rebellion and dominance. This was based on the idea of the heel as a weapon to symbolise womanhood and its feminine attributes, and was put across in an aggressive, obvious manner rather than the subtle, passive way more commonly associated with femininity.

I've been so mad at Johnny that I've gone for him with anything I could lay my hands on – a knife, a stiletto shoe, anything...28

The original motivation to produce a new type of attenuated heel survived the drawn-out development of the design and manufacture of the stiletto. The many methods devised all responded to a similar stylistic challenge, one which called for the invention of what could be termed a progressive product, a style which would announce its modernity and its affiliation to the feminine through a shape which could only be made possible through technical prowess. The stiletto mythology was completed in 1960 when the ‘No Heel’stiletto appeared. The stiletto heel was so ingrained an image by this time that it no longer needed the very object that denoted it. The lightweight design of the heel had been ultimately achieved; it no longer existed! This novelty version, which appeared seven years after the stiletto's debut, served to make the point that both the technical and the stylistic challenge of the ideal' heel had been met.

The stiletto was devised and used to express femininity within the realms of what that meant in the 1950s. Therefore, it could be said that the ultimate form of the stiletto.expressed extreme femininity in terms of its own traditions. It seems pertinent to raise the issue of whether we can criticise such overt expressions of the feminine in design as victimisation if we are basing our criticism on a male perspective. This negates the fact that expressions of femaleness can signify power and be objectified in ways other than masculine.

## Notes

1 For example, Lisa Tickner writes that the stiletto isn't, and can't be, neutral; it is specifically female,’ Block, No. 1, 1979.

2 This too has become a stereotype rather than an iconoclasm, as it was originally intended to be.

3 In an interview in ID, No. 45, March 1987, innovative fashion designer Vivienne Westward comments: I've never thought it powerful to be like a second-rate man’. See early 1987 advertisements for fashion designer Katherine Hamnett.

4 Wilson, Elizabeth, Adorned in Dreams, Virago, London, 1985; Swann, Jane, Shoes, Batsford, London, 1982.

5 Platform shoes of the 1970s are the one exception to this rule.

6 Another example is the Hoover.

7 The Utility scheme ended in 1952.

8 Utility Furniture and Fashion, Geffrye Museum catalogue, 1974.

9 Footwear, February 1947.

10 Footwear, February 1948.

11 This impression reinforced dominant beauty ideals for women when a good figure’ was equated with a slender form

12 Konig, René, The Restless Image, Allen and Unwin, London, 1973. One of the few theoretical texts on fashion which seeks to explain how fashions are created.

13 Footwear, February 1948.

14 In 1948 a last – the form on which a shoe is made – was devised which created a more slender product; this enabled the snug fit of the court shoe, which is necessary for it to cling to the foot, to be increased.

15 Information based on an interview with Edward Rayne, makers of theTelegraph’ shoe.

16 In a similar way to the last-making of the ‘new' court shoe.

17 Block, No. 5, 1981. Dick Hebdige discussed the introduction of Italian design to the UK in the 1950s via the scooter.

18 High Heels, SATRA, July 1957.

19 Shoe and Leather News, 1958 (month unknown).

20 Shoe and Leather News, 3 July 1958.

21 Shoe and Leather News, 2 April 1959.

22 Daily Telegraph, 21 November 1959.

23 The Times, 5 August 1958.

24 Carter, Angela, Nothing Sacred, Virago, London, 1982, p.11.

25 Spender, Dale, Re-inventing Rebellion', Feminist Theorists, The Women's Press, London, 1983. I disagree with Dale Spender's comment that power is still a concept about which women have codified very little’.

26 Just as long trousers are sometimes used in a male rite of passage from child to adult.

27 Williamson, Judith, Decoding Advertisements, Marion Boyars, London, 1979, p. 14.

28 Hamblett, Charles, and Deverson, Jane, Generation X, Tandem · Books, London, 1964, p. 94.

## Further Reading

Barthes, Roland, The Fashion System, Jonathan Cape, London, 1985.

Brownmiller, Susan, Femininity, Paladin, London, 1986.

French, Marilyn, On Women, Men and Morals, Summit Books, New York, 1985.

Goodall, Phil, Design and gender', Block, No. 9, 1983.

MacKenzie, Donald, and Wajaman, Judy, The Social Shaping of Technology, Open University Press, London, 1985.

Molloy, John, Dress for Success, Warner Books, New York, 1975. Parker, Roszika, The Subversive Stitch: Embroidery and the Making of the Feminine, The Women's Press, London, 1984.