# Representations of Women and Race in the Lancashire Cotton Trade

Zoë Munby

This essay examines images of women woven and printed on the cloths which were manufactured in Lancashire for India and China, as well as similar imagery used in the advertising which accompanied those cloths. India and China were crucial markets for Lancashire cottons, yet ones with distinctive cultural requirements. The different imagery used by Lancashire designers for the two countries is discussed here to explore the ways in which patriarchal and colonialist ideas informed the trade; the use of images of women within this trade is a powerful record of the cultural impact of British industrialisation. The sources for the designs are collections of cloths, labels and trade-marks which survive in Britain. For this reason, and because a late-twentieth-century white perspective cannot do justice to the Indian or Chinese experience, this essay focuses on the reasons for the development of this imagery rather than on an assessment of its impact. The incorporation of racist and sexist imagery into products designed for use by the very people who were being represented is sufficient justification for this examination.

By the last quarter of the nineteenth century, competition from North America and Europe was forcing Lancashire to make a more concerted effort to extend existing markets and to develop new ones. India and China, where cotton was the main clothing material used and where, in different ways, Britain had political influence, were key targets.

Entirely plain, low-quality cloth had been sent to India from Lancashire from the early 1800s. India's own cotton industry had been weakened and then almost entirely destroyed by the combination of cheap imports of Lancashire cottons and fiscal measures imposed by Britain. From the 1850s these export goods were, in the majority of cases, heavily adulterated by sizing.¹ In some quarters it was felt, even leaving moral scruples aside, that the India trade was commercially endangered by the reputation it was gaining for bad quality and short measure. The period examined here, from 1870 to 1930, was one in which a section of the industry attempted to transform the trade. The types of cloths made for India continued to be of low quality but from the 1870s they were more diverse, with manufacturers adding new patterned cottons to existing ranges of plain cloths. These changes were, in part, a response to the need to increase trade. But to the problem of low quality was added that of designing for a culture with very different decorative traditions to those of Lancashire.

There were two methods of producing these patterned cloths: small quantities of the cloths sent to India were printed and this percentage increased in the 1870s.² There was also possible, by this time, manufacture on power looms of cottons with elaborate, large-scale, woven patterns. This created direct competition with the more expensive of the handloom-woven saris and dhotis produced in India, which could now be imitated cheaply in Lancashire factories. The printed cloths sent to India consisted mainly of indigo and Turkey' red cloths with stylised floral motifs imitative of India's own printed cottons.³ The pattern-woven cottons were often produced with numerous variations on small geometric and floral motifs, similar to the cottons India had sent to Britain during an earlier period. But a number of manufacturers, as if entranced by the potential of the jacquard loom for producing large-scale intricate patterns, attempted figurative designs employing more adventurous subject-matter which would have been considered quite inappropriate for the home market. Animals – elephants, lions and other tropical beasts - were particularly popular, while the technological wonders of Western society, from sewing-machines to, later, airships, were other favourite subjects. There were also images of Indian and European peoples which explicitly suggested the colonial relationship between the two countries.4

The form these images took had many similarities with the advertising material which accompanied the cloths.⁵ The last few yards of bales orbolts’of cotton for export were stamped with trade-marks and miscellaneous information as to the type and quality of cloth; similar information and images appeared in the form of‘tickets’ - gummed, multicoloured labels. Where cotton was destined for non-European, non-industrialised countries, the images used on stamps and tickets were more strident, larger and brighter, conveying the necessary information in a form which was considered more suitable to the tastes of those outside the cultural orbit of the Western world.

These stamps and tickets, intended for use in sales displays to attract the eye of the buyer and then be discarded, had in practice a much more extended impact. The relatively simple styles of most of the cottons were positively enhanced by the intricate stamp impressions. In some cases, bolt ends were collected and sewn together to make a patchwork fabric whose dominant pattern consisted of the stamp rather than that of the original cloth. The tickets may well have been similarly preserved, for in a society where glossy, multicoloured paper printing had only recently become cheaply available, the quality and complexity of the printed tickets must have made a considerable impact.6 Although evidence of the use of Lancashire goods is scarce, it seems probable that both tickets and stamped bolt ends were retained and valued for purposes other than those for which the Lancashire manufacturers intended them.

The subject-matter of the cottons, stamps and tickets were identical. When depicting people, the cheap quality of the jacquard cloth employed produced crude, caricatured figures; however, the stamps and tickets had the potential for more subtle effects. Europeans were most frequently shown in their powerful roles as members of the army or royalty, and the ever-recurring European women were Victoria and Britannia. By contrast, the Indian women featured were anonymous and were usually depicted as poor and passive, or as sexual objects, particularly on the tickets and stamps. The Indians were shown as primitive or subject peoples. This was achieved either by depicting them via racial caricatures and/or by showing them engaged in some primitive'or exotic' occupation: the men hunting with spears or snake-charming, the women spinning on simple hand-wheels although women were depicted at work far less frequently than men.

Thehumorous' or ‘exotic' quality of the images of men made them suitable subjects for textile or advertising design, but images of women had, most commonly, to fulfil additional decorative criteria. The images of Indian women, with attractively arranged clothing and accessories, had, in particular, certain racial characteristics removed. Although dressed in Indian clothes, their faces, coyly smiling, were of the palest brown with features conforming to European ideals of beauty. This type ranged from the mildly provocative to more explicit images where Indian women were shown as sexual objects, with breasts or hips thrust forward, embracing a lover or posing on a bed (see Fig. 2.1). Today these images of Indian women appear familiar and unremarkable, because the combination of Westernised features with sexual objectification has been adopted in many fieids of Indian graphic art in this century. A variety of Western visual sources over a long period of time have contributed to this style,7 but Lancashire textiles of the 1870s onwards were a/ significant influence, circulating as they did among a wide spectrum of the Indian population. These ways of portraying Indian women may have also drawn on earlier Indian graphic traditions;8 but it seems more probable that the mass importation of Lancashire cottons, with their attendant advertising material, served to introduce new ways of representing women into India itself.

British popular opinion was in no doubt as to Indian sexual mores. Liberal Imperial reformers of the early decades of the nineteenth century had justified the British presence in India as a civilising influence, frequently citing attitudes to women in Indian society, as exhibited in such practices as child marriage and suttee. The more sensual forms of Hindu art and literature were employed as evidence that Indian society was depraved. Apart from the writings of a few scholars, British society as a whole echoed the colonialist's confidence in the superiority, both aesthetically and morally, of British culture.

Indian religious art depicting sexuality and nakedness was clearly one source for the images of women which Lancashire exported. However, the use of such images in a secular context, massproduced and commercially dispensed by an industry of the colonial power, led to images which were explicitly oppressive. Women were depicted not as sexually active and powerful deities, as in Indian artistic traditions, but as passively available – either alone, looking invitingly at the viewer, or passively accepting the advances of a male. Indian society already incorporated traditions of women's inferior role and male power, whether through marriage conventions or in religious and secular law, but these imported images suggested a different type of subservient and sexually available role for Indian women. This essentially foreign form of oppressive relationship was thus additional to existing patriarchal structures.

Such images were not part of Lancashire textile designers' everyday repertoire. The nude, in its classical form, was an easily available and familiar source, but as a vehicle for developing drawing technique and not as a decorative motif in commercial practice. A set of six cotton cloth designs of 1877, with border patterns of nudes taken from classical art, are evidence of the difficulties the Lancashire designers experienced in this area (see Fig. 2.2). Although this subject may have been intended to appeal to the supposed lasciviousness of the Indians, the incongruity of these cultural allusions, and the crude drawing of the figures, executed in low-quality weaving, produced images which were anything but alluring.–

If cheap, woven cotton cloth was not the ideal medium for conveying sensual imagery, then other techniques were used more powerfully. A well-documented instance was the series of blackand-white photographic tickets issued by a Manchester firm in the 1920s. Known to the firm by the collective name Lady Tickets’, the series showed white women, semi-nude, disporting themselves in a variety of unlikely settings, beckoning or gesturing provocatively. TheLady Tickets' were one of the firm's most popular lines’. Although they were sold to cotton merchants and exporters for labelling bales of cotton, they could be used in other ways. The firm still retains a file of correspondence indicating that these tickets were also sold in bulk to individuals in India who expressed an interest in specific pornographic effects.1º It is significant that contemporary British assumptions of racial superiority were waived when the primary objective was to satisfy the tastes of the client, an Indian man. The white male ticket-maker and black male customer colluded in the creation of pornographic images of white women, who, in colonial India, were completely outside the social or emotional worlds of Indian men.

The clear message of the images incorporated into the products of the India trade is that the merchants, manufacturers and designers were content, in general, to convey the dominant British view of India, interpreted by designers from the accounts, commentaries and graphic records of Indian life which were available in Britain. The use of images of women and women's bodies to sell cloth was seen as particularly suitable for this market. Comparisons with the China trade suggest, however, that these images of women were not a universal patriarchal reflex, but were a specific calculated and directed response to a market which reflected sexis' and colonialist attitudes.

The cloths made in Lancashire for China clearly drew upon a concept of Chinese culture and society, as did the cloths for India, but from a Lancashire perspective China was a closed and largely mysterious society in the 1870s. The Chinese business community was virtually the sole point of contact between British and Chinese society, and apart from the trading ports controlled by foreign nations, Europeans were not encouraged to explore China. Much less Chinese fine and applied art was publicly available to designers in Britain than was the case for India, and this lack of familiarity, combined with a clichéd belief in the inscrutable nature of the Chinese character, led to a more circumspect attitude to the trade by the Lancashire industrialist.11

The main figurative cottons produced in Lancashire for the China trade were cotton brocades'12 employing motifs such as blossom, chrysanthemums, bamboo, cranes, medallions and swastikas, all of which were commonly used in Chinese design. Images of Chinese people were less frequently used in the cloths sent to China, but they were common in stamp and ticket design. A significant difference between the China and India trade is suggested by two collections of designs for China where there is evidence of Chinese intermediaries being employed to supply designs or to select from existing ranges of designs. One Manchester ticket-maker's archives contain a collection of the sources from which their designers worked, which include preliminary watercolour sketches produced in China.13 These consist of landscapes and interiors with static figures, drawn in conventional styles; very similar conventionalised portrayals of Chinese society are to be found in a volume of stamp impressions' which belonged to the Manchester exporters Sydney Hudson's. The Hudson designs date from around 1910-30.14 They are particularly revealing as the volume was annotated by the firm in 1917, in consultation with, among others, their Chinese agent. This agent, known as a compradore, represented the firm's interests in China and played a part in determining designs. Each of the Hudson stamp designs was systematically examined and judgment was passed in the form of a note recording: The compradore thinks that . . .'1s The compradore's assessment of the Chinese market is partly predictable: he did not approve of foreign’subjects such as tigers, camels, images of British life or any of the humorous' sketches. He chose subjects such as peacocks, eagles, carp or floral motifs, and only then if they employed stylistic elements from Chinese art.

He directed the firm away from politically sensitive subjects: the design showing a Chinese and a Japanese soldier raising their respective flags on a single flag-pole was not liked in China'.16 More subtle grounds for selection become clearer when we consider three stamp impressions, clearly copies of Chinese originals, one showing a handloom weaver seated at a simple loom and two others showing boys ploughing with oxen in the paddy fields. Despite their stylistic loyalty to certain eras of Chinese art, they were considered unsuitable. A similar judgment was passed on the image of a Chinese woman dressed in a brief riding garment, astride a prancing horse (see Fig. 2.3). All four images were taken from a fine-art genre which depicted everyday Chinese life; it was presumably this informality and the focus of attention on the lives of humble people which was considered unsuitable for massproduction and widespread distribution. But in the case of the woman on horseback, this lively image was possibly also rejected because it was regarded as too sensuous and too independent. The compradore's most enthusiastic comments were reserved for a series of designs which depicted formal groups of Chinese dressed in elaborate costumes and posed statically as in formal portraits, with women and children standing respectfully behind the men (see Fig. 2.4). Incorporated into the stamps' borders are slogans:

Perfect loyal. Perfect piety.

Happy children. The whole family full of joy.

Respectful joy makes happiness.17

The representations of Chinese women preferred by the compradore were similar to those found in other stamp, ticket and cloth designs. The women's faces, derived from stylistic elements in Chinese art, had only minimal indication of features; they were not shown as individuals but as doll-like figures. Their clothes were voluminous drapes, exaggerating this effect. The women were not important in their own right but were shown as elements in the correct representation of the family and society. These Lancashire images of Chinese women conformed to, and indeed were probably directly copied from, Chinese representations of a feminine ideal. Chinese women were depicted in their traditional place and only in relation to male power.18

The available sources for the China trade provide no evidence of the promotion of salacious or semi-pornographic images of women such as were used in India. Tickets produced in both an Indian' and aChinese’ version illustrate the closest the China trade appears to have come to accepting the risqué.19 In each case a couple sits on a wall beside a fountain, the backdrop being onion-domed buildings to denote Indian’ and pagodas to denoteChinese’. In the Indian’ example the couple have their arms around each others' necks and the woman holds the man round the waist; their knees are touching and they are looking into each others' eyes. In the ‘Chinese' example, apart from the woman's hand on the man's shoulder, loose clothing disguises whether or not they are touching; their knees are a respectable distance apart. The man's face is turned outwards and the woman appears to be looking past his left shoulder. This suggests an awareness of national sensibilities: it was realised that images which were considered slightly ‘daring' by some British males would be offensive in China, yet they were considered appropriate for the India trade.

An Anglo-centric view of women, transferred to specific representations of Indian women, was a reflection of other political relations between Britain and India. India had been effectively administered from Britain since the eighteenth century and under direct colonial rule since the middle of the nineteenth centurey, so the idea that British and Indian needs converged was well established by this time. Although China was increasingly slipping under the economic and political control of a number of foreign powers in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it still maintained its own administration. It also retained a strong sense of independent cultural identity, despite economic and political dependency. Britain, amongst other countries, extorted lucrative trading terms in return for protecting the administration from internal reform and nationalist dissent. In doing this, the British were party to the retention of Chinese traditions of female oppression, such as foot-binding and polygamy, although they were prepared to condemn them on moral grounds.20 If at this period China was able to resist Western forms of exploitative imagery, then the Hudson records also suggest that specifically Chinese manifestations of patriarchy could be substituted, and that Lancashire was a willing agent in this process. The interests of the Lancashire manufacturers and traders in China were clearly allied with the status quo; Lancashire cloths and advertising do not appear to have imposed preconceived notions of what was an attractive, saleable or suitable product, in the way they demonstrably did in India.

These fragmentary records of Lancashire's export trade, with the powerful representations of race and gender which they employed, are a clear statement of the breadth of colonial relations. Oppressive representations of women, linked to racial caricature and racially modified images, were potentially important means of cultural control. If they differed for different markets, what remained constant throughout was the power of the industry over the representation of women, and the representation of women without power.

## Notes

1 The sizing of cotton warps, ostensibly a means of strengthening the yarn, was from the 1850s also used to increase the weight of the cloth, since for the export trade cloth was sold by weight rather than length. The size washed away in use, leaving a far flimsier cloth.

2 These were partly substituted for the cheapest plain cloths which were temporarily excluded by India's attempts to balance trade. In 1859 and again in the 1860s and 1870s the Indian administration attempted to impose a tax of 10 per cent on the cheapest Lancashire cottons, so as to reduce their trade deficit. They were ultimately unsuccessful as the Lancashire industry was able to mobilise politicians who overturned the legislation.

3 The printed export cottons have been studied where they survive in Lancashire business collections, but the following discussion of the imagery of the export trade is based on a detailed study of the weaving industry. The developments in cotton print design have not been explored in similar detail.

4 These included a variety of different scenes of Indian and British people symbolically arranged with the Indians either physically lower than the British or in some humble role in relation to the powerful white man.

5 The advertising consisted of tickets', which were coloured and gummed labels, and ‘stamps', block-printed images used to complement the tickets. Both were applied to bales of export cottons as trade-marks and to indicate quality and technical details of the cloth. By the 1870s both had developed into very elaborate forms; they decreased in use after the 1920s, along with the general decline in the Lancashire cotton trade. Jacquard-woven cottons and block-printed stamps were similar in requiring motifs which could be reduced to semi-linear designs; they were usually produced in a single colour. The tickets were, by the 1870s, produced by chromolithography and were more complex than the cloths or stamps.

6 Archer, Mildred, Indian Popular Painting, HMsO, London, 1977, pp. 159–62, discusses the development of the printing industry in India and provides evidence for the popularity of the products of the few Indian presses able to print in colour in the 1880s.

7 See particularly the activities of the East India Company and its sponsorship of artists and photographers in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

8 Indian religious art portrayed women and men in a variety of symbolic and narrative scenes, often semi-naked, but within these traditions of representation women retained a powerful and selfpossessed status.

9 This series of designs survives in the Registered Design collection in the Public Record Office, BT.43. 401/312038/315758.

10 D. Taylor and Co., firm's private collection.

11 The officials of the East India Company had been accumulating Indian art and artefacts from the eighteenth century; this collection was opened as a public museum in London in 1801, under the auspices of the Company, later the India Office. Part of the textile collection amassed by the Company was dispersed to the textile districts in the 1860s and 1870s.There was no equivalent focus for Chinese art and design in Britain, although a small quantity of Chinese material existed in the India Museum.

12 The technical term ‘brocade' was used loosely in the Lancashire cotton industry to indicate any figured cotton.

13 D. Taylor and Co., firm's private collection.

14 S. Richards, private collection. The Taylor designs are undated but are also probably from the very late nineteenth or early twentieth centuries.

15 Sydney Hudson's impressions book, Richards' collection.

16 Ibid.

17 Ibid.

18 See also an unidentified pattern book, Lancashire Museums Service collection, Preston.

19 D. Taylor and Co., firm's private collection.

20 Various opposition movements had raised the issues of improving the position of women.