# Tarting Up Men: Menswear and Gender Dynamics

Juliet Ash

Menswear has existed for the last 30 years, but until 1984 its presentation was subordinate to womenswear. Even during the sixties, when Carnaby Street revamped the made-to-measure tailor and Take 6 displayed Liberty-print shirts alongside maroon jackets and flared velvet trousers, it was only the young, hippies and LSD-doused Burroughs clones who invested themselves and their money in such extravagances. On the catwalks of Paris and in London, Cardin, Courrèges and Mary Quant mostly exhibited for women. Women's peasant dresses lasted well into the seventies, so that eventually even staid postmistresses in Suffolk villages were sporting heaving cleavages, tuckered little sleeves and floating mudbespattered wrap-around skirts to the ankles at 11 o'clock in the morning.

Why 1984/5? What happened to menswear? In the way that women started talking about themselves as having been invisible' historically, culturally and politically in the seventies, so menswear started to be talked about in its own right in the realms of haute couture in 1984, in contrast to its previous invisibility'. Street fashion in Britain had come up with alternative male styles from time to time since the fifties: Bohemians had created Roman-togastyle extravaganzas during the early part of the nineteenth century and Beau Brummels and Oscar Wildes lavished attention on themselves as expressions of individual rebellion. Yet mainstream fashion in the last 200 years has stuck rigidly to the male supporting-cast role. From 1950 to 1980 men in fashion imagery were the besuited ghost-dancers behind the glittering ball gowns of the ‘New Look' (which wasn't new in 1947, but had been developing from the 1930s), the shockability mini-skirt or the pensive midi. Alternatively, men were the unisexual playmate in casual sportswear swinging the beach-bag for the swim-suited belle on the catwalk. There were changes, but only in details: a pocket, a cuff, the width of the trouser-leg, the merging of two different fabrics, the loosening of the jacket. And mostly it was in upmarket publications like Vogue Hommes that an observer of the fashion world could have got an indication of these subtle nuances of change in menswear.

Then, in 1984/5 designers indicated a new direction for menswear. This time it didn't come from the bottom or necessarily from the voung, although later it was to be interpreted by some old New-Men-styled socialists as not only a politics of gender, but one of generation'.1 The fashion media caught on to Jean-Paul Gaultier's men in skirts (see Fig.3.1) and coined the phrase the ‘New Man' to explain not merely a shift in dress but in consciousness also.

The dynamics of gender, age-old sexual conflicts and women's consciousness of inequalities were eradicated at a stroke. Male consciousness had been revolutionized in one year by one inflated image of ONE garment. But few actually wore the mini-skirt or sarong-cum-suit. And many young men's attitudes hadn't changed. Dress hadn't necessarily changed entrenched Yuppie or workingclass male attitudes to breastfeeding, contraception, homosexuality and trade unions. The new' men's fashion magazines, which have followed the design innovations in menswear, even the recently launched Arena (the appendage to the Face, which emerged in Winter 1986) could still sport a compulsory female pin-up. Camera focused up the crotch, decently photographed in black and white, Lisa Marie lounges against pillows with mini pulled up to her thighs. She is sandwiched between Tommy Nutter checked suit for £375 and black cashmere crew-neck sweater at Harrods. What's changed since Playboy?

All that had happened were two things. First, in the design world gay male designers at last had the confidence to design flamboyantly for their own sex instead of tarting up women in heteroinduced fantasies to disguise their desire for their own gender; and young women designers were similarly gaining the confidence to design clothes for men, whether through an acknowledgment of the challenge that designing menswear presented or through sheer lust. Secondly, encouraged by the stylistic theories of Peter York and the monetarist practice of Margaret Thatcher, the Yuppies came, creating and having a market created for them. As house prices rocketed to accommodate the wealthy young execs. so the chain stores opened Next for Men, Principles for Men etc. Designer shops in South Molton Street, Bayswater, Kensington and King's Road in London also opened menswear sections. This market explosion reshaped masculine dress but did not revolutionise ideology. It is a fascinating development as far as it affects the opportunities for young designers; it indicates the constant shifts in the producing and consuming of clothes, and it undoubtedly makes men more lovely to women. As objects of desire in their beautifully cut clothes and their daring combinations of cashmere and denim, their eyes now glance away from the camera, affecting the eternal coyness of Lady Di in power. Fashion designers themselves would be the first to admit that clothes may transform our lives from the dreary, may intimate the dream but they shouldn't be elevated beyond their function to become catalysts of universal political and/or ideological metamorphosis.

But in 1984/5 the media, and fashion magazines in particular, tailed design. The New Man emerged. He was all things to all people. On the one hand, he was talked of as a reassertion of male aggression and supremacy, with his increased spending power; on the other, he was presented as passive, more ‘effeminate’- an attribute inspired by gay men but now inverted as androgeny and asexuality. On the one hand, he embraced Rambo; on the other, he strutted in sarongs and tartan skirts. Design had pushed men's appearance to the limits, menswear was exciting, changing and ‘new', and everyone revelled in the scoops. Yet fashion design is merely an indicator of possibilities and entertains its own internal and external limitations. It cannot even be a conclusive explanation of the world of appearances and its makers are often as inarticulate about ideas connected with gender as their interpreters are verbose. At least the Face was honest in its comment on the New Man in frocks:

. . . the cynic favours the opinion that it's just another event in the fashion victim's diary: an obvious, ephemeral, reaction to Hard Times scruffiness.²

The article went on to describe Jean-Paul Gaultier's men in skirts epitomising the radical feminisation'- a term coined from the women's movement, meaning women separatists:

men with long locks, brocade waistcoats and Jermyn Street velvet slippers . . . next to girls cropping their hair, slipping into Calvin Klein Y-Fronts and patent Doc Martens.³

The magazine ID presented this in an overtly sexual female visual: two women in pinstripe city shirts, boxer shorts and jackets, making love, leaning tógether in a women's toilet.

Behind the emergence of this seeming gender reversal, exaggerated to universal (as far as some media prophets were concerned), asexual, heterosexual proportions and synonymous with the re-establishment of the right-wing values of the covert sexuality of the pinstriped adorned female, lay a slow fashionhistorical progression.

Rebellion in men's fashions was what the Teds did to the Edwardian frock-coat, what the Mods did with the mohair suit, what Punks did with men's hair. They were using fashion design for their own ends and aligned it to a search for politics, culture and an identity. Innovation in menswear was what Jean-Paul Gaultier did with the sarong and the mini-skirt and what women designers of menswear have done with the suit: the revealed concealment of the crutch in looser waistbands, freer upper leg and shorter jackets in, for example, Maria Conejo's designs.

The invention of the New Man as media type foresaw a genuine inventiveness and excitement concerning the design of menswear in the late eighties. But fashion journalists and others seemed to consider it valuable to interpret ideologically what was merely a design turn. In doing so the meaning of both design and men's aspirations became imbued with a plethora of ambiguous speculation.

What was more interesting than the New Man as fashion victim and consumer in 1984/5 was a development that was studiously avoided at that time by the media at large: the simultaneous advent of menswear designed by women designers, particularly in Britain . During the eighties many young women designers have started to branch out from the tradition of men and women designers designing more or less exclusively for women. The potential versatility of designing for both sexes has not escaped young women designers such as Caroline of The Geese in Manchester or even classic female designers such as Jean Muir, whose menswear appeared in Vogue, July 1986. This development culminated in the Autumn 1986 London fashion shows with the presentation of menswear and womenswear in most of the women designers' collections: for example, Ally Capellino, Wendy Dagworthy, Katherine Hamnett, Amanda Quarry and Elaine Challoner. This is less a result of the increasing body- and style-consciousness of men and more a sign of the increasing confidence of women designers with regard to their interest in and knowledge of the design traditions and limitations imposed on them when designing for men.

In practice, designing menswear embodies a subversion of conventional fashion design codes. Women designing menswear implies that it can be worn by women, since they were inspired to make it by enjoying the fabrics, the cut and the details. Menswear has traditionally been of better quality than womenswear, since menswear has fluctuated less in fashion terms and thus needed a higher standard in order to last longer. This provides a challenge for women designers in terms of the skills required to produce garments. But also, especially in Britain, the suit and its accessories provide another challenge for women designers in precisely how it can, in subtle ways, be subverted, ridiculed or made more flamboyant (see Fig. 3.2). One woman designer of menswear has used tie fabric round the edge of the collars of blazers, for example, and western boot-leg bows round the neck in conjunction with ‘traditional' suits. Yet they need not be totally traditional. Padded shoulders were, in this case, inserted in the pinstripe jacket, while the hipster trousers and belt hung down to a mid-point, accentuating the crutch. Young women designers' inheritance of pragmatic feminism in this way replies strongly and originally to the more anxious critique of ‘sexual objectification' launched by seventies’feminists against pornography and ‘sexist’ imagery of women. With the ideal man in mind (whether sexually desired by heterosexual women designers or merely appreciated in terms of the skilled cut of their garments by gay women designers), women fashion designers are beginning to dress men professionally, as men designers have dressed women for centuries. Together with this, women designers are revamping traditional male skills of tailoring and using accessories. The red felt bowler-hat, the tie-fabric collars and the pinstripe penis-hugging suit become signifiers of gender subversion, even sadism, in the hands of women. Alternatively, like the looser trousers mentioned earlier, the man's dressing-gown loses the sombre darkness of paisley or the short, velvet, tight fit of the Edwardian smoking-jacket to become a flowing-to-the-ground, loud, red-and-black print, freeing the body enfolded in fabric and unleashing a concealed potential for women's desires. The woman fashion designer has the potential to change both the gender dynamics of age-old designers' restrictions and the conventional adage that women are attracted to men's characters not their bodies.

The changing dynamics of menswear design had been effectively ignored until the media caught on to an obvious change in 1984. Yet it had already begun to happen in 1980. It started in an ironic way in the September 1980 issue of Vogue Hommes, in a review of the Paris winter collections entitled ‘Les Collections vues par Carole Laure et Just Jaekin'. A woman and a baby appeared, separately and suddenly, in the fashion pages. Up till then Vogue Hommes’fashion photography had contained static, full-frontal (highly covered) conventional men, on their own, in embarrassed stances with hands in pockets, eyes looking askance at the Emanuelle figure outof the frame. Suddenly Emanuelle herself appeared in the form of Carole Lauré, dressed as a man and taking a central position in the photograph. The men's attention was finally focused. They no longer needed to contemplate the horror of facing the camera lens or had to imagine the girl or boy of their dreams in the next photography studio. Even if they were gay models they could fix their eyes on a real narcissist – a woman. Their clothes were the reason for the photograph, yet the woman took centre stage. Men could return to their invisibility as long as women were there to take on the Déjeuner sur l’herbe’ role, even though fully clothed and in men's clothes. But what makes this different from previous imagery in Vogue Hommes is that women had entered a previously all-male enclave. Men were starting in 1980 to look to women for inspiration in the presentation of male dress and appearance, and this led to the beginnings of the effeminacy of structured menswear in the highest echelons of the fashion empire, the Paris collections.

Within the photographer's images a woman provided the supporting role, although not invisible', as traditionally men had been, but now, ironically, a pivotal focus for the image of menswear, not womenswear. The baby, hanging off the arm of a man in casuals, represented Peter York's ‘mothercare man', sensitive nurturing quiche-eater’.4 And in the Vogue Hommes of 1986, there are many children and babies to be seen with the male models. So men do everything now, even in the preserves conventionally allocated to women - the worlds of fashion and childcare. And women can do what only men used to be able to do: they can dress as men in a respectable sophisticated men's Paris fashion magazine. But I would suggest that although the imagery can be interpreted on a universal scale in terms of changing attitudes, it is more likely that, in the fashion world we are talking about, children are seen as an accessory to masculinity just as children in the seventies were accessories to the peasant-skirted female in the cornfields. The image of earth mother wasn't going to last once the work of rearing children started.

The possible objectifying of female desire, the emergence of sexually overt man, was to appear in the September 1982 issue of Vogue Hommes, with lavish displays of male flesh lounging in Calvin Klein underwear. But just as women narcissists have been fostered by imagery in the arts and media since time immemorial, so maybe this was a chance for male narcissism as much as for female desire. A retrenchment of gender-divided values underlies the seeming convergence of men and women's interest in the world of appearances and in particular in the representations of the fashion industry. If Vogue Hommes could present a changing image of masculinity in 1980 and 1982, then the male boom, the variegated imagery of masculinity, was to be an inevitability on the catwalks of 1984/5.

Wherever you looked, from Tatler and Harpers to the Observer and the Guardian, Time Out, the Face and ID, men were represented as clothes pegs for fashion ideas –.old or revamped; exposed as beautiful bodies in Bruce Weber photography; and scorned by York for pushing the pram or wanting to cry’.s Their salaries were given new outlets in chain stores throughout the country devoted to mass-appeal male consumption. All this was typified in the new phrase male fragrances', borrowed from the twenties’ Art déco period – a euphemism for male perfume.

To consider the sudden focus on masculinity is not to reveal a jealousy for such notoriety but to try and investigate what happened to the construction of men's clothes as part of a historical continuum rather than a masquerade of appearances.

The effeminacy of masculine appearance was to be universally talked about, but it remained virtually invisible on the streets. It was not a rebellion or confined to a particular sub-culture, gender proclivity or specific age-range. It indicated a desire for change but ran parallel to entrenchment culturally, ideologically, economically and politically. Class differences had widened so that chain stores (such as Concept Man and Next for Men) could attempt to popularise the haute couture trend but unemployment and low wages would ensure that many men would be unaware of these trends, or, even if they were aware of them, would be unable to afford the clothes while children were going hungry and the rent was still to be found. It was probably easier to stick to Rambo and more economically viable to become a casual’, even if it did mean hunting around for the right labels.

The last historical period to espouse effeminacy, coopt male narcissism as an attribute of the establishment and attempt to popularise extremes of ornamentation in male dress was during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in England and before the Revolution of 1789 in France. As the court in England and France became more and more established during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, so the extremes of male dress increased (see Fig. 3.2). During the Jacobean period brilliant-red high-heels were fashionable for men and muffs were worn.

It makes one wonder whether male anorexics existed in the seventeenth century and why no one has written about the history of men's masochism with regard to fashion, especially as more and more is revealed about the sexual delights of middle-class female masochism during the nineteenth-century age of crinolines and corsetry.

Cromwell and the Roundheads attempted to curb the extravagances of aristocratic Britain, but with the defeat of the English Republic after Cromwell's death, aristocratic values returned with the Restoration and the court of Charles II. In terms of fashion, the Restoration took up where the Cavaliers left off, reintroducing long-skirted coats for men, making use of elaborate silks (whose production had been established by immigrant silk-weavers in Spitalfields in the 1580s) amd encouraging the growth of the periwig to the most ludicrous proportions. This was done in order to exhibit upper-class male wealth and status and to confront the sober dogmas of the Cromwellian period.

It was in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries that the cleric, doctor and lawyer evolved their own distinctive hairstyle. The male (long-haired) wig became a symbol of establishment authority. Or, as Roy Porter puts it:

Distinctions in dress were cameos of status and occupation . . , wigs, accessories and stuccoed cosmetics, modes of dress and undress, could reveal rank, age and even politics . . .⁶

The more weighty the wig, and particularly during periods of fashionably short hair for men, the more supposedly effeminate' the male appearance, the more power could be wielded by judges, doctors and solicitors. Although doctors’wigs were to fade, for both practical and fashionable reasons, Rembrandt's Anatomy Lesson’ remains a magnificent testimony to the medical establishment's pomposity as the bewigged doctors arrange themselves around the corpse.

Dickens, in Bleak House, describes the law courts:

Below the table, again, was a long row of solicitors, with bundles of papers . . . and then there were the gentlemen of the bar in wigs and gowns - some awake and some asleep . . . to see all that full dress and ceremony and to think of the waste and want, and beggared misery it represented.7

In France also Louis XIV's influence meant greater and greater emphasis on conspicuous wealth, symbolised by the men's wearing larger and larger hats, longer and longer wigs, moré silk, ribbons, frills and ornamentation in the brocade used down the centre of a frock-coat or round the cuffs. Despite the fact that tailoring remained basically the same for all classes, the peasants, unlike the aristocracy, rarely wore skirts, and the upper-class effeminisation of masculinity was completed with elaborate use of cosmetics and painting'. The underlying seedy eroticism and debased culture of the eighteenth-century effeminate upper-class male is nowhere better exemplified than in the film The Draughtsman's Contract.

Vogue Hommes, not the most radical of magazines, admits that it was the rise of the sans-culottes’ during the French Revolution that radicalised male dress and returned Europe to a more universal functionality:

. .. on croyait qu’ils allaient nus. Diantre non. Ils étaient les seuls au contraire à porter des pantalons. Ils allaient donc ‘sans culottes’, c’est dire si le pantalon était d’un vulgaire achève. Mais soit, notre homme au costume 3- pièces est déjà pantaloné . . .8\*

So the suit was to continue from the French Revolution to the present day, going from strength to strength, changing in detail but never loosening its grip on the male form. The aristocratic male frock was effectively guillotined. The suit might espouse the frockcoat, as between the 1820s and 1860s, but the ornamentation of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was replaced by bourgeois utilitarian values, symbolised by the sober respectability and equally status-conscious suit or three-piece. Pleats in the waist of the trousers (or pantalons) would come and go, buttons would be replaced by cuff-links or hooks, lengths and breadths of jackets would vary, but the basic tailoring would remain the same. It even emerged in the fifties and sixties as the epitome of capitalist sobriety and male pecuniary power in the City of London, Wall Street and Tokyo. It re-emerged in the eighties as Yuppie garb, featuring ‘The Duke of York’ as star, as described in the Face, March 1983:

Peter York – a pre-modern, prima fascist Prima Donna, perched on his pinstripes right down to his last cuffed detail. A miniature Mephistopheles mocking the majority . . .9

It was all too convenient for the media to turn to the concept of the ‘New Man'; it was inevitable that it should occur after the New Woman' of the seventies, and it was inevitable that, in terms of a specialised fashion design dynamic, it should occur in 1984/5. But in reversing roles in appearance, even temporarily, it did little more than indicate possible changes in menswear design in the coming years. It did not mean that men would change their characters overnight or indeed that they wanted to, nor that women wanted them to. It may have meant only that some men would become more dress-conscious, and a lot of money would be made and spent on thenew' market. As many fashion students have said: Where else was thére to go? It's all been done before in womenswear.'

The New Man was an irrelevant invention because it took as fact the equation that exciting, more effeminate menswear equalled a change in men's consciousness. If anything, the initial extremism of men in skirts was a retrograde move, since it gave the appearance of men changing their roles in society from doer to decoration. It was inevitable that it would merely herald the more wearable, dynamic designs which were to occur in the late eighties. Gender norms are now being challenged by the clothing of men by women designers not merely by men donning a female' piece of apparel, the skirt. It is to the designers, the makers of the images, as much as to the products and consumers that we should turn for our inspiration.

The Face said maybe the New Man is just a fad . .  in the fashion world.’1º But fads in the media operate as gross magnifications of rapidly changing seasonal trends in fashion design. Put the large lens of the media together with the little lens of haute couture and the combined effect is 100-fold enlargement. This apparent enlargement is so dramatic that the reader begins to feel reality has changed. It was a fad as far as journalists (the big lens) were concerned, but for women designers and haute çouture (the little lens) menswear has become visible in its own right in collections, and this is a major breakthrough in design terms. But the ephemeral' vacuousness of the New Man of the eighties remains to be seduced by clothes designed by women for men.

The New Man of the eighties was and is not new, and neither is he rebellious, although he is stylistically colourful and exciting in a specialised haute couture sense. He is an off-shoot of an established élite who germinated from the catwalks of Paris, London and Milan and were cultivated in provincal chain stores up and down the country to take over from Burtons and Hepworths, with the intention of filling Nigel Lawson's coffers.

Women fashion designers still have a long way to go in moulding menswear, buì they have their fingers on the buttons.

## Notes

1 Mart, Frank, Images change: High street style and the new man', New Socialist, November 1986.

2 'Men's where', Face, November 1984.

3 Ibid.

4 York, Peter, Man-Ism’, Harpers, November 1984, p. 212.

6 Porter, Roy, English Society in the 18th Century, Penguin Harmondsworth, 1982, p. 166.

7 Dickens, Charles, Bleak House, Signet Classic edition, 1964, pp. 354-5.

8 ‘La véritable histoire de costume 3 pièces', Vogue Hommes, September 1984, p. 155.

9 Letter from Finnualla of St John's Wood, Letters Page, Face, March 1983.

Images of Difference

10 Men's where', Face, November 1984.