# From Alcatraz to the OK Corral: Images of Class and Gender

Jos Boys

The ideas that architects and government decision-makers have had about proper'’ working-class family life and the role of women since the Second World War have affected public-sector housing design. Unfortunately these ideas don't have much in common with the everyday experiences of the different groups of women living in public housing. What, then, were these ideas about women, community and class? How have they affected the actual design of housing? How have they changed in the last 40 years? What impact have they made on the lives of women? Changes in the idea of community underlie the shift from the modern block of flats in public housing provision to more vernacular forms and styles in recent years. First, housing policy practice and design have been affected by a shift in ideas from the image of the working class popular in the 1950s as homogeneous, self-reliant and organised, to a re-emergence of conservatism in the 1970s and 1980s, where middle-class and respectable' working-class values of competition and individuality are seen to be combined, leaving behind a marginalised ‘underclass'. Second, the impact of the changing images of the family has produced a shift from notions of a vigorous working-class street life and an emphasis on community to a concentration on individual family domesticity and privacy.

While these changes do reflect popular opinion about better housing, they oversimplify the realities of life for different groups of women in society. Such ideas attempt to use design as a solution for social conflicts (for instance differential class status or racism), economic inequalities in access to housing, and problems connected with the role of women iņ society. Here it will be shown that these design changes do not make underlying problems go away. However, design does affect the impact of these problems on different groups of women – often in ways unintended by architects and decision-makers.

## The Working Class: An Ideal Community?

When architectural historian and critic Peter Reyner Banham reviewed the progress of a large public housing estate in Sheffield (Park Hill, built 1957–61) in 1973, he suggested that the scheme's continuing success (or at least lack of spectacular failure) was related to its design by architectswho fiercely believed that the working classes are a very special breed of folk with a unique (Young and Wilmott) way of life that should be supported.'¹ Banham frequently cites the sociological studies of Michael Young and Peter Wilmott as a direct influence on architectural ideas about working-class families and their social behaviour.² While schemes like Park Hill were designed before Young and Wilmott published their research, the ideas about working-class people corresponded with the dominant threads in the political imagery of the new welfare state.³

First published in 1957, Young and Wilmott's book Family and Kinship in East London called for the retention of working-class people in inner city areas at a time when their dispersal to outlying suburban cottage estates was still a major plank of housing policy. Young and Wilmott's case study of Bethnal Green offered an affectionate account of a strong, stable working-class community maintained through support networks provided by women. In the study they look at the effects on social life of a move to a suburban estate, called Greenleigh. A chapter entitled Keeping Themselves to Themselves' highlighted female isolation in the home and an emphasis on status, competitiveness and material possessions - developments which Young and Wilmott found worryingly middle class.

There are now many criticisms of this study,⁴ but at the time it appeared it seemed to have caught a popular mood, particularly among ‘progressives', and it reinforced inter-war accounts of suburban estate life, such as Ruth Durant's 1939 study of Watling. Her research also described the problems of loneliness for women, the lack of facilities and the effects on men of long journeys to work, which tired them and reduced social life, with, as she says, fatigue and worry keeping the family at home.'s These descriptions of a lack of social vitality mirrored architectural criticisms of the visual monotony of inter-war speculative house building, suburban sprawl and council cottage estates, with what the architectural press called their prairie planning’ and SLOAP (space left over after planning)6.

Thus the scene was being set for a shift away from suburban development towards inner city flat building as the major publicsector provision by both Labour and Conservative governments through the 1950s and 1960s. First, the low-density suburban housing schemes of the 1930s and early 1950s were seen as socially boring; second, these new developments seemed to break up traditional' working-class communities; and third, their inhabitants were replacing a rich and informal social life with competitive and isolated individuality. The answer, then, was to provide more new housing within the cities themselves, in a way which reflected the ‘natural' working-class community in its design. As Patrick Dunleavy shows,7 these ideas were linked to other major political pressures: the unwillingness of outer area authorities to take inner city tenants in large numbers; the reintroduction of slum-clearance programmes in 1954, requiring a huge, complementary public rehousing programme specifically for poor working-class people; and the assumption that inner city housing had to be built at high densities.

This idea of community' was in fact a particular understanding, in its enthusiasm for both the urban setting and specifically working-class values. Others saw community’ in a more traditional way as most naturally' present in a rural, village-like environment, with its assumed balance of social classes. Aneurin Bevan, Labour's Minister responsible for housing policy, told the Commons in 1949:

. . . if we are to enable citizens to lead a full life, if they are each to be aware of the problems of their neighbours, then they should all be drawn from the different sections of the community and we should try to introduce in our modern villages what was always the lovely feature of English and Welsh villages, where the doctor, the grocer, the butcher and farm labourer all lived in the same street . . . I believe it leads to the enrichment of every member of the community to live in communities of that sort.8

Under Bevan's influence the 1949 Housing Act left out the term working class’ and the public housing programme was for general' rather than ‘special' needs, that is, for all social classes. In architecture and planning the appropriate spatial interpretation of this preferred social mix was, first, new and expanded towns, and, second, mixed development, that is, a combination of flats, maisonettes and houses with gardens, usually arranged as separate blocks in a parkland setting. To architects and politicians, mixed development symbolised harmonious social heterogeneity through its variety of visual treatments and housing types picturesquely' arranged in the landscape. It was also argued that some more desirable but expensive houses and gardens could be provided on costly inner city land by the savings made on building flats and maisonettes.9 However, given the immediate post-war economic crisis, proposals for a general-needs housing programme were little more than a simplistic dream. As David McKay and Andrew Cox¹º note, despite the 1949 Housing Act, the underlying consensus across political parties was that inner city public-sector housing was for the working class, in particular the poorer sections of workingclass people.

Among architects a series of parallel debates was taking place, with a shift from designs symbolising social mix to new images of the working class in particular. This shift was epitomised by a mixed-development housing scheme built by the London County Council at Roehampton between 1952 and 1959. The site of 130 acres, which was originally the grounds of a single estate laid out in the eighteenth-century picturesque landscape tradition, was now to be developed with a mixture of high blocks, fourand two-storey terraces and old people's dwellings at a density of 100 to the acre, and built in two stages, Alton East and Alton West. The architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner describes the difference between these two sections, which highlights a more general change in attitude among housing architects in this period.

. . . there is a very noticeable change between Alton East and Alton West . . . The earlier buildings are faced with pale-cream brick and have lively projections and recessions in outline. The earlier maisonettes and cottages have roofs of a gentler pitch. The whole combines perfectly with the picturesque plan, the winding streets and informally placed trees. It is architecture at ease. The later architecture is exacting. It is highly intelligent, concentrated, of great integrity, crisp and precise. The point blocks are completely flat in their elevation. Nothing must stick out. The maisonettes have flat roofs and windowless end walls and the slabs are extremely interesting 'but unquestionably ruthless in their rhythm.11

The first approach represented the humane' attitude, adapted from Scandinavian design and most common in early new and expanded towns such as Harlow, Stevenage and Crawley. The second approach became identified with the writings of English architects Alison and Peter Smithson and Team 10 (an international grouping of architects). Called ‘Brutalism', it was concerned with avoiding the most mechanistic ideas of the earlier Modernists such as Le Corbusier. Like Young and Wilmott, the Brutalists showed considerable interest in the intricacies of human association'. However, they also wanted a more honest' approach to appearances - what Anthony Jackson refers to as a rougher gregariousness, supposedly more in character with working-class habits'.12 As the Smithsons themselves write:

drag a rough poetry out of the confused and powerful forces which are at work.13

This ‘rugged grandeur'14 was seen as a modern version of the neo-classical housing design of Georgian London. It both continued the mathematical rationality of the style, with its emphasis on plainness and proportion, and had an ordinariness' similar to eighteenth-century mass-produced'terraced housing. This argument was used to justify repetitive units on a large scale, which were to stand symbolically for working-class unity, solidarity and egalitarianism. Simultaneously, a more rational, mathematical (and therefore more ‘masculine') approach was being offered against the perceived cosiness' of the immediate post-war style of mixed development and the planning of new towns – what Banham calls ‘the debilitating effects of the picturesque'’1s and Lionel Esher, a puritanical protest against the sentimentality, the effeminacy and the triviality of the Festival/New Town/Coventry style'.16 There are echoes here of Richard Hoggart's description of working-class life as elaborate and disorderly yet sober: it is not chintzy or kittenish or whimsical or“feminised"’17

How, then, did ideas about the working-class community add to this notion of solid, unpretentious virtue in affecting housing design? The answer came in a new emphasis on the urban street, particularly in the development of wide access balconies known by architects as ‘streets in the air'. At Park Hill, Sheffield (designed 1953-5, built 1957-61), this idea has its most fluent interpretation.18 Here 3,500 people were housed in a continuous block overlooking the town centre. To the architects, Ivor Smith and Jack Lynn, the access decks were seen as a direct continuation of earlier urban housing and could solve the social isolation of women in both outlying estates and the high flat block by reintroducing street life. As Jack Lynn wrote:

. . . centuries of peace and a hundred years of housing reform in this country have given us the open street approachable from either end and off which every house is entered directly by its own front door - a simple arrangement which gave complete freedom to come and to go, to meet or avoid whom we pleased.19

## At Park Hill, this was translated into the following terms:

Access to the dwellings themselves is by means of pedestrian street decks or Rows. At Park Hill, in place of the four-foot wide balcony serving every floor, promenade decks ten-foot wide, open to the air, are provided on every third floor within the main building mass . . . The front doors to the dwellings open from the decks, which of course are much more commodious than the normal balcony and fulfil the function of ‘streets' within the building, along which prams can be pushed and milk trolleys driven. Being covered from the weather and free from normal vehicular traffic they are ideal places for daily social contact.20

This underlying image of working-class community as street life therefore appeared to resolve the problem of women's isolation in the home by facilitating informal social contact. The overall appearance, with its symbolism of the (repetitive) unity and rugged grandeur’ of working-class people, seemed to solve the problem of how to provide a large amount of public housing for the poor and do so cheaply. Thus within architectural debates problematic social and economic inequalities were dealt with in design terms with its resulting impact on the lives of different groups of women.

## The Realities of Community'

Housing policy in this period was relatively simplistic, with both the Labour and Conservative parties supporting major public housing programmes, albeit for different reasons. Whilst Labour concentrated on public housing, Conservatives saw public provision as a short-term solution to replacing slums. Underlying these policies, however, was considerable agreement on a simple division between inner city flat building for very poor households and suburban housing estates for the better-off. There was little or no analysis of the dynamics of the housing market and the effects on it of government policy, or of the extent to which such housing provision was meeting the needs of different types of households. Both Conservative and Labour governments supported inner city public-sector flat building, with its emphasis on high flats and industrialised building methods, until Labour cut back on high flat subsidies in 1967. Architectural ideas about what forms were appropriate for the inner city working class fitted in with political demands for a mass-quantity, high-density housing programme. First, the shift away from an image of blocks in a parkland setting to blocks interconnected by high-level walkways set the scene (even if unintentionally) for a much closer packing of high blocks and no mixed development. Second, the resolutely urban and tough but ordinary' Brutalism enabled an easy slide into cruder finishes and a lack of detail or variety. Third, the connection between images of a homogeneous, egalitarian working class and repetitive units on a large scale provided an all too easy slippage into an acceptance of high-rise industrialised house building programmes whose designs were determined almost entirely by building contractors. Whilst the forms of housing originated in ideas about working-class community, much high-rise housing built in the boom between 1965 and 1968 was based solely on economics.21

The myth of a homogeneous and egalitarian working class was also directly contradicted by allocation policies. In the early postwar years, as Marion Roberts shows,2² allocation depended very much on respectability', defined by high standards of housekeeping and the ability to pay rent regularly. With the reintroduction of the slum-clearance programmes in the early 1950s, many poor workingclass households who were displaced were able to obtain a council flat or house previously available only to the more affluent, who could afford the rents on suburban estates. Most council allocation policies were clear. Households were respectable' or ‘nonrespectable' and were placed in good’ or bad’ property accordingly. Thus allocation reflected a different set of notions about workingclass communities based on perceived social divisions within the class itself. Slum-clearance policies contained similar ideas. Slum clearance worked on a very different image of the working class to the one previously described.23 At Park Hill, the old terraced housing had been cleared specifically to break up an area thought to contain working-class criminals. In 1963, Wilfred Burns, soon to be Chief Planner at the Department of the Environment and responsible for redevelopment schemes in Coventry and Newcastle upon Tyne, could write:

In a huge city, it is a fairly common observation that the dwellers in a slum area are almost a separate race of people, with different values, aspirations and ways of living . . . One result of slum clearance is that a considerable movement of people takes place over long distances, with devastating effects on the social groupings built up over the years. But, one might argue, this is a good thing when we are dealing with people who have no initiative or civic pride. The task, surely, is to break up such groups evén though the people seem to be satisfied with their miserable environment and seem to enjoy an extrovert social life in their own locality.24

With these assumptions, housing officials and politicians in the 1950s and 1960s saw some slum dwellers'resistance to flats as parochial and reactionary, took a rather sweeping approach to condemning both fit and unfit dwellings²⁵ and showed very little interest in the actual social mix, household type or income distribution in areas designated for slum clearance. Concepts such as community’ or slum', then, obscured the realities of slum clearance and redevelopment and the complex effects they had on different groups of people. The new high-rise housing certainly lackedcommunity’ in the romanticised sense architects used, and in any case it was increasingly being divided by allocation policies into high-quality and ‘sink’ estates. This division threatened to define the degree of ‘respectability' tenants had merely by the location and type of estate they lived on. Popular images of housing in this period certainly refused to agree with architects’images of 'rugged grandeur' and ‘streets in the air'. Instead residents commonly chose nicknames from barracks, prisons and concentration camps such as Alcatraz or Colditz.

Yet underlying the sociological accounts of high-rise housing was the continuing search for this elusive working-class community' which had so influenced the work of both Ruth Durant in the 1930s and Young and Wilmott in the 1950s. This in turn makes it difficult for us, looking back, to assess the effects on women of a shift from poor-quality slum dwelling to‘modern' council houses and flats.

Pearl Jephcott's research on high-rise living in the late 1960s described the problems, particularly for women, of poor transport, inadequate or expensive local shops and lack of play space which Durant and Young and Wilmott had found in suburban settings.26 To Jephcott, as to Durant, it was the combination of poverty with a particular built environment that produced difficulties. Poverty restricted choices in using the city. It meant less likelihood of a car or a nanny, little chance of using restaurants or theatres. Problems with inadequate lifts and an inhospitable housing environment could only make this worse, particularly for women with young children or the elderly, already restricted in their mobility.

But Jephcott's interviews also show a considerable enthusiasm by many tenants:

Perhaps the fact that the new flat represents a rise in family social standards encourages people to keep themselves to themselves. Those met in the study certainly set a high value on the new privacy, even when they regretted losing certain features of the old intimate character of workingclass life.27

Like the other sociologists, Jephcott regrets what she sees as a shift away from working-class community. Whilst her analysis considers poverty, her solution considers ways of ‘improving' community through the provision of community centres and informal meeting places at lifts, etc., to ‘enhance' social contact. Such notions are all too close to the ideas behind modern flat design in the first place. They fail to place high-rise housing in its wider political, social and economic context – both in terms of how it was provided and its effects on different women relative to their income, social role, race or mobility.

In the early 1970s working-class community'was discovered anew – this time in a nostalgic memory of slum areas, so recently vilified as the homes of criminal and non-respectable working-class people. Of course, the old slums were neither all supportive, friendly communities nor absolute dens of iniquity. Instead, they were a complex mixture where sheer poverty was the underlying force behind both mutual aid and petty thieving. But yet again we see the debate on housing contained by stereotyped images. Thus in the 1970s there was a wholesale shift in housing policy aimed at retaining existing communities'. Inner city housing rehabilitation and renewal (with an associated cut in public-sector housing expenditure), and a renewed emphasis on owner-occupation, began to create new patterns of housing form, tenure and use. That improving slum housing was forcing out low-income groups (the idealised working-class community) as rent levels rose and property became owner-occupied was ignored.

## From Community to Territory

As early as 1961 an alternative imagery for high-density, low-rise estates was being developed: brick-clad estates around a series of garden' courtyards. Lillington Gardens in Pimlico, London by architects Darbourne and Darke (see Fig. 4.1) was the first major commission using this approach and was taken up by elements of the architectural press as a welcome return to middle-class values:

[Darbourne and Darke] have begun changing the image' as we say. There are many sides to this subtle, yet decisive feat. There is, for example, the side which is concerned with knitting the new with the pre-existing non-municipal surroundings. Closely related to this is the side which aims to produce an image of organic growth, such as you get in free, unsubsidiséd communities in place of the image of planned-from-above, all-at-one-time. Then there is the side which is concerned with the individual unit. Under the impulse of collectivisation in the fifties, the home has become transmogrified and absorbed into something bigger than itself. Homes have become clutches of serviced cells. Slowly, in many aspects of this firm's work, these are being drawn back into a unity and you have the image of home once more . . . It could be argued that what they have done is to middle-classify the council house, but there is more to their achievement than that. Their approach should be seen as an expression of the idea that the egalitarian society is more easily realised by building on the middle class’ than it is by building on the old notion of theworking class'.28

By the 1970s the popular consensus seemed to be that modern housing design did not represent a homogeneous and valued working class but state bureaucracy and facelessness. The new domesticity’ of Lillington Gardens and its later versions, however, still meant large public building schemes retaining the access balconies and cheap municipal lifts of more explicitly modern' designs. Nevertheless, the new aesthetic it proposed became increasingly popular with local authorities and was referred to as ‘neo-vernacular'.

In the early 1970s, Essex County Counċil produced design guidance for private developers, entitled A Design Guide for Residential Areas, which set out a sophisticated working of these ideas and had considerable popularity not just in East Anglia but in Britain as a whole. As John Punter writes:

The Guide incorporated many established principles of townscape and urban design (scale, enclosure, static/ dynamic space, etc.) with more controversial ideas about the treatment of elevations (unity, restful/lack of repose, balance) and linked these with study of the local Essex vernacular tradition in house styles and materials . . . The Guide rapidly began to influence the design of new development, not least because it offered developers significant savings in land servicing and highways costs. While these were partly offset by the requirements of detailed design it was evident that, even in a period of recession, the neo-vernacular styles and compact layouts offered a differentiated product that appealed to the rural nostalgia village in the mind' mentality of many suburban owner-occupiers.29

Other authors continued to conflate these picturesque ruralesque arrangements with family life, privacy and domesticity. Meanwhile, high inflation was forcing both public- and private-sector house building into smaller and more compact housing both inside and out (see Fig. 4.2).

In his book The Village in the City, 1973, Nick Taylor argues, through a history of suburban development, that the suburban house is anatural' form for ensuring the sanctity of family life.30 His emphasis on a whole series of virtues from the illusion’ of ownership to the seclusion and intimacy of private garden space is very reminiscent of the Victorian bourgeoisie.31 Unlike Young and Wilmott, Taylor believes that keeping yourself to yourself is a virtue for working-class people, here combined with a romanticisation of women's traditional roles and the ‘feminine’in architecture. Of suburban houses built in the Queen Anne style at the turn of the century, for instance, he writes approvingly:

It was style not merely bourgeois but feminine, being neatly domesticated in a manner appropriate to a generation which was at least giving women an opportunity to express themselves culturally.32

Ideas about the improvement of existing public-sector estates were concerned not with privacy per se but with a version of it: the concept of territory'. These ideas are best illustrated in Oscar Newman's book Defensible Space, originally published in 1966, and much more recently in Utopia on Trial, 1984, by Alice Coleman, which has been very popular with local authorities attempting to improve safety on their estates.33

Territoriality calls for the privatisation of as much space around dwellings as possible to enable its ‘natural’ surveillance by individual households. By this means intruders' can be recognised and questioned. To Coleman this means a reduction of all communal space, including the removal of children's play areas. While cynics might say that this approach simply enables local authorities to reduce their responsibilities for public area maintenance, to Coleman it has much deeper psychological consequences. He assumes a direct relationship between houses with gardens freely chosen’in the private market and acceptable social behaviour.Respectability’ thus relates to housing design rather than to, say, income levels.

The.notion of territoriality, however, unlike privacy, contains within it a new version of community. It implies that the social cohesion of a group is generated and maintained by keeping nongroup members – strangers and potential criminals – out. In many schemes developed out ōf the neo-vernacular of Darbourne and Darke and the Essex Design Guide, influenced by popular interpretations of territoriality, architects have developed a symbolic language intended to indicate degrees of private and public property. Here certain kinds of spatial arrangements have the effect of drawing people in and others of keeping them out. As I have described elsewhere,34 such ideas are based on a misunderstanding of social interaction and the relationship between social processes and the built environment. A concept such as territory' attempts to describe complex social, political, economic and environmental problems in universal, apolitical and symbolic terms, just as community' tried - and failed - to do in previous periods. Although the idea of ‘territory' is supposedly neutral and above politics, it actually overlaps with political ideas in a problematic and obscuring way. For instance, design ideas about territory and defensible space have become interwoven with what Errol Lawrence calls common-sense racist ideologies'.3s In the new Toryism, black households become synonymous with problem'families, partly because of poverty but also because of the linked ideas of inadequate family', criminal youth'and cultural deprivation' that surround black people in particular. The stranger' to be kept out can then be blurred with both the criminal' and the alien' presence conflated in racist ideas about young black males' propensity for crime. All of these images combine to appear threatening to the supposed homogeneity of society – that is, white society - at both national and local levels. And struggles over housing provision related to poverty, racism and the sexual division of labour (which affect any individual's access to housing and their use of the local environment) become merely crime prevention'.

In appearance, the improvement of estates again emphasises traditional design elements associated with an idealised rural family life. The overall imagery relies on the rural and domestic motifs of pitched, tiled roofs and wooden windows, panelling and fences, but in a way that is nevertheless different to both privatesector and earlier suburban public housing estates. As one tenant of a newly refurbished North London estate commented, It's like the OK Corral.'

Thus in public-sector housing there has developed an imagery of individuality and domesticity, with an emphasis on brick-detailing arranged picturesquely in a series of courtyards. This has been combined with an image of social respectability to be maintained by keeping strangers out. Again, the heterogeneity of working-class people is obscured and family life romanticised. What the effects of these resulting housing forms are on their occupants and on women in particular urgently need examining.

## Class, Gender and Housing Design

This article has provided an outline of changing attitudes to the working class, to women and the family, and their effects on public housing design in post-war Britain. It is only on outline and does not deal with the complexity resulting from different individual interpretations, varying political and economic processes and differences in local conditions. Nevertheless, the evidence does seem to suggest that public housing designers justify particular housing forms by their perceived appropriateness to a particular image of working-class and/or family life. In the post-war period in Britain local and national housing policy has certainly reflected and reinforced these various stereotypes.

But for women, the ideas developed from such abstract notions as community' show little understanding of the everyday experiences of combining housework, employment and childcare, usually on low incomes. They show little understanding of the heterogeneity of working-class life and of problematic social relations within the working class concerning definitions of respectability and non-respectability, which often show themselves as racism, harassment, or marginalisation of problem’families.

Part of the problem, then, lies in the way in which architects and politicians relate social behaviour and physical design through universal and apolitical concepts such as community, territory or the inherent'respectability of a house with a garden. Physical forms then come to stand for a particular set of social relations in an unproblematic way, outside a particular political, social and economic context.

Many accounts of high-rise housing, for instance, accuse architects of environmental determinism', that is, of believing that physical form directly determines individual behaviour. Here, I have suggested that architects, rather than positing direct cause and effect, offer instead a blurring together of social and physical concepts so that each reflects and reinforces the other. This is not something they used to do with high-rise modern designs and now no longer do; it is still the underlying conceptual framework within which ideas about class and gender are placed. In this way many underlying contradictions in housing provision can be ignored or obscured: for example, the problem of improving housing standards for the poorest households without challenging the economics of the housing market, or of changing the material conditions of the home without considering its effects on the sexual division of labour, or of dealing with the complexity of economics and social relations in the provision of housing.

Instead, concepts such as‘community' or territory' stand for a much more complex social, economic and political process, where access to, and use of, ħousing is dependent on both economic position and social role (that is, an intricate mixture of class, gender, race, age, mobility, etc.) and where the availability of housing is dependent on the historical development of capitalist processes and patterns of state intervention.

Design based on the simple ideas described above hasn't made the underlying problems go away and can make them worse. Unless we can move beyond simplistic concepts of working-class family life, housing design will continue to exaggerate rather than ameliorate inequalities in housing provision and its use.

## Notes

1 Banham, Peter Reyner, The Parkhill Victory’, New Society, 18 October 1973.

2 In the New Society article quoted above, Banham writes, I was convinced that {by] grouping all the front doors of the apartments in to a street-type relationship, the deck would also promote patterns ofcommunity’ that I, like the rest of my generation, had swallowed whole from those great mythmakers of our time, Wilmott and Young' (p. 154). He also refers to Young and Wilmott in his book The Brutalism: Ethic or Aesthetic?, Architectural Press, London, 1966, and Coronation Street, Hoggartsborough’, New Statesman, 9 February 1962, p. 200.

3 See, for example, Laing, Stuart, Representations of Working-class Life 1957–1964, Macmillan, London, 1986, pp. 37–43.

4 Steedman, Caroline, Landscape for a Good Woman, Virago, London, 1986, p. 19.

5 Durant, Ruth, Watling: A Social Survey, P. S. King and Son Ltd, 1939, p. 118.

6 See, for example, Nairn, Ian, Subtopia', Architectural Review, June 1956, andCounter-Attack', Architectural Review, December 1956.

7 Dunleavy, Patrick, Mass Housing in Britain 1945–1975, Clarendon Press, London, 1981.

8 Aneurin Bevan, HoC Debate 426, 1949, Vol. 2126, quoted in McKay, David H., and Cox, Andrew W., The Politics of Urban Change, Croom Helm, Beckenham, 1979, p. 118.

9 See Robert Haynes, Design and Image in English Urban Housing 1945-1957', unpublished M.Phil thesis, University College, London, 1976. This describes the LCC’s official adoption of mixed development and its support for building houses with gardens. In fact, the LCC built 13,102 flats and only 81 houses between 1945 and 1951. See Scoffham, E. R., The Shape of British Housing, George Godwin, London, pp. 59–78.

10 Mckay and Cox, op. cit., p. 119.

11 Pevsner, Nikolaus, Roehampton: LCC housing and the picturesque tradition', Architectural Review, July 1959, p. 35.

12 Jackson, Anthony, The Politics of Architecture: A History of Modern Architecture in Britain, Architectural Press, London, 1970, p. 159.

13 Smithson, Alison and Peter, Architectural Design, 1957.

14 Banham, op. cit.

15 Banham, Peter Reyner, Revenge of the Picturesque’, in Summerson, John, ed., Concerning Architecture, WHO, London, 1968, pp. 265–73.

16 Esher, Lionel, À Broken Wave: The Rebuilding of England

1940–1980, Allen Lane, Harmondsworth, 1981, p. 60.

17 Hoggart, Richard, The Uses of Literacy, Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1986, p. 40. (First published by Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1957.)

18 This form of deck access was seen to improve on Le Corbusier's rue intérieur. Versions appeared simultaneously in the Smithsons’ and Jack Lynn and Gordon Ryder's entries to the Golden Lane competition of 1952 and in Ivor Smith's AA thesis project; Park Hill was then based on these unbuilt schemes.

19 Lynn, Jack, ‘Park Hill Redevelopment', Sheffield, RIBA Journal, December 1962, pp. 447–69.

20 Housing Committee of the Corporation of Sheffield, Ten Years of Housing in Sheffield, 1953–63, April 1962, p. 42.

21 See, for example, Dunleavy, op. cit.; McKay and Cox, op. cit.

22 Roberts, Marion, ‘The Modernisation of Family Life? Sexual Divisions in Architecture and Town Planning 1940-1957', Town and Regional Planning, University of Sheffield, 1985.

23 Yelling, J. A., Slums and Slum Clearance in Victorian London, Allen and Unwin, London, 1986, pp. 153–4.

24 Burns, Wilfred, New Towns for Old, Leonard Hill, 1963, pp. 93-4.

25 Both these aspects are covered in some detail by Dunleavy, op. cit.

26 Jephcott, Pearl, with Robinson, Hilary, Homes in High Flats, University of Glasgow, Social and Economic Studies Occasional Paper, No. 13, Oliver and Boyd, 1971.

27 Ibid., p. 142.

28 Amery, Colin, and Wright, Lance, The Architecture of Darbourne and Darke', Foreword to exhibition catalogue, RIBA Publications, 1977, p. 8; exhibition held 17 May–29 July 1977 at the RIBA.

29 Punter, John, A History of Aesthetic Control, Part 2: 1953–1985’, Town Planning Review, Vol. 58, No. 1, January 1987, p. 47. See also Forty, Adrian, and Moss, Henry, A housing style for troubled consumers: the success of pseudo-vernacular', Architectural Review, No. 167, 1980, pp. 73–8.

30 Taylor, Nick, The Village in the City, Temple Smith in association with New Society, 1973.

31 For a detailed account of the bourgeois development of the home, see Davidoff, Leonore, and Hall, Catherine, Family Fortunes: Men and Women of the English Middle Class 1780–1850, Hutchinson, London, 1987, particularly Chapter 8, ‘My Own Fireside: The Creation of the Middle-class Home’, pp. 357–96.

32 Taylor, op. cit., p. 54.

33 Newman, Oscar, Defensible Space, Architectural Press, London, 1973. Coleman, Alice, Utopian and Trial, Hilary Shipman 1984.

34 Boys, Jos, Women and Public Space’in Matrix, Making Space: From Alcatraz Women and the Man-made Environment, Pluto Press, London, to the OK Corral 1984, pp. 37–54. 53

35 Lawrence, Errol, in Just Plain Common Sense: The ‘Roots" of Racism'in The Empire Strikes Back, Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, Hutchinson, London, 1984.