# Pottery Women: A Comparative Study of Susan Vera Cooper and Millicent Jane Taplin

Cheryl Buckley

Both Susie Cooper (b.1902) and Millie Taplin (1902–80) worked as designers in the North Staffordshire pottery industry between the wars. Although they worked in the industry in different capacities, one as a designer in a self-managed business, the other as a designer in an internationally renowned company, as women working in a male-dominated design profession they confronted similar obstacles. Susie Cooper began working for the pottery-decorating firm A. E. Gray and Co. Ltd in 1922, before she formed her own company, Susie Cooper Pottery Ltd, in 1929; she continues to work today. Millie Taplin began working for Josiah Wedgwood and Sons Ltd in 1917 and continued there until her retirement in 1962. Both women were active as designers when the pottery industry and women's role within it were undergoing change. The issues which dominated the North Staffordshire pottery industry between the wars were, as we will see, to have implications for the roles that women designers were able to play. These issues included the position of women in pottery production, the importance of design as a tool for regenerating the pottery trade and the relevance of design education to the industry.

Underlying this discussion will be an examination of how women designers'roles were defined and confined by patriarchy, and the way that their work has been subsequently acknowledged by design historians.¹ Within the pottery industry only certain aspects of design were considered suitable for women: Susie Cooper was able to break down this gender division, whereas Millie Taplin's position as a designer was prescribed by it.

The roles Susie Cooper and Millie Taplin played were not unique. Women had workęd as designers in both the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries with firms such as Minton, Doulton and Josiah Wedgwood, although they worked primarily as designers of surface decoration.² During the nineteenth century this area of design became more acceptable for women with the formation of Minton's and Doulton's Art Pottery studios, which offered reputable employment to young middle-class women.³ This type of designing was considered appropriate for young ladies because it was clean and it took place in the respectable surroundings of small studios detached from the main manufacturing processes. China painting, as it was known at the time, could be viewed as an extension of Victorian ladies’ accomplishments as it required many of the skills which women were considered to possess naturally’ such as delicacy, dexterity and patience.⁴

By the end of the nineteenth century, women were established as designers in the pottery industry, although their roles were circumscribed by a gender division within the field of design. This was reinforced by a strict female stereotype which delineated acceptable modes of behaviour for young, middle-class women. These perceptions of female artistic skills still permeated the pottery industry when Susie Cooper and Millie Taplin were training to be designers between 1915 and 1922. They were compounded by labour divisions within the pottery industry at large, which was organised along lines of gender, and to a lesser extent according to craft skills. Divisions on the basis of gender stemmed from the commonly held view that women were better suited to certain types of work as a result of their biology.⁵ The introduction of female labour into jobs previously considered to be male preserves focused debate on women's role in the pottery industry. The male unions began to call for this role to be strictly limited to those areas seen as suited to female skills. This meant jobs which placed women in a subservient position to men – as their assistants or in jobs which were at the finishing end of the production process and were considered to require the stereotypical female attributes of dexterity and patience. The manufacturers, however, were keen to break the power of the craft unions by employing semi-skilled women workers, who were non-unionised.6

The debate about women's role in the industry intensified during and after the First World War. As male conscription increased, more and more women took over jobs which had been done by men before 1914. Until this point, the trade unions were still undecided in their attitude to female labour, even though there were 2,000 female members of the National Amalgamated Society of Male and Female Pottery Workers (NASMFPW), which had been formed in 1906 from the numerous craft unions. However, during the First World War, as it became apparent that women were doing men's jobs but being paid only half the wage, the National Society of Pottery Workers (NSPW), which superseded the NASMFPW, fought successfully for equal pay on behalf of women doing men's jobs. By 1919, the NSPW had 25,000 female members, which represented 50 to 60 per cent of women workers in the industry at that time.

The sexual division of labour, although to some extent undermined by the introduction of new machinery and the labour changes necessitated by the First World War, still dominated the pottery industry during the inter-war period. Women workers were to be found at all stages of production, although at the clay end they rarely worked independently of male overseers. It was at the finishing end of the production process, and especially in the decorating shops, that skilled women's work was to be found. Here, women were trained, as they had been in the nineteenth century, as china decorators. The roles which Susie Cooper and Millie Taplin were able to play in the pottery industry were shaped by both the traditions of the china decorators of the nineteenth century and the continuing operation of the sexual division of labour.

Women's employment prospects as designers were also governed by the economic health of the inter-war pottery industry and the attitude to design of the pottery manufacturers. The North Staffordshire pottery industry between 1919 and 1939 was not unlike its nineteenth-century predecessor. Many firms continued to specialise in one area, such as sanitary earthenware, sanitary fireclay, tiles, jet and rockingham, and general earthenware and fine china. The industry was still dominated by the small to mediumsized unit, which comprised 82 per cent of all pottery factories (or potbanks, as they are more commonly known) and employed under 300 workers. In most pottery companies, financial and managerial control resided with the founding family.7 This practice extended from the small potbanks, such as the one set up by Susie Cooper, to the large, internationally known companies, such as Josiah Wedgwood and Sons Ltd. The small companies tended to produce a restricted range of products for a distinct market; the larger ones, which often employed as many as 1,000 workers, produced a wide range of wares, aimed at different markets.

The inter-war years were an uncertain and difficult period for pottery manufacturers and their workforce. Indeed, unlike the rest of British industry, which showed fairly modest growth between 1907 and 1933, there was a fall in output in the pottery industry.⁸ Optimism, which had been created by the boom immediately following the end of the First World War, proved unfounded. Pottery exports failed to reach pre-war levels and in fact both foreign and home markets were threatened by foreign competition. The Wall Street crashhad an immediate and overwhelming effect on the large companies like Wedgwood, whose market for the ornamental jasper and lustres was primarily North American. The problems of the pottery industry were intensified by strong local competition between manufacturers which, when combined with foreign competition, served to push prices down.

To offset these difficulties, manufacturersadopted various strategies, all of which had serious implications for the workforce, pottery manufacture and design. To reduce labour costs and lessen manufacturers' dependence on craft skills, new technology was introduced which allowed the widespread employment of cheap, unskilled female labour. Some of the large companies turned to Tavlorism, which was the theory of scientific management proposed by Frederick Taylor. This was a system of improving worker efficency by finding the optimum method for each job. The aim was to minimise wasted effort on the part of the worker by carefully planning and designing the production process and tools. In addition to this, a formal managerial system was implemented. Against this background of economic uncertainty, manufacturers attempted to reverse the advantageous work conditions and wages won by the union immediately following the First World War.9 In 1923, the employers unilaterally reduced wages by 10 per cent. In a period characterised by high unemployment, the union was weak and unable to resist the employers’ actions, and this set the tone for the next decade.

New methods of stimulating trade were considered by pottery manufacturers; one of these was improving the quality and design of pottery. Numerous lectures and discussions were organised by the Design and Industries Association and the Ceramic Society, on themes such as the relevance of art to industry, the relationship between design and machinery, and the role of the pottery designer.10 Instrumental in the organisation and intellectual direction of these debates was Gordon Mitchell Forsyth (1879– 1952). In 1920 Forsyth had been appointed Superintendent of Art Education for the City of Stoke-on-Trent and the Principal of the City Schools of Art. One of his first tasks had been the reorganisation and rationalisation of art schools in the Potteries. This he had done by making Burslem, which had the best facilities, the centre for day classes, Longton the centre for preparatory classes, Hanley for design and Stoke for modelling and sculpture.11 At the outset he was keen to align the art schools with local industry, because he believed that it was only by art that the pottery industry would gain fresh ground and find new fields to conquer.'1² Forsyth gained considerable support in his efforts from the pottery manufacturers, who rightly saw the art schools as providers of new talent which would be ready-trained in the techniques of the industry.

Active participants in the debates about design were Major Frank Wedgwood (1867–1930), director of Josiah Wedgwood and Sons Ltd from 1916 until his death in 1930, and Albert Edward Gray (1871–1959), founder of the pottery-decorating business of A. E. Gray and Co. Ltd. In the first 30 years of the twentieth century, the Wedgwood company had made a conscious attempt to change the traditional nature of its market and products.13 This latter development had come about chiefly through their contacts with Alfred (1865–1960) and Louise (1882-1956) Powell, who began designing for Wedgwood in 1903. Wedgwood showed that it was interested in progressive design, and this was reinforced in 1926 when a freehand painting studio was opened at Etruria and run by Millie Taplin. This marked a clear response to the increasing demands for hand-painted ware, which was paralleled by the activities of Gray's. By 1914, Gray's ware was advertised as being of excellent workmanship and delicacy of design'.14 Unlike Wedgwood, A. E. Gray and Co. Ltd was not a manufacturer of pottery. However, Edward 'Gray was active in the debates about pottery design which took place under the auspices of the Ceramic Society; in fact, in 1917 he had urged this society to establish a separate art section.15 During the 1920s and 1930s, Gray was an employer of the art-school-trained freehand paintresses, who were thought to be ideally suited to hand-painting the company's ware. This was due to gender stereotyping which ascribed greater dexterity in handling loaded brushes of paint and more skill in producing delicate, detailed decoration to women. Susie Cooper's introduction to the pottery industry came at A. E. Gray’s; it was in this role that she learned many of the decorating techniques which she was to develop later in her own company.

Within the pottery industry there was a subtle shift of emphasis in attitudes to design in these two decades. In the 1920s, although threatened by foreign competition and diminishing export markets, it was still possible for pottery manufacturers to export their expensive hand-made products; the North American market was especially lucrative. For these products, the hand-paintresses used a variety of decorating processes, such as lustre, enamel, gilding and printing. After the Wall Street crash in 1929 and its devastating effect on the British economy, pottery manufacturers found themselves without a market for their products. Of necessity, they looked to the home market and they examined their product ranges in relation to this less lucrative, though potentially substantial, market. Both Josiah Wedgwood and Sons Ltd and the new company which Susie Cooper formed in 1929 followed this pattern.

The parallel careers of Susie Cooper and Millie Taplin as designers in the North Staffordshire pottery industry provide an interesting insight into the factors which determined the role of women in design in Britain between the wars. Designers'roles generally in the pottery industry were governed by specific factors which originated from within the industry. The reputation of some companies rested on the high quality of their products and as a consequence they stressed the important part played by designers. In these, large sections were established to facilitate the activities of the designer. In other companies, design was seen as peripheral and designers were employed to copy the successful products of rival manufacturers rather than to initiate independent work. Roles varied according to the size of the company, the type of products made and the attitudes of the manufacturer. Through a comparison of their roles, it is possible to see that other factors were important when the designer was a woman. Particularly crucial were class and family background, which in the case of these two women were different.

Susie Cooper, like most other women who worked as designers in the pottery industry at this time, came from a middle-class background.16 Her father, who died when she was 11 years old, had worked in the family farm and wholesale vegetable business and had intended taking over the farming side of it. Susie, who was the youngest of seven children, was educated at a local school until the age of 11 and after this she attended a private school in Hanley. Her mother, who was a Sunday-school teacher at Hill Top Chapel in Burslem, was relatively enlightened, encouraging her daughter to go to evening classes at Burslem School of Art and to consider working for a living. To begin with, Susie took both art and cookery classes with a friend, although it was not long before her talent in art was recognised by Gordon Forsyth, who encouraged her to apply for a scholarship. This she did, and by gaining a scholarship she was able to begin her day-time studies at Burslem School of Art, probably in 1919. She spent three years at Burslem and was trained within the newly organised art-school system initiated by Forsyth. Her move into the pottery industry had not been planned. In 1922, she sat an entrance exam for the Royal College of Art but proved to be ineligible because she was not employed in industry. Entry was restricted to people who were already working in industry because the college's aim was to develop skills acquired through practical training as well as to teach new ones. It was in order to gain industrial experience that Gordon Forsyth arranged for her to work with the pottery-decorating company A. E. Gray and Co. Ltd.

The route taken by Millie Taplin at Wedgwood was quite different. Her background was working class; her father was employed in the pottery industry as a caster with the company of Whieldon Sanitary Pottery. She was brought up with her two younger brothers in a terraced house in Boothen, in the heart of the Potteries. Her mother worked for a while when the children were old enough for school, although this was from necessity not by choice. Millie attended the local Church of England school until the age of 13, after which she went to work in a millinery shop. She left within a month when she won a scholarship to Stoke School of Art after being proposed for this by her old school. At the same time, one of her teachers gave her an introduction to the pottery firm of Greens of Fenton as a liner. This involved painting gold lines on cups and saucers, and for this she was paid half a crown a week, a wage which reflected her trainee status. Growing increasingly impatient with this job she moved to Minton's, where she learned to paint the well-known ‘Rose', ‘Pansy’ and ‘Forget-me-not' designs. In 1917 she started work at Josiah Wedgwood and Sons Ltd as a hand-paintress, while continuing her classes for three or four nights each week. Like Susie Cooper, Millie Taplin benefited from the training provided by the Potteries art schools; she was taught ‘still-life painting, plant drawing and pottery painting'.17 Her working-class background meant that Millie Taplin had to work to contribute to the family income; art-school training had to be undertaken in her own free time.

When Susie Cooper went to work for A. E. Gray and Co. Ltd in 1922, she found herself in a company which had established a characteristic style of ware. According to Kathy Niblett from 1913 . . . the use of enamelled lithographs declines and freehand painting becomes prevalent', thus revealing a desire on the part of A. E. Gray to promote the artistic skills of the Potteries'.18 A year after her arrival a new range of lustre, Gloria lustre, was introduced; this had been produced by Edward Gray in collaboration with his friend Gordon Forsyth. This particular ware, which was brightly coloured and hand-painted, was intended to be both ornamental and functional. By 1924 Susie Cooper had achieved the status of designer and to coincide with this a special named backstamp was produced for all ware designed by her. Gradually, Susie Cooper began to develop bold and highly colourful designs based on abstract and floral patterns for the freehand enamel paintresses. In October 1929, with words of warning from Edward Gray that she would onlý last eight months, she left to set up her own company. As she has said more recently: it was of course taboo for women to go into industry in those days. But I knew what I wanted to do.'19

The hand-painted wares developed by Alfred and Louise Powell were becoming increasingly popular in Wedgwood's market; these were initially based on revivals of hand-painted designs from the original eighteenth-century pattern books. Contrasting with these traditional patterns was a range of freehand patterns which were also produced by the Powells; these were adapted either to the Wedgwood earthenware shapes already in existence or to the new shapes which had been specially manufactured for the Powells. Most of the Powells’ designs which were put into production were for earthenware with lustre decoration of bronze and silver. With their Arts and Crafts background, the Powells eschewed many of the mass-production processes which were crucial to Wedgwood's survival in the 1920s. Their continuing role in the company was dependent on the commercial success of their designs, but it was left to Millie Taplin to adapt their intricate and complex patterns to the skills of the freehand paintresses.

It was from this collaboration with Alfred and Louise Powell that Millie Taplin's career at Wedgwood began to develop. Her training with the Powells was put to good use when she was asked to form a handcrafts department in 1928. A year later this was merged with the hand-painting department and Millie Taplin was put in charge. The designs produced under the auspices of this department included the Queensware lustres developed by the Powells, the ornamental and functional earthenware in the Islaminspired Rhodian and Persian patterns, introduced by Wedgwood in 1920 and 1926 respectively, and Millie Taplin's own designs (see Fig. 6.1). These included ‘Buds and Bells', ‘Papyrus', ‘Spring', Summer', ‘Autumn’and ‘Sun-lit'. The last is a typical example and was designed for Cane ware, c. 1930. Like the hand-painted designs of Susie Cooper, it is boldy patterned, with a combination of abstract and stylised flower motifs in bright, strong colours like orange, green, red and blue.

To broaden her knowledge of art and design, Millie Taplin began making regular trips to London to see exhibitions and visit museums, and her youngest brother, Eric, remembers her first trip to Paris, which was a source of great excitement to him and the rest of the family.2o Apparently her parents didn't attempt to hold her back, although her lifestyle was hardly typical for a young workingclass woman in the Potteries.

Both Millie Taplin and Susie Cooper were well established as designers by the early 1930s, one with an increasingly important role in one of the most prestigious pottery manufacturers in Britain at that time, the other in her own company with finance from her family. On her twenty-seventh birthday, Susie Cooper embarked on her career as independent manufacturer. From the outset, she planned to design pottery shape as well as pattern: an impossibility at the decorating firm of Gray's. The finance for her company came largely from her family; with her brother-in-law, Jack Beeson, as partner, in the autumn of 1929 they found a small factory in Tunstall where they could rent space. On one of the painting floors of the George Street pottery, Susie Cooper established the facilities needed to hand-paint ware. Within three weeks, following the Wall Street crash on 29 October 1929, the creditors of the pottery foreclosed on the loan which had kept her landlord's firm solvent and as a consequence she was without premises. Not to be put off, she began to look for other suitable premises and in the spring of 1930 she was once again ready to start production, at the Chelsea Works in Moorland Road, Burslem, in space rented from Doulton's, at that time one of her suppliers of blank pottery. In the Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review of April 1930 it was reported that:

a pottery artist – and particularly a lady – who has the confidence and courage to attempt to carve out a career by laying down a special plant and staff on what must be admitted to be something suggestive of a commercial scale.21

From the outset, the Susie Cooper Pottery Ltd was noted for its modern design. Early designs were very simple and included Polkadot' and Exclamation Mark', both of which were produced in a single colour on cream-coloured earthenware. Another popular design was Wedding Ring', which was made up of concentric shaded bands of colour. More complicated patterns based on floral motifs included Nosegay’ and Briar Rose'. She has since said that many of these designs resulted from her need to create designs which could be reproduced perfectly by her paintresses.22

Paintresses started working for Susie Cooper at the age of 14 and they were trained by her initially to grind colour and to apply it on to blank ware. Gradually, they acquired greater skill, which could then be passed on to new trainees. Florence May Hancock went to work for Susie Cooper as a bander in January 1938 at the age of 15. As a trainee she earned about five shillings a week; then, after two years, she went on to piece-work and earned about 17 shillings a week.2³ Banding was one of the decorative techniques which Susie Cooper employed in her designs. It could take various forms, including shaded, solid, narrow, flat and wash-banding, and it could be combined with other decorative techniques. Later in the 1930s Susie Cooper combined it to good effect with lithographs.

Following the considerable interest which Susie Cooper's designs generated at the 1931 British Industries Fair, Harry Wood, another of her blank ware suppliers, offered her new premises in his factory, the Crown Works, on Newcastle Street, Burslem. Susie Cooper was keen to take up this offer, as she preferred Wood's blank shapes to those of all her other suppliers. She wanted to develop a close relationship with a manufacturer, hoping that eventually she would be able to get her own shapes produced. Confirmation of Susie Cooper's early success came in 1932, when the Queen ordered a breakfast-in-bed set and a jug from her display at the British Industries Fair. In the same year, Harry Wood agreed to manu\~ facture shapes to Susie Cooper's own designs; these were to be produced in an ivory-bodied earthenware. The names of these new shapes, whose outlines were reminiscent of stream-lined bird forms, were Kestrel and Curlew (See Fig. 6.2). With the introduction of these new shapes Susie Cooper began to achieve her ambition, as reported in the Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review of August 1935,

Form, decoration and even texture in the Susie Cooper ware are part of a considered scheme; it is not merely a case of sticking a decoration on to a pot regardless of context ...24

With her new shapes in production, Susie Cooper began to develop suitable surface decoration. Hand-painted patterns like Cravon Lines',‘Spirals’ and ‘Beechwood’ were developed, although with increasing production, the demands on the paintresses' time were becoming too great. It was in response to this problem that Susie Cooper turned her attention to lithographs. In April 1933 she had attended and contributed to a debate organised by the North Staffordshire branch of the Society of Industrial Artists on Lithographs as a Means of Pottery Decoration'. It was claimed at this debate that most of the time of the lithographic transfer printers had been taken up in the past in producing cheap, gaudy imitations . . .'25 Susie Cooper argued for cooperation between the pottery and lithograph manufacturers, claiming that it was no use the lithographer bringing out lithographs produced by an artist who knew nothing at all about the manufacturing processes'.26 She produced watercolours of proposed designs, which she then took to a lithograph manufacturer for the artist to make iņterpretations. Once she had established a source of satisfactory lithographs, she combined them with hand-painted decoration, such as shaded bands, dots and stripes to produce designs like Endon Border', 'Dresden Spray', ‘Iris'and Clematis'. (See Fig. 6.3). All of these designs had hand-painted decoration combined with lithographs of such high quality that it is almost impossible to distinguish them from fine hand-painted designs.

Susie Cooper's involvement in the debate about lithographs highlights her increasing confidence in her role as pottery manufacturer. In September 1932 she was elected to the Council of the Society of Industrial Artists' North Staffordshire branch and she became an active participant in both its debates and those organised under the auspices of the Ceramic Society and Design and Industries Association. As an employer she was fair though exacting.27 Between 70 and 100 people worked for her company in the late 1930s; these included freehanders, lithographers, aerographers, biscuit-workers and kiln-loaders and there was a small printing shop. The company was thriving, with a turnover of a quarter of a million pounds by the financial year 1939–40. Susie Cooper was involved with the company at every level. She produced about 200 new designs a year; in the meantime she was involved in the day-to-day running of the company, taking part in recruitment, work organisation, promotion and marketing.28 At busy times she would even get involved in packing ware.

From the outset, Susie Cooper identified a distinct market, which she believed to be professional, with little money but plenty of taste. At the time, it was argued that ‘she has found, if not actually created, a market for her productions!’29 One of the things she did was to discern a growing market for smaller sets of pottery rather than the massive dinner sets of the Edwardian era, she believed that the drastic changes that have come over the domestic life of many people warrant the provision of smaller and betterbalanced services.'3o To this end she introduced new combinations of ware such as a 15-piece dinner set, a breakfast-in-bed set and an early morning set.31 In the mid-1930s, the cheapest early morning set which had banded decoration retailed at five shillings in shops like Peter Jones, Selfridges, John Lewis, Waring and Gillow, Harrods and Heals.

Susie Cooper took the marketing and retailing of her products very seriously. She had a London outlet in her own showroom at Audrey House, Holborn, advertised regularly in the trade journals and exhibited at the annual British Industries Fairs and at most of the major design exhibitions in the 1930s. This included the Dorland Hall exhibition of 1933, the British Art in Industry exhibition at the Royal Academy of 1935 and the Paris exhibition of 1937. For all these exhibitions, she designed display stands which were described as totally unlike anything else . . . imaginative and at times a trifle audacious’.32

In terms of manufacturing, the Susie Cooper Pottery was a small- to medium-scale unit whose production was closely tied to the design skills of its owner. In turn, any new designs were introduced with the paintresses'skills in mind. New decorating developments were accommodated with relative ease within the factory organisation, which was flexible. Susie Cooper found the business arrangement she had made with Harry Wood when she took up space in his Crown Works factory to be ideal. He agreed to produce blank ware (eventually to her own design), so that she was able to concentrate on the decoration of ware and the business organisation of her company. Wood also benefited, as Susie Cooper produced several shape designs for his company, includingWren' and Iay', which were introduced in the mid-1930s. Added to these were two new shapes which she designed for her own company in 1937 and 1938, Falcon' and Spiral’. Good design was central to Susie Cooper's aims. She wanted to combine low cost with good design’ and believed that the pottery manufacturer should cost his products to cover production costs not design.’She argued that the difference costwise in producing very poor design and very good designs in the pottery industry is negligible – therefore it is the duty of manufacturers to produce the best that they can'.33 Her pottery was dependent on simplicity in both shape and decoration.

Modernity was the essence of her approach to design. This can be seen in both the streamlined shapes and the innovative decoration she developed in the late 1930s.

The reporters for the two major trade journals of the pottery industry, the Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review and the Pottery and Glass Record, discerned in Susie Cooper's designs a ‘feminine' style. In their reporting of the various trade fairs where she had exhibited, they made much of this. In 1932 it was claimed that Miss Cooper is a lady who designs from the standpoint of the lady.'34

There was a grudging acceptance in other articles that ‘the woman's point of view . . . counts for a good deal – in domestic pottery design at all events.'35

The Wedgwood company of the 1930s was very different to that of the 1920s, and as a consequence Millie Taplin’s role as a designer underwent a change. The need to reorganise the company became urgent in 1930 following the slump in exports and the death of the chairman and managing director, Major Frank Wedgwood. When a young management team, headed by Josiah Wedgwood V, a qualified economist, took over the running of the company in 1930, the previous years' total sales were £158,000, with a net profit of £7,000.36 According to Josiah Wedgwood V, the Etruria works at that date was little changed from the time of Josiah I.'37 The new management team was made up of Hensleigh Wedgwood, who joined the New York branch of the firm, Tom Wedgwood, who had responsibility for buildings and plant, and Norman Wilson, who was works manager. In 1934, Victor Skellern joined the company as art director to complete the new team. First on the agenda was a programme of modernisation, which began with the introduction of an earthenware glost tunnel kiln, installed in 1930. This oil-fired kiln was developed by Tom Wedgwood and Norman Wilson. Other new developments included flow-line rubber belt production, a quick-drying kiln, many new glazes, such as matt and satin ones, and new wares, such as the translucent pink bone-china which was introduced in the early 1930s.

The aim of modernisation was to enable Wedgwood to compete in the mass-production markets by producing medium-priced tableware. Inevitably, there was a shift in emphasis away from the more complicated hand-painted work which had been done in the 1920s towards simpler shapes and decoration. At this point, Millie Taplin found herself part of a company structure which was quite different to the paternalistic organisation of Wedgwood in the two preceding decades. Wedgwood's new management had imposed a rationalised management structure, with departmental managers and supervisors. Millie Taplin was part of the design section, in which she designed to a brief in accord with company policy determined by its art director, Victor Skellern. He coordinated the activities both of the chief company designers, who, in addition to himself, included Millie Taplin, Star Wedgwood, Keith Murray and Louise Powell, and the freelance designers, who were increasingly introduced as the 1930s progressed.

In its search for a new market, Wedgwood's design and marketing began to overlap with that of Susie Cooper. Like Susie Cooper, the Wedgwood team involved itself in the debates that focused on the pottery industry and they also showed ware at the same exhibitions in order to publicise their new ranges.38 In 1936 a special Wedgwood exhibition was staged at the Grafton Galleries; it was the first public display of the results of recent experiments at Etruria’.39 These experiments produced a new body, calledAlpine Pink', which was a self-coloured translucent china.40 Other wares on display were white fine china, queensware, coloured earthenware and the moonstone and matt designs of Keith Murray. Of the designers of domestic tableware, Millie Taplin contributed the most with 11 designs, including three for the new Alpine Pink' body.41

Millie Taplin was an important designer at Wedgwood's during this period and she produced a whole range of designs in response to Wedgwood's new policy. All her designs, and indeed those of her colleagues at Wedgwood, were hand-decorated; lithographs were not properly introduced into Wedgwood until the late 1940s. Millie Taplin's Wedgwood designs at the British Art in Industry exhibition of 1935 at the Royal Academy were favourably reviewed in the trade press. Her designGreen Lattice' won fulsome praise from a severe critic who had attacked ware which was more concerned with aesthetics than practicality. He described Millie Taplin as a talented young lady who actually operates at the factory, and of whom it has been said that she is concerned not with art on industry, but art in industry’.42

Wedgwood's sexual division of labour restricted women to design of decoration. Millie Taplin, therefore, was only involved in surface-pattern design at Wedgwood, unlike her male colleagues Victor Skellern and Keith Murray, who also designed shapes. This segregation was due to two factors: first, women were denied experience of forming ware, because of the sexual division of labour which excluded them from skilled jobs in the clay end of manufacturing; second, the legacy of nineteenth-century perceptions of female artistic skills meant that pottery-decorating was thought to require skills which women possessed as part of their nature. Millie Taplin's position in a design team at Wedgwood's gave her little freedom to break out of this feminine' stereotype, especially given that her female colleagues were also designers of decoration. This contrasts strongly with Susie Cooper, who could design both shape and decoration because she was able to define her own role in her own company. At first Millie Taplin lived and dreamed Wedgwood', but during the 1930s she felt increasingly disillusioned with her lack of progress in the company, something she attributed to her poor educational background.43 Unlike Skellern, who had won a Royal College of Art scholarship, and Keith Murray, who had trained as an architect, she had no professional qualifications. It was in order to increase her professional status that she became a member of the Society of Industrial Artists in 1934. She also felt some friction with both designers, because Skellern officially approved her designs and Murray unofficially carried much weight in decisions on design.

In 1934 the Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review noted a host of new ideas emanating just now from the Wedgwood studio’.44 The most striking feature of Wedgwood's product range at this time is that domestic tableware dominated over ornamental wares. Except for Keith Murray's vases, lamps and bowls in matt glazes and John Skeaping's animal figures, the 1936 Grafton Galleries catalogue was filled with domestic tableware at moderate prices. Millie Taplin's contributions to this reveal the extent of her design work, which ranged from stylised floral patterns, such as 'Winter Morn' and ‘Falling Leaves', to abstract and geometric designs, such as Moonlight'. (See Figs. 6.4 and 6.5). She designed for several different decorative techniques, including banding, gilding, ground-laying, lustres, stencilling and hand-painting. Wedgwood's china shapes, such as·the‘Globe’(designed about 1935 by Norman Wilson), were simplified but not as overtly modern as Susie Cooper's, and as a consequence they have a traditional feel. The decoration does, however, show the influence of 1930s' fashionable taste, with its subdued colours and stylised, abstract motifs.

The work of Susie Cooper and the Wedgwood design studio were frequently referred to in the trade journals, in periodicals like the Studio and in books on pottery design written in the 1930s.45 The designs of both won praise from Nikolaus Pevsner; special mention was made of Susie Cooper's lithographs and Keith Murray's designs for Wedgwood.4 Indeed, Murray's work was the most frequently mentioned. Gordon Forsyth in 20th Century Ceramics, 1936, suggested that the employment of Flaxman by Josiah Wedgwood has its modern equivalent in the work of Keith Murray.'47 The trade journals tended to be more critical and asked questions about the practicality and ease of production of the designs of both Susie Cooper and Keith Murray.48 Their work was easily. identified because it was stamped with their names. This was a technique adopted by manufacturers who were keen to emphasise the importance of design and the role of the designer. Although

Wedgwood used this strategy in their sales literature, Murray was the only designer at that time to have his own backstamp. The designs of both Murray and Cooper had a high profile with the Modernist writers of the 1930s. In their designs, Pevsner and his supporters could discern the themes of the Modern Movement: the use of modern shapes and patterns, and an interest in advanced processes and technology. It is a paradox that the matt glazed ware designed by Murray and frequently illustrated in key design texts of the 1930s as being an exemplary machine product was advertised in the Pottery Gazette’ and Glass Trade Review as being thrown and turned by hand to get the finish and strength that the design warrants'.49 High on the Modernists’list of criteria for ‘good' design was the integration of shape and decoration. In his book Art and Industry, 1935, Herbert Read defined the good designer as an abstract artist or sculptor who brings unity to form and decoration. Clearly, in her design work, Millie Taplin was unable to meet this essential requirement to qualify for the label good designer’ and thereby gain entry to the Modernist histories of 1930s’ design.

It is clear from an analysis of pottery design in Britain in the 1930s that neither Keith Murray nor Susie Cooper were by any means typical, and that Millie Taplin, Star Wedgwood, Louise Powell and even Victor Skellern were effaced as designers at Wedgwood by Keith Murray's great popularity with the small but powerful group of writers who set about determining the nature of good design across a range of manufacturing industries. More recently, historians have perpetuated this process by defining pottery design in Britain between the wars in terms of Modernism.so This was not the case. Pottery design was dominated by eclecticism, with most manufacturers producing a variety of designs including all types of traditional, Art nouveau, Regency and Moderne styles. Only a few manufacturers were concerned with Modernism as a distinct theory, and even then their responses were restrained by the economic conditions of the period.

Susie Cooper and Millie Taplin fared differently in the accounts of 1930s writers on design. In the trade journals both women were consistently acknowledged, but in the key design texts Susie Cooper figured prominently while Millie Taplin was ignored. The framework for our contemporary knowledge of their work has been determined primarily by the accounts of this latter group of writers who espoused the values of modernism. As feminist design historians, it is crucial that we challenge these partial accounts; otherwise we will leave intact a design history which overemphasises Modernist design made by men.s1 It is important that we seek out other forms of documentation such as oral history sources, contemporary trade journals, and alternative accounts, which widen our understanding of the work of women designers,

and that we examine design as part of a complex system which is responsive to social, economic, political and cultural change. Central to the formulation of a feminist design history is an understanding of patriarchy and the way that this has defined gender, femininity and the sexual division of labour. The roles of Susie Cooper and Millie Taplin as designers in the North Staffordshire pottery industry between the wars are an illustration of many of these themes. Both women worked within an industry which was dominated by labour divisions originating in gender; each had to negotiate her position as a designer in relation to this. For different reasons both were defined or confined by the label ‘feminine'. Their opportunities in the pottery industry were tied to a whole set of overlapping issues, including their class backgrounds, the nature of their design education and its relevance to pottery manufacture, the economic health of the pottery industry, manufacturers’ attitudes to design and the roles open to women in the industry. Susie Cooper established an independent identity within the male-dominated territory of the North Staffordshire pottery industry. She was a successful business woman and designer. Millie Taplin was without financial support in her role as designer, but within Wedgwood she established herself as one of its foremost designers. Both women made careers in the industry and worked a minimum of four decades. Their work provides an example to women designers today.

## Notes

1 Patriarchy as a concept has been defined by various feminist theorists. An early definition is to be found in Millett, Kate, Sexual Politics, Abacus, London, 1972, p. 25:

Our society . . . is a patriarchy. The fact is evident at once if one recalls that the military, industry, technology, universities, science, political offices, finances – in short, every avenue of power within society is in entirely male hands.

The central problem with this definition of patriarchy is that it is a universal and trans-historical form of oppression which is being described. It presents specific problems for a Marxist feminist approach which is located in historical analysis. A useful definition of patriarchy which attempts to overcome this problem of universal oppression is outlined by Pollock, Griselda, in Vision, voice, and power: Feminist art history and Marxism’, Block 6, 1982, p. 10:

Patriarchy does not refer to the static, oppressive domination of one sex over another, but a web of psycho-social relationships which institute a socially significant difference on the axis of sex which is so deeply located in our very sense of lived, sexual identity that it appears to us natural and unalterable.

2 For more information see Rose, Peter, Hannah Barlow: A Pioneer Doulton Artist, 1851–1916, Richard Dennis, London, 1985; Rakow, Mrs Leonard S., The feminine touch at Wedgwood', in the Proceedings of the 12th Wedgwood International Seminar, held at the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, 1967.

3 Callen, Anthea, Angel in the Studio: Women in the Arts and Crafts Movement 1870–1914, Astragal Books, London, 1979.

4 Women wrote on this subject in the nineteenth century. See, for example, Lewis, Florence, China Painting, Cassell & Co. Ltd, London, Paris and New York, 1884.

5 For a full discussion of this in relation to the contemporary pottery industry, see Sarsby, J.,Sexual segregation in the pottery industry', Feminist Review, No. 2, Winter 1985, pp. 67–94.

6 Women were largely un-unionised because they were unskilled and therefore ineligible to be members of the craft unions. As craft jobs became deskilled with the introduction of new machinery in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, female membership of unions was resisted because it was feared that women would take men's jobs.

7 Whipp, Richard,‘The art of good management: Managerial control of work in the British pottery industry, 1900-1925', International Review of Social History, Vol., XXIX, Part 3, 1984.

8 Machin, D. J., and Smyth, R. L., The Changing Structure of the British Pottery Industry, 1935–1968, Department of Economics, University of Keele, Newcastle-under-Lyme, 1969.

9 These consisted of the abolition of the good from oven' agreement, which had meant that ware had to be in perfect condition after its removal from the kiln and, as a consequence, defective ware was the workers' responsibility and its cost deducted from their wages; the introduction of a 47-hour week with fixed working hours; and the scrapping of stoppages from workers' pay to cover lighting, sweeping, printers' mixing and hot water.

10 For example, Nash, Paul, ‘Design', Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 May 1925, pp. 767–70; Chermayeff, Serge, Modern art from the designer's point of view', Pottery Gazette and Glass·Trade Review, 1 December 1932, pp. 1504–7; Price, J. F., ‘Machinery and pottery design’, Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 March 1935, pp. 363–9.

11 Haggar, Reginald, A Century of Art Education in the Potteries, Stoke-on-Trent, 1953.

12 Forsyth, Gordon, Art: Its effect upon the pottery industry', Pottery

Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 August 1921, p. 1220.

13 For more information see Batkin, Maureen, Wedgwood Ceramics 1846–1959, Richard Dennis, London, 1982; City Museum and Art Gallery exhibition catalogue, Wedgwood of Etruria and Barlaston, Stoke-on-Trent, 1980.

14 City Museum and Art Gallery exhibition catalogue, Hand-painted Gray's Pottery, Stoke-on-Trent, 1982, p. 14.

15 Ibid.

16 For more detail on the importance of class background, see my articleWomen designers in the English pottery industry, 1919– 1939’, in Woman's Art Journal, Fall 1984/Winter 1985.

17 Lodey, Joy, A flower was picked and a famous pottery design was born’, Six Towns Magazine, September 1963.

18 City Museum and Art Gallery exhibition catalogue, Hand-painted Gray's Pottery, Stoke-on-Trent, 1982, p. 20.

19 In conversation with author, March 1983.

20 Eric Taplin in conversation with author, April' 1985.

21 ‘Buyers’ notes’, Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 April 1930, p. 593.

22 In conversation with author, March 1983.

23 In conversation with author, September 1986.

24 ‘Buyers' notes’, Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 August 1935, p. 975.

25 Lithographs as a means of pottery decoration’, Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 June 1933, p. 701.

26 Ibid., p. 713.

27 Florence May Hancock in conversation with author, September 1986.

28 Snodin, Su, ‘Susie Cooper: diverse designer', Antique Collector, August 1982, pp. 52–5.

29 ‘Buyers’ notes’, Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 2 April 1934, pp. 467–8.

30 Buyers' notes’, Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 October 1932, p. 1251.

31 A breakfast-in-bed set included tea cup and saucer, sugar and creamer, teapot, covered muffin dish, cruet, toast rack, egg-cup, marmalade and butter pots. An early morning set included two cups and saucers, sugar and creamer, teapot and two biscuit plates.

32 'Report on the British Industries Fair', Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 April 1932, p. 489.

33 In conversation with author, March 1983.

34 Buyers' notes’,Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 October 1932, p. 1249.

35 'Buyers’ notes’, Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 August 1935, p. 975.

36 Wedgwood, John, A Personal Life of the Fifth Josiah Wedgwood

1899–1968, Josiah Wedgwood & Sons Ltd, Barlaston, 1979, p. 10.

37 Ibid.

38 These were Dorland Hall in 1933 and the Royal Academy in 1935.

39 Grafton Galleries, op. cit, p. 1.

40 Self-coloured means that the colour is in the body of the clay so that it is permanent.

41 Grafton Galleries, op. cit.

42 ‘Report on the British Art in Industry exhibition at the Royal Academy', Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 February 1935, p. 216.

43 Eric Taplin in conversation with author, April 1985.

44 Buyers' notes’, Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 October 1934, p. 1207.

45 For example, Trethowan, Harry, Modern British pottery’, Studio, Vol. 106, 1933, pp. 181–8.

46 Pevsner, Nikolaus, An Enquiry into Industrial Arts in England, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1937.

47 Forsyth, Gordon, 20th Century Ceramics, The Studio Ltd, London, 1936.

48 ‘Report on the British Art in Industry exhibition at the Royal Academy', Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 1 February 1935, p. 216.

49 Wedgwood advertisement in Pottery Gazette and Glass Trade Review, 2 April 1934, p. 438.

50 See, for example, The Open University, British Design, A305 course, 1975, and also Arts Council exhibition catalogue, The Thirties. British Art and Design before the War, Hayward Gallery, London, 1979. In her recent book Ceramics, Bell and Hyman, London, 1986, Frances Hannah explores the issue of Modernism in Britain from a more critical viewpoint.

51 The most recent account of Susie Cooper's work is a major catalogue published to accompany the exhibition of her work held first at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and then at the City Museum and Art gallery, Stoke-on-Trent, in 1987. See Eatwell, A. Susie Cooper Productions, Victoria and Albert Museum, 1987.

## Women and Architecture Lynne Walker

Many women in Britain today are actively involved in a range of activities and positive initiatives related to architecture. They participate in the creation of the built environment through the design process as architects, planners, engineers and designers and contribute to its production as builders, quantity surveyors, construction workers and, most numerously, as consumers of architecture, users of buildings and the spaces around them.

The work of women architects represents the full range of contemporary prcfessional practice and includes the public sector, private practice and housing associations, while feminist architects concentrate on projects which give priority to women's needs. Although architecture remains a male-dominated activity with 2,065 women currently registered as architects to 27,400 men (about 7 per cent), women in professional practice have made major contributions to some of the best-known contemporary buildings: the Open University (Jane Drew,·completed 1977); the Joseph shops in West London (Eva Jiricna, 1984 and 1986); Heathrow Airport Terminal 4 (Ann Gibson of Scott, Brownrigg & Turner, 1985); the Manchester Crafts Village (Gillian Brown of the Manchester City Architects Department, 1982); the Thames Barrier (Jean Clapham, GLC Architects Department, 1972–8); and the pedestrianisation of South Molton Street (Iona Gibson, 1977). And there are feminist architects, or, more precisely, women who are architects and feminists and who emphasise ‘the primary importance of changing the existing design process so that women are involved in decision-making at every stage',¹ who choose to work with women whose interests are not normally represented in the design process – ethnic minorities, disabled and working-class groups – to provide building types which are intended specifically to serve these groups' needs – for instance, health centres, nurseries and women's training centres. Feminișt cooperatives, such as Matrix and Mitra and the Women's Design Service (WDS), an information and resource centre, work collectively and challenge conventional design philosophy, which they see as overlooking women's interests in the built environment.

Matrix's architecture is grounded in their study of architectural history and their research into women's past role and position in architecture, which they wrote about in Making Space: Women and the Man-made Environment, 1984. But they wear this learning lightly, designing low-key, well-planned and comfortable environments, working together with the client group. Often underresourced, one of Matrix's most recently completed buildings, the Jagonari Women's Educational Resource Centre, designed with the Asian women's group Jagonari, was well-funded by a grant of £600,000 from the GLC and brings to a larger scale the best qualities of their earlier projects and buildings. Conscious of its context, which is next to a listed historic building, and with security a major consideration, this substantial four-storey brick building with a two-storey crèche across the courtyard at the rear was designed to have an Asian feel about it but . . . to avoid the symbolism of any particular religion'.² The dignified and eclectic Whitechapel Road front has a shaped gable, onion-domed flèche and is metal-grilled, for decoration and security, while the carefully planned interior is light and spacious with a reassuring atmosphere of comfort and safety, essential to an Asian women's building in a neighbourhood where racist attacks are commonplace.

With contemporary practice as the starting-point, I want to look back to the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries at the role and position of women who, as architects and designers of buildings, were active agents in challenging patriarchy, which limited women's activities to the home and unpaid domestic duties. In fact, many of the women who took part in architecture as designers during this period – Harriet Martineau, Agnes and Rhoda Garrett, Ethel and Bessie Charles and Elisabeth Scott - identified themselves with the Women's Movement. The contemporary corollary of this precedent is that women's present under-representation in the design process can only be altered by similar resistance and struggle.

After a brief introduction, I shall first examine the relationship between architecture and patriarchal assumptions about women's role and position in society, from the emergence of the organised Women's Movement around 1850 to the design of the first major public building by a woman in this country, in 1927. Important debates about the nature and value of a woman's role in this period in the context of architecture centred around the campaign for married women's property rights, women's access to professional training and the entry of women into the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA). These issues are significant because they generated overt expressions of cultural assumptions and norms which reveal the socially constructed nature of attitudes to women.

## The Amateur Tradition

Before the nineteenth century there were two routes to becoming an architect: through the building trades or through an amateur interest in architecture. From the seventeenth century until the end of the nineteenth century, women worked mainly in the amateur tradition, which until the nineteenth century was associated with the aristocracy and upper classes, without having its later pejorative, feminine connotations.

Although it was exceptional for unmarried women to be apprenticed to the guilds which were allied to building, such as carpentry and masonry, married women in the seventeenth century did sometimes receive their husbands’rights and privileges, and widows of carpenters could take apprentices and havepractical control'³ of the business. As in carpentry, in architecture some women also practised in succession to their husbands. After the death of her architect husband Elizabeth Deane (1760–1828), for instance, completed the Naval Dockyards and Works on Haulbowline Island, Cork (1822), efficiently carrying on the family firm, which was joined in 1806 by Thomas Deane, her eldest son, who was aided by his mother's great ability'.4

However, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries architectural design by women was, it seems, exclusively associated with the upper class, which had the time, money and leisure for essentially amateur pursuits. For the sufficiently well-off, architecture was a domestic activity and was therefore appropriate to women, because it could be practised completely within the confines of the family estate, which might provide not only the site but also the building materials and workers. Lady Wilbraham, who designed Weston Park (1671), a country house in Staffordshire, guided by Palladio's First Book of Architecture, is an early but typical example of a woman architect working in the amateur tradition.⁵

During the Enlightenment, educated women were taught drawing, mathematics and surveying, which gave them an excellent preparation for architecture. For aristocratic women, the design of buildings was seen as an extension of these approved ladies' accomplishments, which in the eighteenth century were often expressed in shellwork rooms and grottoes done in the company of women friends and female members of the family. For instance, in the 1740s the Duchess of Richmond and her daughters devised and executed the decoration of the Goodwood Shell House, which was the result of their serious and expensive avocation.6

Upper- and middle-class women in the nineteenth century combined their interest in architecture with a desire to improve the condition of their estate workers. This, in addition to the benevolent end of providing better accommodation, contributed to the consolidation of the position of the landowning classes. George Eliot's Dorothea in Middlemarch, who built ‘good cottages' for farm labourers to the architect, J. C. Loudon's designs, may have been inspired by Louise, Marchioness of Waterford, artist, friend of Ruskin and founder of the model village of Ford in Northumberland.7

This combination of philanthropy and building within the amateur tradition was significant for women architects. Estate improvements, in one instance, led to projects for large-scale public works - an entrance to Hyde Park Corner and a Thames Embankment designed by Elizabeth, Duchess of Rutland.8 Nevertheless, more typically, women of education and means practised the twin motives of philanthropy and building exclusively in the domestic sphere. After studying architecture while travelling on the continent for ten years, the cousins Jane (d. 1811) and Mary (d. 1841) Parminter built a chapel, school and almshouses in Exmouth for their foundation to promote the conversion of Jews to Christianity. This complex of buildings was joined to a thatched polygonal stone house, A-la-Ronde (1794), by a garden, all designed by the Parminters.9 In their house, much of the Regencystyle furniture and the interior decoration in patterns of shells and feathers was also designed and executed by them in the eighteenthcentury mosaic fashion favoured by lady amateurs.

By 1850 the enormous pool of untrained, single women was recognised as a social and economic problem. Suitable employment had to be found that would be appropriate for what were perceived as women's special feminine qualities, which were not to be polluted by the commercial world and, as Anthea Callen has pointed out, would not weaken male dominance or threaten to undermine the patriarchal order of Victorian society.¹º Married women whose position was particularly invidious often also undertook useful but unpaid employment to preserve their respectability as ladies’. In the mid-Victorian period, the approval of middle-class women's mission to the poor gave many of them experience beyond the home, and architecture, although it remained an exclusively male profession until the 1880s, became an area of acceptable activity for middle-class women if it was combined with philanthropy.11

One of the earliest and most prominent campaigners for women's rights in Victorian Britain, Harriet Martineau, designed her own house, with a concern for philanthropy which was typical of thé nineteenth century but highly uncharacteristic of most private house-builders in that period. She wrote in her Autobiography about her efforts to reform the payment of building workers. She was strongly opposed tothe pernicious custom of the district to give very long credit, even in the case of workmen's wages', and one of her intentions in building her own house was to discountenance this and to break through the custom in my own person'.12

The other building type which, with domestic architecture, was thought appropriate for women to design was a church or chapel, especially if built as a memorial to a family member. This activity reinforced the idea of women's supposedly superior moral and spiritual nature; their traditional caring role could be expressed in the design of memorial churches and these, like most domestic architecture designed by women before the end of the nineteenth century, were first and foremost monuments to the family. They were for the family's use, designed as an unpaid private pursuit, thought to be comfortably within the domestic sphere, but they nevertheless gave women opportunities to design buildings and established precedents for participation in professional practice. Sara Losh, for example, designed the highlò individual and imaginative St Mary at Wrey, in the Lake District, as a memorial to her sister, Katherine (consecrated in 1842).13 Like the eighteenthcentury Parminters, her travels on the continent led her to an appreciation of architecture (in her case, early German and Italian Romanesque), which she treated in a completely personal way, untrammelled by architectural fashion.

The memorial motive and benevolence were combined by Mary Watts in the Mortuary Chapel which she designed for the remains of her husband, the painter G. F. Watts, and executed with her class of the Compton Home Arts and Industries Association, which she had established for the improvement of local young men and women. This provided meaningful, paid employment in the craftbased terra cotta industry. The Watts Chapel was a focus of Arts and Crafts philanthropy and design, and, as Mary Watts described in her book The Word in the Pattern, the local villagers joined her in the construction and decoration of this Chapel of Rest, which she had planned in a complex symbolic system. The round-headed Norman doorway, for example, is deccrated with a terra-cotta choir of Art nouveau heads of angels – not cast from a single mould but each a labour of love of a single villager following, to the best of his or her ability, models provided by Mary Watts.’14

In addition to architectural design, the philanthropic motive led many Victorian women, such as Angela Burdett-Coutts, Adeline Cooper, Octavia Hill and Henrietta Barnett, to formulate policies and housing experiments which prepared the way for the involvement of professional women architects in the public sector in Britain in the twentieth century.15 Also under the philanthropic umbrella, many impoverished middle-class women found employment relating to architecture by tracing plans and writing specifications. The tasks assigned to women in architects’ offices in the second half of the nineteenth century represent the aspirations of women for personal and financial independence through architecture, but they also stand for the limitations of their role and position both in society and in the profession. The copying of architectural plans by tracing, for example, was an essential element of Victorian architectural practice, but it was the least prestigious and most boring job for the most junior member of the firm. It was demanding and required the attention to detail and the neat, repetitive work which were seen as a natural extension of those feminine qualities which were so apt for women's domestic activities, most notably embroidery. Even when women joined together as they did in the Ladies Tracing Society, their marginal position was exploited, since, as a delighted Halsey Ricardo reported to a client, they worked at a very cheap rate’.16

Women as a source of cheap, often occasional or part-time labour whose presence is a threat as well as an assistance to the male workforce is a theme which recurs in architecture, as in other professions and trades, throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. But in the 1850s and 1860s the liberal reformers of the Women's Movement, led by Barbara Leigh Smith, an artist and founder of a Cambridge college, who set up the Association for the Promotion of the Employment of Women, were more concerned with women's access to paid work in an expanding free market than with the implications of the capitalist system for employed working-class women.17

The debates about women's involvement in architecture often centred on their physical limitations. Yet the participation in the building industry of thousands of working-class women in the much more physically demanding work of nail- and brick-making was not seen as problematic or threatening to women's role, because this, in the context of architecture, was defined in middleclass or upper-middle-class terms. The class bias of the nineteenthcentury debates ignored the plight of working-class women in the building industry and produced a myopic view of women's capabilities and their potential as architects, blocking women from full participation in the profession, limiting them to decorative or auxiliary tasks.

In the second half of the nineteenth century the continuum of feminist concerns which included the employment of middle-class women also covered women's education, their entry into the professions and the campaign for married women's rights and female suffrage. Of crucial importance from the mid-century was the commitment of English feminists to reform the married women's property law. Inspired by Harriet Taylor's 1851 article on the first women's rights convention in the United States, a nationwide committee was organised and their work culminated in the Married Women's Property Acts, which went through Parliament in diluted form in 1870 and in the full and final version in 1882. Before this date, under common law married women's property, earnings and inheritances belonged to their husbands. As the distinguished jurist Sir William Blackstone explained: ‘By marriage the very being or legal existence of women is suspended, or at least incorporated or consolidated into that of her husband.’18 This virtual slavery',19 which denied full rights and status to women, was the linchpin of patriarchy and the iron fist in the velvet glove of the doctrine of separate spheres that designated a woman's place as in the home rather than in the commercial world, where she could compete with men for jobs and income.

Architecture, unlike painting, sculpture or the decorative arts, was more clearly aprofession’, practised in offices, often organised by partnerships and in firms, with legal obligations to apprentices, clients and builders through legally binding contracts and under the control of local government boards and bylaws. Architects were sued, often in connection with these contracts, and were bound by local ordinances. Since, under common law, married women were not allowed to make contracts or be sued in their own right, they were thereby precluded from many of the professional responsibilities of architecture. These legal restrictions reinforced and heightened the set of underlying negative assumptions about women's role and value that supporters of the reform of the property laws had organised to oppose. As long as women were the virtual property of their husbands, they did not, and could not, act in a professional capacity as the designers of property – property cannot design property. The removal of the legal, ideological and psychological impedimenta by the Married Women's Property Acts, therefore, had great significance for all women, and it had particular importance for the entry of women into the architectural profession.

In the early 1890s leading architects, such as Norman Shaw and W. R. Lethaby, argued that architecture was an art, not a business or profession, and indeed, between the census of 1887 and that of 1891, the classification and status of the architect altered from Industrial Class'in 1881 toProfessional Class’ under ‘Artist' in 1891. The implication for women of these new perceptions was that if architecture was an art, and art was an area appropriate for women's participation, then architecture was also a suitable activity for women.

The question remained, however, whether women should be allowed full participation in the profession on an equal footing with men or be restricted to those aspects of practice which were seen as expressions of their femininity. Here male supporters from within the ranks of architects, E. W. Godwin, C. H. Townsend and R. Weir Schultz, often did as much harm as good. For example, the Arts and Crafts architect C. H. Townsend's view was superficially sympathetic but exasperatingly double-edged. Citing the divided skirt and the precędent of women decorators who have been known to work for days on scaffolds' to counter the often quoted ‘difficulty women would experience as regards the inspection of buildings and the necessary mounting of scaffolding', Townsend concluded quite illogically that ‘women's work in an architect's office should be “drawing board work", such as ornamental and other detail drawings, competition sets of plans, schemes of colour decoration, and perspective drawings'.20

The extension of the ladies' accomplishment of sketching to architectural drafting was part of a process that was gradualist to the point of being counterproductive. Male gatekeepers allowed women out of their domestic sphere and into architects' offices with the ultimate possibility of becoming architects, but it was felt by C.H. Townsend and others that their femininity created problems from which they had to be protected. In fact, this chivalrous view, which dominated thinking about women's role in architecture in this period, circumscribed their architectural activities and blocked them from becoming designers, the most prestigious role in architectural practice. As women's presence would threaten propriety, the dreaded commingling of the sexes' could only be avoided by a system of architectural apartheid which physically separated women from men in their own room, and reduced their status and therefore their threat to the established order. In a separate“women-clerks"room'she could be set to work as ‘a“draughtswoman"’which was, Townsend wrote, ‘an occupation . . . requiring neatness and delicacy of touch, attention to detail, patienċe and care, [and] is one which would seem at first blush more likely to find its proficients among women than men.' This patriarchal view saw these characteristics as springing from women's femininity and fitting them most naturally and comfortably on to the lower rungs of the architectural ladder.

Today, when women have become professional architects, a similar pattern of discrimination, implemented through the mechanism of sexual division of labour, remains, according to a recent RIBA survey, which showed that women architects can expect to hold fewer positions of power and influence in architectural practices and that they are more likely to earn less than men throughout their careers.21

In addition to the more mundane office jobs, the other area to which women were assigned in the late nineteenth century was design for the decorative arts associated with architecture. In Women and Work, edited by one of the founding mothers of the

Women's Movement, Emily Faithfull, E. W. Godwin argued convincingly that women should be trained as architects who could design for the applied arts as well as building, and that furniture and decoration were particularly profitable areas for women architect-designers, as they had been for him.2² However, Godwin's public position was in fact eroded in practice. The work of Beatrice Philip, Godwin's architectural pupil, and later his wife, shows that his argument was applied in his own office, as it was in the profession generally, in its narrowest sense, with Philip painting the decorative panels for Godwin-designed furniture, such as the satinwood cabinet with four painted panels depicting the seasons, 1877, which is today in the Victoria and Albert Museum. There is no evidence that Beatrice Philip designed buildings, and even at a time when the status of the applied and decorative arts was rising and there was much talk of ‘the democracy of the arts', the hierarchy of the arts which privileged architecture over decoration made architecture more prestigious, and more financially rewarding, than decoration. Thus, through the repressive mechanism of the sexual division of labour, women were assigned to the lesser arts', without the option that male architect-designers had of architectural design.

In addition to decoration, women's experience in the home and their higher moral sense particularly fitted them, it was reasoned, to interior design. Thus the Domestic Revival and the Queen Anne' and Arts and Crafts Movements in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries helped promote women's participation in the decorative arts and in interior design, as well as, to a more limited extent, in the architectural profession, at the same time reinforcing the cultural stereotype. As interior designers, architectural theorists and writers, women helped develop the late-Victorian cult of the 'House Beautiful'. Books by women proliferated: for example, The Drawing Room (1878) by Lucy Faulkner, The Dining Room (1876) by Mrs Loftie, Beautiful Houses (1882) by Mrs H. R. Haweis and Suggestions on House Decoration in Painting, Woodwork and Furniture (1876) by Agnes and Rhoda Garrett.

The Garretts were not only the best-known women designers and decorators of the period but they were also active feminists, campaigning tirelessly for women's rights and the strugglefor the successful removal of intolerable grievances" ’,23 as Rhoda's sister, Millicent Garrett Fawcett, called it. For Rhoda, joined by her cousin Agnes, architecture was the original goal, but at first they found it impossible to get taken on in an architect's office. Undaunted, they occupied rooms in a glass-stainer's office and then were formally apprenticed for 18 months to the architect J. M. Brydon, although they were not given any building work there. Their decoration of a house for Agnes' sister, the pioneer doctor

Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, and other projects, including much of the drawing-room furniture at Philip Webb's country house, Standen, established them as leaders in their field.24

## The Entry into the Profession

Like medicine and the law, architecture achieved professional status in the nineteenth century, most notably through the founding in 1834 of the professional body, the Royal Institute of British Architects. Although women were not admitted for more than 60 years after its establishment, women, as we have seen, worked as architects without. RIBA membership or approval. The 1891 census records 19 women architects in England and Wales and five in Scotland, in addition to the women who designed buildings within the amateur tradition', who would not have shown up in the census.

In 1898, Ethel Mary Charles (1871-1962) became the first woman to enter the RIBA. Ethel Charles and her sister, Bessie Ada Charles, who became the second woman member of the Institute in 1900, were articled for three years to George and Peto, after being barred from entering the Architectural Association (AA) in 1893. Ethel Charles supplemented her training by doing university extension courses - in which she received distinctions. After completing her time with Ernest George, she worked as an assistant to the Arts and Crafts architect Walter Cave, and travelled in England, studying Gothic and domestic architecture. In June 1898 she sat the RIBA examinations, almost unnoticed, and her name went forward for Associate membership.25

A last-ditch stand was made by Fellows who wished the RIBA to continue as an all-male organisation. W. Hilton Nash circulated a paper, which was signed by other architects who believed that it would be prejudical [sic] to the interests of the Institute to elect a lady member'.26 Ernest George nominated Ethel Charles and vouched for her ability and seriousness of purpose. A motion to adopt all proposed new members was put and the vote stood 51 for and 16 against. A few months later the RIBA came within one vote of reversing this decision to admit women.²7

Ethel Charles practised with her sister, Bessie Ada, and specialised in domestic work (See Fig. 7.1), entering a competition for labourers’ cottages and designing houses, especially in Falmouth, such as Gyllyngyvase Terrace, 1907.28 In 1909 she won first prize for a church design from among 200 competitors in Germany,²9 but her knowledge of London architecture directed her attention to the City and commercial building. However, domestic architecture remained the socially sanctioned sphere for women architects and, ironically, the volume of domestic building was beginning to dwindle just as they started to enter the profession. Edwardian England was characterised by a concentration of wealth, population and building commissions in the cities, and large public commissions were jealously guarded by male architects. Alas, Ethel Charles, the first woman member of the RIBA, holder of its Silver Medal (1905), international competition winner and the first woman to address an architectural society in Great Britain, built, with few exceptions, simple, quiet houses, often for women clients, instead of the experimental large-scale projects which she admired. This domestic ghetto', in which the Charles sisters and many women architects have since found themselves, limited women's opportunities and reinforced sexual stereotypes; however, it also directed women architects to the most socially useful area of architecture – housing. It is a measure of the different perspectives in the debates surrounding architectural practice today that while many women of the older generation reject domestic architecture for fear of being typecast, and many professional women architects strive for conventional success through the design of public and commercial buildings, feminist architects, with their commitment to women's needs, consciously embrace the stereotype of women as having a special concern for the family and house design.

Although Ethel and Bessie Charles had made a breakthrough into the male domain of professional architecture, few women followed. It made little immediate difference for other women and few joined them in the ranks of the architectural profession. The Charles sisters' struggle shows that at the precise time women were making their entry into the architectural profession, the pressure to maintain the traditional role and position of women intensified: they were refused admission to the Architectural Association (1893), embroiled in battles at the RIBA over entry (1898 and 1899) and involved in confrontations at the AA (1902). All these specific instances of overt discrimination were combined with the daily strain of being outside established practice, swimming against cultural assumptions in a male-dominated profession.

The idea that women were interlopers in the male workplace held sway long after the institutional barriers had been breached at the RIBA. Ideologically, there was only the merest chink in the rigid sexual division of labour which assigned the practice of architecture to men until the conditions of the First World War and the militant suffragist movement combined to force a reappraisal of women's role. Numerically, little impression was made on the profession until the 1930s. The architect Arnold Mitchell expressed the entrenched nature of these attitudes which circumscribed·women's activities when he spoke of the ‘very serious problem ... this problem of sex and the woman taking up work which the man up to the present had been accustomed to consider his own separate province.'3o Fear that women would take jobs, and lucrative ones at that, which had traditionally belonged to men was often heightened by fears of unemployment - male unemployment. Architecture, like all professions, is very much over-stocked’,31 R. Weir Schultz reminded his audience at a conference on employment for women at Caxton Hall, London. Looking back on the previous years of her experience, a young woman architect who was optimistic that women would succeed as architects registered the feeling of otherness and the difficulties of getting work in the 1920s:

There is a certain prejudice against taking women into architects’ offices not because they cannot do the work, but because a tendency to jealousy on the part of men is feared. Accordingly the few girl students who start looking for positions have up to now found it rather difficult to get and to keep them.32

After the First World War, a new generation of professional women architects emerged in Britain. Although most architectural schools have no records of when they first admitted women, the Glasgow School of Art (c. 1905) and the University of Manchester (1909) are the earliest now known to have accepted women students.33 Scotland seems to have been more advanced than England in architectural education for women; Edith M. Burnet Hughes was awarded the Diploma in Architecture in 1914 from the Aberdeen Art School, where she later taught (1915-18). The Architectural Association, which eventually produced the most successful group of women graduates, did not open its doors to women until 1917.

In the 1920s less than a handful of women were taken into the RIBA as Associates: Gillian Harrison (née Cooke), Eleanor K. D. Hughes, Winifred Ryle (later Maddock) and Gertrude W. M. Leverkus. It was not until 1931 that Gillian Harrison (1898–1974) became the first full woman member of the RIBA.³4

In 1928 Elisabeth Whitworth Scott (1898-1972), a recent graduate of the Architectural Association, won the competition for the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon (see Fig. 7.2). Scott's theatre galvanised British women architects, as Sophia Hayden's Women's Pavilion at the Chicago World's Fair had done for American women in 1893. The Stratford Theatre, apart from its obvious importance as the home for Shakespearean productions, was seen as a victory for all women and as evidence of their ability to win and complete large-scale public commissions. Professor A. E. Richardson praised it as the first important work erected in this country from the designs of a woman architect'.35

Chosen out of 72 entries by a distinguished jury, Scott's design of

1927 looked to new architectural developments on the continent and in Scandinavia and was put up with the greatest care for craftsmanship and materials by the firm that she formed, Scott, Chesterton and Sheperd. The theatre was completed in 1932. Maurice Chesterton disclaimed any personal share whatever in the successful design’.36

Elisabeth Scott was representative of women architects of her generation. They tended to be eldest daughters or only children, from a professional background, with an architect relative and often building for women clients. She was conscious that she would encounter discrimination.

After the Second World War, like many other women architects, she moved into the public sector, and in the 1960s she worked for the Bournemouth Borough Architects Department on projects such as the rebuilding of the Bournemouth Pier Pavilion Theatre and Restaurant and the Entertainment Hall of the Boscombe Pier Pavilion.37

The sexual division of labour, which Anthea Callen describes in her essay, is the repressive mechanism through which architecture is made gender-specific. Architecture in our society is still thought to be an activity more appropriate for men than women, and in spite of improvements in the law and in access to professional bodies and in spite of better educational opportunities for women, women do not have the same options to participate in architecture that men do.

Women's exclusion from architectúral practice is a case study in patriarchal control and economic hegemony. The debates which surround women's participation in architecture are highly charged both emotionally and politically, because architecture physically defines the public and private spheres: to allow women access to the design of architecture therefore threatens patriarchal control of spatial definitions, which are essential to maintain the social, economic and cultural status quo.

Although the proportion of women entering schools of architecture is rising, women students are met with a set of pressures which induce feelings of inadequacy and isolation. Architectural schools are male-dominated institutions with their overwhelmingly male student bodies and virtually all-male teaching staff (97 per cent). Without female role-models and with an architectural history constructed of male cult-figures, past and present, a precedent for women's architectural practice is still a very real need of women students and architects alike.

This paper has shown that for hundreds of years women have worked as architects in the amateur tradition', as conventional, professional architects, and more recently feminist architectural cooperatives have developed a radical client-centred practice.38

However, the relationship of women to architecture remains highly problematic; at one end of the design continuum, the image of the architect remains firmly male, and at the other, the women who use buildings have little control over or understanding of their production. The art historical values of innovation and quality which exist in relation to an aesthetic currently known as the mainstream'place women's issues and achievements in a netherworld of other', while British cities are planned and designed with scant attention paid to the needs of women, especially those in communities where mobility and spending power are restricted.39

Women are not, however, inert or powerless. Struggle and the daily life of architectural practice come together. In dealing with clients, for example, issues of race, class and sex are confronted. As the architect Elsie Owusu has pointed out, the expectation that buildings are designed by white middle-class men for white middleclass male clients ‘is challenged every time a black woman [architect] walks on site.'40

## Notes

1 Boys, Jos, ‘Architecture', in A Resource Book on Women Working in Design, ed. Tag Gronberg and Judy Attfield, London Institute, Central School of Art and Design, 1986, p. 11.

2 Jagonari Women's Educational Resource Centre’, Matrix, 1987. Both Matrix and the Women's Design Service produce information publications, which I have relied on heavily.

3 Fraser, Antonia, The Weaker Vessel: Woman's Lot in Seventeenth-Century England, Methuen, London, 1984, p. 108.

4 Deane, Sir Thomas Manly, Sir Thomas Deane P.R.H.A.’, Cork Historical and Archaeological Society Journal, 1901, p. 152; in the possession of the Deane family.

5 Hussey, Christopher, Weston Park, Staffordshire – I', Country Life, 9 November 1945, Vol. 98. p. 819.

6 Jourdain, M., Shellwork and grottoes', Country Life, 11 February 1944, Vol. 95, pp. 242–3.

7 Darley, Gillian, Villages of Vision, Architectural Press, London, 1975, p. 47.

8 Hussey, Christopher, English Country Houses: Late Georgian 1800–1840, Country Life, 1958, pp. 122–3.

9 ‘Some points of view we all pursue', n.d., and other archival material, National Monuments Record Office.

10 Callen, Anthea, Angel in the Studio: Women in the Arts and Crafts Movement 1870–1914, Astragal Books, London, 1979, p. 22.

11 See, for example, Employment for educated women', Builder, 30 Women Architects November 1861; ibid., 2 November 1883, Vol. 44, p. 622; Walker, 103

Lynne, ed., Women Architects: Their Work, Sorella Press, London, 1984, especially pp. 19 and 37.

12 Martineau, Harriet, Autobiography, Vol. 2, Virago, London, 1983, p. 231 (originally published 1877).

13 Wood, M. A., Memorial to two sisters: Sara Losh's church of St Mary, Wrey', Country Life, 4 November 1971, Vol. 150, pp. 1230–1.

14 Blunt, W. S.‘Guide to the Watts Gallery', n. d. Mary Watts detailed the symbolism of her work in The Word in the Pattern: A Key to the Symbols on the chapel at Compton, W. H. Ward & Co., London, n.d. (1905?).

15 Darley, Gillian, Women in the public sector’, in Walker, op. cit., pp. 37–40. See also, Pearson, Lynn F., The Architectural and Social History of Cooperative Living, Macmillan, London, 1988.

16 Letter from Halsey Ricardo to a client, 1883, British Architectural Library.

17 Taylor, Barbara, Eve and the New Jerusalem: Socialism and Feminism in Nineteenth-Century England, Virago, London, 1983, p. 279.

18 Quoted by Holcombe, Lee, in Wives  Property: Reform of the Married Women's Property Law in Nineteenth-Century England, Martin Robertson, Oxford, 1983, p. 25. Before 1882, married women could go to law to obtain their property rights in Equity, but it was an expensive process, thus limiting it to the wealthy. Transactions afterwards were through a trustee, making dealings protracted and cumbersome.

19 Eliza Lynn Linton, quoted ibid., p. 18.

20 Townsend, C. H., "Women as Architects', British Architect, 31 December 1886, Vol. 26, p. viii.

21 'Report from the Women in Architecture Sub-Group’, RIBA, January, 1985.

22 Reprinted in British Architect, 12 June 1874, Vol. 1, p. 378.

23 Quoted in Taylor, op. cit., p. 279.

24 Moncure, Daniel Conway, Travels in South Kensington, Trübner & Co., London, 1882, pp. 166–71.

25 RIBA Nomination Papers for Associate Membership, 1898, British Architectural Library.

26 ‘The admission of lady Associates,’ RIBA Journal, 10 December 1898, Vol. VI, p. 78.

27 RIBA Journal, 11 March 1899, Vol. VI, p. 278.

28 Drawings by Ethel and Bessie Charles, held by the British Architectural Library, are listed in Catalogue of the Royal Institute of British Architects C-F, Gregg Press, Farnborough, 1972, pp. 22–3. The Charles sisters' London address was 49 York Chambers, a block of flats for professional women with communal facilities,

designed by Balfour & Turner in 1892 (illustrated in Architectural Design, 1978, Vol. 48, p. 357).

29 Postcard from Berlin organisers to Ethel Charles, 8 May 1909, in the possession of the family.

30 Mitchell, Arnold, Builder, 22 February 1902, Vol. 82, p. 181. This statement was made after a talk by Ethel Charles at the Architectural Association which is extensively reported in this article.

31 Schultz, R. Weir, Architecture for women’, Architectural Review, September 1908, Vol. 24. p. 154.

32 Birmingham Dispatch, 5 January 1928.

33 Survey of Schools of Architecture, Beeban Morris and Lynne Walker, 1984.

34 Architects: Women, Biography File, British Architectural Library.

35 Richardson, A. E., Builder, 22 April 1932, Vol. 142, p. 718.

36 Daily Telegraph, 6 January 1928.

37 Letter from Bernard Ward, former Chief Architect, City of Bournemouth, to Nadine Beddington, 9 May 1984.

38 See especially, Matrix, Making Space: Women and the Man-made Environment, Pluto Press, London, 1984; Building for Childcare: Making Better Buildings for the Under-5’s, produced and published jointly by Matrix and the GLC Women's Committee, London, 1986.

39 For the radical role that working-class women played in making and assessing housing policy, see, for instance, Swenarton, Mark, Homes Fit for Heroes: The Policy and Architecture of Early State Housing, Heinemann, London, 1981, pp. 62, 91–2 and 97–9.

40 Elsie Owusu, talk on design practice at the ICA,The Design World: Women on the Cutting Edge’, 21 May 1988.

Part Three Women in Design Production