8

# 'If You Have No Sons’: Furniture-making in Britain

Pat Kirkham

Furniture-making in Britain is, and has been since the Middle Ages, male dominated at the levels of production, design and entrepreneurial activities. Within the various crafts which comprise furniture-making, only upholstery and, more recently, french polishing, have admitted women in any substantial numbers. Women designers have never featured prominently and the majority of firms are run by men.

The expectations of girls and the concept of what is suitable work for females are bounded by myriad assumptions – spoken and unspoken, acknowledged and unacknowledged. The furniture industry is yet another example of the apparently simple and obvious fact that girls and women are capable of a great many things not normally expected of them if they are given the opportunity. In furniture-making, training and career opportunities mainly went the way of boys, but occasionally girls – if they had no brothers to follow their father and widows – if they had no adult sons to carry on the business were able to work as furniture-makers.

This essay examines some of the ways in which women have entered the furniture trade and, at the same time as outlining their contributions to it, considers the nature of their marginalisation within it. It covers a broad historical period in order to indicate similarities as well as differences in attitudes over time towards women in the trade, and it indicates how, in particular circumstances, changing social relations tempered notions of fitness' and ‘suitability'¹ and women proved themselves fully capable of doing what was deemed to be men's work'. It focuses on London, particularly in the later stages, because the capital not only constituted the largest single furniture-making centre in the country but was also generally in advance of the provinces in terms of developments in design, manufacture and business practices, at least until the nineteenth century. The focus is also partly for convenience in that it simplifies the analysis of a long historical period and partly unavoidable because so very little is known about women in provincial furniture-making centres in Britain.

Since first beginning research on the modern London furniture industry some twenty years ago, I have kept a file index of women makers, entrepreneurs and designers, but most of the references remain tantalisingly brief. There is sufficient evidence, however, from the late seventeenth century onwards to suggest that women were never totally absent from the trade and that their roles changed over the years. One specific question which intrigued me, together with my growing interest in how and why women were marginalised in some areas of craft and design but not in others, propelled me into pulling together my disparate material. The question related to the opportunities afforded to the daughters of furniture-makers when there was no male heir in the family.

A general discussion related to the gender of heirs took place after Anthea Callen's paper on the sexual division of labour in the Arts and Crafts Movement at a conference on women and design organised by the Design History Society in 1985 (a later version of which is printed in this volume). The roles of May Morris, daughter of William Morris, as designer, embroideress and business woman were the subject of discussion. The question of whether she would have received quite the same encouragement in all those roles within the firm of Morris and Co. had she had a brother was one I felt obliged to raise. Possibly not, seemed to be the answer. Even with someone who distanced himself from so many of the orthodoxies and restrictions of Victorian values as William Morris, it is difficult to argue that children of both sexes would definitely have been treated equally, would have received the same encouragement to design as well as to execute objects, let alone run part of the firm. Would a male child have ended 'up as a designer/maker of embroidery, a woman's craft', or might he have entered a male' craft such as furniture-making?

The topic emerged again in my discussions with Ray Hille, one of the few women to run a furniture-making firm in Britain in the half-century after the First World War. Encouraged by her Jewish émigré father, who set up business in London's East End at the beginning of the twentieth century, she not only developed her talents as a designer but also succeeded him as head of the firm. Would this have happened had Salamon Hille had a son? Probably not, was the answer. Yet Ray Hille was thrilled to learn that she followed in the tradition of Catherine Naish, a royal furnituremaker of the eighteenth century who took over her father's royal commission in 1759 because there was no male heir.² This was confirmed by recent discussions with Doris Young, designer and managing director of Evans of London, who took over running the family firm after her father's death in 1943. She has no doubt that this only happened because there was no male heir.

The main bulk of this chapter deals with craft and enrepreneurial activities but there is also a small section on women as designers. This leads into the short case studies of Ray Hille and Doris Young, both of whom acted as designers as well as entrepreneurs (though Doris Young much less so than Ray Hille). Together with the section on women and war work, they highlight some of the ways in which the dominant patterns within the furniture trade have been broken through, if not broken down.

## The Medieval World

Within furniture-making the notion of capability has often rested on the thorny question of physical strength: were/are women strong enough to undertake the physically demanding aspects of certain furniture crafts? There can be no doubt that in the Middle Ages the woodworking side of furniture-making was arduous. Joiners and carpenters worked in solid wood which was heavy to cut, lift and shape. Indeed, as late as the eighteenth century, certain trade guides commented that youths (and the assumption was that they were male) wishing to become furniture-makers needed to be physically strong. Even in the twentieth century the heavy nature of some of the work was cited by male furniture-makers as a reason why women should not be allowed to enter their craft. Yet hard physical work was not unknown to medieval women: agricultural labour, for instance, was even more physically exhausting and dirty then than it is today. There is no reason to believe, therefore, that medieval women could not have stood up to the physical demands of furniture-making. There is a certain similarity here to the discrepancy between the .still-pervasive myth that British coalmining is too.tough and dangerous a job for women and the reality of women working in coal mines in both the USA and the USSR. However, although we know that some women did work as furniture-makers, the evidence, scanty and scattered as it is, does not suggest that men and women participated either in equal numbers or experienced equal opportunities within the trade in the Middle Ages.

Feminist historians have done an excellent job in rescuing the lost world of medieval women. They have shown how the dominant ideology about women, which came through religion and aristocratic power and confirmed women as inferior, was tempered by social reality and particularly by the experience of life in the expanding urban centres which afforded women certain freedoms. They have emphasised that women wereparticipant workers in the household unit of production', the main unit of production in medieval Europe.³ Female producers and retailers were active in a variety of occupations including shipwrights, armourers, bakers, brewers, barber-surgeons, bow-stringers and tanners. Clearly not all medieval women were the saintly maidens of literature and the church, or the anonymous peasants working in the field that popular history would have us believe.

Having established the important part played by women in the medieval economy, however, it is necessary for historians to strike a note of caution. In our enthusiasm to prove women's capabilities by pointing to evidence from the past, we must not overstate the position if the evidence does not warrant it. This is particularly true of furniture-making, where it is difficult to know how far to generalise from a few isolated references to women working, particularly when the evidence relates to different towns in Europe. Some women certainly made furniture, but how many and in what proportion to men is difficult to say. Nowhere do women appear to have worked in the trade in anything like the same numbers as men. A feminist analysis needs to be applied to the evidence in hand even if it leads to the conclusion that women were largely excluded from thé areas of work in which we are interested as historians. Indeed, it is not surprising that women should have been marginalised in furniture-making, or any other occupation, given that medieval society was structured so as to exclude women from public and political life. They could not be jurors in courts, serve as borough officials, aldermen and mayors or hold official positions within the manor. The dominant ideology reflected and reinforced the subordination of women: the church encouraged women to model themselves on a Madonna who represented purity, gentleness, domesticity and gentility, while in literature genteel ladies were admired from a distance according to the complicated etiquette of courtly love. Many poor women in the medieval period were denied jobs associated with gentility but nevertheless the ideological importance of gentility in defining femininity partly explains why furniture-making - as opposed to, say, silk weaving - was a male-dominated craft in the more prosperous urban centres. The woodworking side of furniture-making was dirty as well as laborious and could in no way be considered genteel. By contrast, upholstery was considered more respectable. This was partly because the main cost of much furniture lay in the expensive hangings or coverings used: the slightest mistake in cutting and sewing proved extremely costly. It was also a clean craft. There was no dust generated, as with woodworking, and therefore decent clothes could be worn at work without fear of spoiling them. It is clear that by the late seventeenth century more women furnituremakers were associated with upholstery than with any other aspect. This was probably also true for the Middle Ages, but there is insufficient evidence at the moment to bear this out. Sewing was, of course, a skill traditionally taught to girls in the home and therefore it appeared a natural' occupation for them to follow.Yet men also worked at upholstery: they learned to cut and sew as part of a craft apprenticeship. Furthermore, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries men were the only upholsterers allowed to work with the most expensive materials,4 and it is very likely that this was a medieval tradition, of the sort that existed within the craft of embroidery.⁵

There were no formal restrictions to women entering any of the furniture-making crafts or any of the guilds which represented them. The origins of the guild system in Western Europe are obscure but, from at least the twelfth century, these collective organisations were the main institutions whereby monopolies over particular crafts were practised: there were strict controls on apprenticeships, prices and wages were regulated and high standards of production were enforced. Women furniture-makers were in guild membership in the English provinces in the reign of Richard II (1377–99) and in 1612 the Upholsterers' Company in Salisbury drew up rules which made reference to sisters as well as brothers. Yet one should not leap to the conclusion that men and women were equal within the guilds, which were very much male institutions. They were run by men, mainly for men. Their language was one of male dominance. Women were allowed to learn a craft by right of patrimony, that is by virtue of one's father having been a member of the guild. The London companies were run by Masters and few women ever joined the ranks of the Livery (one of the main ruling bodies within each company).Brotherhood' predominated; sisters' were the exception rather than the rule. The provisions made in most guild rules or charters for widows (not widowers) rested on the assumption that members were male.

Women were mainly involved in the guilds through marriage or birth, acting as assistants to their husbands or fathers and thereby supplementing the family/household earnings. Even those few guilds which formally prohibited women from employment made exceptions in favour of wives and daughters. Widows also sometimes carried on the business after their husbands died. Women may have been participant workers' in the household economy but their role was defined by their particular relationship to a male furniture-maker. Furthermore, whatever her precise task within the trade, a woman was also expected to run the household as well. Medieval working women did two jobs, just as working women do today.

Some women worked independently of their husbands at their craft or trade. It was customary for the wives of freemen of London and certain other towns and cities throughout Europe to be allowed to work as sole merchants' orfemmes soles’.7 In early sixteenthcentury London this custom spread to the wives of non-freemen as women became increasingly involved in production outside the home. It was these women who most resembled the small independent male artisan producers. There was one major difference: if a married woman took an apprentice, no matter whether she was a femme sole or not, the customs of the City of London decreed that the apprentice be bound to both the woman and her husband, even if the latter worked at a completely different trade and knew nothing of his wife's trade. The regulation ensuring that the husband was absolved of any responsibility for the debts of his wife indicates the independence of the femme sole, but it should be remembered that it was introduced to protect the male.8

Some of the femmes soles may have been women who trained as craft apprentices, but even less is known about this aspect of women's work and training. Some women took on only female apprentices; indeed, the reference to the custom of the City of London requiring that apprentices be bound to the husband as well as the wife applied only to female apprentices. The custom appears to have rested on an assumption that women took on only female apprentices although they did occasionally bind boys. An all-female group of apprentices constructed a particular and different atmosphere in the craft workshop and household, where apprentices lived for the duration of their training from the age of 13 to 21 years. This undoubtedly appealed to many parents and guardians of young girls: they could rest assured that their charges were not in the way of the daily temptations, from general time wasting and lack of concentration on their work to overt sexual relations, that they would have faced in a household which also included male apprentices, whose reputation for riotous behaviour was notorious.9

At first consideration it would seem that another reason why parents and guardians preferred girls to be bound with a woman was the latter's knowledge and understanding of the biological and emotional changes associated with adolescence, particularly menstruation. This understanding would have been there, however, had the girl been apprenticed to a married man, because his wife would have been in charge of looking after the apprentices. It may have been that there was also a preference for girls to be taught the details of their craft in the workshop by a woman rather than a man, but the evidence is not clear.

As it was, most women furniture-makers did not learn about furniture-making through a full seven-year craft apprenticeship as most male furniture-makers did. On the contrary, daughters learned about the work as they grew up and wives learned about it after marriage. The guilds recognised the economic necessity of using the ‘free' or cheap labour of these women. They also acknowledged that, at a time when life expectancy was not long and death struck indiscriminately, suddenly and frequently, it was necessary for wives or daughters to carry on a business. It was customary in London for this to happen. There is increasing evidence of bequests of tools of the trade from husband to wife in the fourteenth century, as workshops grew in size, and this was to be the pattern throughout the later Middle Ages.1o This was the changing social reality, noted by historians, which allowed women to step outside prescribed roles – even if for some of them it was only until a son or nephew was old enough to take over the business or they retired from the trade altogether on remarriage.

Although in times of economic expansion the old taboos about what was fit work for women fell away, they were re-constructed at times of economic contraction, as in the fifteenth century, for instance, when male-dominated craft institutions attempted to exclude women from the labour-force.11 As today, the marginalised position of women made them particularly vulnerable to the ups and downs of the economy. In general, however, the increased opportunities for women to enter the crafts opened up a new world outside the immediate domestic environment and household concerns and brought a new dimension to their lives.

## The Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries

Major changes took place in furniture-making in England after the Restoration of 1666, when the new craft of cabinet-making was introduced. Trade guides noted that this craft, which produced the sophisticated veneered furniture previously only associated with foreign craftworkers, was ‘somewhat laborious' but emphasised that a would-be apprentice needed more ingenuity than strength'.12 Since not even the greatest male chauvinist has denied the ingenuity of women, one might expect more women to have entered furniture-making. This did not happen: indeed, the proportion of women working in the woodworking side of the London trade probably decreased in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. This was because the very capitalistic forces which had assisted the entry of women into crafts and trades in the later Middle Ages had created such wealth by this time that the hallmark of the successful tradesman was that his wife did not work either at a craft or assist him in his business. The male success in the world of work was reflected in the relocation of the wife to the domestic sphere – to a supposedly leisured existence.

Little is known of those women who continued to work at the bench. A minute proportion – less than 1 per cent – of furnituremaking ‘masters' and apprentices were women.13 The numbers were highest in the 1710s and 1720s and held steady from the 1730s to the 1770s, after which they fell dramatically. Since most women worked in upholstery, it is not surprising to find that 75 per cent of women bound to women masters' were in that craft (although this amounted to very few women in all). In general, the fees charged by women taking on apprentice upholsterers were roughly the same as those charged by men. However, what was then the highest fee charged by any London furniture-maker was given to Sarah Goodchild, upholsteress, in 1746 by Thomas Hoare when his son, also Thomas, was indentured for £157 10s.14. This shows that certain women had equal status to men, although the path to success was more easily reached within the area of upholstery because it was viewed as a domain appropriate to women.

The wives of the poorest craftsmen working on their own continued to be forced by economic necessity to assist their husbands at the bench. Those married to craftsmen who ran larger and more prosperous firms were usually so closely involved in the running of their husband's firms that they were described as mistress of the managing part’ of them.1⁵ Management became an increasingly important part of business activity as firms grew in size and complexity.16 As furniture-makers abandoned their craft work for supervisory and entrepreneurial activities, so too did their wives. It was in this area, rather than as makers, that women played their most significant role within the furniture trade in the eighteenth century.

Many of these women were themselves daughters of craftworkers or tradesmen, brought up in a household which included apprentices and familiar with workshop customs and practices. They helped their mothers run the household and sometimes assisted their fathers in the business. These women transferred skills of management learned in the household – the private domestic sphere – to the public sphere of the workshop. They helped their husbands manage the firm, taking charge of the book-keeping and accounts, as well as standing in for them when they were absent from the workshop. Indeed, the ability of a woman to run the business not only in a husband's temporary absence but in the case of death was something Defoe recommended craftsmen/entrepreneurs to look out for when choosing a wife.17

Examples of wives and daughters running a firm can be seen in the royal household accounts of the eighteenth century. Several women appear as royal-warrant-holders, supplying furniture to the Lord Chamberlain's Office, which was also in charge of the repair and maintenance of furniture.18 These royal commissions were much sought after, not only for their prestige but also because they brought in regular work and income. None of the royal furnituremakers who were female seems to have been an independent femme sole. The first woman who appears in the royal accounts after the Restoration is Elizabeth Price, who, in 1685, took over the post of Royal Joyner' after the death of her husband.19 The same post, by then titled Royal Joyner and Chair maker', was later taken over by Catherine Naish, who held it for 13 years from 1759, after it had been held by her father, Henry Williams, for nearly 30 years.20 Women also worked as royal upholsterers. For instance, Sarah

Gilbert took up such a post in 1729 after the death of John Gilbert, her husband or son,21 while Hannah Farmborough²² and Lucy Gilroy²³ took over their late husbands’ appointments in 1773 and 1783 respectively.

Besides the royal furniture-makers there were other female makers operating in London in the eighteenth century. Sarah Touzey ran a carving firm in Bloomsbury²4 and leading up holsteresses included Martha Williamson and Sarah Goodchild.2s Not all of these women were widows carrying on their late husbands' businesses. It has been assumed that the Ann Buck whose trade card (see Fig. 8.1) indicates that she was a dealer in furniture and upholstery in Holborn carried on the business of her husband, Henry Buck, after his death in 1750. A member of the Joiners’ Company Livery, Henry Buck was a wealthy cabinet-maker with a workshop in St Paul's Churchyard. Ann appears to have worked independently, however, because not only did she work from a separate address for the nine years before Henry's death but she also ran a different type of firm – he made and sold furniture while she bought and sold it.26

One of the better-known examples of a widow continuing a business is that of Alice Hepplewhite, who, two years after the death of her husband, George, published The Cabinet-maker and Upholsterer's Guide, 1788, a folio volume of designs from drawings by A. Hepplewhite & Co., which was the largest since the publication of Thomas Chippendale's Director in 1754. It proved such a success that a second edition was issued in the following year and a third in 1794.27

As early as the 1720s, however, Daniel Defoe commented that some women acted as if they were ashamed to be the wives of tradesmen.28 This tendency increased as the size and scope of furniture-making firms expanded in the second half of the eighteenth century. Trained craftworkers who ran the larger firms no longer touched the tools of their trade. They were primarily entrepreneurs.

One such was John Cobb, a leading upholsterer of the second half of the eighteenth century, a haughty character who was described as strutting around his workshop in full dress of the most superb and costly kind . . . giving orders to his men’.29 Such a man would have regarded it as a social stigma for his wife to work; she had to pretend she was a gentlewoman, in the manner of their close friends the Halletts. William Hallett was one of the most successful furniture-makers of his day, so successful that in 1747 he bought a country estate formerly owned by the Duke of Chandos, an act which Horace Walpole labelled a mockery of sublunary grandeur'.3º Figure 8.2 shows William Hallett, his wife and family in the ideal situation to which all furniture-makers aspired:

both husband and wife liberated from work and living as country gentry.

## The Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries

One of the maior developments in the nineteenth century was the growth of the cheap furniture trade, which supplied an expanding lower-middle-class and respectable working-class market. Beginning in the East End of London in the 1830s, and growing enormously from the 1870s, thedishonourable trade'(as it was known, to differentiate it from the quality or ‘honourable trade') was characterised by cheap labour, independent masters, small workshops, an extensive division of labour, hand production, low wages, long hours and a lack of trade union organisation. Cheap goods were not produced in large, heavily mechanised factories – that was not to come until the inter-war years and later – but by human power in highly exploitative conditions.³1

The overwhelming majority of East End workshops were run by men. A few women worked on their own as independent‘masters' or employed two or three assistants, just as the men did, but these were few and far between. In general, women worked as employees, mainly in upholstery, french polishing and in fancy cabinetmaking. Their cheap labour was often undercut by the even cheaper labour of young boys or the free'labour of the furniture-maker's own children (girls and boys), who, from about the age of six, were put to doing simple finishing work.32

## Fancy cabinet-making

There was a distinct sexual divison of labour within fancy cabinetmaking, which was also known as cabinet small work. A great deal of this was made for and used by women. Indeed, the word ladies' was prefixed to a variety of pieces, such as jewel boxes, dressingcases, work tables, work boxes, portable desks and writing-tables. Yet the only contribution women were allowed to make was the lining of the interiors of cheap luxuries’, such as jewel boxes and dressing-cases, with paper, silk, satin or velvet. The women who did this work, which required some skill, were usually the wives of fancy cabinet-makers, but such was the sexual division of labour that the part which required greater care and nicety', such as the lining of jewel cases with velvets, was given over to men.33

## French polishing

Women in Another division of labour based on gender developed later in the Design Production nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as increasing numbers of 118 women worked as french polishers. Although there was no difference in the actual craft process carried out by female and by male polishers and they both had to use the same amount of elbow grease' when polishing, women generally tended to work on the smaller items, while the very largest pieces of furniture were reserved for men to polish, the implication being that they had greater stamina.34 The inter-war years saw great changes in this part of the trade, mainly as a result of the introduction of quick-drying cellulose lacquers, which gave a hard finish and were applied by mechanically operated spray-guns. Many polishers found themselves made redundant as the new work was done by less skilled people, often women, in working conditions which were widely acknowledged to be rather dirty, messy and unpleasant.35

## Upholstery

Women continued to be more strongly represented in the soft' side of the trade than in any other. In upholstery a division of labour began to emerge in the early nineteenth century between the two main tasks of stuffing and covering. Both men and women worked as chair-stuffers in the mid nineteenth century, but there was a degree of division in this craft according to gender; the cutting and covering of better-quality items was always left to men. When Henry Mayhew reported on the working conditions of upholsteresses in 1849, he noted that they cut out only the cheaper chintz or holland cases which protected furniture stuffed and covered by male workers.36 However, women and men both undertook sewing and making up curtains, cases and bed furniture as well as joining together carpet pieces.37

Although many upholsteresses were classified as unskilled because they had not undergone any formal training, sewing was traditionally taught in the home and therefore they achieved very high levels of expertise. Its cleanliness and association with the feminine' skill of sewing ensured that it continued to be considered sufficiently genteel to be undertaken by women who weresober and steady' and of respectable appearance. Henry Mayhew reported thatthere are more old maids employed in the upholstery business than any other.'38 Many were middle-aged and some were also the widows of upholsterersbut they had one thing in common – they were dependent upon their own wages for their livelihood. The low wages of the East End made that a pitiful livelihood for many of them.

## Women and War Work

Just as in the medieval period the dominant ideology concerning women and work shifted according to changes in material circumstances, so in the modern period the two world wars of the twentieth century show most clearly the same process. During the First World War the high rate of male volunteers for the armed forces among furniture-makers ushered in many changes in the trade. Women were brought in as emergency workers and, except for exceptionally heavy work, undertook every process in the trade as and when it was required of them. They also undertook war work', such as covering the body and wings of a wooden aircraft with linen.

The official National Amalgamated Furnishing Trades Association (NAFTA) view of women working in the industry was as follows:

We must act with caution, in the interests of our men, in the interest of the nation, and also in the interests of women, to prevent the sweaters of our trade using the war period, and the plea of patriotism to further their own ulterior motives to secure cheap female labour, to the detriment of the trade, the men employed in it, and the thousands of our members fighting their country's battles in alì parts of the world. One doesn’t want these men to come back and find their places taken by women at one half of the rate. Innovation may be necessary; women may have to be employed: but to secure proper safeguards is a duty imposed on us all.39

The reference to women working àt one half of the male rate is an exaggeration. A national wartime agreement of 1916 between employers and unions fixed women's rates at two-thirds of the male rate for comparable work and also stipulated that women working in furniture-making should belong to an appropriate trade union.

Before the war women had worked mainly in polishing and upholstery, but during it they also worked at cutting and preparing wood as well as at packing and labouring. Some drove the horsedrawn vans and carts in which furniture was moved from shop to shop and finally delivered to the custoner. Consequently, NAFTA was forced to change its rules to allow women working at such jobs into union membership – albeit ‘emergency membership'for the duration of the war only. By the end of the war, the union as a whole had 3,000 women members, representing over 13 per cent of the total membership – a figure not exceeded until 1943.40

Women had proved themselves fully capable of performing all the tasks asked of them, but most did not remain in their jobs after the war. These jobs were taken over by the returning ex-servicemen, who came home expecting a land fit for heroes'. Although certain employers had noted the economic advantage of exploiting women's cheap labour, they did not pursue the idea after the war.

At one level they had a forceful union to deal with and it would also have seemed unpatriotic and uncaring to deny work to ex-soldiers, but it went deeper than that. The dominant ideology relating to women and work, particularly the ideas about women's inability to handle demanding physical work that still existed in furniture workshops and factories, together with traditional notions of what was ‘men's work' and what was ‘women's work', had been set aside rather than effectively challenged. They remained so strong after the war that they overrode any consideration of economic advantage on the part of furniture employers, who never seriously tried to keep women at the jobs they had occupied during the war. Most women also accepted their experiences in wartime as exceptional' and either left the industry or returned to their old jobs without giving voice to any protest.

Those women who remained in the trade worked mainly in upholstery and french polishing, with a few in the caning and rushing of seats. One of the unions representing male workers in the latter trade, however, resolved in 1919 to oppose vigorously women's intrusion into our shops, and to voice our resentment against their organisation'.41 This policy, adopted by the United French Polishers' Society was clearly sexist but they justified it by arguing that women were cheap labour and cheap labour brought down the trade as a whole. The society could, of course, have argued and fought for better pay and conditions for female polishers, but instead it chose to actively block their entry into the trade. In 1925 matters came to a head when the UFPS refused to sit on the French Polishers' Federated Committee (the joint committee representing all unions with polishers in membership) as long as NAFTA sent a woman delegate. The latter organisation stood by its decision to have a woman represent their largely female membership. The UFPS replied by refusing to sit with what it called the representatives of cheap labour, be it male cheap labour or female cheap labour'.42 This was one of the issues which kept the two societies from amalgamating until 1969.

The Second World War again saw women take up jobs, including machine sawing, previously done by male furnituremakers. By 1944 one in four workers in the furniture industry was female. Many women who worked as french polishers before the war transferred to aircraft production. They performed jobs such as picking up and putting in tiny screws which were considered suitable for ‘nimble female hands' yet classified as unskilled in terms of pay. Some women worked at assembling aircraft on an equal basis as men – equal, that is, in everything but payment.

The influx of women necessitated a change in the way in which both the furniture trade and women were perceived. Furniture factories were physically demanding places in which to work and in wartime women proved that they were up to the tasks before them. This was not only widely acknowledged but also praised, because it was a valuable part of the war effort. After the war, however, there was great pressure on women to return to the home, and certainly to vacate male iobs. Yet even at the height of women's retrenchment in the home in the 1950s and 1960s, female membership of the furniture trade unions remained as high as 15 per cent (as opposed to only 4 per cent in the 1920s).43 What those women who remained in the industry lost, however, was the right to work at male' jobs in machining and assembly work. After the war women went back to their traditional jobs in upholstery and polishing. A few women were allowed to stay on in veneering but, once again, this was because it was considered that female fingers were more nimble than male ones and therefore better suited for the cutting, jointing and matching of veneers.

The changing roles of women during both world wars indicate the extent to which material circumstances affected the ways in which women were regarded in society and opened up new opportunities for them. However, the enduring strength of the dominant ideology must not be underestimated. Set aside for the duration of the war, it emerged only slightly changed and still based on the premise of men's superiority. The opportunities offered by the war were temporary, just as the taking over of her husband's business by a widow in the seventeenth century, until either a son came of age or she remarried, was temporary. Nevertheless, those opportunities did allow women access to areas of work otherwise proscribed and afforded individual women not only an economic livelihood but also considerable satisfaction and fulfilment.44

## Design

If the historical evidence concerning women and production in the furniture trade is scanty and problematic, then that concerning women and design is even more so. Part of the problem lies in what constituted design before the rise of the professional designer – a long process which began in mid-eighteenth-century London but was still only slowly gaining pace a century later. Furniture was either designed by specialists, such as architects, artists, engravers and others working outside the craft, or by craftworkers trained in traditions which involved a slow evolutionary process of change in form as well as construction. Apart from the few known signed designs by individual designers, the majority of pieces produced since 1750 are of what is known today as anonymous'design.

The difficult question is how far this anonymous design was simply a continuous refinement of traditional forms or, as capitalism and sophisticated markets developed, a more complex response to novelty and fashion or a combination of both. We do not know at what stage design took on a more self-conscious role, but in a major world trading centre such as London it must have been from the late Middle Ages at least. Certainly by the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries drawing and design were taught as part of a craft apprenticeship to carvers and cabinet makers. Trade guides pointed out that unless youths developed the ability to invent, anticipate or capture the latest trends in style they would never be successful financially.45 In other words, design was acknowledged as an important element in the selling of objects. Its significance increased until eventually a division of labour emerged between those who made and those who designed.

So where does this leave women? It can be assumed that some of the women who, as has been shown, worked in the furniture trade before the mid eighteenth century also designed furniture. Therefore, they must have been responsible for some (even if it was a small percentage) of the anonymous’pieces of English oak and other furniture so greatly admired by collectors today. Beyond that it is not possible to speculate at present.

As a specialised design training, as opposed to a craft training, developed from the second half of the eighteenth century, there is no evidence that women were involved. Indeed, the male domination of this area seems almost complete. It was male craft-trained entrepreneurs such as Thomas Chippendale and John Linnell who took advantage of the new design-teaching at Hogarth's and other drawing academies in mid-eighteenth-century London and who spent part of their professional life as designers.4 In an attempt to establish themselves in the public eyeas designers, certain craftworker entrepreneurs published pattern books of furniture and ornamental designs in the 1740s, 1750s and 1760s, but, once again, no women were involved.

It has recently been suggested that the designs in the folio of designs mentioned earlier published by A. Hepplewhite & Co. in 1788, two years after the death of George Hepplewhite, might be by his widow.47 There is certainly no proof that the unsigned designs are by George Hepplewhite, a master cabinet-maker of London;4⁸ indeed, it is one of history's many ironies that we so yenerate a man who is one of the most elusive characters of furniture history and was clearly not one of the leading manufacturers or designers of his own day. Since his authorship of the designs in the famous Hepplewhite pattern book is open to question, could they have been the work of his widow, Alice, of whom even less is known? Although one wonders why the question has not been raised until recently, there are, unfortunately, no sound grounds for attributing the designs to her – it is certainly not enough to say that the designs themselves are ‘of feminine and delicate furniture’.49 This type of description is commonly used of the light, elegant furniture fashionable in the early and mid-1780s, yet it was not the prerogative of one gender either in terms of design or consumption.

Angelica Kauffmann (1741–1807), the Swiss artist who trained in Italy before working in London, where she became a founder member of the Royal Academy, is often cited as the one woman who was involved in furniture design. Some of her engravings were used as the basis for decorative panels and other painted or marquetry work on furniture, but she does not appear to have designed decoration specifically for furniture,5º as did a group of male Swedish furniture-maker/designers who lived in London in the 1790s.5¹ Kauffman is important in that she was a well-respected artist of her day, but, given the present state of knowledge, we cannot claim that she was a woman artist who designed decoration for furniture, let alone furniture itself.

By the 1860s most of the leading furniture firms employed designers on some basis or another, but none were women. At one level it would appear that the Arts and Crafts Movement, with its rejection of commercialism and its provision of an alternative sphere, ought to have changed all that. The enormous popularity of craft work, particularly from the 1880s, together with the general movement towards the emancipation of women, encouraged greater numbers of women into schools of art and design to study craft subjects.

In chapter 11, The Arts and Crafts Alternative', Lynne Walker shows that the number of women designers and designer-makers working within the movement increased greatly in the period c. 1880–1920, but furniture was not one of the main areas affected. Furniture remained problematic because of the question of suitability'. Women did not establish workshops which placed a great emphasis on furniture-making or design; there was no female equivalent of Ernest Gimson or Sydney Barnsley whose names today are synonymous with Arts and Crafts furniture.52

There were few job opportunities within the trade. This was compounded by workshop practice being seen as the basis of good design at the turn of the century. Links between art schools and local commercial firms were emphasised and the teaching of young workers already apprenticed to a craft became the central focus of design educationalists such as W. R. Lethaby (Central School of Arts and Crafts) and B. J. Fletcher (Leicester School of Art). This meant that women who did not have access to a particular trade through apprenticeship were also denied a training in that area by the schools of art and design.

The Home Arts and Industries Association, founded in 1884 to encourage the practice of handicrafts and morally uplift workers, particularly women, by filling ‘empty spaces’in their lives, encouraged the design of furniture, but the women involved mainly concentrated on designing patterns for woodcarving, or designing and executing wood-inlay work.s3 Concentration on decorative work was one way women found of circumventing the constraints upon them. Such work fitted in with a view of woman as both decorative and decorator; the beautiful beautifier of objects and homes. If the decoration of furniture was acceptable for women because of its associations with domesticity and decoration, its associations with the fine-arts gave it respectability and gentility. Some of the women involved in decorating furniture worked independently of men, but others, such as Louise Powell and Kate Faulkner, either worked with men or relied on male relatives or friends for contacts for work.s4 The involvement in craft work of Kate Faulkner, whose gesso decoration on a Broadwood piano was featured at the first Arts and Crafts Exhibition in 1888, for instance, was through her brother, one of the founders of the firm Morris, Marshall, Faulkner and Co., which played such a key role in the Arts and Crafts Movement.s5 A few women trained or teaching in art schools designed decorative items. Margaret Macdonald Mackintosh, for instance, whose own style of design influenced the furniture of her husband, the architect and designer Charles Rennie Mackintosh, designed decorative screens, but few women concerned themselves with furniture proper.56

The fine-art associations of the enormously popular craft of artistic wood-carving'⁵7 meant that it was also a respectable' area within which women could study and work. The School of Art Woodcarving was established in London in 1879 and within three years had a woman manager and some female members of staff.58 Standards were extremely high and the school was open to amateurs as well as those undergoing a professional training. Of the latter, men could either go into all-male workshops or teach; once again, there were no commercial opportunities open to women, who could only teach. By the First World War the art and design schools had come nowhere near to breaking out of their established gender patterns.Women's Crafts' courses proliferated, but few women were involved in furniture design. In the odd instances where the mould was broken, it was done outside the schools, but only by individuals such as Ray Hille operating in very particular circumstances.

## A Case Study: Ray Hille and Doris Young

Showing an early aptitude for drawing and a keen interest in antique furniture, Ray Hille was painting lacquer furniture in her early teens. By 1918, aged 19, she was designing furniture as well as producing detailed workshop drawings.59 Despite all this, she did not work full-time in the family firm. There was one problem: she was female. It was not thought suitable for a woman, even one as talented as Ray, to run a furniture firm, so she worked as a civil servant. Her father's old age and ill-health meant that she took increasing periods of unpaid leave to manage the firm, but even then it was not expected that one day she would take overall control. However, when in 1932 Salamon Hille decided to retire and sell the firm, he found that the potential buyers would only take a half share and stipulated that Ray should remain because she knew the clients and represented business continuity. Above all, she had design and production expertise. In that year Hille became a limited company under the command of Ray Hille, a young woman in an industry dominated by men at all levels: craft, management and design.

Hille continued to take an active part in running the firm until the 1980s, when, in her eighties, she slowed down – but only a little. A remarkable lady whose story deserves to be told in full detail, in all its glory, she illustrated just how well women could do male' jobs when given the opportunity (see Fig. 8.3). So well did she do that job that one of the leading shop stewards at Hille's in the 1950s paid her what was, in his terms, a great compliment: she was, he recalled, one of the lads’.60

Doris Young is another woman who took over and ran the family firm, in this case from 1943. Established by her grandfather in 1868, the business had passed to her father, but there were no male heirs. Doris was one of two daughters and, because she was aware of how much her father wanted a son, she tried to be Paddy the next best thing' to a boy.61 Father and daughter went fishing, just like father and son, and it was on these trips that the young Doris learned a great deal about timber, the furniture trade in general and the family firm in particular. Yet neither she nor her father envisaged her working in the furniture trade. She may have substituted for a son on fishing trips but she was not seen as an alternative heir to the firm. Her entry into the business came about in a much more fortuitous way. Because she was not brought up with an expectation of entering the family firm, she (like Ray Hille) worked as a civil servant, in this case for the Inland Revenue. It was after her marriage and during her child-rearing years that she took an increasingly active part in the day-to-day running of the family firm, beginning with reorganising tax returns and invoice payments. She helped out in the office, particularly with book-keeping, learned about selecting and buying materials and about the organisation of the trade, including trade mills and out-work. She was more than capable of taking over the firm in 1943, when her father died. Her career as a designer is also of interest, not least in terms of gendered design. She has always paid attention to the needs of women as consumers, including the need to keep dusting to a minimum.62 One of her designs, for instance, was a chair for nursing mothers specially developed for the City of London maternity hospital.63

Still active today, Doris Young remains managing director of the firm and is an energetic supporter of the Design and Industries Association (DIA) and design training for the young. She sometimes wonders, as Ray Hille did, why feminists are interested in her work, since she does not consider herself a women's libber’.64

In conclusion, this survey of women and furniture-making shows the extent to which the trade was male-dominated while not being exclusively male. Parts of it were deemed respectable enough for women to work in, while other parts, such as upholstery and later polishing, had traditions of employing women. The marginalisation of women existed from the Middle Ages, only to increase in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. That marginalisation was greater in design than in production, but in neither area were women strongly represented. Where women did break through it was either when general economic circumstances favoured them, as in the case of the two world wars, or in exceptional circumstances which afforded women opportunities not normally open to them, witness the case studies of Ray Hille and Doris Young.

## Notes

1 Burman, Sandra, ed., Fit Work for Women, Croom Helm, London, 1979. Beard, G., and Gilbert, C., eds. Dictionary of English Furniture Makers 1660–1840, Maney & Sons, Leeds, 1986, p. 638. The quotation is from Hilton, R. H., Women Traders in Medieval England’, in Class Conflict and the Crisis of Feudalism: Essays in Medieval Social History, Hambledon Press, London, 1985, pp. 205-15. See also Hanawalt, B. A., ed., Women and Work in Pre-industrial Europe, Indiana University Press, Indiana, 1986; Shahar, S., The Fourth Estate: A History of Women in the Middle Ages, Methuen, London, 1983; Ozenfant, S., When Fathers Ruled: Family Life in Reformation Europe, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1983; Davis, Natalie, City Women and Religious Change in Sixteenth Century France', in McGuigan, D. G., ed., A Sampler of Women's Studies, Ann Arbor, Centre for Continuing Education of Women, University of Michigan, 1973; and the publication to which most articles on medieval women still refer: Power, Eileen, Medieval Women, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1975, with an introduction by M. M. Postan.

I am extremely grateful to Helena Graham for discussing the question of women and work in the medieval period with me and for her helpful suggestions.

4 Campbell, London Tradesmen, London, 1747, p. 170. See also Kirkham, Pat, Furniture Making in London: Craft Design, Business and Labour, unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of London, 1981.

5 Parker, Rozsika, The Subversive Stitch: Embroidery and the Making of the Feminine, The Women's Press, London, 1984, pp. 98–117.

6 Abrams, A.,‘Women traders in medieval London', Economic Journal, June 1916, pp. 276–85; Kahl, W. F., The Development of London Livery Companies: An Historical Essay and Select Bibliography, Kelley, Boston, Mass., 1960; Reddaway, T. F., The livery companies of Tudor London’, History, Vol. LI, No. 173, October 1966; Royal Commission on Municipal Corporations, 1835–7; Royal Commission on the Livery Companies, 1884.

7 Postan, op. cit., pp. 10 and 53; Abrams, op. cit., pp. 280–1.

8 Abrams, op. cit., p. 281.

9 Kirkham, op. cit., p. 99, n. 16.

10 Abrams, op. cit., p. 283.

12 Collyer, Joseph, The Parent’s and Guardian’s Directory, London, 1761, p. 150; Campbell, op. cit., p. 172.

11 Hilton, op. cit., p. 206.

13 These figures are taken from the Inland Revenue apprenticeship records in the Public Record Office (PRO) and the apprenticeship records of the Joiners' and Upholders' Companies in the Guildhall Library.

14 PRO IRI/18

15 Pinchbeck, Ivy, Women Workers and the Induistrial Revolution 1750–1850, Cass, London, 1969, p. 282.

16 Kirkham, op. cit., pp. 154–79.

17 Defoe, op. cit., p. 287.

18 See Beard and Gilbert, op. cit.

19 Ibid., p. 715.

20 Ibid., p. 638.

21 Ibid., p. 338.

22 Ibid., p. 289.

23 Ibid., p. 344.

24 PRO IRI/22

25 PRO IR/18 & 20 and Guildhall Library, Upholders'Company, Apprenticeship Bindings.

26 Beard and Gilbert, op. cit., p. 123.

27 Ibid., p. 422.

Design Production

28 Defoe, Daniel, The Complete English Tradesman, 2nd edn with supplement, 1727; reprinted 1969, Kelly, New York, Vol. 1., p. 287.

29 Smith, J. T., Nollekins and His Times, Henry Colburn, London, 1829, Vol. II, p. 177.

30 Quoted in Coleridge, Anthony, A reappraisal of William Hallett’, Furniture History, Vol. 1, 1965, p. 12.

31 Kirkham, Pat, Mace, Rodney, and Porter, Julia, Furnishing the World: The East London Furniture Trade 1830–1980, Journeyman Press, London, 1987.

32 Mayhew, Henry, ‘Of the fancy cabinet-makers of London', Morning Chronicle, 8 August 1850.

33 Ibid.

34 Kirkham, Mace and Porter, op. cit., pp. 9–10.

35 Ibid.

36 Mayhew, Morning Chronicle, 16 November 1849.

37 Ibid. See also Anon., A General Description of All Trades, London, 1747, p. 215, and Campbell, London Tradesmen, London, 1747, p. 170.

38 Mayhew, op. cit.

39 Reid, Hew, The Furniture Makers: A History of Trade Unionism in the Furniture Trade 1868–1972, The Malthouse Press, Oxford, 1986, Appendix: Women Workers in the Furniture Trade'.

40 Ibid.

41 Ibid.

42 Ibid. See also the journal of the Amalgamated Upholsterers' Union for this period, which is housed at the TUC Library.

43 Reid, op. cit.

44 Interviews with women who worked in the furniture trade in the Second World War, Lancaster, June 1970, and London, March 1987, and also with women who worked in other wartime jobs.

45 Collyer, op. cit., p. 86.

46 Gilbert, C., The Life and Work of Thomas Chippendale, 2 vols., Studio Vista and Christies, London, 1978; Hayward, Helena, and Kirkham, Pat, William and John Linnell: Eighteenth Century London Furniture Makers, 2 vols., Studio Vista and Christies, London, 1980.

47 Caldwell, Ian, ‘Working women in the 18th century', Antique Collector, October 1985, pp. 80–1.

48 Beard and Gilbert, op. cit., p. 422.

49 Caldwell, op. cit., p. 80.

50 Ibid.

51 Hayward and Kirkham, op. cit.

52 Comino, Mary, Gimson and the Barnsleys: Wonderful furniture of a commonplace kind', Evans Brothers Limited, London, 1980.

53 Callen, Anthea, Angel in the Studio: Women in the Arts and Crafts Movement 1870-1914, Astragal Books, London, 1979, pp. 95–136.

55 See Thompson, Paul, The Work of William Morris, Quartet Books Limited, London, 1977, passim.

56 Bird, Liz, Threading the Beads: Women in Art in Glasgow, 1870– 1920', in Uncharted Lives: Extracts from Scottish Women's Experiences 1850–1982, Press Gang, Glasgow, 1983, pp. 98–116.

57 It was regarded as sculpture in wood.

58 Callen, op. cit., p. 166.

59 For this and other information on Ray Hille, see Lyall, Sutherland, Hille: 75 Years of British Furniture, Elron Press, London, 1981; Kirkham, Pat, Hille: Profile of a British Furniture Company 1906– 1982, Leicester Polytechnic, Leicester, 1982; interview with author, March 1982.

60 Reynolds, Les, in conversation with author, 17 October, 1987.

61 Doris Young, lecture at the Geffrye Museum, London, 17 October 1987.

62 Doris Young, lecture, Geffrye Museum.

63 The chair was later transformed into a television chair.

64 Doris Young, in conversation with author.