10

# Sexual Division of Labour in the Arts and Crafts Movement

Anthea Callen

We do not, on the whole, find that great opposition is offered by manufacturers to the wider employment of women. Indeed, even with the existing low estimate of the value of women's work, their assistance may be expected. ‘There is no reason', says one of them, why we should object to employ women. They work for lower wages than men.’ On the score of strict justice we may possibly dispute the reasoning of such a view of things, wondering if good work, even if done by a woman, is not worthy of good payment. But we may, nevertheless, accept the position thankfully and while we endeavour to secure the good work, leave for the present the question of its just reward.1

The second half of the nineteenth century saw the rise of the Arts and Crafts Movement, bringing with it a new role for women which they readily took up. Although the Arts and Crafts Movement was in many ways socially and artistically radical, at the same time it in fact reproduced, perpetuated and thus reinforced dominant Victorian patriarchal ideology. It recreated in microcosm traditional divisions between male and female roles, which can be seen in the areas of design, production, craft skills, income and management.

As the modern bourgeois ideal of the family came into being in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, so the modern notion of domesticity evolved. Although hallowed as an almost sacred undertaking and duty for women, at the same time domestic activity was not recognised as real work. It was a labour of love. In a society in which everything was measured in terms of financial profit - especially success and power - women were therefore outsiders, their real' work unacknowledged.

Ruskin himself was one of the many writers who eulogised the new domesticity.² In the Victorian ideal, woman was the spiritual guardian of the home as a secular temple and a haven within a turbulent mercantile society. This ideal necessitated middle-class woman's exclusion from the productive male commercial world in order to maintain the stability of patriarchal ideology. She provided the passive' to give meaning to the male active'. She was to be a companion, who will raise the tone of [her husband's] mind from low anxieties, and vulgar cares' and lead his thoughts to expatiate or repose on those subjects which convey a feeling of identity with a higher state of existence beyond this present life.'3 The woman's leisure - her exclusion from male-defined work activities – indicated the degree of her man’s success and therefore their social status.

This bourgeois ideal of woman, along with the increasing emphasis on domesticity, created a paradigm to which all classes of society were intended to aspire. During the 1840s there evolved the concept of the family wage: in other words, the man's wage,which was intended to support his entire family. While this was, of course, by no means universally implemented, nevertheless the ideal wife's place was considered to be within the home and became, in theory, realisable for the working classes.

By the same token a woman's wages were seen as merely supplementary to the husband's income: pin' money. As a result, at no time during the nineteenth century did women's earnings enable them to support themselves adequately. This provoked particularly severe problems for single and widowed women, whether working or middle class. Many women, especially married women, who were obliged to work did so as out-workers - a word which encapsulated both the shift in workplace and in status – taking work into the home in order to fulfil a dual productive role. While superficially reminiscent of the pre-industrial family productive unit, in this new system women were entirely at the mercy of agents and middlemen. These latter frequently imposed harsh deadlines and truck payment, which undervalued both labour and skill. Such out-work was notoriously ill-paid and the hours were excessive; moreover, the women's isolation effectively curtailed any political organisation for improved pay or conditions. This helped to create a cheap labour-force and a reserve army' of women which could be called in and then dismissed on economic whim.

The women of the middle classes in particular were raised and educated to embody the ideal of domesticity, their only socially sanctioned career in life was marriage and their training rarely fitted them for work outside the domestic sphere. Yet in fact the opportunities for marriage were decreasing throughout the century, for, as one writer commented in 1872:

Unfortunately, till it is removed by emigration or some other equally potent remedy, we may never forget the fact that there are too many women in England . . . As a matter of fact, we find women in Great Britain outnumbering men by nearly a million; and we find also, in the face of the marriage theory, that three [million] out of six million adult Englishwomen support themselves and relatives dependent on them.4

However, for middle-class women, work, especially paid work, meant a serious loss in social status in which lady’ andwork' were contradictions in terms. Leonore Davidoff has cited a typical example of this attitude, dating from 1866:

My opinion is that if a woman is obliged to work, at once (although she may be Christian and well-bred) she loses that peculiar position which the word lady conventionally designates.⁵

The plight of unmarried and destitute gentlewomen became a national concern. In view of the characteristics attributed to ladies, it was essential to find work for them which could be considered suitable'. Contamination from the sordid male commercial world was to be avoided at all costs if women were to maintain their role as the haven from that world, and if men were to retain their dominance and authority within it. Thus in both social and economic terms, the reinforcement of a sexual division of labour at all levels of society was essential for the preservation of the very fabric of the society's structure.

Art work was one of the few occupations considered suitable for middle-class women in the Victorian period. Here was a field of employment that appeared to be merely an extension of traditional feminine accomplishments. It would enhance rather than erode the role designated as natural’ for the Victorian woman, for art work represented only the slightest adjustment of her accepted social position:

To whom should we so confidently apply for all that concerns the beautifying of home-life as to the presiding spirit of the home? Why should not the instinctive taste and natural grae of woman be reflected in the hues and harmonies of colour and form on the walls of her rooms, on the curtains arranged by her deft fingers, on the soft carpet beneath her feet, and in the thousand forms of comfort, convenience, or elegance which surround her?⁶

In fact this type of work – although in this context, paid work – was an extension of what Roszika Parker and Griselda Pollock describe as bourgeois women's role in perpetuating aristocratic traditions: ‘to be beautifiers, civilizers, orderers in the face of the social mobility and economic instability of a chaotic and threatening world'.7 At the same time, art work was defined as ‘domestic': it would thus not encroach upon the newly formulated male-female labour divisions:

We may remark, at the risk of repetition, that there is here no question of the introduction of women to new employments, or of the danger of tempting them from their homes . . . All that now concerns us is the question of fitting women to do the work well, which they already do, but do badly. In the consideration of new openings in Art-work we do not actually introduce any new element.⁸

This notion that work for women should not disrupt the patriarchal status quo, and in particular that it should not remove women from the private domestic sphere, is crucial. As Parker and Pollock argue, it was by labelling certain aspects of artistic production domestic', by calling them crafts, that, in the evolution of the modern concept of art, the split between high art and the lesser arts was constructed:

What distinguishes art from craft in the hierarchy is not so much methods, practices and objects but also where these things are made, often in the home, and for whom they are made, often for the family. The fine arts are a public, professional activity. What women make, which is usually defined as craft', could in fact be defined asdomestic art’. The conditions of production and audience for this kind of art are different from those of the art made in the studio and the art school, for the market and gallery. It is out of these different conditions that the hierarchical division between art and craft has been constructed; it has nothing to do with the inherent qualities of the object nor the gender of the maker.9

This hierarchical split can be traced back to Renaissance times, when artists began to shun the practical and manual aspects of their craft in order to raise their social status by identifying themselves with intellectuals. However, significantly, it was with the Industrial Revolution and the rise of the bourgeois family with its acompanying concept of domesticity, that the schism reached completion. So for these Victorian artists, writers and social thinkers who sought humane alternatives to the divisiveness of their society, it is not suprising that pre-Renaissance society as they saw it seemed to offer a charming ideal.

The desirability and popularity of artistic work for middle-class women had been actively fostered as early as 1842 with the establishment of the Female School of Design in London. This government day-school provided design instruction for needy gentlewomen aged between 13 and 30. The influx of ladies into the expanding provincial art schools at this time not only indicated an increasing number of amateur artists but also aknowledged the importance of art for women as part of an acceptable career as governesses and, increasingly, as artists-craftswomen.

The 1870s saw an expansion in opportunities for ladies seeking artistic careers. In art embroidery there was the foundation of numerous institutions for teaching, employment and for selling ladies' work, including, in 1872, the Royal School of Art Needlework in South Kensington, London. In ceramics there were the National Art Training Schools, Minton's short-lived Art Pottery Studio in South Kensington and the growth of the Doulton Lambeth Pottery, which employed almost exclusively lady artists; Howell and James' of Regent Street, London, also organised annual competitions and exhibitions of women's ceramic work. In woodwork there was the foundation of the School of Art Woodcarving in South Kensington. With artistic and technical improvements in colour printing, book illustration became a field in which women's participation was encouraged. The expansion of the market for children's books was especially important, as women were inevitably considered best qualified for this genre. In typography and in lithographic illustration, as in most of the male-dominated craft trades, women had to be trained and employed separately in order to avoid direct contact and economic competition with men.

By the time the Arts and Crafts revival was fully fledged, in the mid-1880s, many women were already engaged, if not entirely accepted, in a range of craft and design fields, and their close association with the Movement was therefore quite predictable. The emergence of the Arts and Crafts Movement presented many women with opportunities for otherwise inaccessible practical training in an expanding market. It offered the possibility of paid home-work to those women with family commitments, or those whose social status did rot allow them to work outside the home. The Movement gave the relative freedom of freelance work to women faced with punishing discrimination in more traditional professional circles. But while offering women many positive advantages, the Arts and Crafts Movement also insidiously perpetuated the class, sexual and labour divisions inherent in late-Victorian society.

The involvement of women in the Arts and Crafts Movement can be divided into four main categories, which also reflect the broad class divisions within the Movement. First, there were the working-class and agricultural labouring-class women, who were organised and employed in the revival of traditional rural crafts or cottage industries. Ruskin himself was a prime mover in these rural craft revivals. Second, there were the aristocratic, upper- and middle-class women of comfortable means and the appropriate leisure, who were philanthropically engaged in the organisation both of the rural craft revivals and of the artistic training and employment of destitute gentlewomen, mainly in urban centres. Third, there were the impoverished gentlewomen themselves, those ladies forced by circumstances to earn an independent livelihood or augment a meagre one, either by waged art work in an employer's workshop, as out-workers or freelance – usually practised discreetly from the home. The fourth category covers the élite inner circle of, most commonly, educated middle-class women, often related by birth or marriage to the key male figures within the vanguard of the movement.

Most of the crafts undertaken by such women were an extension of Victorian accomplishments and pastimes for ladies. Of those already listed above, woodcarving could be seen as an exception, yet the work was often small-scale, delicate and required very little physical strength. Embroidery and lacemaking were traditionally feminine crafts (although originally practised by both sexes). China painting and book illustration evolved painlessly from the watercolour sketching and drawing so essential to the accomplished lady. Bookbinding, jewellery and metalwork, which required fine detailed work, were also recommended as feminine pursuits.

In certain artistic fields male and female involvement overlapped, but most were considered masculine or feminine. Thus women were actively excluded from architectural training and practice and many allied trades. Few women made the pots they decorated. Almost no women became wrought-iron workers, founders, stone-masons or plaster-workers. Furniture-making and fine printing were almost exclusively male fields of creativity.

Women were only able to train for bookbinding and metalwork through private, paying classes, as they were prohibited from entry into trade classes at schools like the Central School of Arts and Crafts. The case of Miss L.M. Wilkinson, a pioneer of women's rights who had trained as a bookbinder with Cobden-Sanderson's Doves Bindery and attempted to break the embargo on women at the Central's trade classes in bookbinding in the late 1890s, provides evidence of the discrimination against women in that trade. In a letter to the London County Council regarding Miss Wilkinson's application, W. R. Lethaby, then co-director of the Central, outlined the reasons for her exclusion.

on the bookbinding matter. He tells me that there is now a strike going on in Glasgow on the employment of women, the point being not any objection to them as such, but that they cut down wages to a vanishing point. He says if a sewer did apply, she would not be admissible beyond the sewing department. He is convinced that putting a woman into the class would break it up in two days.10

The sexual division of labour in bookbinding, as in many other crafts, had a clear economic basis as a result of the devaluation of women's work. Only certain tasks were given to women in order to avoid bringing them into direct competition with men, which would threaten male jobs, male status and male wages. The tasks given to women were often the most exacting but also the most tedious and menial, because women were generally thought to be more tolerant of boredom than men. In the bookbinding trade women provided a cheap labour-force as sewers, and it was only in the private binderies, Arts and Crafts workshops or where women set up their own binderies that they could practise all the processes of the craft. In this way both sexual and class divisions were maintained in the broader trade context.

Men only exceptionally associated themselves with the feminine' crafts. William Morris was one such exception in that he learned, or rather taught himself, embroidery. But even his involvement was chiefly that of a pioneer, an explorer, and once ancient techniques had been mastered he generally passed the mundane work of execution on to the women of his family and workshop.

Although in its ideals the Arts and Crafts Movement sought to eliminate the split between designer and maker, in many ways it failed. It is significant that the division between designer and executant often represented yet another break between male and female. Nowhere was this so explicit as in needlework. The status of embroidery in particular was high in the Middle Ages, but as Roszika Parker wrote:

As society progressed', embroidery became an almost exclusively female activity, and over the centuries this relationship has been mutually destructive. Embroidery suffered from being characterised as women's work. The same characteristics were ascribed to both women and embroidery: they were seen as mindless, decorative and delicate – like the icing on the cake, good to look at, adding taste and status, but devoid of significant content.11

Because of its association with gentlewomen, who were discouraged or excluded from unfeminine' intellectual and creative pursuits, embroidery came to be seen as a purely manual skill. However, the creation of designs for embroidery, an activity thought to demand greater intellectual powers, was not eschewed by men. Virtually all the best-known craftsmen of the late-Victorian period made designs for embroidery or lace, which were then executed by women, often their wives or daughters. This supposedly required only manual dexterity – in itself an acquirement which was underrated both because of its linkswith women's work’ and because it was ascribed the lowest level in the hierarchy of creative processes.

Jane Burden, wife of William Morris, noted how he became interested in embroidery as early as 1855 and, after their marriage in 1859, initiated her into the craft:

He taught me the first principles of laying the stitches together so as to cover the ground smoothly and radiating them properly. Afterwards we studied old pieces and by unpicking etc., we learnt much – but it was uphill work, fascinating, but only carried through by his enormous energy and perseverance.12

Not only did he teach Jane Burden to embroider, but he seems to have instructed every woman with whom he came into contact in the art. These included Mary Nicholson, who kept house for him at Red Lion Square, where Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co. were located in the 1860s; Madeleine Smith, wife of George Wardle, Morris' manager at Red Lion Square; Kate Faulkner, Elizabeth Burden and Georgiana Burne-Jones. The latter four and Jane Burden, with several women working under them, executed embroideries on cloth and silk for the firm.

As soon as the Morris daughters were old enough, they too joined in the collective embroidery work, in the manner of the medieval system Morris admired so much. Henry James recorded in 1869 that Morris ‘works it stitch by stitch, with his own fingers, aided by those of his wife and little girls’.13 The eldest, Jenny, was at this date eight years old, while May was only seven, so their involvement in the craft evidently began at an early age. In respect of the general sexual division between designer and executant, May Morris was an exception. Trained by her father, she took complete charge of the firm's embroidery workshop at the age of 23, in 1885. She wrote and lectured widely, in England and America, on embroidery design and execution, yet her own work is often unfairly dismissed as lifeless in comparison with her father's.

The Morris firm seems to have employed few women in its workshops, apart from the embroidery section. Contemporary photographs show only one other case, where two women are at work on carpet weaving. Thus, in the main, the Morris firm's activities in which women were engaged divide into two groups: first, members of the family or friends who either helped to run the business and were employed in active production more or less full-time or who, like Georgiana Burne-Jones, served as part-time, and presumably unpaid, helpers; second, the group formed by the unknown number of waged women employees who, under the supervision of May Morris, produced the bulk of the firm's embroideries as well as their ready-to-sew kits.

The employment of women in this traditionally feminine branch of the crafts reinforced a sexual division of labour which was largely repeated throughout the Arts and Crafts Movement as a whole. It is not clear whether May Morris was receiving payment for her work, or if she was simply supported by her father as a member of his family. However, when she was planning to marry Henry Halliday Sparling in the late 1880s, she was forced to experiment with frugal living, which suggests that even at this date she was not earning an independent income from the firm.

May is away at Kelmscott Manor alone learning to cook & how to live on a few shillings a week. She is bent on marrying without waiting till her future husband gets employment. I have said & done all I can to dissuade her, but she is a fool and persists.14

In terms of social status as well as personal self-respect, the question of pay for work is of vital importance. At this time the titleamateur' was already a derogatory one, and it was applied most often to women and to their work. This is hardly surprising in view of the ideological split between the public and domestic spheres, and of the social unacceptability of paid work for middleclass women. The negative connotations of dismissal and exclusion attached to the title amateur'made it yet another weapon in the patriarchal armoury.

The crafts most commonly practised by women echoed both traditional and more recent patterns of sexual labour divisions. Embroidery, lacemaking, china painting, jewellery, bookbinding, illustrating and even woodcarving were all activities which could be pursued within the home, often without the need for a special workshop or studio. While this did enable many women to take up craft work, it inevitably reinforced the distinction between the public and private, male and female worlds. It was a situation which in itself often presented the craftswoman with severe problems, as one writer noted (the italics are mine):

It may be that women cannot at once rise to the level on which men stand after ages of culture and conscious freedom: or, more likely that no woman is, or ought to be, able to free herself from domestic duties and associations, which, in their inevitable interruption, render almost impossible the concentration of purpose and leisure of mind essential to high success. We have here a really strong reason against the success of women in any continuous avocation, especially if followed in the home. On the master, or on the son of the house, the library or studio door may be closed until opened by himself. But the very nature of her duties makes this impossible for the mistress who manages her own house; while, as a rule, very few mothers have sufficient sympathy with any fixed purpose of work to secure to their girls the same freedom which, as a matter of course, they give to their boys.15

In addition, working in the home placed women in a position of physical and psychological isolation not dissimilar to that of working-class women out-workers, except that the latter (for example, in lacemaking) did when possible work in groups to economise on light and heat. Because of family ties or of the need for chaperoning, many craftswomen functioned best in the loosely structured, flexible Arts and Crafts organisations; they tended to avoid production-oriented, tightly-knit workshops. Most of the women active in the Birmingham-based Bromsgrove Guild, for example, withdrew after its removal to Bromsgrove, at which point most of the Guild's feminine'crafts ceased.

One of the organisations in which women were most deeply involved at all levels was the unpretentious Home Arts and Industries Association, founded in 1884, which was probably the most influential of all in its nationwide, grassroots dissemination through teaching and practice of the ideals of the Arts and Crafts Movement. It was the organisation which, both practically and ideologically, had the closest links with accepted domestic activities normally pursued by women. It was also the furthest away in the Arts and Crafts hierarchy from themaster craftsmen’. Work by the Home Arts and Industries Association, shown annually at the Albert Hall in London, was often condescendingly derided as amateurish by critics in, for example, the Studio magazine.16

It is clear that home-work was the most common way for women to practise a craft in the early 1870s, when a writer noted the lack of craftswomen working in outside studios. Doubtless due to the problems of training and employment of craftswomen in a maledominated environment, this writer recommended a separate and parallel development of businesses run and staffed by women, where women could also be taken on as apprentices. As well as avoiding ideological conflict, this ‘separatist' system side-stepped the problems of male-female competition and of the threat of wage parity or loss of male status. It also eliminated the difficulties of chaperoning women in an exclusively male workplace. This approach to the‘very real difficulties attending the employment of women, in remunerative work of any kind' was detailed by a writer in 1872:

What seems greatly to be desired is that some women, having first fully qualified themselves by earnest study, should, either alone, or in combination, set up in business, on strict business principles, making arrangements for female apprentices, and fairly trying the question of woman's work on its own merits. A few efforts in this spirit, made by wise and competent women, would do more to advance the real interests of women than can be done by all the societies in the kingdom, however wellintentioned, or well-managed . .. As it is, numbers of young women are gathered together in the workrooms of milliners and of drapers, who do their work, and generally in the end marry and settle down in their own homes, not necessarily injured by their businesslife. There seems to be no reason why young ladies might not be so gathered into the workroom of a lady engraver, or designer, and so on, and there be enabled to do work for which they are fitted by natural gift, or by artistic culture.17

In practice the training and employment of ladies in an allfemale environment bore little comparison to the notorious sweatshop existence of their working-class counterparts. At such institutions as the Royal School of Art Needlework, the ladies were constantly supervised and cloistered in a way appropriate to their station, keeping to a minimum the loss of social status associated with paid employment. Home-work and the need for discretion by a working lady were evidently important factors in creating a sense of isolation among manó craftswomen of the middle classes. But a tendency within the Arts and Crafts Movement at large towards male-dominated organisations – reflecting broader social patterns – seems to have reinforced this problem.

The notion of brotherhood so central to the Movement may have its origins in the Gothic Revival and with the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. The trend towards male-bonding, which was apparent throughout contemporary social relations, was the logical product of a social structure which discouraged intellectual and emotional equality between men and women, and restricted social intercourse between the sexes to a narrow, rigid formula. The status quo was maintained even among the radical élite of the movement. Take the Morris circle as an example. A letter about Jane Burden written by Henry James to his sister after a visit to the Morris family in 1869 gives an insight into the attitudes to women prevalent at this period:

A figure cut out of a missal – out of one of Rosetti's or Hunt's pictures – to say this gives but a faint idea of her, because when such an image puts on flesh and blood, it is an apparition of fearful and wonderful intensity. It's hard to say whether she's a grand synthesis of all the Pre-Raphaelite pictures ever made – or they a keen analysis’ of her – whether she's an original or a copy.18

These extraordinary remarks serve to emphasise the degree to which women were distanced and dehumanised as objects of visual display, Jane Burden here being evaluated in terms normally reserved for assessing art objects rather than people. James' comments demonstrate the ideological function of visual representations in mediating the lived experience of, in this instance, Jane Burden as a person. The constructed reality of art displaces real human contact.

Many women in the Morris circle, including Jane Burden herself, were from working-class backgrouņds. They found themselves taken up by this group of intellectuals and aesthetes for their sultry beauty and ‘earthy sensuality'. Because of class divisions in Victorian society, such women held the appeal of forbidden fruits; yet once conquered, they assumed the status – and, for their men, the taboos – attached to women of the middle classes. Marital sex with women of one's own class was for reproduction, not for pleasure. The Victorian code of morals, here overcast with strains of medieval chivalry, required that any real sensual relationship be abandoned for a remote idealisation of these women. It was evident that sex and marriage were incompatible, as Swinburne so aptly intimated ın his letter to Edwin Hatch in 1858, when he said that he liked to think of Morris having that wonderful and almost perfect stunner of his to look at or speak to. The idea of his marrying her is insane. To kiss her feet is the utmost men should dream of doing.'19

Thus it is no coincidence that so many of the Arts and Crafts guilds – founded upon the Victorian vision of those institutions – were male-dominated or, as in the case of the influential Art Workers' Guild, founded in 1884, exclusively male ‘clubs'. Although a Women's Guild was founded in 1907, a minor offshoot of the Art Workers'Guild, it was by then too late for it to fulfil the functions needed in the early years of the Movement: to provide women with a source of mutual support and a sense of common aims, strengths and shared identity. Although in the Guild's separately administered Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society women exhibited alongside men, there was no attempt to integrate men and women in the Guild itself, the powerhouse of the Arts and Crafts Movement, no attempt to institutionalise alternative patterns of male-female labour divisions.

This failure reinforced the sense of otherness' experienced by craftswomen; it fuelled the conflict between gender and professional identities to which such women were subject - and thereby reinforced wider Victorian social and work patterns, rather than offering any radical alternatives. So despite its positive aspects, the Arts and Crafts Movement further alienated those women who were faced with the need to reconcile the opposing ideals of lady and work, woman and artist, private and public.

These divisive categories still pose serious problems for women, as contemporary experience and research make clear.20 Personally, I am not an advocate of Minimal embroidery or Conceptual ceramics, and I cannot agree with those who wish simply to elevate crafts to fine-art status and craftswomen to artist status – this seems neither viable nor desirable as a solution, as fundamentally it changes nothing. Nor do I wish to see domesticity thrown out of the window. Change needs to take place at all levels for it to be effective. What is needed, in my opinion, is continual questioning and reappraisal of the personal and of the political in its broadest sense: self-critical analyses of our approaches to history and the ways rewriting the past can transform the present, of our received ideas and preconceptions of all oppositional categories – craft/fineart, female/male, nature/culture – and how the construction of such polarised binaries functions to constitute negative others' within our patriarchal culture. It is through lack of awareness and understanding of these categories and of their ideological power that we collude in the construction and limitations of our own sexual roles and creative potential.

## Notes

1 Art-work for women I’, Art Journal, 1872, p. 66.

2 See, for example, his discussion of women's roles in Of Queens’ Gardens’, Section 68, in Cook, E. T., and Wedderburn, A. D. O., eds., Works, London, 1902–12, Vol. 18.

3 Ellis, Mrs Sarah, The Wives of England, Their Relative Duties, Domestic Influence and Social Obligations, London, 1843, pp. 99-100; quoted in Houghton, W. E., The Victorian Frame of Mind, London, 1957, p. 351.

4 ‘Art-work for women II', Art Journal, 1872, p. 103.

Sexual Division of Labour 163

5 Letter to the editor of the Englishwoman's Journal, Vol. 8, 1866, p. 59; quoted in Davidoff, Leonore, The Best Circles, London, 1974, p. 95.

6 Art-work for women I’, op. cit., p. 65.

7 Parker, Rozsika, and Pollock, Griselda, The Old Mistresses: Women, Art and Ideology, Rowledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1981, p. 99.

8 ‘Art-work for women III’, Art Journal, 1872, p. 130.

9 Parker and Pollock, op. cit., p. 70.

10 See Callen, Anthea, Angel in the Studio: Women in the Arts and Crafts Movement 1870–1914, Astragal Books, London, 1979, pp. 189-91.

11 Parker, Rozsika, The word for embroidery was WORK’, Spare Rib, No. 37, July 1975, p. 41.

12 Morris, Barbara, Victorian Embroidery, London, 1962, p. 95.

13 Letter to his sister of 10 March 1869; quoted in·ibid., p. 97.

14 Jane Morris' letter to Rosalind Howard of August 1888; quoted in Henderson, Philip, Morris, His Life, Work and Friends, London, 1967, p. 298. May Morris and Sparling were married in 1890; they were later divorced.

15 Art-work for women II’, op. cit., p. 102.

16 See, for example, Esther Wood on the Home Arts and Industries Association Exhibition, Studio, Vol. 23, 1901, p. 106. For more information on the Association, see Callen, op. cit., especially pp. 5-7.

17 ‘Art-work for women II’, op. cit., p. 102.

18 Henderson, Philip, ed., The Letters of William Morris, London, 1950, p. lxi; letter of 10 March 1869.

19 Henderson, 1967, op. cit., p. 50.

20 See, for example, Lippard, Lucy, From the Centre, New York, 1976; Callen, A., et al., ‘A beginning time: Three women artists look at the experience of art college’, Spare Rib, No. 44, 1976; Parker and Pollock, op. cit., especially Ch. 5; Pollock, Griselda, Art, artschool, culture: Individualism after the death of the artist', Block, No. 11, Winter 1985–6.