# 11 The Arts and Crafts Alternative Lynne Walker

Anthea Callen concluded the previous chapter thus:

This failure [to institutionalise alternative patterns of male-female labour divisions] reinforced the sense of ‘otherness' experienced by craftswomen; it fuelled the conflict between gender and professional identities to which such women were subject – and thereby reinforced wider Victorian social and work patterns, rather than offering any radical alternatives. So despite its positive aspects, the Arts and Crafts Movement further alienated those women who were faced with the need to reconcile the opposing ideals of lady and work, woman and artist private and public.

This paper is a sisterly response which aims to adjust that view of the Arts and Crafts Movement and the women who took an active part in it, and although there is much common ground, I want to argue that the extent to which the Arts and Crafts Movement reinforced Victorian patriarchal ideology is less clear-cut and rigid than was previously thought and that instead of further alienating women, the Arts and Crafts Movement provided women with alternative roles, institutions and structures which they then used as active agents in their own history.

Most significantly, these Arts and Crafts alternatives provided opportunities for women's paid employment, which often took place outside the home, in the public sphere, which in the late-Victorian period became the new arena for middle-class women professionals and art workers. In many cases women's Arts and Crafts design work led to financial and personal independence well beyond previous experience, enhancing women's position and status in society in a much more fundamental way than has been conceded. Instead of alienation, the role of craftworker, which the Arts and Crafts Movement generated, produced feelings of competence and satisfaction in women; it did not increase isolation and 'otherness', as has been suggested. Although the position of women was far from unproblematic, the improved status of women within the Arts and Crafts Movement, which dates from the 1890s, was well-established by the First World War, when wartime pressures and the Women's Suffrage Movement combined to make real societal change possible. Thus the Arts and Crafts Movement had prepared the ground, in some quarters at least, for the challenge to the dominant patriarchal status quo which came with the Great War. Through alternative patterns of labour and production women in the Arts and Crafts Movement had struck at the centre of the gender-power nexus, the financial dependency of women, to struggle against the Victorian ideology that had restricted them to the private, unpaid world of home and bourgeois respectability.

The social structure of the Arts and Crafts Movement had great implications for women, as Alan Crawford and I found when we surveyed 360 organised Arts and Crafts groups (c. 1880–1914) in Britain. We found that the most characteristic organisation of the Arts and Crafts Movement (273 out of 360) was the workshop, which was in a basic sense the core of the Movement, where the essential activity was carried on'.¹ We concluded that the Arts and Crafts Movement in Britain was important as an organised response to social needs and was particularly important in relation to women's participation, which highlighted the need to see the Arts and Crafts Movement in the harsh light of economic necessity'.²

We also argued that the large numbers of women present in Arts and Crafts organisations reflected a more fundamental exclusion of middle-class women from paid employment'.3 What these groups offered – and this was a goal of the Movement generally – was an alternative to the Victorian commercial world, and this was especially significant for middle-class single womęn.

condemned to a twilight world without a role in society, often without money, and without a socially sanctioned means of making money. To such people, the possibility of earning some kind of living by making saleable goods at home, or in discreetly anonymised premises, was some kind of lifeline thrown by the Arts and Crafts Movement.4

However, the circumscribing nature of the sexual division of labour and its operation within the Arts and Crafts Movement is not in dispute here. Rigid sex roles and sexual stereotypes determined the crafts in which women could participate, and, moreover, the crafts which were thought to express women's limited, and “special" feminine capabilities',5 in Anthea Callen's phrase. Bookbinding, for example, was represented in the Studio in 1898 as a natural extension of feminine attributes and endorsed enthusiastically as an appropriate craft for women: it is a craft that calls for little heavy manual labour and great patience, with neatness raised to the level of a fine art.'6 A sexual stereotype reinforced certainly, but women were active agents operating in this specific instance to find employment and creative fulfilment as Arts and Crafts bookbinders. By the 1890s the Arts and Crafts Movement had raised the temperature of artistic produçtion and increased opportunities for women to make money from craft work. For example, the Guild of Women Binders were selling their work through a depot in Charing Cross Road, London, which attracted women from all over Britain. Another writer in the Studio praised the high-class and original work which women', such as Phoebe Traquair, ‘are now producing in the field of bookbinding'.7 The work also, of course, generated income.

A second sexual division of labour existed within the production of the craft object itself: tasks were divided between the male designer and the female maker, and in commercial and trade practice the maker's role was further subdivided with women assigned ‘appropriate'menial tasks within the production process. Sewing, as Anthea Callen has shown,⁸ was the traditional job for women in the bookbinding trade. However, Arts and Crafts practice was anti-commercial and opposed to trade practices, and it sought to bring the process of designing and making together, giving them equal value. In fact, the holistic Arts and Crafts approach meant that women were not restricted to sexually stereotyped roles in the design process and were free to design the products which they also sometimes made. Women were able to sidestep the restrictive practices enforced by the sexual division of labour in commercial production and found more options, more freedom of expression and, significantly, more financial rewards, through Arts and Crafts alternative practice.

As an index to women's role and position within the Arts and Crafts Movement, the best measure is perhaps the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, the central exhibiting organisation of the Movement. They displayed craft work from throughout the British Isles and featured a wide range of work from both men and women, with exhibits from lesser-known figures, provincial designers and amateurs, many of whom were women, as well as exhibits produced in the workshop of the Movement's leading figures, such as William Morris and C. R. Ashbee.

In order to examine the sexual division of labour within the Arts and Crafts Movement three representative exhibitions – those of 1888, 1896 and 1910 – have been studied.9 The first set the pattern for those which followed; the second took place in the heyday of the Movement; and the last was held in the year which is often cited as the time the Movement died (see Fig. 11.1).

Three questions are crucial here. First, to what extent did women show and sell their work through the central exhibiting body of the Movement? Second, did their participation increase or decline between 1888 and 1910? Third, and most important, was there a sexual division of labour between male designer and female maker and was it broken down or maintained during this period? The evidence supports the view that the Arts and Crafts Movement provided the focal point for hundreds of British women's craft production and sales, that women's participation in the Movement increased during this period, and that the sexual division of labour within the Arts and Crafts Movement tended to break down over the period in question, providing women with access to a wider range of artistic and professional activities.

Using the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society as an index for women's craft production and a measure of the sexual division of labour within the Movement, the 1888 exhibition reinforced traditional divisions along gender lines in many instances, but there was also a promising flexibility in the system. The predominant activity for women was embroidery, a traditional feminine craft, and the majority of these women were the makers of designs by men. This was particularly true for women married to the male leaders of the Movement – Mrs Walter Crane, Mrs Henry Hoiiday, Mrs Reginald Hallward and Mrs William Morris (named here as they were normally listed in the catalogue). However, there were an equal number of independent women embroideresses at the 1888 exhibition who were there in their own right as designers or designer-makers. On the whole, though, women were much less numerous than men at the 1888 exhibition and more restricted to traditional feminine crafts. Notable exceptions were, for example, Agnes and Rhoda Garrett, interior designers who were equally active in the cause of Women's Emancipation and the Arts and Crafts Movement. The Garretts designed a complete interior, which consisted of furniture, metalwork, carpets, wallpaper and woodwork, that equalled the coherence of the work of Morris and Co., which was also on display at the 1888 exhibition. Significantly perhaps, the Garretts' scheme did not include embroidery, which was identified so completely with the Victorian feminine ideal which they were struggling against.

Although many women produced furniture designs, often as part of the Home Arts and Industries Association programme, it has been pointed out that Arts and Crafts women did not make furniture; but then, neither did many of their Arts and Crafts male counterparts, such as W. R. Lethaby, Mervyn Macartney or Ernest Gimson, who gave up chair-making because it was too physically taxing. All Arts and Crafts designers came up against the practical problem that making a craft object is very time-consuming and much less profitable than design.

The 1896 Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society is best known to historians as the exhibition which introduced the work of the Glasgow designers to the English Arts and Crafts Movement. Margaret and Frances Macdonald, whose work was a prominent part of the Glaswegian display, were the paradigm of Arts and Crafts designer-makers: they had established their own craft workshop away from the restrictions of trade practice even before their marriages to Charles Rennie Mackintosh and Herbert MacNair. Like most of the Glasgow contributors, they had connections with the Glasgow School of Art, which, by 1900, had roughly half men and half women in its student population. Art schools, like Glasgow, which imbued their students with Arts and Crafts principles, provided women with the skills necessary to professionalise themselves: with an art-school training women could set up their own workshops, or teach at arts schools or in the state school system.¹0

The revival of craft metalwork, jewellery and enamelling in the 1890s is represented in the new work exhibited by Arts and Crafts designer-makers such as Georgina Gaskin, Phoebe Traquair and Edith Dawson, and the 1896 exhibition also demonstrates women's growing numbers in bookbinding, illustration and stained glass. In addition, it reflects the revival of hand-weaving and appliqué embroidery with exhibits from Maude King and Mary Blount, who helped found and run two of the largest and most remarkable Arts and Crafts groups in the countryside near London: the Haslemere Weaving Industry, where local working-class women wove cotton, linen and silk on handlooms (at a starting wage of 5s. per week), and the Peasant Arts Society, also in Haslemere, which produced appliqué embroidery, hand-woven pile carpets and tapestry carpets.

As Rozsika Parker has pointed out, the impact of one of the Glasgow teachers, Jessie Newbery, who was an exhibitor at the 1896 exhibition, transformed the way embroidery was taught and practised.11 Embroidery in Newbery's hands was no longer seen as a natural extension of the makers of feminine attributes, but was redefined in Arts and Crafts terms, emphasising the importance of design, simplicity and materials. Stylistically distinctive from the English Arts and Crafts, the work of the Glasgow women at the 1896 exhibition demonstrates how women themselves took an active part in the reinterpretation and professionalisation of a traditional feminine craft, and it also demonstrates the increased breadth of craft and design activities, fuelled by the Arts and Crafts Movement, which were open to women.

Parker brings out the complexity of the problem and argues that Jessie Newbery and Anne Macbeth loosened the hold of femininity on embroidery', but at the same time embroidery ‘became institutionalised as the province of female staff and girls'. As she points out, each new gain for women was accompanied by a new dividing line between male and female territory.'12 The weight of evidence for the Arts and Crafts Movement in relation to embroidery is analysed by Parker as follows: And whatever criticism can be levelled at the Arts and Crafts Movement in terms of sexism and elitism, it was instrumental in raising the standard of hand embroidery and allowing women to recognize the value of their work, not as mere evidence of the femininity which would enable them to attain male financial support, but as something which actually earned them money.'13

The broader aims of Maude King and Mary Blount, who both worked jointly with their husbands, were the repopulation and regeneration of the countryside, which was expressed in their quasireligious philosophy of country life, but the economic imperative for women's work, in this instance working-class women who were employed in their workshops, was often masked or de-emphasised by the statements of Arts and Crafts philanthropists, like the Blounts and Kings, who saw the goals of workshop activities from an idealistic perspective. But from the perspective of the craftworkers it was first and foremost an opportunity to make a living wage in an area which at the best of times provided only seasonal work for women.14

By the 1910 exhibition, women's role and position in the Arts and Crafts Movement had strengthened in terms of numbers, and alternative patterns of male-female labour divisions had been established in the crafts represented at the exhibition. Jewellery was the predominant craft for women. Phoebe Traquair, for example, exhibited a silver and gold necklace with an enamelled pendant which incorporated the craft skills that women had taken up in recent years. Previously the jewellery trade had been dominated by men. Although women had traditionally taken part, with the advent of craft jewellery in the 1890s, this became an area which was considered especially appropriate for middle-class women, as the skills required were thought particularly ‘feminine'; and, of course, women were its primary consumers. In 1901, Aymer Vallence wrote about women and jewellery in Studio:

The number of ladies who have achieved success in jewellery design proves this, indeed, to be a craft to which women's light and dainty manipulation is peculiarly adapted.'5

This kind of stereotyping, which saw the work as an extension of the maker's femininity, reinforced the connection between biology and creativity, but at the same time, women worked against the ideological grain by using this craft not as an amateur pursuit but as an area in which they could practise as professionals. Jessie M. King, for instance, made a series of designs for jewellery which were sold exclusively through Liberty's in London. Significantly, jewellery made by women sold very well, as an annotated copy of the 1910 exhibition catalogue in the Victoria and Albert Museum Art and Design Archive shows.

Like metalworking and jewellery, stained glass was another area revitalised by the Arts and Crafts Movement which provided opportunities for women. Traditionally, women were excluded from the stained-glass trade, apart from the occasional freelance commission. However, as we have seen in other areas, the Arts and Crafts rejection of commercialism and its emphasis on the individual designer-craftworker provided an alternative way of working for women.16 Mary Lowndes, for example, a leading member of the Suffrage Movement, who had trained as a cartoonmaker with the Arts and Crafts designer Henry Holiday, had her own studio in Chelsea from the 1890s, where she made the designs which she then painted on glass in the workshops of Britten & Gilson, the Arts and Crafts firm. This unified Arts and Crafts method contrasts sharply with the strict division of labour in stained-glass production at Morris and Co. Lowndes worked exclusively in the thick, reamy Prior's Early English Glass', designing and making both domestic and ecclesiastical work, such as a three-light window at the Church of the Holy Innocents in Lamarsh, which was exhibited at the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society and illustrated in the Art Journal.17

How do we conclude this exercise in the application of theory to practice? The three points addressed should now be considered. First, using the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society numbers, it is clear that women's participation in craft production increased dramatically during the period in which the Movement flourished, and that by 1910 women had achieved virtual parity with men at the most prestigious Arts and Crafts exhibition and at the most important school of art and design (the Glasgow School of Art). Second, by 1896, under the Arts and Crafts banner, women's work had diversified from traditional feminine crafts to include a wide range of activities which were open to both sexes. Stained glass, for example, was a craft which was not an option for women at the beginning of our period (1888), but was very popular with professional women designers by the 1910 exhibition, as the catalogue shows and as the programme of the Pageant of Women's Trades and Professions' at the 1909 International Woman Suffrage Alliance makes clear:

Glass Painting has of late years received a great impetus in this country, and women are taking their part with men in

Women in. Design Production

the front ranks of the new movement; though it is probable that twenty years ago there was not among artists a single woman glass painter.18

Most importantly, by the end of the period there is strong evidence that the sexual division of labour between male designer and female maker had broken down within the Arts and Crafts Movement. The number of women designers taking part in the exhibitions of 1888, 1896 and 1910 showed a continuous increase, and in fact there were five times as many women designers in 1910 as in 1888. The number of women executants, however, was roughly the same in 1910 as it had been in 1888. So far as women are concerned, then, the increase in women's participation was overwhelmingly in terms of designers. By 1910, women were normally designers in their own right, and if they worked as executants it was usually either to make their own goods in an Arts and Crafts way or to work the designs of another woman.19 This is a finding which challenges the idea that traditional male-female roles were generally recreated in the Arts and Crafts Movement. In the final analysis, the Arts and Crafts Movement, while it may not have won a definitive victory against the dominant Victorian patriarchal ideology', did far more than simply reproduce and perpetuate it in a monolithic way. What the Arts and Crafts Movement did was to provide an alternative to the commercial system that excluded women. In the harsh light of economic reality it gave women a role as designer-makers which many of them used to acquire financial independence and personal fulfilment, changing the way women thought about themselves in relation to work and creating the precedent for other women to follow Arts and Crafts ideals well into the 1950s.

One final point about the chronology of the Arts and Crafts Movement can be made in conclusion. Elsewhere it has been argued that the Arts and Crafts Movement did not stop in the period 1910-14 but continued with vigour into the inter-war years.20 Certainly it seems on the evidence of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society that by the time the generation of Morris had begun to die out and even the younger generation of Arts and Crafts men were running out of steam, the women in the Movement were just finding their feet.

## Notes

1 Crawford, Alan, and Walker, Lynne, Arts and Crafts organizations', a paper given at the Annual Conference of the Victorian Society, 1978.

3 Ibid.

4 Ibid.

5 Callen, Anthea, Angel in the Studio: Women in the Arts and Crafts Movement 1870–1914, Astragal Books, London, 1979, p. 22.

6 Bookbinding for women', Studio, Vol. 13, 1898, p. 109.

7 Studio, Vol. 16, 1899, p. 150.

8 Callen, 1979, op. cit., p. 187; previous chapter.

9 Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society Catalogues, 1888, 1896, and 1910. This is a representative selection of exhibitions; others during this period were held in 1889, 1890, 1893, 1899, 1903 and 1906.

10 Parker, Rozsika, The Subversive Stitch: Embroidery and the Making of the Feminine., The Women's Press, London, 1984, pp. 184-8.

12 Ibid.

11 Ibid., p. 187.

13 Ibid., p. 184.

14 Ibid.

15 Crawford and Walker, op. cit.

16 Vallence, Aymer, Studio, Vol. 19, 1901, p. 48. See also Lisa Tickner's excellent The Spectacle of Women: Imagery of the Suffrage Campaign 1907–14, Chatto & Windus, London, 1987.

17 Cormack, Peter, Women Stained Glass Artists of the Arts and Crafts Movement, catalogue of an exhibition at the William Morris Gallery, London, 1985.

18‘Women workers in the arts and crafts’, Art Journal, 1986, p. 116.

19 Quoted by Cormack, op. cit.

20 Data compiled from the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society Catalogues, 1888, 1896, 1910.