# 12 Women and the Inter-war Handicrafts Revival

Pat Kirkham

The spirit and traditions of the Arts and Crafts Movement continued throughout the inter-war years, most notably in the field of amateur handicrafts. The period witnessed an unprecedented boom in handicrafts as they became accepted as a leisure pursuit for thousands and thousands of people, particularly women. The acceptability of amateur handicraft work was based on a change in attitude towards craft as leisure as opposed to craft as work and also on a breaking down of the hegemonic hold of notions of professional training and individual genius. Amateur craftworkers came from all walks of life. Many handicrafts could be picked up and put down fairly easily and did not demand long stretches of leisure time. Nor were they the most expensive of hobbies, an important factor in the uncertain economic times of the 1920s and 1930s. White-collar and skilled manual workers were well represented in the towns, while in rural areas the Women's Institutes organised a wide social mix of women, many of whom had learned craft work as part of their domestic roles. Although drawn from both sexes, the vast majority of teachers, writers, instructors and students involved in handicrafts were women. The first three categories were professionals but it was at the amateur end, the student/practitioner end of the movement, that women had access to the crafts in an unprecedented way. Open-ended access was a crucial factor; all women had to do to participate was to join a local authority evening class or a Women's Institute.

Women in Design Production 174

One problem encountered in discussions of amateur handicrafts is that many people still denigrate some of the types of craft work popular at this time, such as raffia-weaving or papier-mâché work. Whereas crafts such as embroidery or handloom weaving are now deemed worthy of academic study and aesthetic appreciation – and are elevated to art' status by some – there still remains a hierarchy within the crafts. The very mention of those at the bottom of the hierarchy solicits a range of pejorative responses formerly directed at embroidery and other women's crafts'. This is reminiscent of the way in which within film and television studies soap operas and women's films' were once thought too insignificant for academic discussion. These two genres now have their academic respectability;

let us hope that one day all aspects of handicrafts will be considered as worthy of study as any other aspect of material culture.

The problem of the hierarchy, or pecking-order, of respectability within the crafts is exacerbated by the reluctance of art and design historians to study amateur work, which, by definition, is not great' art or design. Such élitist considerations need to be set aside for these aspects of popular culture to be viewed as valid in their own right. Rozsika Parker is one of the few art and design historians who examines amateur work but, unfortunately, her excellent and pioneering book, The Subversive Stitch, 1984, barely touches on the inter-war period.¹ In terms of pleasure and satisfaction, amateur handicrafts need to be looked at from the points of view of those who undertook them - and oral history interviews leave one in little doubt about the rich rewards they brought many people. This article examines the roots of the handicrafts revival,; the widening range of handicrafts undertaken and the participation of women in what was, together with the cinema, dancing and sport, one of the most popular of inter-war pastimes.

The roots of the post-1918 boom in handicrafts activity go back to the ideas of John Ruskin and William Morris, particularly those relating to joy in labour and the need to revive, or at least protect, traditional crafts which were part of a popular cultural heritage.

The particular nature of the inter-war amateur enthusiasm for craft work also depended on a fundamental change in attitude towards the crafts which marks the difference between preindustrial Britain and the swamping of home, rural and other craft skills by large-scale production, the division of labour, factory organisation and mechanisation. Although historians have overemphasised the importance of the industrialised and industrialising sector of the British economy in the nineteenth century, and even the early twentieth century, at the expense of other sectors, the century before 1914 saw the working population increasingly losing day-to-day contact with the crafts as work, particularly those done in the home or rural areas. Indeed, the very popularity of craft work as a pleasurable hobby came about only with its removal from the world of paid work. Once outside that world, it became more accessible to women, who were also largely outside that world of work.

The leap from craft as work to craft as leisure was enormous. The morality of late-nineteenth-century Britain was such that leisure pursuits could not simply be accepted per se. Joy in labour alone smacked too much of sheer pleasure. In a society where work was hallowed as morally uplifting in itself, no matter how alienating it might be, leisure also had to have this value placed upon it. The Home Arts and Industries Association, founded in 1884 with the far-reaching aim of recapturing culture as the common property of the people, for instance, hoped to improve the morals of workers as well as improve their handicraft skills.²

The association wanted to foster dormant or undiscovered talents and fill the empty spaces'in people's lives outside paid work, spaces which it feared might otherwise be filled by drinking, gambling or generally licentious behaviour.

While there was a positive aspect to wanting to fill ‘empty spaces’ in people's lives (indeed, this theme ought to be a key one in the crafts debate today), we should not underestimate the negative aspect. Fear of what people might otherwise do with their spare time loomed large for those who realised the weight of social discontent in Britain in the years immediately after a bloody world war and workers' revolutions in Russia and Germany. It was argued that handicrafts were character-building: they cultivated resourcefulness, adaptability, initiative, self-reliance and a will to persevere. Social and educational reformers hoped these qualities, as well as the actual activity of handicrafts work, would keep people away from other distractions, be it the public house, the cinema (‘mechanised pictures', as W. R. Lethaby disparagingly called it) or class politics.³

The teaching of handicrafts in schools would produce a new generation of children less likely than their parents to be tempted by such distractions. This area of teaching developed rapidly in junior schools in the years·immediately after the First World War as new educational philosophies, based on the belief that children are innately creative if only given freedom of expression, were put into practice. At the same time as emphasising creativity and joy in labour, however, the teaching of handicrafts remained part of a wider process of socialisation. For girls in particular, it continued to restrain them, to define good' behaviour (see Figs. 12.1, 12.2). There was also some differentiation according to gender, which reinforced stereotypical gender roles. Bookcrafts, for instance, were seen as suitable for both sexes while knitting was recommended as a handicraft for girls.⁴

The recognition of children's art and craft work as valid in themselves helped the more general acceptance of non-professional work, whether by children or adults. This was reinforced in the early twentieth century by a growing appreciation of primitive’, that is, non-European, largely non-representational, art and design. What had formerly been regarded as crude came to be seen as expressive once painters, psychologists,'anthropologists, ethnographers and others increasingly recognised the cultural richness of so-called ‘primitive' societies in which craft work played an important part.s The inter-war years saw a spate of publications, many of which reached high levels of scholarship, which led to a widespread appreciation of non-European craft work in Britain, elsewhere in Europe and the USA. This appreciation of contemporary cultures in which concepts such as ‘genius’ or ‘professional' artist/designer were alien reinforced the arguments of William Morris and his followers in the Arts and Crafts Movement that the monolithic hold of such concepts, and of structures based upon them, had to be broken before art and crafts could flourish freely. Certainly amateur craft work of the type discussed here flourished only when notions of early specialisation, narrow professional training and the isolated individual artist as genius were challenged. Only then were children and women allowed full and free access.

It was not only that women took up craft work on a greater scale than before but also that a wider range was available to them. This expanded rapidly in the early twentieth century, largely because of the impact of the philosophy of W. R. Lethaby, who extended William Morris' concern for the commonplace things of life into an insistence that the very essence of civilisation lay in caring about simple, everyday things.6 The leading design reformer of the early twentieth century, for him art was simply all worthy handicraft', which included not only hand-weaving and basket-making but also cooking, bread-making and laying the table nicely'. These latter activities had, of course, been undertaken by women for years and years without anyone considering them as art. Lethaby understood that modern society was too concerned with notions of genius' and great performers' to appreciate the common things of life. His philosophy elevated the ordinary domestic concerns of women to the same status as oil paintings or marble statues. There was no overnight transformation in attitudes towards such crafts (indeed, the process is still continuing), but Lethaby's insistence on the crucial importance in any civilised society of crafts associated with women gave a new confidence and sense of importance and appreciation to a whole generation of female teachers and students.

One of the organisations which put into practice many of the new ideas about handicrafts was the National Federation of Women's Institutes (NFWI).7 Needless to say, it found a stalwart supporter in Lethaby, not least because it played a major part in preserving British craft traditions and encouraging new people to take them up. The NFWI was, of course, an all-female institution. The first British Institute was founded in 1915 and the movement quickly established itself nationally. Its ability to foster a cooperative spirit and seemingly cut across class barriers led Harry Peach to liken it to the village guilds of the fifteenth century.8 All women were not equal within the NFWI, then or today, but, because working-class women often had the greatest craft skills and knowledge, they received considerable attention within the organisation.

The federation's magazine, Home and Country, regularly ran articles about Women’s crafts’ – or arts, as Lethaby called them in the articles which he regularly contributed. He went so far as to argue that plain sewing was an art in Sewing arts', where he also discussed patchwork, samplers, embroidery, quilt-making and lacemaking.ª This elevation of these activities to the status of art played a major part in generating a new pride in women's crafts which had previously been derided or ignored. That pride was reflected back and multiplied many times over in the exhibitions and other activities organised by local Women's Institutes.

The energetic Alice Armes was the Federation's handicrafts organiser in the inter-war years, when exhibitions were held at both national and local levels. As early as 1917 a small display of NFWI work was shown at the National Economy Exhibition in Hyde Park and there were national NFWI exhibitions in 1918 and 1920. At the local level the Oxfordshire Institutes were particularly active on the handicrafts issue and in 1921 organised a travelling exhibition of hand-work.1º Local participation was all important if these women were to save crafts from extinction. Even on somewhere as remote as the Isle of Skye the weaving of homespun woollen had almost died out and had to be consciously revived and rejuvenated.

The role of handicrafts in the post-war reconstruction of rural Britain was discussed within the NFWI, but it was felt that most women did not have the time or inclination to develop their craft work on a commercial basis. Instead, attention was turned to establishing a Guild of Learners in 1920 to assist in bringing the best instruction in handicrafts within the reach of villages' and restoring the best traditions of British craft work.11 The development of skills and the maintenance of high standards were key objectives: for example, only items of the highest standard, rather than a cross-section of work, were chosen for the National Handicrafts Exhibition which the NFWI held at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1922. The prestige of the venue indicates the seriousness with which the NFWI approached handicraft work as well as its enormous popularity.

It was relatively easy to agree on standards of quality in production; it was less easy to agree on matters of ‘taste'. This in turn reflected class and educational divisions with the organisation. The taste of the well-educated middle-class women who acted as handicrafts organisers conformed to contemporary notions of good'straightforward design as represented by the Design and Industries Association, which often used contrasting photographs of objects to show ‘good' and ‘bad' design.1² Unfortunately, a great many of the British public, and not a few NFWI members, rather liked some of the items in the ‘bad taste' categories. A particular bête noire of art and design reformers was the crinoline lady,13 in any shape or form, and a furore erupted in Nottinghamshire on this issue. Alice Armes made herself very unpopular with the Nottinghamshire Women's Institutes in the 1920s when she tried to impose her taste on them by refusing exhibition space to a paper nightdress-case in the shape of a crinoline lady. This particular object had been greatly admired by local NFWI members, who were infuriated by Armes' attitude and made it clear that they did not want to see her in the area again.14

The range of crafts covered by the Women's Institutes was enormous, embracing more crafts than any other single institution. Classes ranged from shoe-mending to straw-hat-making, from tinkering to tailoring and from basketwork to blacksmithing. This very full and energetic participation of the Women's Institutes in the handicrafts revival could, at one level, have opened up new areas of craft activity for women. At this popular level of the Arts and Crafts Movement, however, it is difficult (certainly at this stage of research) to see any breakdown of the existing gender divisions in the crafts as a result of this activity. While there was an extension of the definition of what crafts were deemedworthy' andartistic' the very concept of ‘women's crafts' appears to have hardened in the inter-war years.

The Women's Institutes never challenged the dominant ideology relating to women's role in society. There were many layers of assumptions about what was ‘womanly'that remained unchallenged: Lethaby, for instance, in a foreword to a book on embroidery, recommended all girls to practise the fascinating game of playing with the needle and the pattern book'5 (the italics are mine). In general, men were concerned with metalwork, woodwork and furniture, whereas women were concerned with all the sewing crafts, knitting, weaving, rug-making, upholstery and leatherwork. There were clearly many, many notable exceptions. Some men knitted and some women made furniture, but the gender divisions generally held true, with some crafts, such as bookbinding and basketwork, appearing neutral' enough to appeal to both women and men.

The NFWI was an important and powerful women's organisation but, because it did not challenge the status quo with regard to women and crafts, its very strength reinforced, and if anything hardened, the division between those activities undertaken by women and those undertaken by men. The establishment of separate departments ofwomen's crafts' in art and design schools also had a similar effect. While their establishment was, at one level, an acknowledgment of the competence of women and their great interest in certain craft areas, at the same time these departments affirmed women's marginalisation, if not exclusion, from others. Suddenly, anything which was not in a department of women's crafts was, by definition, not a women's craft, and vice versa.

Although Glasgow School of Art pioneered many of the artistic women's crafts, such as embroidery, and increased its complement of women staff between about 1895 and 1915,1⁶ it was other schools which established separate departments of women's crafts. Leicester is a good example of an art and design school which established a special department for women students who were exclusively taught by female staff. The idea of establishing such a department at Leicester School of Art was first voiced before the First World War but it was not until 1917 that it finally opened. It was run by two women, Frances Livingston and Annie Heynes, and they were responsible for teaching 18 students. The only department in the School of Art to be taught by women for women, it was also the fastest growing in the inter-war years. By the end of the 1920s there were 12 full-time staff, who, together with part-time staff, taught over 130 students.17

While the department catered for students who hoped to work in local trades and for trainee teachers, it also offered non-vocational training to those who wished to learn how to discriminate between artistic and inartistic work and make the best of leisure'.18 The latter students attended both day and evening classes. The day students were generally married women or others who were not in paid work, while evening students included women who worked in local factories. They all attended because they enjoyed creative craft work. They were taught by the same staff as the day-time vocational students. Creativity was encouraged and students had to make their own original designs for dresses, fabrics or embroidery. Students mostly made articles for themselves or the home. Dressmaking classes were always over-subscribed, with women wanting to make items for their trousseaux, dance dresses and home furnishings.19 The boom – it almost amounted to a craze – for handicrafts led to a great demand for materials, tools, instruction manuals and demonstrators. Teacher training colleges, junior schools, adult evening institutes, and Women's Institutes were the main bodies generating demand in the 1920s. In the following decade handicrafts were taken up in a major way in senior schools and also in hospitals, with the growth of occupational therapy.2o The needs of the various institutions and individual craftworkers were met in various ways. The NFWI, for instance, published some instructional leaflets and organised a host of short courses and lectures. Local colleges of art and design also catered for the interested amateur, as did individual artist/craftworkers who offered tuition: Cecile Francis-Lewis, for instance, offered batik lessons in the 1920s at her London studio,21 while many women learned or perfected their handloom-weaving at Ethel Mairet's workshops.2² However, the main name associated with handicrafts instruction is Dryad: in inter-war Britain the name Dryad was synonymous with handicrafts. Those who were then schoolchildren remember using the materials while those who taught recall the anticipation with which they awaited each annual Dryad catalogue.

Dryad was owned and run by Harry Peach, a disciple of W. R. Lethaby, who firmly believed in the moral and uplifting values of amateur handicrafts. He also believed that previous attempts to revive crafts at a popular level had failed precisely at the amateur level. Standards had been set too low and he saw one of his missions in life as the raising of those standards. He insisted on good materials and tools for amateur as well as professional craft activities. The story of how the energetic Peach promoted handicrafts and turned Dryad into the world's largest supplier of handicraft materials and publications is told elsewhere.23 What needs to be noted here is the extent to which women were involved in the enterprise, particularly as writers and demonstrators. The publication of instructional leaflets began in 1920 and books in 1923. The most prolific author was a Dryad employee and former student of Leicester School of Art, Elsie Mochrie, who, in the years between 1923 and 1931, had over 20 publications to her credit, many of which ran into several editions. Mochrie specialised in embroidery, leatherwork and raffia work, while her Dryad colleague, Ivy Roseaman (also ex-Leicester School of Art) specialised in felt appliqué work and raffia work. Another author who worked for Dryad was Ursula Fletcher, daughter of Benjamin Fletcher, Headmaster of Leicester School of Art until 1920 (he then became Head at Birmingham). Joan Reynolds, a former student of the same school, also wrote for Dryad.

Given the instructional nature of the leaflets and books and the popularity of handicrafts in schools, it is not surprising that Peach looked to authors who were teachers as well as practising craftworkers. They included Anne Heynes on patchwork and quilting (Leicester School of Art), Gladys J. Shaw on leathercraft (Birmingham Central School of Arts and Crafts), Lilian E. Simpson (University of Birmingham, lecturer in crafts) and Marjorie Weir on weaving (Bradford College of Arts and Crafts and Examiner to the National Froebel Union), Dorothy Hart on upholstery (organiser of needlework and hand-work, Oxfordshire Education Committee). Louisa Judd-Morris on decorative needlework (Women's Crafts Mistress at Bradford College of Arts and Crafts), Olive Hacking on needlework (London Institute of Needlework and Principal of the School of Constructive Needlework) and Anne Macbeth on rug-making (Glasgow School of Art).

Despite all the publications, the best learning experience for many would-be craftworkers was personal tuition by a skilled worker. Much of the demand for demonstrations and lessons came from Women's Institutes, school teachers and teacher educators. Dryad ran its first, and very successful, summer school in 1921, when about 20 people were taught basket-making, raffia- and small-loom-weaving (see Fig. 12.3). Tuition soon expanded to cover other subjects, including embroidery and leatherwork. Single lessons lasted for one and a half hours but students could also enrol for a group of three lessons or choose courses lasting three days or a week. Dryad Handicrafts staff travelled throughout England and Scotland in the inter-war years. It was on such courses that many women first learned the craft or crafts that would bring them so much creative pleasure for years to come.

Between them, Dryad Handicrafts and the Women's Institute Movement dominated the handicrafts revival of the inter-war years. Neither was afraid to espouse the cause of quality amateur work; indeed, that was the main aim of both organisations. Neither saw the revival as restricted to women or solely concerning women's crafts', but because of the sheer numbers of women involved and the types of crafts, such as needlework, knitting and sewing, which were most popular, the main defining markers of the Arts and Crafts Movement in those years were amateur and female participation on a scale never before envisaged. Although complex in its roots and development, the handicrafts revival of the interwar period represented craft work as a truly popular phenomenon which brought varied pleasures and a great deal of satisfaction to thousands upon thousands of ordinary people.

## Notes

1 Parker, Rozsika, The Subersive Stitch Embroidery and the Making of the Feminine, The Women's Press, London, 1984.

2 See Willink, W. E., ‘The Home Arts Movement', Transactions of the National Association for the Advancement of Art and Its Application to Industry, Liverpool Meering, 1888, London, 1888, pp. 272–5, and Naylor, G., The Arts and Crafts Movement, Studio Vista, London, 1971, p. 158. See also Chapters 10 and 11 in this volume by Walker and Callen.

3 See Kirkham, Pat, Harry Peach, Dryad and the DIA, Design Council, London, 1986, pp. 70–3.

4 Dryad Handicrafts catalogues c. 1924–36, sections on knitting and crochet.

5 Kirkham, op. cit., 71.

Women in Design Production 182

6 See Lethaby, W. R., Home and Country Arts, Home and County, London, 1923; Lethaby, W. R., Form in Civilisation: Collected Papers on Art and Labour, Humphrey Milford, London, 1938

(first published 1922); William Richard Lethaby 1857–1931: A Volume in Honour of the School’s First Principal Prepared by A. R. N. Roberts at the Suggestion of William Johnstone OBE, Central School of Arts and Crafts, London, 1957; and Rubens, Godfrey, William Richard Lethaby: His Life and Work, Architectural Press, London, 1986.

7 For a history of the NFWI, see Goodenough, Simon, Jam and Jerusalem, Collins, London, 1977.

8 Kirkham, op. cit.,

9 Lethaby, 1923, op. cit., pp. 45–63.

10 Goodenough, op. cit., pp. 70–2.

11 Ibid., p. 70.

12 See Kirkham, op. cit., pp. 47–69, and Plummer, Raymond, Nothing Need Be Ugly: The First Seventy Years of the Design and Industries Association, Blackfriars Press, Leicester, 1985.

13 See Holdsworth, Bruce, English Art Education Between the Wars', Journal of Art and Design Education, Vol. 3, No. 2, 1984, p. 169.

14 Goodenough, op. cit., p. 72.

15 Waring, Mary E., An Embroidery Pattern Book, Pitman, London, 1917, p. vi.

16 Bird, Liz, Threading the Beads: Women in Art in Glasgow, 1870– 1920', in Uncharted Lives: Extracts from Scottish Women's Experiences 1850–1982, Press Gang, Glasgow, 1983, pp. 98–117.

17 Leicester College of Arts and Crafts, Prospectus, 1927. See also unpublished thesis (CNAA M. Phil) on the history of the college by Lys de Beaumont, 1988.

18 Ibid.

19 Ibid.

20 See Kirkham, op. cit.

21 I am grateful to Chris Boydell for this reference.

22 See Coatts, Margot, A Weaver's Life. Ethel Mairet 1872–1952, Crafts Council, London, 1984.

23 See Kirkham, op. cit.

Part Four

A Place of Their Own