# 13 A View from the Interior Alison Ravetz

Women, Class and Gender in Housing

'It's ’aving 'ouses built by men, I believe, makes all the work and trouble', said Arthur Kipps' wife, Ann, at the turn of the century.¹ The sentiment is not misplaced even today. Although women are identified with houses in our society as in many others, throughout history they seem to have had remarkably little to do with house design.

Houses are pre-eminently symbols of public worth and status. A glance at any estate agent's window will confirm that it is the exterior that counts. Interiors are seldom depicted, and then only for quality' houses of high value. But it is with the interiors that women are most intimately concerned. Even in the architectural Modern Movement, which broke with tradition in its concern for functional, labour-saving homes, the identification of houses by their exteriors passed without question. So, in Figure 13.1, women do not figure: presumably they are tucked away inside, doing the dishes or ironing the clothes.

There is, of course, a simple and obvious explanation for the phenomenon noticed by Ann Kipps. Scarcely any woman of her time belonged to the design or building professions, and comparatively few do, even now. Sellers, buyers and their agents view houses from the outside, as objects. So, in a different way, does the design professional, who may think about the interior to a greater or lesser extent but who is more concerned with form, façade and site layout. The question addressed here, therefore, is what about the women working in the interiors? Did they make no contribution at all to house design? Or did they perhaps make one that was overlooked?

There is a fast-growing body of feminist research into the relations between women, housing and environments. So far as it relates to the normal built environment, it concentrates on the extent to which this handicaps women, or excludes them from consideration.² Another theme that is taken up is that of the atypical or abnormal development, such as the tradition of feminist-inspired settlements and cooperatives.3 This is more meaningful in an American than a British context, for in the USA feminism was more integrated in society and more effective than in Britain. In Britain, it is possible to trace a movement of cooperative housekeeping, but in the main any contributions that women made to house design had to be from their conventional, subordinate position in society.

The development of housing in nineteenth-century England was strictly related to social class. The evolution of the ordinary urban house was dominated by the Georgian or pre-Georgian terraced house of the urban upper classes. As this was passed down the social scale, it mingled with the small, functional terraced cottages that were built for artisan and sub-artisan populations, many towns having their own distinctive types. The model tenements built for the deserving and industrious poor from the 1840s onwards, although sometimes designed to look like upper-class terraces, provided a different, alien type of dwelling.

The inspiration for house design was provided either by the market - which accounted for the desire to make houses look impressive from the outside and to seem to be better than they really were – or by social policy, which was responsible for building regulations and bylaws. All who aspired to gentility were bombarded, in Victorian England, with information about the precise levels of rent and household establishment they should aim at on their level of income. Wives and daughters, themselves part of a man's‘establishment', must usually have concurred, for the house's status also determined their own access to society, and so to matrimony. Even Karl Marx, living in London in the 1860s, was quick to move to a better house when his precarious fortunes improved, with his daughters’futures in mind.4

Such considerations, of course, excluded poor women. Unless they worked as servants for the gentry they were likely to have only part of a house, perhaps even one room or less, as their home. Many of the houses originally built for the gentry as well as other, humbler houses, were subdivided for the poor – a fact that may be overlooked in architectural histories of the surviving examples. For housewives living in such conditions, the greatest possible improvement, as Octavia Hill saw, was to be able to rent two rooms instead of one.⁵ Better still if they could have a whole house. Thus, class-determined though the system was, there were also strong gender motivations in moving upwards through the housing stock. This must have served as a powerful barrier to any search that women might otherwise have made for an alternative dwelling type. In housing, as in other spheres of life, women sought improvement through the established class avenues. Only when such an avenue proved a dead-end would they be impelled to think afresh, not along class but along gender lines.

The year 1950 might be taken as a watershed to mark the close of one era and the opening of another. Because by then two things of profound significance for women had occurred: the middle-class wife had finally and irrevocably lost her servants and the workingclass wife had gained, or was in the process of gaining, a whole house to look after. The two stereotypes that had dominated the Victorian domestic scene had finally bowed out: the mistress of servants and the poor woman living in shared accommodation. Space was left for an apparently new figure, the ‘ordinary housewife'. Rich or poor, they were all now multiple role, allpurpose, high value-low cost' housewives,6 responsible for all the material and personal care of other family members, for active consumption in the market and, of course, for housekeeping.

A comprehensive history of the housewife has received, if anything, rather less attention than the history of housework. Granted, there are certain pools of light: on the married woman factory worker, for instance,7 and the middle-class mistress of servants.8 But there seems to be a virtual blank for the prototype of the modern housewife, the woman looking after her own home and bringing up her own family. We might suppose her to be described in the classic Family and Kinship in East London, but the view assembled there is compounded of retrospective and romanticised views of working-class life, over-optimistic anticipations of council housing and male, middle-class attitudes on the part of the observers.9 The Victorian middle-class woman is popularly imagined as a useless, fainting creature; but Patricia Branca's reanalysis of her role depicts her as a pioneer of social, economic and technical change.10

## Three Nineteenth-century Women

In Jane Carlyle's own time, there was no general interest or concern for the plight of women struggling with the new domestic role. It was on the poor that male housing reformers focused, and in so far as women were able to play a role in reform, they followed suit – notably, as builders of model cottages and villages.11 Although it was impossible for women to be legislators, philanthropists, industrialists or professionals, there did emerge three outstanding women reformers who made significant contributions to housing. Thus the heiress Angela Burdett Coutts, using Charles Dickens as adviser and Henry Darbishire as architect, built tenements for the poor at Columbia Market in the East End of London in the 1850s and 1860s. The schemes, and particularly the pretentious gothic market hall itself, apparently enjoyed limited success.12

A generation later, Henrietta Barnett founded Hampstead Garden Suburb, in what was then the most fashionable model for reformed housing, that of the garden city. Dedicating her life to the cultural improvement of the working classes in general, rather than women in particular, Dame Henrietta saw the suburb as an extension of her settlement' work with Canon Barnett in the East End of London. She appears to have adopted the garden city ideology without question, infused as it was with the paternalism of Port Sunlight and Bournville. It was an ideology in which rural and domestic idylls were fused, as Davidoff and others have shown.13 The cottage houses and healthy environment of garden cities and suburbs were intended to benefit the family as a whole. Considering how much middle- as well as working-class Victorian wives and mothers had to do with sickness and death, they doubtless would have agreed wholeheartedly with this. The ideal family was considered then, as much later, an undivided whole, although the roles of its members were sharply differentiated. The husband went out to work and returned to till his garden or allotment. The wife meanwhile minded house and children; and both spent their leisure time within the community (see Fig. 13.2). It was a picture that contrasted with the realities of Dame Henrietta's own life, which she had chosen to dedicate to a full-time vocation in the heart of the city, without the handicap of children.14

For Dame Henrietta, as for a whole line of women who were involved in the movement as wives, committee members or (in rare cases) professionals, the humanity and social concern of the garden city movement must have seemed to guarantee its appropriateness for women. The movement made some vital contributions to house design, first adopting the socialist-inspired plans of Raymond Unwin and Barry Parker, and later bequeathing them to council housing, through the medium of the Tudor Walters Report.15 This school of design was the antithesis of the shallow, façade' approach to housing mentioned earlier. It tended to design houses from the inside out and was concerned with orientation and outlook, as well as with the optimum use of space. Because of Unwin's strongly held ideological views about the worthlessness of parlours in workingmen's homes,16 it also involved a debate about the relative importance of the ground floor room, and this was an issue that, as we shall see later, was not allowed to drop for the next 40 years. Although women strongly dissented from Unwin's views on the parlour whenever they were given a public hearing, there is no doubt that his and Parker's work on the planning of the small house addressed itself to domestic labourers and their needs more than any architect had done before.

The third great woman housing pioneer of Victorian times was Octavia Hill, a granddaughter of the social reformer Dr Southwood Smith and the closest female parallel of the male legislator or professional. From the 1860s Octavia Hill worked among the very poor, many of whom belonged to what she called the destructive classes'. Her objective was to get them to live more decently by offering inducements such as house repairs, improvements and rewards of various kinds. To this end she became a landlady and agent for other landlords. New houses were of little concern to her, for they were remote from the people she was dealing with. Indeed, she constantly warned of the dangers of providing the poor with accommodation that was too good or too expensive for them. For these and also for ideological reasons she was implacably opposed to the provision of state housing for the poor. Steadfastly refusing to adopt simple, deterministic explanations or solutions, she worked at the interface between people and environments, where cause and effect between bad' people and bad environments were ultimately indistinguishable. Her constant refrain was, You cannot deal with the people and their houses separately’.17

Under the Octavia Hill ‘system', through punishment, reward and (one suspects) a degree of moral blackmail, people were expected to become responsible for themselves and to raise their own standards, in surroundings that they themselves learned to value and care for, and which they could afford. Her policy was to make the best of what was there: this seemed, after all, the obvious thing to do, since people could not themselves engineer their own environments.

Easily branded as a political reactionary, Octavia Hill could also be regarded in the rather different light of today's anarchist thought in housing, where control by users is seen as more important than fixed standards and official regulation.18 Thus, though she could never be called a progressive, she might be termed a radical. She herself likened her work to housekeeping. She was involved with people's most intimate encounters with dustbins, drains, floorboards, clothes-lines and window-panes. To that extent she may be called the most feminine of all the three nineteenth-century women housing reformers mentioned here. That this was not just a personal foible but had meaning for many people is demonstrated by the enduring success of her distinctive system of management. For, in spite of her own loathing of standardisation and bureaucracy, over the years she trained an army of women helpers and rent collectors, so involuntarily founding a specifically women's profession of housing management. This was the first such profession which a later, male housing profession contended with and eventually absorbed.19

## Housewives and House Design

Octavia Hill was too bent on getting poor housewives to enlarge the size of their homes by renting a second room to consider how better design might help them in their tasks. One of few who did think along these lines at this time was the illustrious chef Alexis Soyer, but his main concern was with apparatus for cooking.2º In an abundant Victorian literature on the homes of the poor, there is much talk of sanitary, medical and moral matters, but little or nothing on how their housing helped or hindered women in the domestic tasks they had to perform.

At the other end of the social scale, the mistress of servants had as her object, not the reform of her house, but the question of how to organise the servants so as to get more work out of them. This was also of great concern to men, who paid the wages, but delegated the actual management to their wives. Thus we find that the young David Copperfield admonished his lamentable child-wife, Dora: You really must accustom yourself to look after Mary Anne'.21 By late in the century we find men almost as anxious as women about the threatening demise of domestic service, sometimes coming up with ingenious proposals for labour-saving houses.22 But it was after the turn of the century, and particularly with the advent of war, that this prospect became an alarming reality for upper- and middle-class men and women alike. One concerned gentleman arrived at the neat solution that his wife and daughters should perform the maids' work, himself meanwhile providing encouragement and labour-saving gadgets.23

It was perhaps this strong male interest in getting the housework done with minimum inconvenience to themselves that, more than any feminist inspiration, explains the interest of certain men of the garden city movement in collective housekeeping.Co-operative quadrangles' of kitchenless houses were built at Letchworth, Welwyn Garden City and Hampstead Garden Suburb, at the urging of H. G. Wells and the instigation of Ebenezer Howard. Relying variously on professional day servants or tenants' wives to run their common dining-rooms, they were hailed, then and now, as being feminist and revolutionary; but in fact they embodied ideas that had been current for some time. Thus professional catering services and a new profession of lady' day servants had been canvassed for some years; and while the removal of individual kitchens does, indeed, seem a revolutionary step, there are ways in which it seems more so today than it did in its own time. The many domestic manuals of the Victorians (of which the renowned Mrs Beeton's is only one) give a clear impression that the kitchen was thought of not so much as an integral part of the family home as a distant cavern from which dinners emerged, with the wife as a nervous intermediary. In the quadrangles, the home (without kitchen) still remained distinguishable and private, with gender divisions unchanged. Ebenezer Howard, who moved into Homesgarth at Letchworth in 1913, congratulated himself, we may remember, on his wife’s liberation from housework.24

Towards the end of the nineteenth century, some of the domestic manuals suggest that middle-class housewives were having to take over the servants' work, and they were admonished to preserve the same standards and routines after the servants themselves had left.25 At the same time, we know from older women who once worked as servants that they often tried to carry their mistresses' standards into their own homes after marriage. Poor housewives, however, remained overburdened, ignored and inarticulate until, in the years leading up to the First World War and later, in the inter-war period, some educated and politically aware women began to speak up for them. Thus, inspired severally by their Fabian, Liberal, Cooperative or trade union beliefs and affiliations, Maud Pember Reeves,2⁶ Leonora Eyles,27 Eleanor Rathbone²8⁸ and Margery Spring Rice²9 described the daily round and labour of the poor working-class housewife. Their work was often supported and researched by the many women's lobbies and pressure groups that by now existed: most notably, for its influence on working-class women, the Women's Cooperative Guild, which had been founded in 1883. Also important for their influence on public opinion and policy were the Women's Industrial Council (f. 1894), which was concerned with the future of domestic service,3º the later National Council of Women of Great Britain, with its offshoot, the Council of Scientific Management in the Home, and the women's electrical and gas associations.

In so far as they considered the design of the dwellings that working-class wives had to live in, the views of these various individuals and bodies did not always coincide with the conventional wisdom of housing reformers, or with what has since become the received history of housing design. Early in the twentieth century, Maud Pember Reeves felt that scullery houses represented a great improvement for working-class women, as did tenements.31 In the 1920s, writing as a professional woman purposely living as a poor housewife, Leonora Eyles wrote feelingly of ‘all the misery' of housekeeping in a five-roomed house in Peckham.3² On the eve of the Second World War, Margery Spring Rice considered council dwellings, including council flats, to be the best of all dwelling types. Perhaps the key to the variations was that, as the latter observed, as women were moved into better housing their own standards rose, so that they became more discriminating about things they would never have thought about before. Women's standards were likely to be conditioned by their experience and their growing self-awareness, including awareness of their developing domestic role, in contrast to standards that were objectively' derived and imposed from outside.

Many of the accounts of working-class housewives were concerned with the effects of having to share accommodation. This meant that their multiple tasks might have to be carried out in one small room, which needed constant rearrangement by day and night. One of the greatest problems was the lack of space in which to move around, so that family members had all to get up and go to bed at the same time. Water and waste needed to be carried up and down flights of stairs, and often the only cooking appliance was a broken bedroom grate. Observers of slightly better homes noticed how, even there, there was no space for new appliances, notably those appliances of mobility, the bicycle and perambulator.³³ The former, of course, belonged to other family members, but the latter was first acquired by many working-class wives with the allowance paid to soldiers' wives in the First World War. Prior to reaching this level of mobility, the poor housewife might be literally immured in her home, for apart from the problem of carrying children, she herself often lacked shoes and outer clothing.

Bearing in mind things such as this, it is understandable that the women who commented on early twentieth-century working-class housing, like Octavia Hill before them, did not concern themselves so much with design as with space, housekeeping tasks and standards. As for middle-class housing, two women were unusual in advancing some design suggestions. One was Dorothy Peel, who held a government post in the First World War and was later household editor of The Queen. Her long writing career developed from books that took servants for granted³⁴ to others which argued for improvements to traditional houses, now that the servants had gone.35 The active Fabian and women's rights campaigner, Clementina Black, published an original design for cluster dwellings with collective facilities intended to be useful to the professional working woman.3⁶ Neither woman's proposals had any noticeable influence on middle-class housing, which continued to be motivated by class rather than gender considerations.

By far the most significant input of women into house design occurred through the Women's Subcommittee to the Ministry of Reconstruction in the closing stages of the First World War.37 This was set up ty the Minister, Dr Christopher Addison, largely at the urging of a women's movement which was still fresh from its victory with the vote and highly politicised. Labour, Liberal and Cooperative women were involved in the Subcommittee, as well as local suffrage societies, a professional group like the Association of Women House Property Managers, numerous mother and baby welfare groups, and even the typing pool of the Savoy Hotel in London. Probably all those participating would have góne along with the Women's Labour League when it said, 'Women ought to be the housing experts, and consider what they want, and leave compromise aside.'38

The brief of the Subcommittee was to visit specimen houses built by the Ministry of Munitions during the war and to advise on various plans for post-war houses for the working classes then being put forward, with special reference to the convenience of the housewife.'39 The members set to work with a will, having efficient officers and experienced campaigners, and they used questionnaire surveys, leaflets, lectures and exhibitions to try to canvass and represent working-class housewives throughout the country. In Sheffield it was claimed that 7,000 such women were reached. The conclusions, put forward in two reports of 1918 and 1919, were that the first priority should be the health of the whole family. In design, adequate space in the dwelling should take precedence over labour-saving devices, and if at all possible, three bedrooms and a parlour or best' ground floor room should be provided. Cooking should be eliminated from the traditional kitchen-living-room and transferred to the scullery, where the sink was already placed. There should be a specialised bathroom with a fixed bath and piped water, although it did not greatly matter whether this was downstairs or upstairs, or even whether it contained a wash-hand basin. When considering what would be conducive to labour saving, the Subcommittee stressed fittings and services, rather than appliances. Thus they recommended deep sinks, with a plug and two draining-boards, and wall, floor and corner details that would be easy to clean. Most importantly, they stressed that a hot water supply was essential, while a cheap electricity supply was highly desirable.

The Subcommittee took a deliberate decision to extend its horizons beyond the individual dwelling to the surroundings, for it was impossible

to treat Housing as a separate matter from Site and Town Planning, and to deal with the modern town cottage as a separate unit. Only through such careful planning can we make a real advance towards building up the communities of the future, whether we are considering their needs from the houswives' and mothers' point of view, or from that of the citizens in general.40

Thus the need for children's play space, over and above the private garden, was stressed, and even the comparatively enlightened garden suburb developments were criticised for not paying enough attention to this. To the members it seemed obvious that if the providing societies had been organised to a larger extent by women more provision would have been made for the needs of children as distinguished from those of adults.'41

Playgrounds, and even social centres, could be argued for on grounds of good health and the promotion of citizenship; but when it came to communal arrangements like wash houses, laundries, holiday homes and public meals services, an interesting gap emerged between the ideals of the Subcommittee and the working-class women they were representing. The former believed that such things would greatly ease the lives of working-class housewives and that the solution of many of the more difficult domestic problems will eventually be found along the lines of co-operation rather than in isolated effort.'4² As things were, however, they regretfully had to conclude that the working-class woman was set against anything smacking of communal arrangements. She had in fact already done more than enough involuntary sharing, as the Labour supporter Dr Marion Phillips noted. Was such a woman's resistance from ignorance, she asked:

Is it because she is more conservative than any other class of the community? Is it that she is more prejudiced and conventional? Not a bit of it. The truth of the matter lies in a very different direction. Her experience is that the first need in Housing Reform is good and sufficient bedroom accommodation. The second is opportunity for cleanliness both for the house and the person. The third is sufficient living room and parlour accommodation to make the social life of the family a real pleasure. Now these are the things she knows she must have before she can consider that she has got the right kind of home, and not one of them lends itself immediately to co-operative treatment.43

Reluctantly, the Subcommittee respected these scruples and decided that, for the working-class woman for the time being, privacy should be paramount.

The work of the advisory group suggests that women at this time had a very clear idea of what they wanted the house to perform, and why. This is particularly to be seen in the way they fulfilled one part of their brief: namely, a critical scrutiny of plans for post-war, state-subsidised houses published by the Local Government Board. Their numerous and very detailed criticisms of these gave huge offence at the Board, which accused the women of ignorance, invasion of professional (i.e. male) expertise and wild utopianism – as, for instance, in their ‘strong opinion, equivalent almost to a demand, that every house should have a separate bathroom with a bath fitted with a constant supply of hot and cold water, ready for use at any hour.'44 The Board pressured the Minister to suppress the Subcommittee's reports completely. This Addison was unwilling to do; but in the end two parts out of three were suppressed, although the part that was published included their main points of principle.

This episode made it plain that when women did try to intervene in a practical way in house design, even when officially invited to do so, there was a strong hostile reaction. The far more influential housing report of this time was the Tudor Walters Report, where Raymond Unwin, from his now receding socialist past and experience of garden city practice, laid down the design and technical blueprints for post-war public housing.45 The report, anticipating only a limited number of subsidised dwellings, saw the necessity of taking advantage of the transition that housing standards were already going through, and of providing new standards that would set a model for society. These were not, in fact, intended for the poorest sections of society but, in accordance with the doctrine of filtering up', they were to be for the not-sopoor, whose vacated accommodation would benefit all those below them on the housing ladder.

This may help to explain the curiously didactic tone of the report. It reflected Unwin's own thoughts about the futility of putting parlours into workingmen's homes, although it did grudgingly conclude that, since the majority wanted them, they should be provided. The report was deeply concerned with the kitchen area of the house, echoing the Women's Subcommittee in saying that working-class people wanted to remove the cooking function to the scullery, but fearful that in their desire for a parlour people would sanction a recombination of living-room and scullery. Worse still, there was a danger' in enlarging the scullery, because families might be tempted to eat their meals in it. After debating this, it somewhat uneasily concluded that

Perhaps too much weight should not be given to the danger of improper use of rooms, in view of the stronglymarked tendency of working-class families to live in the living-room and to confine the cooking to the scullery.46

In spite of making so many assumptions about working-class life, and although the work of the Women's Subcommittee must have been one of its main sources of information (if not the only one), the Tudor Walters Report surprisingly makes no direct reference to housewives. Thus it refers to working-classwitnesses', but not to women. Nor does it concern itself with housework, like the Women's Subcommittee, or lay anything like the same emphasis on electricity, hot and cold running water, or small but significant details like a double draining-board for the sink.

It might, of course, be argued that the particular bias of the Tudor Walters Report was due to its being more aware of the need for economy and the political realities of the subsidised housing that was going to be introduced. In the event, even its recommended standards were considerably higher than what most local authorities built. This included a great many two-bedroomed houses and houses without bathrooms, while only a minority had parlours. At the same time, the three-bedroom semi' dominated the new owneroccupied sector between the wars. Typically, this had, downstairs, a small hall with the staircase, two reception or living-rooms and a small working kitchen, or ‘kitchenette', as it was commonly called. This was, in fact, the old scullery, now dressed up with words and imagery from Modernism in architecture and aided by ideas from American home economics and household efficiency experts. The builders had, perhaps, their own profit motives for building houses with this internal layout, with compact kitchens; but in its self-containedness, private garden, separate parlour (or lounge’) and labour-saving' kitchen, the spec-built house did in fact come close to the ideal of many women, according to surveys carried out in the 1940s.47 Together, the new public and private houses of the inter-war years began to transform the twentiethcentury housing stock. Both irrevocably departed from the traditional terraced house with attics and cellars.

During this time women continued to be articulate about the reform of house design through a plethora of organisations which included a Women's Committee of the Garden City and Town Planning Association, which was operative from the 1920s, the Electrical Association for Women, founded in 1924, and the Women's Gas Council, founded in 1930. The National Council of Women of Great Britain had a number of satellite organisations, which included a Women's Health Enquiry Committee and the Council of Scientific Management in the Home. This in turn had a Household Service Committee from 1929 and a' Research Subcommittee from 1932. The latter concerned itself particularly with kitchen planning and in 1937 it created a model kitchen which toured the country. It continued its work after the Second World War, when it published a critique of the prefab bungalow,48 and it continued to publish on housework, efficiency and scientific management in the home down to the late 1960s.

During the Second World War, virtually all women's groups in the political parties, and well-established women's organisations like the Women's Voluntary Service (wvs) and the National Federation of Townswomen's Guilds, felt constrained to publish reports on post-war housing. In 1944 the Women's Group on Public Welfare published Our Towns: A Close-up, in response to the dreadful urban standards and living conditions that came to light when evacuees were received into comfortable rural homes.49 A Housing Digest prepared for the Electrical Association for Women in 1946 was able to quote from housing reports of 10 different women's bodies, none of which were party political ones.⁵0

As in 1918, the government was concerned to incorporate the views of women in its plans for post-war public housing. This was now expected to cater not just for a minority section of the working classes but for a very broad social cross-section of all in need of homes. The new, official, trend-setting report was the Dudley Report, Design of Dwellings, which, rather like the Tudor Walters Report before it, was able to register a shift to higher standards, including electricity, gas, and hot and cold running water, alì of which were now taken for granted. It also noted that the expectations of women were much higher than before. The report emphasised that the housewife is the expert' on the way the house and its rooms were used, and that she must therefore be consulted.51 Accordingly, it admonished local authorities to make more use of their power to coopt women on to housing committees, which they could do under the 1933 Local Government Act. Of the 20-strong subcommittee which drew up the Dudley Report, eight were women (including a woman architect as secretary) and 17 women's organisations were consulted, out of a total of 57 organisations. They included nine which had not appeared in the 1946 Digest.

To obtain its more detailed information about women's needs, the Dudley Report subcommittee did not ask a body of eminent women to represent the voiceless majority but made use of mass surveys. Thus it used the work of a Women's Advisory Housing Council, which surveyed thousands of housewives in towns and villages, and more thousands of young women in factories and the forces. The Society of Women Housing Managers also carried out mass surveys on council estates, and local women's groups were consulted by many city councils. Besides confirming that women, when asked, were enthusiastic about the ideas for post-war housing that were being circulated by architects and planners, these surveys conveyed to the subcommittee the notion that house design should hinge around the housewife's work patterns, particularly the rota of family meals. This led them to the conclusion that there must either be room to eat in a larger kitchen, or a dining recess in a through living-room adiacent to the kitchen. In the illustrations the wife was depicted as cooking or serving meals, while the husband was either cleaning shoes or being waited on. It is fair comment, therefore, thatwomen's views were seen as important but only in their capacity as housewives.'s2

While it is outside the timespan covered by this essay, it is of interest to note that the Parker Morris Report, which appeared in 1961, reviewed and set new, improved, official housing standards and adopted quite a different attitude to women. The Report took cognisance of the four million working wives, and it considered the lavout and use of rooms from the point of view of the family and the individual rather than the housewife. Concerned with growing leisure time and affluence, it emphasised the proliferation of household appliances, which husbands and other family members would use, as well as the wife. A different climate for women at this time, and one not necessarily in their own interests, is reflected by the fact that only 10 women's organisations gave evidence to the Parker Morris Committee – less than one-fifth of the total.s³

## Conclusion: The View from the Interior

This brief review suggests that it is not strictly true to suppose, with Ann Kipps, that women were not involved in house design. Their input was quite large, especially in the period between the wars, although in many ways it never surpassed the peak reached with the Women's Advisory Housing Subcommittee of 1918. At that time, however, the male establishment closed ranks when women threatened to become involved in any direct or practical way. The policy, which was clearly seen again at the time of the Dudley Report, was to consult women and to design for women as housewives. One risks being inaccurate and simplistic, however, in supposing that this limited and patronising approach necessarily alienated women. The evidence suggests, on the contrary, that women themselves agreed that houses should be designed for housewives. At first this was largely because of the preoccupation with the working-class housewife. Reformers and campaigners like Rathbone and Eyles, and the many women's bodies giving evidence or publishing reports, agreed that the first concern was to provide houses that would enable working-class mothers to rear healthy families and perform their housework more efficiently. It was, to a large degree, a case of middle-class women prescribing what they thought was best for working-class women, and they did not make any distinction between the housewife and her family: they assumed their interests were identical.

This helps to explain why, with occasional isolated exceptions, there was no campaign among women to promote alternative and distinctly feminine or feminist house designs, and how the most available model, that of the garden city movement, was taken over. At its most basic, this offered the first priority: a self-contained house with privacy. Later, as the small twentieth-century house evolved, in both public and private sectors of the market, it gave women some of the conveniences they wanted. These eventually extended beyond the space and basic utilities stipulated by the 1918 Women's Subcommittee to more specialised, technological devices, which were welcomed by virtually all women activists and women's organisations in the belief that labour-saving' kitchens would both lighten the drudgery of working-class wives and enable middle-class wives to fulfil their multiple roles without servants. Any fallacy inherent in this idea did not begin to appear until after 1950, when women had experienced their mechanised isolation and found that it seemed mysteriously to make them subject to guilt, depression, and a problem that has no name'.s4

While this was the main course of development, a much more muted interaction between women and their domestic environments escaped notice. This had in fact come to light, without comment, in the 1918 Women's Subcommittee's surveys among working-class women and it was brought out clearly and systematically by a Mass Observation Enquiry into People's Homes in 1943. Based on a questionnaire of about a thousand housewives in different parts of the country, this differed from other wartime surveys in canvassing opinions about actual, existing homes, rather than asking loaded questions about people's post-war expectations. The report found a high degree of acceptance of conditions as they are'ss – so much so, that women evidently experienced difficulty in distancing themselves from their houses in their responses. Thus one womannever thought of disliking the place where she lived.'56 Mass Observation found this surprising and disturbing, especially when it came to questions of neighbourhood, where they found housewives completely uncritical, their views being bounded by its physical characteristics, its shops, its mass entertainments - notably the cinema – and the neighbours.'s7 The report concluded that to an extent unbelievable to those who have not investigated it, many people are passive-minded, letting things be done to them, hardly thinking of what they could get done, if they would co-operate with their neighbours and fellow citizens’.58

Did this mean, then, that women in general were hopelessly apathetic about the environments they lived in? Apathy is likely to have played a part, although, apropos of the quotation above, it is worth remarking that the great attraction of the cinema for women was that it offered warmth, escape and, above all, inaccessibility to others, for a short while.s9 Where houses were concerned, Mass Observation had to concede that women were not without discrimination. They showed a very detailed interest in and innumerable ideas about the home and its possible improvement.'60 These related to the long-established ideals of privacy and space, showing that women had clear ideas about what rooms they wanted, how many, and for what purposes. This led Mass Observation to conclude that normal working-class citizens want from their house an expression of independence, autonomy, control of life.’61

It appears, therefore, that the women in question viewed their houses subjectively as the arena and instrument of their own social and working roles. This stance is not all that far from the Octavia Hill approach. It is also compatible with the findings of those observers who found that a variety of dwelling types and design could suit women, given differences in their background housing experience and current needs. To the insights of those mentioned above might be added the Leeds women canvassed by the 1918 Women's Subcommittee, whose preferred house type was remarkably like the more solid, traditional Victorian terraced houses of that city.62 Because of this subjectivity, and also because of the great flexibility of many aspects of housework, there were, for women, no absolutes. Given space, privacy and the basic services, any type of dwelling would have things in its favour and could be adapted to changing family needs.

It is not surprising, therefore, that Mass Observation was able to record very high degrees of satisfaction with different types of dwelling. Between 84 and 86 per cent of informants liked their homes when these were council houses, council flats and ‘Modelville'(i.e. Bournville) houses. The kitchen was a strong determining factor, and it is significant that 90 per cent of those in new (council) flats liked their kitchens.

It was, if anything, harder for women to say what their ideal house would be than to pass judgment on their existing one. This might be partly out of a sense of realism – they knew they would never have their dream home – and partly, perhaps, because it was difficult to project needs and routines, so carefully tailored around their existing habitat, into a future one that had not been experienced. Negatively, they could imagine the benefits of relieving drudgery through plumbing and bathrooms; positively, it was more difficult to say what benefits more rarefied innovations might bring. Added to this, standards and even terminology were changing fast, so that Mass Observation found ‘there is great confusion in the public mind about the homes they could have and should have. On a few points there is mental chaos.'63 At the end of the day, however, nearly half the sample would have liked a small house with a garden, although as many as 21 per cent gave here' as their free choice.

Thus the view from the interior expressed by housewives reflects a highly personal relationship with their homes. The view was subjective, but it did not follow that it was irrational. This was difficult for those who worked professionally in housing to comprehend. Designers and policy-makers had to treat houses as objects, and even the women campaigning for better housing had to adopt the same objective' stance if they were to be heard in the public arena. Inevitably, all such ‘operators' fastened on to physical, quantifiable standards, seeing reform also in physical terms: in design, fittings and materials, rather than other aspects.

Such aspects could have included reform in women's access to housing, in housing costs (cleaning and furnishing costs as well as rents), or innovations in the organisation of domestic labour. The women speaking from the interior did so because that was their place; but any effect this had on house design was merely oblique and confirmed their housewife's role. That there might be objective lessons to be read from their subjectivity was something that would not easily occur to anyone who had not shared their place.

## Notes

1 Wells, H. G., Kipps, 1905.

2 ‘Women and the American City', Signs, special issue, 5.3, Spring 1980; Wekerle, Gerda R., Paterson, Rebecca, and Morley, David, eds., New Space for Women, Westview Press, Boulder, Col., 1980; Matrix, Making Space: Women and the Man-made Environment, Pluto Press, London, 1984.

3 Hayden, Dolores, The Grand Domestic Revolution: A History of Feminist Designs for American Homes, Neighborhoods, and Cities, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1981; Pearson, Lynn F., The Architectural and Social History of Cooperative Living, Macmillan, London, 1988.

4 Kapp, Yvonne, Eleanor Marx, Vol. 1, Lawrence & Wishart, London, 1972.

5 Hill, Octavia, Homes of the London Poor, Macmillan, London, 1875.

6 Oakley, Ann,. Housewife (cover design), Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1976.

7 Hewitt, Margaret, Wives and Mothers in Victorian Industry, Rockliff, London, 1958.

8 Branca, Patricia, Silent Sisterhood: Middle-class Women in the Victorian Home, Croom Helm, London, 1975.

9 Young, Michael, and Willmott, Peter, Family and Kinship in East London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1957.

10 Branca, op. cit.

11 Darley, Gillian, Villages of Vision, Architectural Press, London, 1975.

12 Tarn, J. N., Working-class Housing in 19th-century Britain, Architectural Association Paper No. 7, Lund Humphries, London, 1971.

13 Davidoff, Leonore, l'Esperance, Jean, and Newby, Howard, ‘Landscape with Figures: Home and Community in English Society', in Mitchell, Juliet, and Oakley, Ann, The Rights and Wrongs of Women, Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1976.

14 Barnett, Henrietta, Canon Barnett, His Life, Work and Friends by his Wife, 2 Vols., Murrary, London, 1918.

15 Local Government Boards for England and Wales, and Scotland, Report of the Committee . . . in Connection with the Provision of Dwellings for the Working Classes (Tudor Walters Report), Cd. 9191, HMsO, London, 1918.

16 Unwin, Raymond, Cottage Plans and Common Sense, Fabian Society Tract 109, 1908.

17 Hill, op. cit., pp. 102–3.

18 Ward, Colin, Housing: An Anarchist Approach, Freedom Press, London, 1976; Turner, John F. C., Housing by People: Towards Autonomy in Building Environments, Marion Boyars, London, 1976.

19 Brion, Marion, and Tinker, Anthea, Women in Housing: Access and Influence, Housing Centre Trust, London, 1980.

20 Ravetz, Alison,‘The Victorian coal kitchen and its reformers', Victorian Studies, XI, 4 June 1968.

21 Dickens, Charles, David Copperfield, 1849–50.

22 Layard, George Somes, ‘The doom of the domestic cook', Nineteenth Century, 33, February 1893; Stevenson, J. J., House Architecture, II, Macmillan, London, quoted by Franklin, Jill, Troops of servants: Labour and planning in the country house 1840–1914’, Victorian Studies, XIX, 2 December 1975.

23 A Survivor, Life Without Servants or, the Rediscovery of Domestic Happiness, Mills & Boon, London, n.d.

24 Hayden, op. cit., p. 231.

25 Beeton's Houswife's Treasury of Domestic Information, Ward Lock, London, n.d.

26 Pember Reeves, Maud, Round About Pound a Week, Bell, London, 1913; Virago, London, 1979.

27 Eyles, Margaret Leonora, The Woman in the Little House, Grant Richards, London, 1922.

28 Rathbone, Eleanor F., The Disinherited Family: A Plea for the Endowment of the Family, Edward Arnold, London, 1924.

29 Spring Rice, Margery, Working-class Wives, their Health and Conditions, Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1939; Virago, London, 1981.

30 Butler, C. V., Domestic Service: An Enquiry by the Women's Industriai Council, London, 1916.

31 Reeves, op. cit.

32 Eyles, op. cit., p. 25.

33 Rowntree, B. Seebohm, Poverty: A Study of Town Life, Nelson, London, 1901.

34 Peel, Dorothy Constance (Mrs C. S.), The New Home, Constable, London, 1898; Marriage on Small Means, Constable, London, 1914.

35 Peel, Dorothy Constance, The Labour-Saving House, Bodley Head, London, 1917; The Art of Modern Housekeeping, Warne, London, 1935.

36 Black, Clementina, A New Way of Housekeeping, Collins, London, 1918.

37 Ministry of Reconstruction Advisory Council, Women's Housing Subcommittee, First Interim Report, Cd. 9166, HMsO, London, 1918; Final report, Cd. 9232, HMsO, London, 1919; McFarlane, Barbara, Home Fit for Heroines: Housing in the Twenties', in Matrix, op. cit.

38 Quoted in McFarlane, op. cit., p. 28.

39 Ministry of Reconstruction, 1918, op. cit.

40 Ministry of Reconstruction, 1919, op. cit., para. 56.

41 Ibid., para. 61.

42 Ibid., para. 66.

43 Phillips, Marion, Co-operative housekeeping and housing reform’, The Labour Woman, V, 22, February 1918.

44 PRO, RECO I (in Files of Ministry of Reconstruction Women's Housing Subcommittee, 1918-19, in Public Record Office, London).

45 Local Government Boards, op. cit.

46 Ibid., para. 89.

47 Mass Observation, An Enquiry into People's Homes, Murray, London, 1943.

48 Women's Group on Public Welfare, Subcommittee on Scientific Management in the Home, Report of an inquiry into . . . the temporary prefab bungalow on the household routines', Sociological Review, 43, section 2, 1951.

49 Women's Group on Public Welfare (with National Council of Social Service), Our Towns: A Close-up, Oxford University Press, London, 1944.

50 Association for Planning and Regional Reconstruction, Housing Digest: An Analysis of Housing Reports Prepared for the Electrical Association for Women, Art and Educational Publishers, London and Glasgow, 1946.

51 Central Housing Advisory Committee, Design of Dwellings, HMSO, London, 1944.

52 Matrix, op. cit., p. 74.

53 Ministry of Housing and Local Government, Homes for Today and Tomorrow (Parker Morris Report), HMSO, London, 1961.

54 Friedan, Betty, The Feminine Mystique, Gollancz, London, 1963.

55 Mass Observation, op. cit., p. 5.

56 Ibid., p. 68.

57 Ibid., p. 208.

58 Ibid., p. 208.

59 Eyles, op. cit., p. 117.

60 Mass Observation, op. cit., p. 4.

61 Ibid., p. 159.

62 PRO, RECO I, File No. 623.