CHAPTER 3 OceanofPDF.com Design Thinking How Thinking Like a Designer Can Create Sustainable Advantage THE FIRST TIME I VISITED the Research In Motion (RIM) headquarters several years ago, I couldn’t find the right building. I’d driven about ninety minutes from Toronto to the twin cities of Kitchener and Waterloo. The landscape was as flat as Kansas, with farms flanking either side of the expansive superhighway. This area of southwestern Ontario strikes a unique balance. Just outside town and off the highway, the buggies and carriages of Old Order Mennonites are still a common sight. They mark a stark contrast to Waterloo itself, a city of about a hundred thousand people. Waterloo, traditionally a sleepy university town, has become a high-tech hub, as scores of technology companies have sprouted up, building on the strength of the renowned engineering program at the University of Waterloo. RIM is one of them. As I wound my way through the streets of Waterloo, I felt I could have been in Anywhere, North America—a shopping mall here, a power center there, a Chinese restaurant, a section of single-family houses, several Starbucks. Eventually I found 176 Columbia Street, RIM world headquarters. I was surrounded by an unruly cluster of squat buildings, none more than eight stories tall. The buildings all looked pretty much the same, with no hint as to which contained the executive offices. I tried one. Wrong. I hopped back in my car and drove to another. Eventually, I found the right one. As I was ushered in, I looked around, expecting to see the usual trappings of a tech-firm head office. There was the usual high-tech corporate security. But beyond that, there was no fancy, avantgarde furniture, little in the way of art, no design flourishes, and certainly no foosball tables. The conference rooms, functional but not ornate, were named after legendary Canadian hockey players such as Wayne Gretzky and Gordie Howe. Walking around, you might guess you were in the regional office of a prosperous but unexceptional Canadian company, rather than in the global headquarters of one of the world’s most innovative enterprises. It’s not that the folks at RIM don’t care about design. As makers of the ubiquitous BlackBerry, they’ve built a company with a market value of as much as \$84 billion on the design, manufacture, and marketing of wireless communications devices. But for them, design isn’t a cooler-than-thou office compound with beanbag chairs and cerulean walls. Design isn’t just about making things beautiful; it’s also about making things work beautifully. Design is about moving knowledge along the funnel, starting from the mystery of how to enable and enhance communication in a mobile age. At RIM, design is about design thinking. ## OceanofPDF.com As I was soon to discover, RIM is headed by one of the most committed and remarkable design thinkers—Mike Lazaridis, RIM’s founder, president, co-CEO, and design visionary. Lazaridis is responsible for product strategy, R&D, product development, and manufacturing. His co-CEO, Jim Balsillie, leads the business side of RIM, including corporate strategy, sales, and finance. It’s a uniquely successful partnership between two starkly different men. Balsillie is a sleek bundle of contained energy, his quick mind—and mouth—racing from one idea to the next. Next to the angular, athletic Balsillie, Lazaridis cuts a softer, heavier figure, with a thick mane of prematurely grey hair. He is quietly thoughtful until it comes time to talk about his products. Then, the enthusiasm virtually bubbles out of him. When he shares new products with his board of directors (of which I’m one), he can only be described as wildly excited, genuinely thrilled to share his innovations and to see the reactions. Clearly, designing BlackBerrys makes him happy. Born in Turkey to Greek parents, Lazaridis was five years old and already fascinated by technology when he immigrated with his family to Canada in 1966. By 1984, Lazaridis was an electrical engineering student at the University of Waterloo, just a few credits shy of graduating. But his real passion was designing gadgets. He convinced his parents to lend him seed money to start a technology company and finally dropped out of the university when the fledgling start-up secured a contract with General Motors. Lazaridis started out making circuit boards and before long was generating more than \$1 million in annual sales. One of his customers was Balsillie, who eventually left his job to help Lazaridis grow RIM into something even bigger. Lazaridis turned his attention to mobile communication devices. He’d learned about digital signal processing at the university, and combined with the expertise in surface-mount technology he’d gained from his circuit-board work, Lazaridis was convinced he could change the wireless communication marketplace, then entirely dominated by analog technology. He knew it was a ridiculously lofty goal. All the phone companies were massively invested in analog, while digital was in its infancy. Looking back, he says, “Digital had nothing going for it. It was complicated, it was expensive, it was bulky. Anyone who didn’t understand the future, and couldn’t see where digital signal processing was going to take us, thought this was ridiculous.” His prototype digital devices, he says, could be summed up quickly and derisively: “Three boards, packed with parts, battery lasts maybe fifteen minutes. What the hell is this crap?” <sup>1</sup> Yet Lazaridis was convinced digital processing was the future, and that RIM could take the lead if it thought about innovation in a way that none of its peers did. It’s a philosophy that he maintains to this day. Product design, he says, “has to push the envelope to the point where it seems like you’re making a mistake.” He argues that you have to strive to make a leap far beyond what is possible at the moment. “It has to be audacious from a technical point of view,” he says. “When a little company in Canada decides to build a cellular radio and to build it better than the people who birthed cellular radio—notably Motorola and Ericsson at the time—that’s a big, audacious goal.” All the more reason to pursue it, figured Lazaridis and Balsillie. RIM entered the product market with an interactive two-way pager, but Lazaridis already believed that the growth of e-mail would make paging obsolete. He wanted to combine the flexibility of the wireless network with the relatively data-rich communication of e-mail, taking wireless communication beyond the character limits of text messaging. Making a logical leap to what might be, he hit on the idea of a personal digital assistant that would handle e-mail on the go. RIM’s signature product, the BlackBerry, was born. From its inception in 1984 to the launch of the BlackBerry in February 1999, RIM grew relatively slowly. Since the BlackBerry launch, RIM has grown explosively from zero subscribers and \$50 million in revenue from its legacy pager products to more than 25 million customers and \$11 billion in revenue by February 2009. <sup>2</sup> And the BlackBerry has become an indispensable aid to millions of people. Not for nothing is it nicknamed the CrackBerry. RIM took its first big mystery—how to provide wireless e-mail to corporate users—and drove it to a heuristic—the first primitive BlackBerry. RIM then drove that heuristic to an algorithm, serving corporate customers around the world through its carrier partners and its own proprietary network. It achieved massive scale and efficiency as it drove through the knowledge funnel. But it didn’t stop there. Lazaridis, who shifted from circuit boards to pagers to Black-Berrys, continually reexamined the original mystery and sought out new mysteries as well. “In a business,” he says, “no matter how good the process is, no matter how much you’ve got it down pat, no matter how much money you’re making, how efficient, you have to always go back and say ‘Is there something fundamentally wrong with the way we’re seeing the market? Are we dealing with incomplete information?’ Because that’s what’s going to get you: it’s not necessarily that some young whippersnapper’s going to come up with some better idea than you. They’re going to start from a different premise and they’re going to come to a different conclusion that makes you irrelevant.” By watching his competitors, Lazaridis had learned the danger of resting comfortably on existing heuristics and algorithms. “Motorola lost because it didn’t embrace the future,” he says. “It was too damn good at what it was doing.” Seduced by reliability, Motorola had stopped thinking like a designer. OceanofPDF.com Design thinking, as a concept, has been slowly evolving and coalescing over the past decade. One popular definition is that design thinking means thinking as a designer would, which is about as circular as a definition can be. More concretely, Tim Brown of IDEO has written that design thinking is “a discipline that uses the designer’s sensibility and methods to match people’s needs with what is technologically feasible and what a viable business strategy can convert into customer value and market opportunity.” <sup>3</sup> A person or organization instilled with that discipline is constantly seeking a fruitful balance between reliability and validity, between art and science, between intuition and analytics, and between exploration and exploitation. The design-thinking organization applies the designer’s most crucial tool to the problems of business. That tool is abductive reasoning. Don’t feel bad if you’re not familiar with the term. Formal logic isn’t systematically taught in our North American educational system, except to students of philosophy or the history of science. The vast majority of students are exposed to formal logic only by inference and then only to the two dominant forms of logic—deductive reasoning and inductive reasoning. Those two modes, grounded in the scientific tradition, allow the speaker to declare at the end of the reasoning process that a statement is true or false. Deductive logic—the logic of what must be—reasons from the general to the specific. If the general rule is that all crows are black, and I see a brown bird, I can declare deductively that this bird is not a crow. Inductive logic—the logic of what is operative—reasons from the specific to the general. If I study sales per square foot across a thousand stores and find a pattern that suggests stores in small towns generate significantly higher sales per square foot than stores in cities, I can inductively declare that small towns are my more valuable market. Deduction and induction are reasoning tools of immense power. As knowledge has advanced, our civilization has accumulated more deductive rules from which to reason. In field after field, we stand on the shoulders of the giants who have come before us. And advances in statistical methods have furnished us with ever more powerful tools for reasoning inductively. Thirty years ago, few in a boardroom would have dared to cite the $R ^ { 2 }$ of regression analysis, but now the statistical tools behind this form of induction are relatively common in business settings. So it is no wonder that deduction and induction hold privileged places in the classroom and, inevitably, the boardroom as the preeminent tools for making an argument and proving a case. Yet a reasoning toolbox that holds only deduction and induction is incomplete. Toward the end of the nineteenth century, American philosophers such as William James and John Dewey began to explore the limits of formal declarative logic—that is, inductive and deductive reasoning. They were less interested in how one declares a statement true or false than in the process by which we come to know and understand. To them, the acquisition of knowledge was not an abstract, purely conceptual exercise, but one involving interaction with and inquiry into the world around them. Understanding did not entail progress toward an absolute truth but rather an evolving interaction with a context or environment. James, Dewey, and their circle became known as the American pragmatist philosophers, so called because they argued that one could gain understanding only through one’s own experiences. Among these early pragmatists, perhaps the greatest of them and certainly the most intriguing was Charles Sanders Peirce. Peirce (rhymes with “terse”) was fascinated by the origins of new ideas and came to believe that they did not emerge from the conventional forms of declarative logic. In fact, he argued that no new idea could be proved deductively or inductively using past data. Moreover, if new ideas were not the product of the two accepted forms of logic, he reasoned, there must be a third fundamental logical mode. New ideas came into being, Peirce posited, by way of “logical leaps of the mind.” New ideas arose when a thinker observed data (or even a single data point) that didn’t fit with the existing model or models. The thinker sought to make sense of the observation by making what Peirce called an “inference to the best explanation.” The true first step of reasoning, he concluded, was not observation but wondering. Peirce named his form of reasoning abductive logic. It is not declarative reasoning; its goal is not to declare a conclusion to be true or false. It is modal reasoning; its goal is to posit what could possibly be true. (For further information, see “Why You’ve Never Heard of Charles Sanders Peirce.”) Whether they realize it or not, designers live in Peirce’s world of abduction; they actively look for new data points, challenge accepted explanations, and infer possible new worlds. By doing so, they scare the hell out of a lot of businesspeople. For a middle manager forced to deal with flighty, exuberant “creative types,” who seem to regard prevailing wisdom as a mere trifle and deadlines as an inconvenience, the admonition to “be like a designer” is tantamount to saying “be less productive, less efficient, more subversive, and more flaky”—not an attractive proposition. And it is a fair critique that abduction can lead to poor results; unproved inferences might lead to success in time, but then again, they might not. Some abductive thinkers fail to heed Brown’s requirement that the design must be matched to what is technologically feasible, launching products that do not yet have supporting technology. Consider the software designers who inferred from the growth of the Internet that consumers would want to do all their shopping online, from pet supplies to toys to groceries. Online security and back-end infrastructure had not yet caught up to their ideas, dooming them to failure. Other abductive thinkers fail to address Brown’s second requirement: that the innovation must make business sense. Looking back on the dot-com crash, Michael Dell, founder of Dell, argues that little has changed. “Still today in our industry, if you go to a trade show, you walk around and you will find a lot of technology for which there is no problem that exists,” he says. “It’s like, ‘Hey, look at this, we’ve got a great solution and there is no problem to solve here.’ ” <sup>6</sup> Think of the Apple Newton, the world’s first portable data assistant. Launched in 1993, it utterly flopped. According RIM’s Lazaridis, it was a failure of abduction. “It had no future,” he argues. “What problem did it solve? What value did it create? It was a research project. What could you do with it that you couldn’t do with a laptop? Nothing. And everything you could do with it, you could do better with a laptop.” Apple Computer (as it was known then) wasn’t wrong when it inferred that customers would value a small, portable, digital assistant, but it didn’t ultimately deliver a solution that matched the insight. # Why You’ve Never Heard of Charles Sanders Peirce by Jennifer Riel Bertrand Russell called him “beyond doubt … one of the most original minds of the later nineteenth century and certainly the greatest American thinker ever.” <sup>4</sup> So why is Charles Sanders Peirce at best an obscure footnote, while other nineteenth-century American philosophers like William James, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Henry David Thoreau are still widely read today? Peirce has been characterized as a prickly misanthrope, which may help explain his low profile. He acknowledged it himself, contrasting his own personality with that of his friend William James: “He is so concrete, so living; I a mere table of contents, so abstract, a very snarl of twine.” <sup>5</sup> Many intellectuals have had cranky dispositions, yet have gone on to great acclaim. Unfortunately, Peirce compounded his prickly demeanor with a serious transgression of Victorian propriety. Peirce’s father was a well-respected professor of astronomy and mathematics at Harvard. Peirce, on the other hand, struggled to get any academic appointment, due to a somewhat lackadaisical work ethic. It took more than fifteen years after his graduation from Harvard to gain a nontenured position as a lecturer in logic at Johns Hopkins University. The appointment would be short-lived. Early in his career, Peirce married Melusina Fay, daughter of a prominent Cambridge family. While still married to Fay, Peirce took up with Juliette Froissey, a young French girl, openly living and traveling with her. When he and Fay were finally divorced a few years later, he married his mistress just six days after the decree. Puritanical Boston society was aghast. He was thereafter fired by Johns Hopkins and largely shunned by the academic community for the rest of his life. Peirce had transgressed against the strict rules of a highly religious, morally rigid community. His punishment was swift and far-reaching. He was reduced to poverty for the rest of his life, unable to afford heat in winter and subsisting on charity from local merchants and his old friends from Harvard. He lived in enormous pain, as the result of a nerve disorder diagnosed as facial neuralgia. The pain made him more moody and unpleasant still. For these reasons, we do not have a sustained body of work from which to get a true sense of his contribution to philosophy and logic. Rather than consult a concise set of abridged works, the Peirce scholar must delve into thousands of handwritten, unpublished manuscripts. So, he remains the tormented, secret hero of American philosophy. So the prescription is not to embrace abduction to the exclusion of deduction and induction, nor is it to bet the farm on loose abductive inferences. Rather, it is to strive for balance. Proponents of design thinking in business recognize that abduction is almost entirely marginalized in the modern corporation and take it upon themselves to make their companies hospitable to it. They choose to embrace a form of logic that doesn’t generate proof and operates in the realm of what might be—a realm beyond the reach of data from the past. That’s a risk many leaders won’t take. Making Peirce’s logical leaps is not consistent or reliable; nor does it faithfully adhere to predetermined budgets. But the far greater risk is to maintain an environment hostile to abductive reasoning, the proverbial lifeblood of design thinkers and the design of business. Without the logic of what might be, a corporation can only refine its current heuristic or algorithm, leaving it at the mercy of competitors that look upstream to find a more powerful route out of the mystery or a clever new way to drive the prevailing heuristic to algorithm. Embracing abduction as the coequal of deduction and induction is in the interest of every corporation that wants to prosper from design thinking, and every person who wants to be a design thinker. ## OceanofPDF.com Thinking abductively to dive into a mystery is part of the culture at RIM, though Lazaridis uses different language to describe it. Rather than mystery, he prefers the term paradox. “It’s this whole idea of solving the paradox,” he says. “How do you solve a paradox? Well, you have to know what the paradox is.” In order to advance knowledge, the design thinker has to get comfortable delving into the mystery, trying to see new things or to see things in a new way. In the early days of the BlackBerry, Lazaridis saw that laptop users were demanding smaller and smaller devices, while the industry was bumping up against the size limitations of small keyboards and display screens. A standard QWERTY keyboard can only get so small before it becomes awkward and uncomfortable to use. A screen displaying all the information a user expects can be reduced only so much before it becomes unreadable or painfully cluttered. Staring at this paradox—this mystery—Lazaridis stepped back and asked what could be true. What if users didn’t use all their fingers to type? What if the information we think must be displayed actually gets in the way of understanding? How could reducing size create a better and more usable product? He worked through the paradox. “When is a small keyboard better?” he asked. “When you can use your thumbs. When is a small display better? When it draws your attention to something important.” By moving to a handheld device with a thumb-operated keyboard, RIM changed the game on size. By thinking very carefully about what information actually is essential to the end user, RIM reframed the user interface to be simple and clean. RIM thought about what could make its device truly delightful to the customer. When it came to e-mail, that meant making sure that the device alerted the user that a new e-mail had arrived only when the message was ready to be displayed: “It’s fundamental, but every developer we’ve ever hired to do this project or rewrite the code makes the same mistake,” Lazaridis explains. “They signal you as soon as the e-mail arrives.” In that case, the user would be prompted by a buzz, pull out her BlackBerry, and have to wait several seconds for the message to be displayed on the screen. Instead, Lazardis insisted that the message pop onto the screen the moment the device is removed from its holster. “Why should you sit there and wait?” he asked. Delighting the customer also meant thinking about what the device was really meant to do. Looking back, Lazaridis notes that the BlackBerry’s key value wasn’t in receiving and sending e-mail. Rather, it was in quickly giving users enough information to decide if they needed more. So RIM designed the display screen on the BlackBerry to give users just enough information to make that determination. When a message arrives on your BlackBerry, he says, “There’s a dividing line. You know who it’s from, you know the title, and you know a little bit about the message. Everything else is above and below. What we’re trying to say is, ‘This is what you need to know, without touching anything.’ You need to know who it’s from, what’s the subject, and a little bit of the text to decide if you want to keep reading it or put it away. The value is that it gives you the information you need to decide whether you need to respond or whether you don’t need to deal with it right now.” Notifying the user only when the message is ready to be displayed, combined with giving just enough information to allow the user to make a quick assessment of what to do with it, is the BlackBerry breakthrough. “We understood that value,” Lazaridis says, “and then everything we did was about that—immediate delivery, the quick keyboard response, all the shortcuts. Making that loop so tight and so easy to form muscle memory around, that’s what made it addictive. We worked on that loop and everything else was irrelevant. The browser, who cared? Everyone else was working on how do we put paging systems into this, how do we come up with messaging services so we can charge them and send them alerts and all this. We didn’t care. All we wanted to do was get you enough of the e-mail that you could respond. That’s all that mattered.” Later on, during RIM’s high-growth phase, Lazaridis continued to display the attributes of the design thinker, including a willingness to explore new questions for which there is no time-tested solution. Originally, the BlackBerry was an e-mail device with no voice capability. It was so popular that RIM could have successfully exploited that one product for years. Demand was growing by leaps and bounds in RIM’s original market, as corporate IT departments bought BlackBerrys by the bushel for company executives. RIM knew exactly what and how to sell to them. But rather than rest on his laurels, Lazaridis looked back along the knowledge funnel to the next mystery and caught a glimpse of what might come next: a handheld device that merged voice and data. Consider, too, the evolution in RIM’s definition of its core business. Initially, RIM sold its BlackBerrys with a package of minutes of data usage. But eventually, Lazardis and Balsillie realized RIM’s strengths lay in designing, building, and marketing communications devices for busy people, not in selling minutes, which was the expertise of wireless carriers such as Verizon and Vodafone. Lazaridis and Balsillie redesigned the distribution model to treat carriers as partners rather than competitors, which in turn opened a powerful new distribution channel for RIM’s products. More recently, Lazaridis wanted to extend the BlackBerry to a rich new market: consumers. He foresaw a day when a competitor in “smart” phones (phones with voice, e-mail, and Web-surfing capability) for the consumer market would gain enough scale to tackle RIM in the corporate market. To head off that unknown rival, Lazaridis went to work creating a new suite of consumer-friendly products (smaller, with a camera and music-handling capabilities). He asked his staff to build the best and smallest Black-Berry they could imagine; he said to his staff, “Define for me what the ultimate BlackBerry is.” <sup>7</sup> They came back with smaller and smarter consumerfriendly designs. Soon, these models, the Pearl and the Curve, became RIM’s biggest-selling products. Just as important, the Pearl and the Curve hit the U.S. consumer smartphone market ahead of Apple’s iPhone, establishing a leading market share for the BlackBerry. So rather than having that market to itself, Apple has had to battle with an established consumer player, RIM. Interestingly, RIM’s other competitors have had less success in the move to smart phones. “Apple realized the same thing we knew about Nokia and Motorola and all the others, which is that they were too successful and focused on feature phones (without e-mail and Web capability). They weren’t betting on the future,” says Lazaridis. “They were betting on their engine—their low-cost, high-volume, global supply chain juggernaut. They were missing the point. There will be no feature phones in the future. It will all be smart phones.” Long before the iPhone was even a rumor, Lazaridis was back to work creating the 3G Bold with a dramatically enhanced screen and the mediahandling capabilities of an iPod. Next came the touch-screen Storm. Lazaridis recognized that a set of his customers wanted a touch-screen device, but felt that existing touchscreen technology lacked an essential element of the BlackBerry experience—the ability to separate navigation (scrolling to the desired message) from confirmation (opening the message). Lazaridis again applied abductive logic, driving for a breakthrough technology that allowed the user to separate navigating from confirming on a touch screen while simultaneously providing the positive feedback of a click—the distinctive feature of the Storm. What makes RIM exceptional is that its leaders make a conscious and overt effort to rebalance the organization against the natural tilt toward reliability, actively pushing knowledge down the funnel. Most businesses stress the overriding importance of continuity and consistency. A concerted effort to balance reliability with validity can appear to threaten those values. But RIM’s success demonstrates how validity need not undermine reliability. By embracing both design thinking and abductive thinking, RIM amplifies and extends the strength of reliability, creating a competitive advantage far greater and more lasting than validity or reliability alone. It is both more innovative and more efficient than its competitors. Its competitive advantage isn’t based on cost leadership or differentiation or a particular resource. The basis of advantage is its speed of movement through the knowledge funnel, which produces perpetual advantage in both cost and innovation. To understand the source of its advantage, we have to look at the cost dynamics of activities as they move through the knowledge funnel from mystery to heuristic to algorithm. The dynamics can be summarized as an axiom: as knowledge moves through the funnel, costs fall. ## OceanofPDF.com Delving into mysteries is the most expensive activity along the knowledge funnel, because you literally don’t know what you are doing. The high cost helps explain why so much research into mysteries is conducted in universities, government-funded labs, and other not-for-profit entities. Research professors spend their entire careers staring into the mysteries of their particular field. Most of their work is not economically viable. It doesn’t conform to any particular schedule, budget cycle, or planning document. When first encountering a mystery, design thinkers have to look at everything, because they don’t yet know what to leave out. The danger is that what’s omitted might be the key to the mystery. With little to go on, the design thinker employs abductive reasoning to discern a pattern in what to others is still an amorphous whole. Of course, the search for patterns is typically marked by repeated false starts and blind alleys; many abductive inferences to the best explanation will be wrong. But with experience, design thinkers learn to spot handholds where others see only a sheer cliff face. Mysteries, then, are expensive, time consuming, and risky; they are worth tackling only because of the potential benefits of discovering a path out of the mystery to a revenue-generating heuristic. The benefits of moving knowledge to the heuristic stage derive from the process of omission. Instead of having to consider every facet of a mystery, the creator of a heuristic need consider only a subset, which yields results more quickly. But a heuristic takes advanced skill and judgment to operate. The operators of the heuristic form a cognitive elite in their organization, highly valued for their skill, training, and experience in applying the heuristic. But the organization pays a high cost for their elite capabilities. Driving down those costs provides the motivation for applying abductive reasoning once again, toward moving knowledge to the next stage—the algorithm. The algorithm generates savings by turning judgment—a general way of getting toward the desired solution—into a formula or a set of rules that, if followed, will produce the desired solution. Having removed further variables and variation from the equation, an algorithm is even more efficient than a heuristic. Algorithms can be run by less experienced and less expensive personnel than can heuristics. Computer code—the digital end point of the algorithm stage—is the most efficient expression of an algorithm. The unit cost of data entry by a modestly trained clerk in Bangalore is already low, but the cost of a computer to scan an invoice and enter the data into the appropriate cells on a spreadsheet is essentially zero. All that’s needed is for someone to operate and monitor the computer. At the code stage, knowledge has been narrowed to the extreme. But with it comes lightning speed and infinitesimal costs, the ultimate efficiency. Code takes the cost dynamic of knowledge to its logical limit. The analysis of cost dynamics seems to imply that the most profitable course for any company that solves a mystery is to drive it to a heuristic and then to an algorithm so tight it turns to code. Then it should give up on design thinking and run that code forever, making heaps of money for shareholders. But that approach is shortsighted, because, as I discussed in chapter 1, it fails to capitalize on the option that the company created—at sizable human and economic cost—as it pushed knowledge quickly through the knowledge funnel. To exploit that opportunity, a company can choose to redeploy its design thinkers. By putting them to work on new mysteries, the company both defends its current position and goes on the offensive, like RIM’s Lazaridis, who has continually reinvented both products and strategy by tackling new mysteries and revisiting heuristics and algorithms that grew out of answers to older mysteries. ## OceanofPDF.com To be sure, there are impediments to effectively ingraining design thinking in an organization. The main roadblock is the corporate tendency to settle at the current stage in the knowledge funnel. Companies often let mysteries remain mysteries, declaring them unsolvable. A studio executive might insist that it’s impossible to forecast which movies will hit it big and which will go straight to DVD. A consumer-products executive might declare that it’s impossible to accurately predict consumers’ changing tastes or how they will react to a price increase. Instead of delving into the mystery, they just create coping mechanisms. The current fad for “emergent strategy” is one mechanism, being nothing more than a clever way to blame a confusing environment for a company’s inability to plan ahead. Companies that leave important mysteries as mysteries not surprisingly find themselves with no resources available to solve mysteries, precisely because the companies are so very inefficient. Another costly impediment to design thinking is the widespread corporate tendency to leave heuristics in the hands of highly paid executives or specialists with knowledge, turf, and paychecks to defend. If they were to advance the heuristic in their heads to the algorithm stage, the company could break the specialist’s information monopoly and hand the job to a less costly employee. To them, design thinking might well be seen as a threat to be beaten back. Another common corporate error is to settle at the algorithm stage without refining that algorithm to code. Some algorithms sit unrecognized and unexploited because they’re run by people, not computers. For example, the duties of a manager of a retail store might include preparing the weekly staffing schedule. Making up the schedule entails following strict rules involving a handful of variables and little or no individual judgment. A piece of software could do the job just as well or even better, a fact recognized by such companies as Workbrain and Blue Cube, which automate scheduling for retailers. There are plenty of other recent examples of clerical algorithms being pushed to code and saving incalculable personhours of mindless work. But the impetus for that work is coming from the supply side, from outside software vendors who perceive what their clients do not: they’re using costly labor to run algorithms that could easily be pushed to code. By clinging stubbornly to one stage of the knowledge funnel, companies squander opportunities to become more efficient in delivering what they are currently delivering. And the overriding emphasis on a single stage crowds out the time and energy needed to explore new mysteries and fashion new heuristics. This sedulous and usually unexamined loyalty to the status quo undercuts the company’s best efforts at innovation. The design-thinking organization, in contrast, reaps the benefit of efficiency as it pushes activities through the knowledge funnel and frees up time and capital to tackle the next knowledge-advancement challenge. But it takes special leadership to stare down the capital markets and do what is necessary to promote the company’s long-term health and vibrancy. Chapter 4 explains how, as chairman and CEO of Procter & Gamble, A. G. Lafley managed to convert a tradition-bound, publicly traded company into a design-thinking organization, driven to push knowledge as far and fast as possible, and how he won over a skeptical analyst community in the process. Chapter 5 highlights the way in which an organization’s structure, processes, and norms can help or hinder design thinking. Chapter 6 discusses the ways in which leaders can act as guardians of validity to protect their companies against the tendency to let knowledge settle at its current stage. ## OceanofPDF.com