CHAPTER 4 OceanofPDF.com hours of mindless work. But the impetus for that work is coming from the supply side, from outside software vendors who perceive what their clients do not: they’re using costly labor to run algorithms that could easily be pushed to code. By clinging stubbornly to one stage of the knowledge funnel, companies squander opportunities to become more efficient in delivering what they are currently delivering. And the overriding emphasis on a single stage crowds out the time and energy needed to explore new mysteries and fashion new heuristics. This sedulous and usually unexamined loyalty to the status quo undercuts the company’s best efforts at innovation. The design-thinking organization, in contrast, reaps the benefit of efficiency as it pushes activities through the knowledge funnel and frees up time and capital to tackle the next knowledge-advancement challenge. But it takes special leadership to stare down the capital markets and do what is necessary to promote the company’s long-term health and vibrancy. Chapter 4 explains how, as chairman and CEO of Procter & Gamble, A. G. Lafley managed to convert a tradition-bound, publicly traded company into a design-thinking organization, driven to push knowledge as far and fast as possible, and how he won over a skeptical analyst community in the process. Chapter 5 highlights the way in which an organization’s structure, processes, and norms can help or hinder design thinking. Chapter 6 discusses the ways in which leaders can act as guardians of validity to protect their companies against the tendency to let knowledge settle at its current stage. ## OceanofPDF.com