CHAPTER 4 OceanofPDF.com Transforming the Corporation The Design of Procter & Gamble PROCTER & GAMBLE (P&G), the world’s largest consumer packaged-goods company, spent most of the 1990s in a restructuring mode. It actively acquired new businesses, diligently pursued cost-cutting measures, and reorganized its business around products rather than geography. It bought and sold businesses, closed plants, and shuttled executives to new positions in the company. By January 1999, it had a new CEO in place and was ready for the challenges of the new century. Or so it seemed. Instead, by spring 2000, P&G was facing perhaps the greatest crisis in its 165-year history. CEO Durk Jager had spent several months embroiled in a complex but ill-fated potential merger with drug companies Warner-Lambert and American Home Products (now Wyeth). A friendly takeover offer for Gillette was quickly rebuffed. In March, with its core business in decline and acquisitions slowing down, P&G was forced to warn investors that it would suffer its first quarterly profit decline in eight years. In response, the stock, which had already fallen from a cyclical peak of \$116 in January to \$86, fell by 30 percent, to less than \$60 a share, in a single day. <sup>1</sup> The headlines in the business press that spring told the story: “Procter and Gamble Awash in a Sea of Selling,” <sup>2</sup> “Trouble in Brand City,” 3 “Investors Agonize over P&G Stock Slip; Analysts: Recovery Could Take 3 Years.” <sup>4</sup> Investors—and employees—had good reason for their loss of confidence. Revenue growth at the \$40 billion company had slowed to a measly 3 percent to 4 percent a year, profit had stagnated, and seven of ten of P&G’s biggest billion-dollar brands were losing market share. Worse, the decline was accelerating. By June, P&G’s fiscal year-end was looming and so was yet another profit warning. The company’s performance was deteriorating so quickly that the dramatically scaled-back targets set just three months earlier were already far out of reach. Wall Street had long set its watch by P&G’s earnings; suddenly, analysts could no longer rely on the company’s forecasts, and the Street took its frustrations out on P&G’s stock. P&G shares stalled around \$60; analysts scorched management in their reports and downgraded their recommendations. P&G, they said, was no longer a sure bet for long-term growth. P&G’s board had seen enough. For the first time in the company’s storied history, directors fired the chairman and CEO. As they considered Jager’s successor, directors saw one obvious candidate: A. G. Lafley, who had recently returned from a successful assignment running the Asia-Pacific business to head both the North American region and the global beauty business. Directors worried that Lafley, then fifty-three, needed several years more seasoning. But P&G was a promote-from-within company; there were no other compelling internal candidates, and it would be almost unthinkable to bring in an outsider, no matter how deep the crisis. So, on June 8, 2000, the board appointed Lafley as CEO. To ease their concerns about Lafley’s relative youth and inexperience, directors asked Jager’s predecessor, the capable and popular John Pepper, to come out of retirement and serve as chairman for Lafley’s first two years. The headline in P&G’s hometown paper, the Cincinnati Enquirer, read, “Bruised P&G Turns to New, Old Leaders.” Investors remained wary. P&G stock fell \$4 to \$57.50 on the day Lafley’s promotion was announced and fell below \$55 by the end of June. In less than six months, P&G had dropped from the twenty-first largest company in the world, as measured by market capitalization, to fifty-first, just over one-third the value of Walmart, its biggest customer. 5 Shareholders, analysts, employees, and retail customers were unhappy, and they were all looking expectantly at Lafley. He recognized that at the heart of their discontent lay a single, disturbing trend: P&G’s value equation—the value P&G created for consumers relative to the cost of creating that value—was becoming increasingly unfavorable. The company was introducing fewer and fewer successful new products and brand extensions, and was taking longer and longer between introductions. Meanwhile, P&G’s costs, especially in research and development—were soaring. P&G’s faltering pace gave Lafley’s immediate customers—big global retailers like Walmart and Tesco—an opening, which they were quick to seize. They aggressively courted shoppers with their own in-house, private-label products, hoping to persuade them to switch from P&G’s more expensive, branded offerings. The push was successful; as Lafley studied the competition reports, he could plainly see that private-label brands were taking market share from P&G in many categories. Lafley knew there was only one way to win back straying shoppers and convince others not to leave the reservation: P&G had to become more innovative, so that customers would be willing to pay a premium for P&G products. But innovation could not come at any cost. The expense side of the value equation also had to be addressed. P&G needed to become more efficient, so that it could charge a lower premium to customers and still keep shareholders happy with steady growth in profits and margins. There was just one problem: conventional business thinking said that a company could have innovation or it could have efficiency, but not both at once. There was, according to the received wisdom, always a trade-off. Although he was a rookie CEO, Lafley was prepared to take bold action to pull P&G out of its downward spiral. Design thinking, he believed, offered a way out of the trade-off between innovation and efficiency. He committed to turning P&G into a design organization, beginning with his senior leadership team. In 2001, only a year into his tenure, he appointed Claudia Kotchka as the corporation’s first-ever vice president for design strategy and innovation. Her mandate was to build P&G’s design capability and act as the corporation’s champion of design thinking. (See “Building a Design-Thinking Organization from Within.”) ## Building a Design Thinking Organization from Within ## by Jennifer Riel The first time A. G. Lafley offered Claudia Kotchka the job of heading up P&G’s design initiative, she turned him down flat. In fact, when he approached her again a few months later, she turned him down a second time. Kotchka had reason to say no. She had recently launched Tremor, a new word-of-mouth marketing initiative within P&G, and did not feel ready to let it go. And she was wary. She knew that creating a design-thinking organization would be a major effort, and she wondered if the newly minted CEO would have the time to devote to it: “He had a lot on his plate, so I just didn’t think this would be a priority. I knew that if it was not a priority for him, it was never going to happen. It was just too big an effort.” <sup>6</sup> But by September 2001, when Lafley came to Kotchka for the third time, she could see that he was truly serious about embedding designing into the DNA of P&G. “I knew he had decided it was critical. The question that I asked him was, ‘What’s your vision for the company, and how does this fit in?’ That was what I needed to know,” Kotchka explained. Lafley replied that he planned to leave five legacies by the end of his tenure as CEO. Design was one of them. Kotchka thought, “Okay, if this is one of the five important things for him to leave the company, it’s a big enough change that I will absolutely take it on.” Some questioned why Lafley had handpicked Kotchka for the task; she was a proven performer and dynamic internal entrepreneur, but absolutely not a designer in her own right. Lafley wanted Kotchka for the balance she struck between business and design. As he explained to her, “In order to do this, I need someone who can speak both languages—the language of design and the language of business.” Lafley understood that credibility with the business folks would be essential, but so would an ability to understand designers, to know what makes them tick and how to apply their skills to business. Kotchka, who was trained as an accountant but who had been drawn to design as she took on corporate marketing roles, was the perfect fit. Embedding design into a company as big as P&G, and one with such a strong and defined culture, was a massive challenge. “A. G. had always been a believer in design,” Kotchka said, “but the company, I would say, had not.” Reflecting on her time as P&G’s design czar, a role from which she has recently retired, she laid out several key steps needed to bring design into an organization: ## Set expectations clearly up front and get your boss on board The first thing Kotchka did when she finally accepted the job was to draw up a contract with Lafley, outlining what she could do, what she could not, and what she would need from him to make it happen. The contract, Kotchka said, was invaluable: “Getting very clear with him in what I could accomplish, how long it would take, was probably one of the smartest things I did. We had a very clear plan of what I was going to do and what he was going to do, and that paid dividends later.” In her view, the most important thing to agree on was where to begin. Kotchka was adamant that she needed to start in the areas of the company where there was an existing interest in design thinking, rather than in the areas of greatest need: “I said, ‘I’m going to start where there’s suction. I can’t force design on some business that doesn’t want it.’ ” Lafley ultimately agreed. Kotchka also got early agreement on the time line. She studied the path that Dutch electronics giant Philips, an acknowledged design leader, had taken to transform itself from a manufacturing company into a consumercentric design organization, and concluded that it would take P&G about the same amount of time. “It took them ten years, so I told [Lafley] that. I was very clear about the fact that this was the kind of time line we were looking at. He said do it in five,” she said with a laugh. “But at least we were clear it wasn’t going to happen overnight.” ## Get help (you’ll need it) Kotchka turned to outside experts like IDEO, her external design board, and a trio of deans (Roger Martin, Patrick Whitney, and David Kelley) to supplement her own skills and expertise, but she also hired the best design talent she could find. Unfortunately, she needed senior talent, and P&G’s recruiting apparatus was set up to hire new graduates straight out of college. “It takes at least ten, maybe fifteen years to really get mastery in design,” she said. Kotchka didn’t have the time to start from the bottom; she needed to import some expertise. In the end, she broke with P&G custom and used outside recruiters to help find that talent. ## Expect some speed bumps Well aware of the difficulty of creating a design organization within P&G, Kotchka was nonetheless surprised by some of the challenges that popped up along the way. The corporate culture at P&G was not set up to support design thinking, and she needed to work long and hard to adapt the internal systems to work for her designers. Everything from the recruiting process to the physical work environments to the way in which market research was conducted needed to change in order to allow design to take hold in the organization. “Everything,” she said, “was designed against us.” ## Don’t try to talk about it.Just demonstrate it. Kotchka found that the importance of design and its transformative effects could not be explained, only experienced. To illustrate her point, she cited market research, a traditional strength of the company, with traditional practices. For years, P&G had sworn by focus groups. Designers, on the other hand, prefer to go deeper than a focus group allows, spending time one on one with users to better understand their needs. To move in that direction, Kotchka had to slowly validate the new approach over the course of a few years. She would send senior executives out with designers to experience firsthand how a designer observes, questions, and probes the hidden dimensions of the user experience. Over time, by seeing up close how design thinking yields new insights, the executives came to embrace it. “Everything we’ve done has been about demonstrate, demonstrate, demonstrate,” Kotchka said, summing up. “They’ve got to see it; they’ve got to experience it.” Kotchka set out to build a design function within the organization, assigning designers to sit on the business teams. Her decision to embed designers in the business units was unusual; most other companies centralized the design function. Kotchka felt very strongly that, at P&G, it was essential to have designers sitting inside the core business teams rather than segregated in a central staff function. Her goal for design, she said, was “to really embed it in the culture, not just have a new design function. I needed people in the business units, sitting in the business units every single day, in order to make that happen.” Kotchka said that the decision, questioned at the time and utterly unprovable in advance, was one of her most important strategic choices: “They’re definitely part of the business team, and that was our goal. We wanted a seat at the table. We wanted design to be sitting on the leadership team, wherever decisions get made, and have a voice. And we wanted the business units to really understand design, participate in design, and not see it as a black box.” To help P&G better understand design, Kotchka also reached outside the organization to build a network of design experts. She created an external design board made up of world-class designers such Tim Brown, CEO of IDEO; John Maeda, president of the Rhode Island School of Design; and Ivy Ross, Gap’s executive vice president of marketing. While the board does review P&G’s designs, it is also a key sounding board for the business teams. Teams come to the board for help in thinking through intractable problems or for review and critique of preliminary solutions. The external board works, Kotchka said, because members are not pursuing a personal agenda and have no legacy to protect when they turn their minds to P&G’s dilemmas. In addition to the design board, Kotchka built close working relationships with several outside design agencies, particularly with David Kelley and Tim Brown of IDEO. In 2003, Lafley took his entire thirty-fiveperson Global Leadership Team to the IDEO offices in San Francisco for a day and a half of immersion in design thinking that Kotchka said illustrated clearly that “design is not about making things pretty: Lafley’s leadership team really got to experience design thinking for the first time.” Experience, Kotchka felt, was the key. Once P&Gers, from the senior team down, got to experience design thinking, they would be converted. The question was how to create an experience that could be accessed by tens of thousands of employees around the world. OceanofPDF.com Kotchka wanted an intervention that would encourage and facilitate P&G’s category leadership teams to really engage in design thinking to solve problems. For help, she turned to three deans: David Kelley of the Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford (aka the d. school) and also cofounder of IDEO; Patrick Whitney of the Institute of Design at the Illinois Institute of Technology; and me, from my perch at the Rotman School of Management in Toronto. In 2005, as a group, we began discussions about creating a comprehensive program that would provide practical experience in design thinking to P&G leaders. We believed that design thinking for business broke down into three essential components: (1) deep and holistic user understanding; (2) visualization of new possibilities, prototyping, and refining; and (3) the creation of a new activity system to bring the nascent idea to reality and profitable operation. In December, six months after we began our discussions, and with the invaluable help of project manager Heather Fraser, we launched a prototype of the program with the P&G global hair-care business in London, England. The prototype, called Design-Works, was itself an exercise in design thinking. We got a raft of feedback from participants, which we then integrated into refined programs for the cosmetics, skin-care, colorants, fabric-care, and home-care units. One of the most important aspects of the experience, Kotchka argued, was that the participants were working with their close colleagues on problems the teams were facing day to day. “The course was really designed for business teams—a whole business team—to get experience using design thinking, working on real problems,” she said. “And that is what makes this course so incredibly successful.” The program also had to be scalable and, as Kotchka said, “designed so we could learn it and run it ourselves.” The P&G design leadership, including Kotchka and her second-in-command for DesignWorks, Cindy Tripp, were intensively involved in transferring DesignWorks technology to P&G personnel. By the summer of 2007, P&G personnel were leading DesignWorks exercises independently. The program has since extended its tendrils through the organization. Now, not a day goes by without a DesignWorks session taking place somewhere in the P&G universe, led by one of their hundred and fifty or so trained facilitators, not necessarily designers but members of business units who have expressed an interest and volunteered their time. “These things are literally going on every day, and we don’t even know where or when,” Kotchka noted happily. DesignWorks began by encouraging category teams to seek a deeper understanding of their consumers, to stare into mysteries and not continue to utilize the same old heuristic. The hair-care category team, for example, went to a styling salon to observe how women actually used styling products, a part of the hair-care category in which P&G is underdeveloped compared with its leadership position in shampoos and conditioners. The next day, the team members brought those customers back to talk about their experience at the salon. Drawing on what they learned from those discussions, the category team explored how to create an at-home user experience that rivaled the salon experience. They created prototypes of the experience, tested them at the salon, one on one with each member of the user group, and incorporated their learning into the next product iteration. Finally, they worked on converting the refined experience into a system of activities that P&G could execute with sustainable advantage over competitors. The category leadership teams emerged from the process with a greater understanding and appreciation for design thinking. The course both models and teaches the organized pursuit of new knowledge, looking up the knowledge funnel and seeking productive new insights. “The business teams think they’re coming to do packaging,” Kotchka said with a laugh. She told the story of one finance manager who said that before the program he didn’t see the need to learn about package design. “And afterwards, he came to me and said, ‘Claudia! This is amazing! I can see how I can use this in my everyday work.’ And that is the goal. They all walk out with solutions they would have never thought of before; this is the whole idea behind design thinking. It’s going to take you to a place you’ve never been. And that’s what it does every time.” While DesignWorks alone does not establish a balance between reliability and validity at P&G, it gives senior managers a set of tools and a process for engaging in validity-oriented thinking in a creative, practical way. OceanofPDF.com In addition to equipping his managers with more skills and expertise in design thinking, Lafley worked to change organizational norms to support design thinking. He modeled that thinking in his own behavior, doing indepth at-home visits with consumers wherever he traveled. He even chatted (through a translator) with rural Chinese women washing clothes in a river. After all, they use detergent too. He changed key processes, including strategy review. The tradition at P&G was that each category president came to the annual review with a thick deck of slides that culminated in a single right answer for the coming year, including all the inductive and deductive proof needed to gain the approval of the CEO and senior management. Additional slides were prepared to address any objections top management could conceivably raise. Lafley recognized that this process was a recipe for producing reliability, not validity. The category presidents wanted their strategies to be airtight, so risky creative leaps were out of the question. Lafley saw he had to stop the drive for reliability before it gathered momentum, so he devised a new process. Presidents would submit their slide decks two weeks before the strategy review. Lafley would read the materials and issue a short list of questions that he wanted to discuss at the meeting. He emphasized that he wanted a discussion, not a presentation. Presidents were allowed to bring only three more pieces of paper—charts, graphs, notes—to the review. Only by more or less forcing category managers to toss around ideas with senior management, he reasoned, could they become comfortable with the logical leaps of mind needed to generate new ideas. At first the presidents and their teams bridled at Lafley’s new process. Actual dialogue at the senior levels of P&G was exceedingly rare before Lafley became CEO. Rather than engaging in dialogue, executives devoted their time and energy to bulletproofing arguments and then advocating and defending them. Dialogue was different, foreign—and unnerving. Only after two or three cycles did it dawn on the presidents how invigorating and mind opening it was to engage in dialogue about what could be rather than what was. It was also great for their businesses. Freed from the demand to come up with the single right answer and prove it, they started to work out bigger bets with the corporate team. To elevate design thinking in the corporate hierarchy of values, Lafley made the solving of wicked problems a high-status, glamorous assignment. (For a short primer, see “Wicked Problems.”) For instance, the executives who turned around the baby-care business, which had been in secular decline for almost a decade, were at least as highly rewarded as those running bigger or more stable businesses. He also set up explicitly projectbased work with managers, making clear that their work was time bound and that they would go on to another project or assignment when they had completed their current project. In addition to building skills and changing organizational processes and norms, Lafley made dramatic interventions at each stage of P&G’s knowledge funnel, converting mysteries to heuristics and heuristics to algorithms during his time as CEO. OceanofPDF.com ## Converting Mysteries to Heuristics At the mystery end of the funnel, Lafley was frustrated with P&G’s success rate for innovation projects. By the time he became CEO, a mere 15 percent of R&D projects were meeting their internal targets. Even though P&G was an acknowledged R&D powerhouse in the consumer packagedgoods sector, with a track record of game-changing innovations like disposable diapers, anti-dandruff shampoo, and fluoride toothpaste, it was not earning the returns on innovation spending needed to maintain a winning value equation. Lafley recognized that despite P&G’s record of innovation and mammoth R&D budget, its R&D organization was not distinctly better than the competition at converting mysteries to heuristics. In fact, engaging with mysteries was not the R&D department’s strong suit. Its forte was honing and refining existing discoveries and making sure that the portfolio of existing P&G products kept improving and optimizing in ways that consumers would recognize and value. The original Pampers disposable diaper was a genuine breakthrough, a risky and imaginative solution to the mystery of diaper washing. But once that innovation took hold in the market, P&G’s R&D department turned its attention to the steady improvement of the disposable diaper. Software guru Bill Buxton calls this sort of activity N+1 innovation. <sup>7</sup> Lafley was confident that when it came to N+1 innovation, P&G was the best in its competitive space. But N+1 innovation was not going to yank P&G out of the doldrums. P&G needed true discovery activity: the conversion of mystery to heuristic, which Lafley recognized is widely distributed in the world. Large corporations like P&G do not produce a share of discoveries proportionate to their investment in the pursuit. On the other hand, independent inventors, small invention-focused firms, and academic researchers produce a share of discoveries wildly disproportionate to the resources they apply to the task. They work independently of reliability-oriented organizations that insist they prove every initiative or undertaking with empirical data. Instead, they work in validity-based environments—sometimes no more than a basement workbench—that are conducive to producing desired breakthroughs, however inconsistently and infrequently they might emerge. ## Wicked Problems ## by Jennifer Riel Lots of problems are hard: differential calculus, for instance. Or determining the optimal production schedule for a new manufacturing plant. Or assigning a realistic value to stock options. Hard problems are complex and take many steps from beginning to end, making it difficult to see your way clear to the solution from the outset. Hard problems face us at every turn, but fortunately business schools specialize in giving us the analytical tools that allow us to tackle and solve these problems. So hard problems aren’t the problem. The real challenge that faces the CEO and the young manager alike is that not all problems are hard problems. In fact, many of them belong to an entirely different category: wicked problems. Wicked problems aren’t merely harder or more complex than hard problems. They don’t just involve more factors or stakeholders. They don’t just take us longer to solve. Analytical thinking alone, no matter how skillfully applied, isn’t going to generate an answer to a wicked problem. Wicked problems, first identified by mathematician and planner Horst Rittel in the 1960s, are messy, aggressive, and confounding. Rittel’s notion of wicked problems was detailed by C. West Churchman in a 1968 issue of Management Science. Churchman described wicked problems as “a class of social system problems which are ill-formulated, where the information is confusing, where there are many clients and decision makers with conflicting values, and where the ramifications in the whole system are thoroughly confusing.” <sup>8</sup> In other words, wicked problems are ill-defined and unique in their causes, character, and solution. Here’s how to tell if you have a wicked problem: • The causes of the problem are not just complex but deeply ambiguous; you can’t tell why things are happening the way they are and what causes them to do so. • The problem doesn’t fit neatly into any category you’ve encountered before; it looks and feels entirely unique, so the problemsolving approaches you’ve used in the past don’t seem to apply. • Each attempt at devising a solution changes the understanding of the problem; merely attempting to come to a solution changes the problem and how you think about it. • There is no clear stopping rule; it is difficult to tell when the problem is “solved” and what that solution may look like when you reach it. It’s almost as if attempting to solve a wicked problem is like that old cliché of trying to grasp a handful of sand: the harder you grip, the more sand slips through your fingers. The more you think about the problem, the more wicked it becomes. With hard problems, your job is to look at the situation, identify a set of definite conditions, and calculate a solution. With wicked problems, the solution can no longer be the only or even the primary focus. Instead, dealing with wicked problems demands that attention be paid to understanding the nature of the problem itself. Problem understanding is central; the solution, secondary. It’s no wonder that so many designers have come to embrace the notion that their role is to work with wicked problems. “Designers thrive on problem setting, at least as much as problem solving,” explains Bill Buxton, principal researcher for Microsoft. <sup>9</sup> In a world rife with wicked problems—the end of oil, the battle for talent, confounding mysteries of all kinds—the companies that succeed will be those that make a valued place for design thinkers, for those people who thrive on setting and solving wicked problems, throughout their organization. With so many talented inventors working at discovery, Lafley saw the futility of P&G’s insistence that all its product innovation be homegrown. With the help of colleagues in his R&D organization, Lafley championed a wholly new approach to R&D called Connect + Develop. Connect + Develop called for P&G to connect with innovators outside the P&G tent and develop their creations as only P&G could. He set a goal that P&G would source half its product innovation from outside the company. P&G’s contribution would consist of adding value to these inventions by exercising its state-of-the-art capabilities in qualifying inventions, honing and refining them for the market, and distributing the eventual product on a mass scale. When it came to branding, positioning, pricing, and distributing a great new product, P&G’s capabilities were unmatched. Not surprisingly for a big corporation, those activities were one or two stages removed from mysteries; commercialization and branding are mainly heuristics, and selling and distribution have largely been refined to algorithms. In essence, the Connect + Develop initiative, through its networked approach, bulked up P&G’s supply of ideas in the mystery-to-heuristic transition where it was thin, enabling it to feed more opportunities into its well-developed heuristics and algorithms, which had idle capacity. By doubling the volume of discoveries entering the funnel, Lafley doubled the capacity of the overall funnel. Among the successful products to emerge from P&G’s knowledge funnel since Lafley launched Connect + Develop are the Crest SpinBrush, the Mr. Clean Magic Eraser, and the Tide to Go stain remover. By 2006, at least 35 percent of P&G’s new products had elements that originated outside the company, well on the way to Lafley’s goal of 50 percent in five years. OceanofPDF.com ## Driving Heuristics to Algorithms Like most large corporations, P&G employs an army of highly paid and extremely talented managers who spend their days running the same heuristic processes over and over (though this may come as news to them). In fact, the vast majority of corporate employees earning six figures or more spend most of their time operating a personal heuristic—a high-level intellectual exercise requiring considerable personal judgment, which their organization depends on them to provide. They have no obvious incentive to drive their own heuristic down the knowledge funnel to an algorithm, because an algorithm can be run by a less experienced and dramatically cheaper human resource. Unless given an incentive to free up time to stare into the next mystery, managers valued for their skill at running a heuristic will jealously guard their domain. Lafley realized that because heuristic skill is so highly rewarded, even some of P&G’s most essential and long-running activities—above all, brand building—still existed only as heuristics in the heads of scarce and costly senior executives. Despite its central importance to P&G, very little of the brand-building heuristic had actually been committed to paper. In part, that is because P&G itself isn’t a marketplace brand the way Tide, Pampers, and Crest are. Those individual brands are managed by the global category teams that have grown up around them. Those teams have become a magnet for marketers who want to hone their brandbuilding expertise to the highest possible pitch. Among the alumni of P&G’s brand-building academy are Steve Ballmer of Microsoft; Meg Whitman, formerly of eBay; Jeff Immelt of GE; James Hackett of Steelcase; and Scott Cook of Intuit. But because little had been done to shift brand building significantly toward an algorithm, a great deal of knowledge about building brands existed only in the oral history of the company and in the heads of its current brandbuilding experts. The only way to understand what brand building actually entailed at P&G was to hang around the experts, watching and trying to learn from what they did and said. With Lafley’s support and encouragement, P&G made a conscious, topdown effort to drive the brand-building heuristic toward algorithm. Lafley engaged some of his best brand builders and thinkers to document a brandbuilding framework and drive it toward an algorithm (recognizing that, because of brand building’s complexity and inherent subjectivity, it is unlikely ever to be a true algorithm). Like all good design thinkers, the group put out a first prototype—Brand Building Framework 1.0—and then solicited user feedback, integrating the findings into the next iterations of the model, which became Brand Building Frameworks 2.0, 3.0, and so on. For the first time in P&G history, junior marketers had a detailed, regularly updated process document to use in learning and practicing brand building. The days are gone when all a fledging marketer could do was watch and listen to the masters, trying to infer what they were up to. What is most remarkable about the work of writing down P&G’s embedded brand-building wisdom is that it had for so long been simultaneously the most important thing at P&G and the least documented. One might have imagined that it would be the most documented, but that ignores the powerful incentives that heuristics runners have to keep their heuristics to themselves. P&G is systematically stripping away those incentives in order to drive much of the brand-building discipline all the way to an algorithm. The Brand Building Framework has two goals. The first is to give junior marketers the tools needed to do much of the work previously done by high-cost elites. But those elites have not been made redundant. By handing over the routine part of their jobs to junior staffers, senior brand builders are free to accomplish the framework’s second goal of focusing their considerable talents on the next mystery in order to create the next brand or brand extension that consumers want. Some of these managers may never be comfortable exploring mysteries, but others will be. They are P&G’s pioneers, pointing the way to the organization’s future as they drive the brand-building heuristic toward an algorithm. ## OceanofPDF.com Design thinking can create value in areas of the corporation far removed from marketing and product development. Design thinking, for example, transformed P&G’s Global Business Services into a design shop. The effort began in 1998, when P&G undertook its most significant reorganization in more than twenty years. Seven global business units (GBUs) replaced the previous structure, which had divided P&G’s businesses into four geographic regions. In the new structure, rather than having four separately managed, regional detergent businesses, P&G would have a single detergent business with profit responsibility for the entire globe. Second, P&G created five market-development organizations (MDOs) to distribute products in the various markets on behalf of the GBUs. The MDOs were accountable for sales volume but not profits. Third, it created a global shared services organization (Global Business Services or GBS) to deliver employee services, facilities management, financial and accounting reporting, purchasing, and information technology. It was a bold reorganization, in which P&G created the first global market-facing organization (MDO) in its industry and a truly integrated, global shared services organization (GBS). In 2002, P&G took an even more momentous step with GBS. Realizing it had gone as far internally as it could to drive scale, the leaders of GBS made the strategic decision to outsource key business processes. Rather than outsourcing to one integrated provider, P&G opted to establish relationships with best-of-breed partners that were leaders in their field, including Hewlett-Packard for IT infrastructure and accounts payable, Jones Lang LaSalle for facilities management, and IBM for employee services. More than two thousand GBS employees transferred to the partner firms. During the decision-making process, Filippo Passerini was a key GBS advocate for the best-of-breed strategy. In 2003, Passerini was named head of GBS. Passerini’s challenge was considerable, as was his opportunity. He recognized that GBS had now outsourced the most algorithmic of its activities. Those activities were the most readily translated into servicelevel agreement terms in outsourcing contracts. The question now was how to think about the GBS services and employees that remained. Passerini’s vision was to redefine GBS as an agile design shop whose employees would focus on opportunities to turn heuristics into algorithms and refine algorithms into code. This meant attacking wicked problems that bedeviled P&G, working on a project basis rather than a permanent basis, and flowing teams of GBS staff to whatever work was deemed most critical and time sensitive. For example, the product category teams around the world prepared each year for strategy and planning exercises by assembling a binder of information on the overall business environment, competitive challenges, and the like. GBS staffers noticed that the binders contained many common elements and saw an opportunity to streamline the process into an algorithm. A GBS team wrote code that automatically pulled together the vast majority of the information into integrated, online “decision cockpits” that put the information the executives needed at their fingertips. Automating that task freed up the organization for higher-level work. The flow-to-the-work project culture also helped P&G integrate the \$57 billion acquisition of Gillette, itself a global organization with \$10 billion in sales and thirty-five thousand employees. GBS, together with its partners, flowed numerous project teams to work on the Gillette integration and completed it flawlessly, a huge undertaking. GBS moved all Gillette’s systems, encompassing a corporation operating in more than two hundred countries and territories worldwide, onto P&G’s platform. The pressure to work quickly and efficiently was intense: P&G management had publicly projected \$1.2 billion in synergy savings. By flowing teams to the work, GBS was able to deliver the systems integration in just fifteen months. It was the largest and fastest integration in P&G’s history and took far less time than large-scale integration efforts at other leading corporations. With the transformation of GBS—and its continued success as a partner to business units in tackling wicked problems—morale has soared. GBS personnel now point with pride to their record of taking over an activity and delivering equal or better service at a substantial reduction in cost. That savings gives P&G the lowest cost of shared services in the industry and puts it on a path to significantly reduce the cost of shared services as a percentage of sales. And it has made Passerini a star among chief technology officers for sowing creativity across traditionally administrative functions such as employee services, facilities management, and IT. Rather than focusing exclusively on honing, refining, and cutting the cost of current algorithms, his organization’s focus is on helping P&G speed activities through the knowledge funnel, whether in-house or through an outsourcing partner. At each stage of P&G’s transformation into a design-thinking organization, Lafley aimed at driving activities down the P&G knowledge funnel, shaving costs and gaining speed in the process. Within three years of Lafley’s appointment as CEO, P&G was transformed from a mature company with slowing growth, eroding profits, and moribund brands into a genuine growth company, with profit growth of 15 percent per year. Thirteen of its top fifteen brands had increased their market share. Within six years, revenues were \$70 billion and growing at a consistent 10 percent clip. P&G’s roster of billion-dollar brands expanded to twenty from ten, and several other brands were flirting with that benchmark. R&D spending fell from 4.8 percent of sales to 3.6 percent, yet the success rate of its newproduct initiatives had quintupled to 65 percent. Profit had doubled and was growing at 15 percent annually. But perhaps the surest sign that Lafley had won over the reliability-oriented financial community was the growth in P&G’s market value. Within three years, it had doubled to nearly \$200 billion, making P&G one of the ten most valuable companies in the world, ahead of Johnson & Johnson and about the same as Walmart. No single factor can account for such an impressive and thorough turnaround, but by almost any measure, the P&G of today is dramatically more innovative and strikingly more efficient than the P&G of just a few years ago. As an argument for the power of design thinking, that’s hard to top. ## OceanofPDF.com