CHAPTER 5 OceanofPDF.com technology officers for sowing creativity across traditionally administrative functions such as employee services, facilities management, and IT. Rather than focusing exclusively on honing, refining, and cutting the cost of current algorithms, his organization’s focus is on helping P&G speed activities through the knowledge funnel, whether in-house or through an outsourcing partner. At each stage of P&G’s transformation into a design-thinking organization, Lafley aimed at driving activities down the P&G knowledge funnel, shaving costs and gaining speed in the process. Within three years of Lafley’s appointment as CEO, P&G was transformed from a mature company with slowing growth, eroding profits, and moribund brands into a genuine growth company, with profit growth of 15 percent per year. Thirteen of its top fifteen brands had increased their market share. Within six years, revenues were \$70 billion and growing at a consistent 10 percent clip. P&G’s roster of billion-dollar brands expanded to twenty from ten, and several other brands were flirting with that benchmark. R&D spending fell from 4.8 percent of sales to 3.6 percent, yet the success rate of its newproduct initiatives had quintupled to 65 percent. Profit had doubled and was growing at 15 percent annually. But perhaps the surest sign that Lafley had won over the reliability-oriented financial community was the growth in P&G’s market value. Within three years, it had doubled to nearly \$200 billion, making P&G one of the ten most valuable companies in the world, ahead of Johnson & Johnson and about the same as Walmart. No single factor can account for such an impressive and thorough turnaround, but by almost any measure, the P&G of today is dramatically more innovative and strikingly more efficient than the P&G of just a few years ago. As an argument for the power of design thinking, that’s hard to top. ## OceanofPDF.com