CHAPTER 6 OceanofPDF.com ## Ease of Defending Reliability vs.Validity In most corporate settings, it is much easier to defend analytical thinking and reliability than it is to defend design thinking and validity. Most executives reached their station in life by studying the past in gruesome detail to chart a course for the future. They have empirical data to support the course they advocate. They are not prepared to evaluate an alternative viewpoint that proceeds not from the basis of what was, but what could be. Such a way of thinking appears fuzzy, dreamy, and more suited to an idealistic undergraduate than a seasoned veteran of the real world. But if a corporation is to bring anything new into the world, it will have to cultivate respect for the sort of logical leap that brought the Aeron into a world that had never seen anything like it. The challenge for the corporation is to make validity part of the lexicon, overcoming the core training of its employees, boards, and investors. To overcome those challenges, it needs to build in structures and processes that foster, support, and reward a culture of design thinking. “Companies are good at producing ‘hothouse tomatoes,’ ” says John Maeda of the Rhode Island School of Design. “They’re perfectly formed and identical, edible but not delicious. Most don’t yet know how to integrate the ‘heirloom tomato’—the tomato that looks a little different than the rest, lovingly grown by hand with attention to detail, mouth-wateringly delicious. There’s a place for both of them at the table.” And, he says, a very good reason to go after both. “When people are working on a creative project, they’re happy. When a team can come together around a creative cause or a knotty problem, they want to come to work every day. A tough design challenge could be one of the best retention tools a company today has for its best innovators.” <sup>15</sup> OceanofPDF.com