In February 1980, when I was fifteen, I saw Paul Schrader’s American Gigolo at the National Theatre in Westwood and had no idea the movie was influenced by Robert Bresson, the French minimalist filmmaker, or that the ending—a fake alibi one character offers another—was lifted from Bresson’s film Pickpocket. (In 2012 when I was writing the screenplay for Schrader’s The Canyons, my penultimate scene involved a version of that alibi between Lindsay Lohan and James Deen, an updated riff on Pickpocket’s final moment, but Gigolo was my model there, not Bresson.) Looking back, the impact American Gigolo had on me is impossible to tally, and it’s not as if this is a great film—it’s not, and even its director agrees—but in the way it changed how we look at and objectify men, and altered how I thought about and experienced LA, its influence is vast and undeniable. The film is set in 1979 Los Angeles, whose denizens dine at Ma Maison and Perino’s and Scandia and Le Dome—and Julian Kay, the title character, is living in a chic Westwood apartment, adorned in Armani, driving the empty streets in a Mercedes convertible and making his living as a male prostitute for wealthy older women while haunting the Polo Lounge in the Beverly Hills Hotel, and he is extraordinarily beautiful—the movie captures Richard Gere at the height of his beauty, when he was thirty but looks younger. Julian has two pimps who supply him with work: one is a blond woman, a divorcée who lives in Malibu, played by Nina Van Pallandt, and the other is a big, bad black man played by Bill Duke, who lives on the West Side in a high-rise festooned with Warhol prints. We’re not sure if the woman knows about the other pimp—maybe this matters at first, maybe it doesn’t, but what does matter is that Julian is a happy, superficial capitalist with very little backstory. He just exists, floating through this world, an actor. He tells someone at one point that he was born in Torino, but we don’t know if this is true because in the previous scene he lied to a client about being a pool boy at the Beverly Hills Hotel in his youth. The engine of the plot kicks in when Julian is framed for a murder, and American Gigolo becomes a crime thriller. Narratively, it’s somewhat standard, and its resolution is clean and simple. But none of that matters because the movie’s design is so seductive and stunning. American Gigolo was Paul Schrader’s third movie as a young director and everything he learned on his first two pays off here: the gliding camera movements, the gorgeous sets, the dramatic lighting—all aiding in the creation of his acid vision of Los Angeles as a brightly colored wasteland. This is a sunlit neo-noir, ominous and beautiful, and it was of its moment: there was something late-’70s New Wave about it, minimal and chic, lush and corrosive, and there was something gay about it as well, which then seemed everywhere in the culture. Mainstream audiences had never seen a man photographed—objectified—the way Richard Gere was. The camera ogled his beauty, roamed over his skin, devoured his adolescent petulance, was hypnotized by his flesh, and Gere was the first leading man in a big studio movie to go full frontal. Originally, John Travolta was going to star in American Gigolo but walked away just weeks before production, and an audience might have rooted for Travolta’s earnestness more than Gere’s blankness; Travolta might have humanized the movie—instinctively brought humor to it—and would have given it a realism. But with Gere at its center, the movie is a chilly and remote experience, and at this point in his career humor eludes him. There’s a sadness to Gere, yet this doesn’t erase the notion that Julian Kay is less a character than an idea, an abstraction, an actor, and he’s certainly not likable. And yet Gere’s blankness and the movie’s austerity collided, and audiences went with it in the spring of 1980 and made him a star. The model Lauren Hutton plays Michelle, the unhappy wife of a California senator, and she’s quite stunning as well, but the movie loves its leading man—the tension comes from Gere’s beauty and narcissism. Women had always been photographed like this, but men hadn’t—it was new, it was gay, it ended up influencing everything from the popularity of GQ magazine to how Calvin Klein began advertising men. In retrospect, it’s amazing that American Gigolo was a hit: the film is deliberately paced, sometimes glacially so, and flirts with pretension more often than it doesn’t, so it’s hard to believe this art object with very few commercial concessions (except, of course, that delirious come-on of a title) was in fact a big Paramount picture produced by Jerry Bruckheimer. In 1980 I was beginning the Less Than Zero project which would culminate in 1985 with my first novel’s publication, and though I took many of my cues from Joan Didion and LA noir, along with bands like the Doors and X and the Eagles, American Gigolo was another key template so much so that I named the male teenage prostitute Julian as well. What I responded to at fifteen was the moral ambiguity of not only the subject matter, and of Julian Kay himself, but also the filmmaking: I couldn’t make up my mind about what the movie was selling me—and I liked that. Blondie’s electrifying “Call Me” burst over the opening credits like an anthem, though the movie was basically dark and pessimistic with Richard Gere’s beauty offered as something to crave, while at the same time something deeply ambiguous. That fall, Robert Redford’s Ordinary People spoke most passionately to my sixteen-year-old self, with Timothy Hutton as the movie character I most identified with, but now I can barely watch it. For all its flaws, I can watch American Gigolo endlessly. It came out when films could have a kind of far-ranging cultural influence, just as novels could, and both movies and novels now look like art forms of the twentieth century, not the twenty-first. Movies no longer work for us as an exploration of unseen, faraway cultures, unless they’re otherworldly and fantastical. We’re no longer impelled to go to a theater simply to see Richard Gere standing naked in his Westwood apartment, maneuvering through the gay men dancing at the Probe on North Highland Avenue or just hanging out on sunlit Rodeo Drive—to live as voyeurs of the wealthy world of Beverly Hills in which American Gigolo takes place. All this is over: reality TV and Instagram have replaced it. Julian Kay is an actor—and Gere’s performance is a performance of a performance. American Gigolo’s narrative trajectory is that of a performer who needs to become real and get off the stage in order to save himself. Of course, this is the standard loss-of-innocence arc that’s found in most American movies, except here it’s more interesting and literally superficial than usual, as is the actor’s performance. I’d become aware of Gere a few years before while watching the Z Channel in my Sherman Oaks bedroom and saw him costarring in the overwrought 1977 adaptation of Judith Rossner’s 1975 best seller, Looking for Mr. Goodbar. (I read my mom’s copy of the novel when I was eleven.) About forty-five minutes into the movie he appears as Tony, one of Diane Keaton’s pickups. She first notices him at a singles bar because he’s about to steal a wallet out of someone’s purse—but why wouldn’t she notice him anyway? He’s beautiful. In the following scene Gere brings Keaton to orgasm in her apartment while Donna Summer sings “Could It Be Magic” and then performs a balletic mock-rumble kung-fu dance in his jockstrap while brandishing a glow-inthe-dark switchblade. All of this was electrifyingly sexy to my eighth-grade sensibility (it’s ludicrous now) and in an erotic trance I began following Gere’s career through 1978 (Days of Heaven, Bloodbrothers) and into 1979 (Yanks), developing a full-blown teenage fixation. It could have been anyone, I guess, but the timing of my adolescence and of these movies made for another collision. In this phase of his career Gere represented a gritty 1970s male sensuality and seemed perfectly cast in the downbeat, nihilistic world of Looking for Mr. Goodbar, whose story was yet another one of that decade’s archetypical narratives. Schoolteacher Theresa Dunn’s murder at the hands of a random sex partner in the mid-’70s urban wasteland of Manhattan was sexually arousing and had a tabloid excitement for me at fourteen, but it also alternately horrified and bored and depressed me. Diane Keaton experiences her ultimate orgasm as she’s being stabbed to death on another one-night stand (by Tom Berenger, another fixation of mine from that moment) beneath the flickering dead end of a strobe light, gasping and covered with blood—punishment achieved and morality play completed. And yet I watched the film over and over again during the weeks it played on the Z Channel, for glimpses of Gere. In 1979, the only movie he appeared in was Yanks, John Schlesinger’s World War II ensemble about GIs stationed in northern England in 1943. It was the first time Gere had starred in a movie made by a gay director, and the difference between this and his two previous movies (one directed by Terrence Malick, the other by Robert Mulligan) was noticeable to me even at fifteen. Everything changed because the camera now approached Gere as a star, accentuating the sad almond eyes, the sensuous full-lipped mouth, the glamorous hollowed-out cheeks, the smooth ex-gymnast’s body that we glimpse naked in a barracks shower in one of the very first scenes—the blocking somewhat obscures explicit nudity, but we get the idea—and his prominent nose seemed less schnozzy: someone in lust was photographing him. Watching Yanks for the first time that fall when I was fifteen, I hadn’t before seen a more beautiful man in any movie, but he also seemed blank and lost, which probably added to his beauty. Gere’s flaw in period films like Days of Heaven and Yanks was that he seemed too contemporary, too modern, to truly fit into these worlds, and because of this he was mannered. He comes off in Yanks as amateurish, with a flat and uninflected voice, and he doesn’t look or sound or move the way $\mathbf { w e } ^ { \prime } \mathbf { d }$ imagine a wisecracking short-order cook from Arizona would—he seems instead as if he should be preening on the catwalk in late-’70s Milan, twitchy from drugs and open to anything sexually, or else lounging around Studio 54 and the Fiorucci boutique in Beverly Hills. Gere emanates a sense of entitlement that seems faintly bizarre, yet he holds the screen even as it is almost always apparent that he’s acting, and overly self-aware, never really disappearing into the role. There remains a genuine tension in this. Yanks is a glazed and somewhat embalmed piece of traditional studio moviemaking, and all the Americans are miscast: Chick Vennera as Gere’s best friend is encouraged to overdo everything, and who in their right mind considered William Devane a romantic leading man, paired with the luminous Vanessa Redgrave no less? It was a major bomb, but Gere had already shot American Gigolo by the time Yanks flopped. This was the second movie in which he’d replaced Travolta (the first was Days of Heaven), and though Paramount wanted Christopher Reeve for Julian Kay after Travolta split, Paul Schrader held out for Gere, finally convincing the head of the studio, Barry Diller, to cast him. (Julie Christie dropped out after Travolta left, and Meryl Streep later turned down the role of Michelle because she found the script distasteful.) In the opening half of American Gigolo, it’s obvious that Julian Kay will be anyone you want, depending on how much you pay him. One of the first times we see him he’s hanging upside down in his apartment, wearing gravity boots while rehearsing lines in Swedish for an upcoming eight-thousand-dollar trick, and later he runs the same lines with that senator’s wife, Michelle. Sometimes he’s a chauffeur for a wealthy widow from Charlottesville, and then he turns into a swishy German decorator in order to protect a client when they’re visiting Sotheby’s—arguably one of Gere’s more embarrassing moments on screen. In the movie’s most iconic scene Julian gets dressed for a night out, wiping cocaine off a small mirror, laying out beautiful Armani suits on his bed, choosing a costume, inspecting the drawers of luxurious shirts and shimmering ties while Smokey Robinson sings “The Love I Saw in You Was Just a Mirage.” Near the end of the movie, Julian desperately tells the pimp who set him up for the Rheiman murder in Palm Springs that he’ll play other roles (gay, kink) in order to escape this frame-up, and you realize that American Gigolo could be considered a horror movie about an actor losing his audience. Julian thinks he’s free but he’s constantly told what to do—everything’s really just an audition to get paid. I’ve been involved with actors since I was a child, in close proximity from elementary school and high school into adulthood, both professionally and a few times romantically. Even with the crazy passive-aggressive positivity actors need simply to maintain their balance and to feed their hunger to seduce and control you, I’ve always found them endearing and likable. This neurosis is ultimately forgivable since this is what actors are supposed to do —to make you like them. Their job simply demands: I want to make you want me. And because of this, at least for the majority of actors whom I’ve hung out with, acting is a hard life, filled with a low-level fear and emotional peril due to what might happen if you don’t like them. What if you don’t respond to what they’re selling? It’s pretty basic: what happens if the actor just isn’t liked? This is not a job that’s forced on anyone; it’s simply chosen by people who want to express themselves (regardless of where their neuroses come from) and also hope to make a living from doing so. But most actors never succeed, and the struggle and rejection inherent in their trade makes just about any other profession seem sane and straightforward. The reasons an actor is wanted and hired are so random— often luck based, having nothing to do with merit and capability—that watching this game from the sidelines, as a nonactor, can be upsetting enough to make your mind reel. (This is why I find casting sessions almost unbearable—even before hearing someone read from the script, from the moment they walk into the room I can tell instantly whether he or she is right for the role, or not.) Imagine, then, what this feels like for them. Actors are so integral to film and theater and TV that the best of them unearth truths that are stunningly revealing, and they can also be a joy to watch because of their physicality as well as their talent. Who has a problem looking at amazingly pretty people for the duration of even a mediocre movie? Actors depend on their likability, and their attractiveness, because they want people to watch them, to be drawn to them, to desire them. Because of this, actors are, by their very nature, liars. For this reason, they end up playing a part for us in their lives, too. And they can’t help it: they spend their days disappearing into personas. They want to please, they want to do a good job, they have a need—and because of this actors can be as simple and amiable and guileless as the friendliest golden retriever. Or they can be paranoid and emotionally needy narcissists, always worrying about what anyone and everyone wants from them. Is it just a job? Is it only a performance? Do they want sexual gratification? What role should I play to get this part? How high do I turn the sexual wattage up for the casting director, this producer, that executive? God, I hope they like me. Actors dread criticism and are more wounded by it because, unlike most of us, they live in front of an audience, and criticism means the public might not like them anymore. Criticism means the next job, that next flirtation, maybe the big career-changing payday might not happen. For the actor, criticism is tied far more intimately to survival than it is for any of the rest of us. Or at least it hasn’t been, until lately. A long time ago in the faraway era of Empire, actors could protect their carefully designed and enigmatic selves more easily and completely than is possible now, when we all live in the digital land of social media where our phones candidly capture moments that used to be private and our unbidden thoughts can be typed up in a line or two on Twitter. Some actors have become more hidden, less likely to go public with their opinions, likes and dislikes—because who knows where that next job’s coming from? Others have become more vocal, stridently voicing their righteousness, but signaling one’s social-justice virtue isn’t necessarily the same as being honest—it can also be a pose. Who might these actors offend if they behaved like regular people, angry and riddled with contradictions? But being an actor involves turning into a blank, hollowing yourself out so you can replace whatever was there with the character you’re playing next. What does it mean to be real as an actor? What does transparency mean if you’re essentially a vessel waiting to be filled again and again and again? Part of the actor’s immediate charm stems from an upbeat attitude they keep selling, one that masks their true selves. If you get to know an actor intimately you might or might not have access to that true self in private, but rarely will you see it in public, where the actor always continues to play a part. But most of us now lead lives on social media that are more performance based than we ever could have imagined even a decade ago, and thanks to this burgeoning cult of likability, in a sense, we’ve all become actors. We’ve had to rethink the means with which to express our feelings and thoughts and ideas and opinions in the void created by a corporate culture that is forever trying to silence us by sucking up everything human and contradictory and real with its assigned rule book on how to behave. We seem to have entered precariously into a kind of totalitarianism that actually abhors free speech and punishes people for revealing their true selves. In other words: the actor’s dream. In May 1985 Less Than Zero was published, and even though it didn’t become a national best seller until the fall, it was talked about in certain publishing circles and it wasn’t long before magazines started asking me—a junior at Bennington College—to write articles for them. One of the first was Vanity Fair, whose editor in chief summoned me to New York that July when I was attending the Bennington writers summer workshop in Vermont. I took the train down to Manhattan and arrived, somewhat nervously, at the bar at the Algonquin to meet the woman who had revived Vanity Fair into what was becoming once again the buzziest magazine around. I sat across from her and was immediately uncomfortable: Tina Brown was soft-spoken, petite, with a no-nonsense air of British formality, and she could stare you down with a laser-light intensity. I found her stillness intimidating, so as a hungover, shaggy twenty-one-year-old I ordered a midday vodka and grapefruit juice to settle my nerves. She wanted to know what I might like to write about, and I shrugged because I really didn’t have a clue. I wasn’t even sure I wanted to write a piece for the magazine, and I finally told her so. But she persisted, sometimes silently. Tina’s silences were always weighted with meanings I couldn’t decipher, and she didn’t seem to care how long they lasted. I remember an especially lengthy one that went on for minutes when we had lunch in the late ’90s at the Royalton, when she wanted me to write a profile of the then-recluse Axl Rose for The New Yorker, where she had become editor in chief. (I demurred.) I was used to all this by then, but at the Algonquin, a decade earlier, I kept shifting uncomfortably. And then she brought up the Brat Pack, who had been newly branded in a recent New York magazine piece. “Is there an actor in the Brat Pack that you might like to profile?” Tina asked. I shrugged. “What about Judd Nelson?” she suggested quietly. St. Elmo’s Fire had opened a few weeks earlier and I’d seen The Breakfast Club that spring. “Yeah, maybe…” Now it was my turn to go silent. She looked at something on the table, then back at me. “He’s quite annoying, isn’t he?” I made a meaningless gesture with my hands. “Yeah, I guess…” “I think he’s quite annoying,” she said again, then asked, “Don’t you?” I’d never met Judd Nelson and told her so. “He seems a bit obnoxious,” she insisted. “That might be a very interesting match—you profiling Judd.” Something seemed to be swirling around the bar in the Algonquin that summer afternoon: she was beginning to get to me and I was seeing things her way, and soon I began to nod. “Yeah, yeah, he does seem pretty annoying,” I said. “You’re right.” Tina then asked when I’d next be in LA and said she was hoping to get the piece ready for Vanity Fair’s Los Angeles issue, which would be out in October. I told her I’d get back to LA in August when the workshop was over, and she said she’d handle all the necessary arrangements. I left the hotel in a kind of daze, worried that I’d mindlessly accepted an assignment that in the end would somehow displease her. She seemed so exacting and the magazine itself so impossibly glamorous to my college-kid sensibility, and did I really want to do a hit piece on an actor? But I found out from my agent later that afternoon what I would get paid and it staggered me—“A fuck of a lot of money,” as she put it—and by comparison to the digital age when everyone basically writes for free, it seems even more staggering in retrospect. And so the plan was set in motion: I would meet the actor Judd Nelson, find him appalling, and write about how awful hanging out with him had been. I realized later—I didn’t make the connection in the bar—that Tina had of course read New York’s Brat Pack article. It was the most talked-about piece of celebrity journalism in years. The magazine had sent David Blum to Los Angeles to profile Emilio Estevez, arguably the most famous of the actors in Joel Schumacher’s recently released St. Elmo’s Fire, and what had been pitched as a typical puff piece quickly warped into a scathing portrayal that soon became scandalous. Estevez’s mistake was inviting the journalist to trail him around LA, allowing him to observe what young stars do with their nights off. It’s all quite harmless: nobody’s snorting blow or banging hookers, it’s just Emilio using his new status to get into nightclubs and comped at movie theaters, but the authorial tone makes everyone in the piece, no matter what they’re doing or saying, seem entitled and annoying. Its chief weakness—and the reason I’m mystified why it has carried such pop-cultural weight for more than three decades—is that the only people in it besides Estevez are the barely present Rob Lowe and Judd Nelson, for whom Blum reserves the bulk of his ire. Timothy Hutton makes a brief appearance, but he was never part of the Brat Pack; he’d become a star five years earlier and had already won an Oscar. But Blum lumps everyone from that period together, including Tom Cruise, Matt Dillon, Matthew Broderick, Matthew Modine and Nic Cage. And so begins a curious study in journalistic pathology: a youngish male reporter (Blum was probably thirty at the time) seems to seethe over the beauty and good fortune of these up-and-coming young actors, so he twists their youthful nights out— drinking Coronas at the Hard Rock, reveling in the attention from starstruck girls—into something almost sinister. Because of the roles Nelson had played in The Breakfast Club and St. Elmo’s Fire, as well as in a little-seen movie I’d caught earlier that year called Fandango, and because by now I’d read the New York Brat Pack piece, I wasn’t sure whom I was going to meet, and because I had been influenced and flattered by Tina Brown, I expected to dislike him. But Judd was nothing like the snarling John Bender in The Breakfast Club or the entitled yuppie Alec from St. Elmo’s Fire, or anything I had inferred from another magazine’s previous snarky profile—he was smart, funny, direct, likable. And because we were getting along so well I decided, while we were sitting in Carney’s on Sunset Boulevard on the afternoon we met in August of 1985, to confide what my editor had in mind for the piece, and what she was probably expecting me to turn in. Judd contemplated this, and we went back and forth on how to approach this problem, and the unfairness of it all, whether real or imagined, and then came up with an alternative. Instead of a Judd Nelson profile we offered Vanity Fair a piece about where young Hollywood really hangs out—not Spago and the Roxy, but the secret places where the hip and connected actually go. We envisioned “Looking for Cool in LA.” When I pitched the piece to the magazine they loved it, even bringing handsome young Bradford Branson on board to shoot the places Judd and I had decided to extol as LA’s coolest. What I didn’t let anyone at Vanity Fair know was that the places Judd and I would sanctify were actually some of the most retrograde, least fashionable venues in greater Los Angeles—places that real young Hollywood sophisticates not only would shun, but probably hadn’t even heard of. Where did LA’s youngest and hippest prefer to eat? At Philippe: the original home of the French-dip sandwich, a simple cafeteria on Alameda and Ord. For a cultural excursion: the Museum of Neon Art. The coolest place for a drink would be the bar at the downtown Hilton on a seedy stretch of Wilshire Boulevard. And then there was the fictional Bud Club— a legendary floating emporium that could magically pop up anywhere from Glendale to dark and deserted Venice, so elusive that it allegedly drove the young and hip insane. Everywhere from the retro coffee shop Ben Frank’s to a Chinese fortune-teller hidden in the outskirts of Pasadena became the fake go-to for LA’s juvenile elite—and Judd and I sold them all, posing at each in black suits and skinny ties and Ray-Bans for photographs Brandon shot in beautiful shimmering black and white. To make sure nobody at the magazine would get suspicious we threw in a few legitimately trendy places: Power Tools, the Ritz Café, Chianti Cucina, Dirt Box. Ultimately, the two of us felt that we had both dodged a bullet—me having something stranger and less orthodox than a hack profile could offer, and Judd going unscathed by an encounter with a potentially dubious journalist. The piece ran in the November 1985 issue, our names heralded on the cover and superimposed over Sylvester Stallone posing with Brigitte Nielsen. As a senior at Bennington College I remember opening that issue on a bus heading from campus into town and feeling both delighted and frightened by what Judd and I had pulled off, and it wasn’t long before I heard that Vanity Fair had found out what we’d perpetrated, and understandably I was never asked to write anything else during Tina Brown’s reign. Ironically, a few of the places we prematurely proclaimed cool ultimately became so for a little while, because of the piece, and it seems a reminder now of the power of Vanity Fair, of youth, and of the 1980s. Simon & Schuster announced a first printing of five thousand copies of Less Than Zero, expecting to sell maybe half that amount. In the spring of 1985, I honestly didn’t care how many copies it sold—I was just amazed the book even got published, that something I’d been working on for five years was going to be an actual hardcover sold in real bookstores. In the long ago Empire of America it took much longer than it does now not only for a novel to catch on with what was then a more substantial reading public, but also for actual books to make it into actual bookstores, which was where we all went to buy a book. We might spend an hour there, browsing the aisles, a favorite pastime of mine that’s now just about impossible to replicate, so many of us having been lured away from brickand-mortar shops by the ease of Amazon, and their promise to deliver a copy to our mailbox the day the book is officially published. This wasn’t the case in May 1985, when a first novel by a writer nobody had ever heard of left a warehouse and was slowly made available through the rest of the country over the summer and even into the fall. And it wasn’t until October that the book appeared on The New York Times best-seller list. Though hardly a blockbuster, it sold well for a first novel and it was a genuine word-of-mouth success, since Simon & Schuster had initially budgeted no money to promote and advertise it. But the media, almost immediately, grew curious and began writing about both the book and its author, and—for whatever reason—Less Than Zero soon started to connect with a large and youthful audience that saw itself mirrored in its attitude and sensibility. The novel seemed to confirm something for many people, as if it were a news bulletin from the front lines —this is what kids are like today!—rather than a highly personal novel that I’d been working on, in one form or another, since I was sixteen. But when I finally finished it, at twenty, the book ultimately did feel like a reflection of where we were in the moment and not just an autobiographical story— the narrator was always both me and not me. Or perhaps the real appeal was the spell it cast for readers thousands of miles away from Southern California: What would it really be like to live in this Beverly Hills fantasy that they felt was so cool? This was often, I found out in fan letters, the takeaway for young readers in Indiana, in the UK, in New Delhi. Our tour guide through Less Than Zero is handsome and pale Clay— eighteen, passive, druggy, bi. A boy profoundly disconnected from just about everyone: his family; his girlfriend, Blair; and his friends, among them Julian, who turns tricks with older men in order to pay off a drug debt. There’s no real plot until the last quarter of the book; the story’s told in fragments, a mosaic, and the details keep adding up with, hopefully, a quiet menace. There’s no love, and no real friendship: money, teenage sex and easy access to drugs open the door to a kind of gleaming nihilism. “Disappear Here” the book keeps insisting, quoting a billboard on Sunset Boulevard that haunts Clay. Part of the book’s appeal to young readers could be that they’d never been presented quite like this in contemporary American fiction before: as sophisticated teenagers who aped the attitudes of their materialistic and narcissistic boomer parents. But Less Than Zero doesn’t blame the parents. And in fact it’s still rare for a young person’s novel to feature kids who are just as bad as their parents, if not even worse. Most of those parents are demonized, but the parents in Less Than Zero are rarely on display at all. It’s kids left to their own devices who have tripped themselves into this world of too much money, too many drugs and too much entitlement who become their own worst enemies. The novel also reflects a numbness that was pervasive in the culture, particularly in Los Angeles, when I started writing it in 1980—a numbness that was thrilling and yet also contrary to reflexive understanding, to genuine feeling as well. The movie rights were optioned before publication by an independent producer named Marvin Worth (Lenny, The Rose), who had a deal with 20th Century Fox, the studio that would be financing the movie. The purchase on their end was sponsored by Scott Rudin and Larry Mark, who were the vice presidents of production under Barry Diller, who, at that time, was the studio’s chairman—and all three of them wanted this movie to happen. The first script was written by the Pulitzer Prize–winning playwright Michael Cristofer, but Fox thought it was too harsh for a “commercial” film and already we’d reached a divide between the novel and the adaptation. Why buy the rights to Less Than Zero if you weren’t going to accept the spirit of the book? Since the novel had quickly become a touchstone for young people, maybe the studio could roll the dice and make some money by adapting faithfully what was already a well-known title. But we were never talking about a sure thing—unlike The Fault in Our Stars, Less Than Zero hadn’t sold eighteen million copies—and this was never going to be a family-friendly enterprise. If Fox wanted to make an honest re-creation of the book they would have to go all the way, because a compromised version was never going to work: it wouldn’t be the thing readers had initially responded to, which was the cool numbness of it all. Fox brought in Jon Avnet, who had successfully produced Risky Business, a big hit featuring upper-middle-class teenagers that made Tom Cruise a star, but Avnet considered the Michael Cristofer script “depressing and degrading” and you began to wonder if Avnet had ever read the book, because he now wanted to “transform a very extreme situation into a sentimental story about warmth, caring and tenderness in an atmosphere hostile to those kinds of emotions.” Larry Gordon, the president of Fox when the book was purchased, had been replaced by Leonard Goldberg, who, unlike the other players at the studio, was a family man, and he found the material distasteful, but Barry Diller persisted and wanted the movie made. Everyone just needed to get on the same page and figure out how to do it. The screenwriter Harley Peyton was hired to write a new script where Clay’s bisexuality and drug use were eliminated in a narrative that no longer presented him as passive and “amoral,” and yet executives at the studio still worried that it was too edgy a proposition for even eight million dollars, which wasn’t a lot of money for a studio film in the 1980s. But they believed, however, that they’d found the right director: Marek Kanievska, a Brit who was hired because he’d dealt with ambivalent sexuality before and had made “unlikable” characters appealing in his film Another Country, which featured Rupert Everett in a role loosely based on Guy Burgess, the famous—and gay—spy. So shooting commenced, but ultimately Fox took the movie away from Kanievska because, according to people on set, he kept making it edgier and straying too dangerously close in spirit to the source material. The cinematographer Edward Lachman later recalled that the studio hated his incredible Steadicam shot of the (then unknown) Red Hot Chili Peppers performing at a club, because the band was “shirtless and sweaty,” and Fox demanded that the shot be removed. Early test-screening audiences between the ages of fifteen and twenty-one revealed that they hated the Robert Downey Jr. character, so new scenes were shot to make his character more “likable” and “repentant”—that was the studio’s word: “repentant.” The lavish high-school graduation sequence that opens the movie was part of the reshoots, and it now contained a lot of smiling and good vibes along with champagne bottles being popped. Because of all this panic and wrangling, something’s off in the finished product: it doesn’t work dramatically. In the opening, pre-credit sequence there are already strained plot devices that begin to engulf the movie: expressions of intense emotion from the main characters that aren’t in the book, a push for everyone to be likable. Clay and Julian and Blair are now a team, happily graduating from high school on a sunny day and looking forward to the summer and beyond. In flashbacks, Clay recalls these events from his chic dorm room somewhere on the East Coast, and it seems that he and Julian are best friends, and Blair is his main squeeze. Julian has stayed in LA to pursue a career as a record producer-slash-club promoter, and Blair wants to concentrate on her modeling career rather than go to college. (In the book Blair attends the University of Southern California.) In the movie, during Clay’s first term away, Julian becomes impossibly addicted to drugs, and he and Blair end up sleeping together. Clay discovers this when he returns to LA at Thanksgiving break for a surprise visit, only to find the two of them in bed in Blair’s beautiful downtown loft. And so, a love triangle’s set up. A conventional narrative structure has been imposed upon a book where narrative is nonexistent, and this now needs to resolve itself, because the movie—even before the opening credits roll—has set this particular storyline in motion. Clay is now upstanding: antidrug, resolutely heterosexual and prone to chastising everyone for his or her behavior, the ultimate Jewish mother. The Clay from the book who doesn’t care about anything or pretends not to is now the uptight center of the movie. This choice straitjackets a panickedlooking Andrew McCarthy, who had already become a go-to guy for Gen-X stoicism and moral despair, and his presence here is a drag, wholesome and preppy and whitewashed. (My first choice for Clay had been Anthony Michael Hall, which the studio rejected as they did my first choice for director, Walter Hill.) Downey tries hard to make Julian, the novel’s unreachable nihilist, lost and lovable, and the book’s smart-spoiled tough girl Blair, who knows all this is a total mess and a scam, becomes the superjittery and helpless Jami Gertz, teary-eyed and earnest and completely miscast. The supposed “heat” between McCarthy and Gertz (which isn’t in the book) is especially iffy, even though they are constantly making out and have to simulate sex twice. There’s even a scene in which McCarthy has to fake an orgasm when Gertz gives him a hand job in his vintage convertible Corvette spinning wheelies on Rodeo Drive, as a biker gang zooms by. The credit sequence, with neon-red block lettering and the Bangles cover of “Hazy Shade of Winter” blasting over it, still feels somewhat iconic, but watching Clay smile in recognition at familiar landmarks (the Hard Rock Cafe, and, oddly enough, the Beverly Hills boutique Giorgio) once he’s back in LA for Christmas break, craning his neck out of the cab to get a better look, is flatly bizarre, because he’d been here just three weeks earlier yet seems to have little trepidation about returning to a city where he grew up and is now problematic in troublesome new ways since he discovered his best friend and girlfriend are an item—happily taking in these sights makes no sense. None of this is drawn from the novel, where I don’t think there’s a single scene when Julian and Blair are even in the same room together. Edward Lachman ends up being the key creative artist in Less Than Zero the film is gorgeously lit and shot. Visually, the movie’s often stunningly beautiful, accentuating massive open spaces that suggest the loneliness of LA, and the sets are spectacular: there’s an over-the-top Beverly Hills Christmas party complete with fake snow and hundreds of extras (Brad Pitt is one of them), and fake icebergs dotted with video monitors and giant Christmas trees dusted white, all of which propose that this is ostensibly a movie about cocaine, and its grandeur might remind you that this kind of movie will never be made again on such a lavish scale. As an artifact from that era it’s unparalleled: no other youth-culture movie set in LA has such an epic look, certainly compared to Valley Girl or Fast Times at Ridgemont High (both better movies by the way). And yet it doesn’t work because it betrays the source material and takes the punk nihilism that influenced the novel and squeezes it into a big, teen-friendly, mainstream studio movie— about “friendship” with way too much smiling: tearful smiling, sexy smiling, happy and sad smiling—which creates an incredibly lopsided experience. The movie’s earnestness and yearning to be likable and relatable is what ultimately kills it. A week before the movie’s release, and just a few days before I was planning to see it screened at Fox’s offices in Manhattan, Marek Kanievska called to say he needed to see me. We hadn’t met but I was close friends with a woman who’d had an affair with him during postproduction and told me about the problems Marek was having with the studio, so I had some ideas about the difficulties he’d had. Marek wanted to meet at six o’clock at Nell’s, a popular nightclub that I was frequenting then, though I doubted that Nell’s was open that early but it turned out to be, sort of. Only Marek and his date were sitting in a booth in the otherwise dark and deserted space, and I realized that the club had been opened for him—a friend of the Brit Pack that owned and operated Nell’s—and also that I’d never been there much earlier than midnight. I also realized I hadn’t heard anything specific about the movie itself because having graduated from college only a year earlier, I’d just recently moved to New York and was working on a new novel and more interested in other things. I’d only skimmed the Michael Cristofer script but I’d never read the Harley Peyton draft. When I sat down Marek was slumped over in the booth, already drunk. My initial smile froze as he started talking: “I’m so so sorry for how the movie turned out. I tried my best, I fought the battles, I lost. I’m so so sorry.” And because of this, I was prepared later that week when I watched the movie in a packed screening room where I’d invited friends, people from MTV, the VJs of the moment, several actors I knew. It didn’t take very long to tell something was wrong, and for my excitement of seeing my fictional world visualized to quickly fade. As the movie crept to an end, it dawned on me that there hadn’t been a single scene or line of dialogue in the movie that was taken from the book. Marek Kanievska didn’t direct another film for thirteen years. Oddly enough, that one—Where the Money Is, starring Paul Newman—and American Psycho opened the same week in 2000, and American Psycho beat it at the box office. In an unpublished forward to his 1964 autobiography, Charlie Chaplin wrote, “In this record I shall tell only what I want to tell, for there is a line of demarcation between oneself and the public. There are some things which if divulged to the public, I would have nothing left to hold body and soul together, and my personality would disappear like the waters of the rivers that flow into the sea.” I thought about this quote recently, after having Judd Nelson on a podcast I hosted infrequently starting in the fall of 2013 and into the late spring of 2017, because it seemed like the perfect summation of something I’d detected with a number of actors I’d talked with on that PodcastOne show. I hadn’t seen Judd in nearly twenty-five years when I invited him to participate, ostensibly to discuss The Breakfast Club on its thirtieth anniversary but actually because I remember him back in those days as intelligent and outspoken and completely realistic about Hollywood; in particular, he’d told hilarious stories about the troubled production of St. Elmo’s Fire. In real life he was closer to a male version of Molly Ringwald’s Claire Standish, and if that sounds prim and unattractive, it wasn’t. This was the private Judd I’d spent time with at the height of his brief fame, and when I greeted him, now in his midfifties, at the podcast studio in Beverly Hills, I wasn’t surprised that he seemed to have mellowed out. But the private person I had expected to shine on the podcast never really showed up in front of the microphone. The frazzled and funny Judd still existed, but not necessarily in public. In the studio when I asked how tricky the St. Elmo’s Fire shoot had really been, he hesitated and answered diplomatically even though it had taken place more than thirty years earlier and everyone’s career had by now come and gone, and I realized then that he was putting on a performance— wanting to be liked, wanting to sell himself—and anything that sounded critical or negative wasn’t going to help his cause. The only criticism he volunteered that hour, in fact, was directed at the journalist who had trashed him in that New York magazine piece about the Brat Pack. Yet after the podcast, while we were standing around the parking garage of PodcastOne, Judd started regaling me and my producer with those stories about making St. Elmo’s Fire. I interrupted him to ask why he hadn’t talked about any of this on the show where I had prodded him gently and then less gently but then stopped when it became obvious he simply wasn’t willing to go there. When we scheduled his appearance I’d assured Judd this wasn’t a shockjock podcast and we weren’t hunting for or addicted to controversy, but afterward he explained that he wasn’t in the business of telling tales out of school. There in the garage, I asked who exactly might be offended: St. Elmo’s Fire’s somewhat flamboyant director, Joel Schumacher? Or was it Jo-elle Shoo-ma-Shay, as I remembered some cast members called him when we were hanging out together in the summer of 1985? Weren’t the stories of drugs and Demi Moore already out there—was this really a problem? But Judd considered these sorts of truths negatively. There were other topics we hadn’t hit during that hour though, and he agreed to come back and record some stuff that we could edit into the episode before we posted it. I emailed him later that day inviting him back, offering him a few dates when the studio was free, but only if he was going to be more honest and transparent. Otherwise, what would be the point? I wrote this in a semi-joking, bro-tobro tone, but I haven’t heard back from Judd since, and he lives not far up the street from me. My naïveté in expecting him to seize this incredible opportunity was part of an ongoing narrative experienced with other actors I interviewed on the podcast, and this left me feeling, as usual, foolish and lost. But that was my problem, of course. What happened with Judd Nelson wasn’t necessarily a surprise. On the podcast, actors tended to present themselves very differently than filmmakers, writers and comedians did. The coy back-and-forth we often fell into could be charming, but it also made me wonder, as the host: Who was I talking to? A “real” person who happened to be an actor, or a replicant or a construct? My experience with Judd wasn’t entirely unlike the one I recorded with Molly Ringwald earlier that year, even though we’d known each other since 1991, when she started dating a friend of mine, and we stayed in touch after they broke up. She accepted my invitation to appear on the podcast, though in retrospect I’m not exactly sure what she’d expected. I wanted to make her look good, as I do with all the guests, and came up with five or six topics I knew she could riff on, explaining how she felt and where she stood. And since I knew how opinionated and tough she could be when discussing Hollywood and her career in private I wanted her to feel comfortable enough on the air to open up. But a few days after we recorded the podcast, I heard that she’d been offended by some of my topics: Did she ever think that John Hughes had a sexual thing for her? What as a teenager was the true nature of her relationship with Warren Beatty? How did she deal with Robert Downey Jr.’s drug abuse while making The Pick-Up Artist? Ultimately, she reached out and asked to talk through all this over dinner. We met at an upscale Italian restaurant in West Hollywood, where Molly relayed how she’d felt ambushed, that she wasn’t in control and was being used. She thought some of the topics I’d brought up put her in an awkward position—things she would never want to talk about publicly, even though, I reminded her, while recording that session she’d candidly admitted to being called a “cunt” on Twitter by someone who didn’t like an innocuous tweet she had posted—and that this was the moment she’d vowed to lay off Twitter. After a few glasses of wine we relaxed, and Molly said she simply disagreed with my approach and also that she was writing a memoir and couldn’t afford to divulge everything—she had to save at least a few secrets. When two fans came up to our table and asked to take her photograph on their phone, Molly politely declined in the packed and noisy restaurant, the traffic whirring behind us on busy Third Street because this was a private moment. I first noticed this reluctance among actors to be transparent with James Van Der Beek, of all people: a friend of mine, but also someone with whom I’d been working on a TV project and who also happened to have starred in The Rules of Attraction, based on my second novel. I wanted to do a podcast with James about the making of that movie and he enthusiastically agreed. He then mentioned that he was sick of the business and had decided to shuck the acting nonsense (this was before he was hired by CBS to costar in CSI: Cyber) and concentrate solely on writing and directing. He needed to air some complaints he had about where Hollywood was going, and about the failures of his own career—and he did so, to a degree, but for the most part, the angry and critical, pissed-off and disillusioned James I knew never appeared in the podcast. He was careful, respectful and, by the end, was worried whether he’d offended anyone—maybe he shouldn’t have made that innocuous aside about James Franco? When my producer and I assured him he hadn’t, James was visibly relieved. Should I have been surprised when an actor enacted a version of himself far more carefully than any civilian would? A version he’d want to play in front of an audience? No, that shouldn’t have surprised me because most of us now are way more careful about how we present ourselves than ever before. What my podcast was fighting, I realized, was the limitations of the new world order. And even if this might be the new status quo, I still wanted to know: What the fuck was everybody protecting? Later, I would come to understand, it was the corporation. One of the more labored podcasts I recorded was with Jason Schwartzman. Before we started he warned me that he was just generally a very angry person, so I should be prepared if he decided to rip loose, but this anger was nowhere to be found the first time we recorded. Instead, tired after having been up all night with a new baby, Jason struggled to engage and often asked if we could come back to a particular question after taking a break. And once we got to the second half of the podcast, it seemed that I was talking far more than my guest was. When the hour was over, Jason apologized that this wasn’t the right day for him to be recording and said he felt genuinely terrible that he’d given so many of my questions only confused and perfunctory answers. I disagreed and told him the podcast was fine (plus after my producer’s edit it would run more smoothly) but he insisted on retaping it a week later, when he promised to be better “prepared”—as if being “prepared” instead of just being himself was the point. And so we taped another session and edited the two into what we hoped was a more coherent whole. Yet Jason never came off as angry—in fact, one listener noted that he used the words “amazing” and “incredible” thirty-eight times when describing people he’d worked with over the last two decades, and that he kept everything humming with a positive and respectful vibe. Again, it was naïve of me to have expected anything else, but this new cautiousness and obsession with coming off as likable was happening everywhere. Even the porn star James Deen was more diplomatic talking about the behavior of his costar in a movie he and I had done together (Lindsay Lohan in The Canyons) than he had been in private. Like Judd Nelson, he reserved his only moment of public anger for a journalist, David Lipsky, who had attempted, James thought, to defame him. In the late 1980s, when Tom Cruise and I lived in the same building in downtown New York, I saw him only twice—both times in the elevator. These brief sightings became the basis for a scene in American Psycho in which Patrick Bateman rides up in one with Cruise in a fictional apartment building on the Upper West Side, and though it can be argued that much of the novel is a madman’s fantasy, the Tom Cruise I wrote into it was definitely based on reality. I wrote that scene in 1989, a year before Cruise was pictured romping in the Pacific on a Rolling Stone cover that I was to become overly invested in. Cruise was only twenty-seven in 1989 (I was twenty-five) but already such a generational icon that I thought including him would grant the novel a jolt of surreal authenticity. By July 1990, the summer of that Rolling Stone cover, Cruise was entering the next stage of his power. He’d already done all the stuff necessary to get there: propping up two old-timers (Paul Newman in The Color of Money, Dustin Hoffman in Rain Man) and helping them win Oscars; surviving a fiasco that was a bomb (Legend), and another that became a big hit (Cocktail), the movie that Bateman and Cruise discuss in American Psycho, though Bateman thinks it’s called Bartender; and proving he could play a showy, complicated role boldly and with no apologies (Born on the Fourth of July). The Rolling Stone cover was shot by Herb Ritts and suggests sex, of course, but the image of Cruise emerging from the foamy water also hints at rebirth, a new beginning, and that’s where I thought I was heading as well after completing American Psycho at the end of 1989. In the movie Cruise was promoting, Days of Thunder, he plays the racecar driver Cole Trickle and opens the picture in a burst of self-parody— racing a motorcycle wearing sunglasses and a swanky mullet, zooming through a sheet of fog while synthesized drumbeats herald his arrival. The movie was supposed to be a commercial for NASCAR, but what’s odd is that despite his trademark intensity, Cruise is weightless here; he has no authority or charm, yet everyone bows to him and reacts immediately to everything he says and does, which makes them all seem crazy. It’s shot with the impersonality of a Coke commercial, and the whole thing suggests the decadence of a very distant movie era. Cruise looks as pretty as a model but he can’t loosen up, staying so clenched that not even Robert Towne— the legendary screenwriter, and slumming here—can liven him up with practical jokes and a few funny lines. Days of Thunder didn’t work in the summer of 1990, and this would be one of the last times Cruise would command a film from beginning to end; it’s also the only movie of his where he receives story credit. In 1990, we were still in the moment when few could foresee what a polarizing figure Tom Cruise would become. There was something so innocent and white and distinctly American about him: the seminary student from Syracuse who’d already married and divorced an older actress was now the biggest movie star in the world, showing off his abs on the cover of Rolling Stone in a wet T-shirt. He was enigmatic yet still approachable—the grin hadn’t hardened into granite, the hyena laugh wasn’t so forced or pronounced and nobody was talking about Scientology. He seemed energetic, perpetually youthful, ambitious and unworried. He was living the collective dream of his era. There was no possibility this boy was going to become the least open and most secretive of movie stars—which would, for a time, make him the most fascinating. This guardedness (or insecurity), when it arrived, might have come from so many places. Was it the absent dad? (In a career spanning almost forty years Cruise has played a father only three times, including Eyes Wide Shut, incidentally a masterpiece.) Was it the dyslexia? Or the gay rumors he still hasn’t erased? With no answers from the man himself, we can only guess. In many respects Cruise has never really shaken off that image captured by Ritts on that beach: the moment when our culture equated boyishness with ambiguous masculinity. American Gigolo was certainly a key influence for this, too, and photographers like Ritts and Bruce Weber also created an “ideal” that has been prevalent in the media ever since: they took standard teenage (and gay) boy pinups and eroticized them further with an artsy and ironic sheen. Cruise was one of the first movie stars to embody this and to help carry it forward—probably because he possibly was the least manly major actor of his generation. Though he belongs to an entirely different one, compare the forty-three-year-old Cruise in War of the Worlds to Gene Hackman in The Conversation at the same age. Cruise never really erased the persona of the sexy-geek boy toy he played in Risky Business, and since time often freezes the occasion when an actor becomes a star, we’ll have that initial image of him in our collective head forever. Was the summer of 1990 the beginning of this realization for him, when the excitement fades and is replaced by a horrible understanding that you’re in fact a thing shaped by the mood of the public, and that celebrity is a business? He looks happy on the cover of Rolling Stone— coming off an amazing run, having recently met his future wife Nicole Kidman—but is this when he starts thinking, Yes, I’m on a beach being shot by Herb Ritts, which is going to emphasize my physical attractiveness, and the purpose of this is to sell a movie that everyone involved with must know isn’t very good? Maybe this is the reason that all Cruise can offer here is adolescent beauty. We don’t learn anything about him in the article that accompanies those pictures, and perhaps this is when the gossip and innuendo begin swirling around him. Rereading the profile many years later, I’m struck again by how little is revealed—how prefabricated it all seems, how obsessed Cruise is with maintaining his image and likability. I find myself thinking about how differently that elevator scene in American Psycho might be played today. Would Bateman, a man also obsessed with appearances, recognize a kindred soul? Or—after witnessing the couch jumping on Oprah, the hectoring on the Today show, the thing called Vanilla Sky, the Going Clear documentary and hearing about the Scientology allegations, the two divorces and “the auditions” for new wives, The Mummy—would Bateman quietly back away, hoping to go unnoticed? In 2006, I moved back to Los Angeles to work on an adaptation of The Informers, a collection of short stories I’d published in 1994. And, for the first time in nearly twenty years, I found myself in close proximity to actors simply because so many of them were involved in my work as a writer and a producer who also assisted in the casting of movies. Due to a certain desperation that many actors carry yet try hard to mask, I felt more empathy for them than I ever imagined I could, and I was sometimes empathic to a fault, occasionally to my own detriment. I often socialized with them and, on more than one occasion, hooked up. Once or twice I tried to help an actor more than I perhaps should have, because I’d been seduced and fallen for a performer whose agenda I should have seen more clearly. After arriving back in LA I’d been warned by a few industry veterans that this was part of the game in Hollywood, but it was one I’d never played before. When I was told not to get too seriously involved with an actor, I didn’t listen. I preferred to have my ego stroked, and because of a kind of perverse sexual gratification that accompanied the seduction, I got tripped up. The sex wasn’t necessarily real, but then what was? We spent a year of preproduction to build what would cost millions of dollars (The Informers budget crested out at twenty million) and require a crew of hundreds, with locations stretching from Beverly Hills to Uruguay, and it was all something manufactured—a fantasy, an illusion. The stories the movie was based on were made up, my twenty drafts of the screenplay were an endless work of fiction, amounting to a complicated mosaic, that was futilely rigorous in its attempt to encompass eight fake storylines about imaginary people (and which ultimately bore little resemblance to the seriously compromised final product). Because of the large cast, the auditions alone took almost a year, so I was, in effect, dealing with hundreds upon hundreds of actors who wanted to play the four college-aged men at the center of the movie, and who were desperately persuasive about getting themselves cast. Interesting and unexpected things happened—I found out there was a wide array of possibilities, of a kind that I’d always suspected was just another Hollywood myth. In retrospect, whatever pain I suffered was entirely my own fault, because I’d failed to play the game correctly and as a writer took everything too seriously (one of the actors nicknamed me “Dramatic Chipmunk,” referring to a meme that was making the rounds in 2006). As the writer, I was trying to keep everything real outside the moviemaking process, and I mistakenly thought the process itself was real, despite the fact that we were making a movie. I assumed the deranged optimism a movie—that fantasy— required wouldn’t spill out into the real and pragmatic worlds outside this realm. But you find out about a lot of things the hard way when you’re making a movie, any movie. Maybe the director has sold himself as being more connected to the material than he actually is because he needs the money. Maybe one of the actors with a druggy past isn’t as clean as you all thought (one of the stars of The Informers would die a month after the wrap party of a heroin overdose). Or maybe that actor you’ve become intimate with is only that: an actor longing to be a part of this fantasy, part of the family it takes to realize it, even if all the while he’s just playing a role. The mutual degradation that revealed itself to me was a kind of absurd Hollywood joke without a punch line, one that, years later, I’m thankful for. On certain days, in certain situations, the memory of that time serves as a reminder of the struggles and disappointments that come with making a movie, and this momentary distraction can make me cringe, until I get my bearings and am able to shakily regroup. Of course the actors had warned me, and I hear them clearly now, but in order for the fantasy of it all to move forward this part had to be played very well; the seduction had to seem real so I could buy into a fantasy that I thought was real, and to allow the process to complete itself. In the end, these actors never got the role, no matter how hard I tried.