# Introduction Design and Creativity

Liz Moor and Guy Julier

The global rise of design in the past two decades is indisputable. Statistics flow out of national governments, regional administrations, professional institutions and academic centres that testify to its exponential growth in terms of the numbers employed in the design industry, its turnover, its contribution to Gross Domestic Product and its export value. It has become a new object of measurement, placed alongside more traditional indicators of productive wellbeing such as agricultural output, manufacture and retail.

The enthusiasm with which policy-makers in many countries have embraced and championed this sector – and, by extension, the creative industries as a whole – evidences a more general shift towards the privileging of an entrepreneurial knowledge economy in the developed world. As much of the manufacturing base for making the quotidian objects that permeate our homes, offices, shops and landfills has moved to South-East Asia and Central and South America, so more ‘developed’ countries turn their attention to the more intangible business of innovation and creativity. Design becomes a leading-edge activity in this move. The characterization of late-modern economies as ‘design-intensive’ (Lash and Urry 1994) has provoked new interests in the ways in which the aesthetic elaboration of social and cultural themes has become central to economic productivity.

This book is concerned with the processes of design and how creativity is managed within this new economic, political, social and cultural landscape. While ‘creativity’ remains the intrinsic currency of the design industry, we do not read it in its traditional sense as an essentialistic preserve of individuals. Rather, we take the view that it is contingent within various managed structures, networks of power, economic processes and policy priorities, and we deal with this issue in two ways. First, the influences of systematization are examined within specific design fields by reviewing the everyday practices of its actors, and the extent to which their work is shaped by imperatives of accountability, transparency and systematization. Second, such influences are traced to the broader external contexts of political economy, urban policy, global

markets, and new trends in social and environmental agency. In this way, the book elaborates some of the concrete ways in which the ‘values’ of design and other creative practices have become imbricated with a range of social and political projects, whilst also addressing wider questions about the causes and effects of such shifts. How, for example, are traditional notions of ‘creativity’ reworked in the context of new public and commercial imperatives? What are the broader implications of the centrality of creative industries in delivering a range of both civic and commercial goals? How do demands for accountability refocus the priorities of creative practice? Before we explore these issues in more detail, let us first outline the new context for and practice of design in the twenty-first century.

## Design in the Twenty-first Century

Globally, the design profession has seen exponential growth over the past two decades. A number of examples bear this out. The European design market grew at around 25 per cent between 1982 and 1989. By 1994, the Netherlands Design Institute was predicting a growth of the European design market from US\$9.5 billion to US\$14 billion by 2000 (NDI 1994: 9–10). Country by country data appears to lend weight to this prediction. The independent design profession in France is relatively new, with 53 per cent of organizations operating for fewer than ten years. Sweden has seen a rise of 272 per cent in the number of firms between 1993 and 2002 (Bruce and Daly 2006). However, in the twenty-first century, the design profession is set to grow, beyond the preserve of economically advanced countries. China, for example, saw a 23 per cent increase in enrolment on art and design degree courses between 2003 and 2004. A further 1,200 design schools are planned to add to the 400 that have opened in China in the last two decades (Rigby 2007).

The geographic reach of design practices has also extended. Globalization has led to a dispersion of the processes of conception and execution of design artefacts. In 2006, for instance, merchandise trade grew by 21 per cent (WTO 2007). The creative development of objects, images or spaces may be distributed across continents and time zones and they may be assembled from components made in various countries or mediated through multiple communication networks. The location of global design centres for Ford, Sony and Nokia in London since 2000 evidences a presumption that design studios may be physically distanced from both their productive infrastructure and their consumer bases.

At the same time, a variety of ‘space-shrinking technologies’ (Dicken 2003) speed up and intensify these processes. This is not just in terms of the physical dispersion of design outlined above; it also impacts on the design process itself. For example, until the advent of Computer-aided Design in the last two decades, the typographic designer would mark up a proof for a printer to set up, or a product designer would be reliant on the specialist technical support and working hours of a workshop to make up prototypes. Digitization means that such intermediaries in the process are dropped. Information technologies facilitate a different quality of proximity and the acceleration of interaction between designers, producers and consumers. Designers interchange their proposals with clients more frequently, creating thicker, less linear and less onedirectional communications in the development process. A feedback loop between these interests is ever more instantaneous as consumer information and attitudes are more readily and accurately collated.

Historically, design has emerged from production. It has been a craft-based activity, born out of the specific requirements of manufacturers. The designer’s role was largely to give specific form to the new goods and services of a corporation. The emergence of the consultant designer alongside the more complex aesthetic demands of advanced capitalism reverses this relationship. Designers insert themselves into productive activities at various stages. They bring expertise to arenas of commercial competition or governmental policy. Their role and creative outputs therefore become increasingly diverse as new specialist areas for its application are developed. In 2006, British Design Innovation (BDI) – a UK design industry monitoring company – identified twenty-five design sub-disciplines. In addition to activities such as ‘branding and graphics’ or ‘multimedia/ new media’, they also specified such approaches as ‘design and innovation management’, ‘social responsibility’, ‘high-end consumerism’, ‘internal communications’ and ‘product testing’ (BDI 2006). While the majority of work undertaken by design firms remained in the more traditional disciplines that are medium-based, their survey was designed also to recognize new skill-sets that were emerging in design, particularly in service and proposition creation. The latter, then, is a reflection of a trend in the design practice to move beyond what is usually termed the ‘visual translation of client strategy’. BDI classified this typology – which occupies roughly 70 per cent of UK design activity – as the work of the ‘design agency’. But it also identified two other typologies. Occupying about 20 per cent of national design activity was the ‘design studio’: that is, production-led, mostly graphics-related practice that sees projects through to execution. But an expanding third sector, making up about 10 per cent of activity, was that of the ‘strategic design consultancy’. Here the emphasis is much more on how design can be used, for example within corporate planning or in policy development to gain competitive advantage or deliver public services more effectively. These days, therefore, the physical output of the design firm may shift from design specifications, for example by way of corporate identity guidelines or technical drawings, to the production of the actual artefacts themselves through to strategic reports and audits, or the orchestration of entire systems that integrate products and services.

The design disciplines covered in this book are not all-encompassing and do not necessarily reflect the respective sizes of the typologies given above. Similarly, it would be impossible in this volume to represent the twenty-five sub-specialisms of design practice that the BDI identifies. Our interest is in those design specialisms – some of which are still emergent – that are of particular significance within this discourse of audit and the systematization of creativity. As design has grown in value and recognition, so it has been encountered in new interfaces in commercial and public sector practices. For example, one of our interviewees in Part III of this book talks of how, as a product designer and strategist, he has had to work with and through many more departments of a corporate client, such is the growing importance accorded and interest shown in design by them. It is in such interfaces with other disciplines and discourses that design gains influence and power (Lupton and Miller 1999). At the same time, within such contexts the work of design has to be more delicately and intelligently negotiated through client interests and priorities, with their attendant codes of conduct, professional norms or modus operandi. It is these emergent challenges, where design shifts to a complex process, which interest us in this book.

In both commercial and public sectors, designers mediate between a range of departments, agencies, institutions and other interests. Thus we might not talk so much about ‘design management’ or ‘design leadership’ as the ‘management of design’. Design management is generally tied to the optimization of design performance within organizations. Design leadership refers more often to the innovation of new strategies of design performance or application. Our interest, by contrast, is in the everyday structuring and coordination of design processes, both internally within the design consultancy and in its alignment with external factors, from client relationships to wider legislative and policy issues of governments. Methodologically speaking, academic concerns in design management and design leadership invariably move from the analysis of scenarios to the modelling of ‘best practice’ approaches. Our own approach is slightly different. By focusing on case studies that explore the practical ways in which design is managed, and the wider ambitions of commercial or public sector interests in which it is contextualized, we seek a deeper understanding of the processual complexities of design and a more critical perspective on the wider forces shaping its development.

## The New Economy and New Public Management

The developments covered in this book – which include the intensification and speeding up of design processes – resonate with a set of wider assumptions regarding the New Economy. At the heart of New Economy practices is the idea of ‘faster, better, cheaper’. Within this discourse, creativity and innovation play central roles. In support of this notion, books such as Howkins’s The Creative Economy: How People Make Money From Ideas (2001) or Ray’s The Cultural Creatives (2001) set out a business agenda in which creativity and creative people are the frontiersmen of this new economic landscape.

Parallel to such developments in the private sector have been widespread systemic changes in the last twenty years in the way that public sector interests are organized and delivered. The so-called New Public Management has ushered in an emphasis on entrepreneurial approaches to the delivery of public services within an attendant reorientation of their management towards private sector styles, a growth in subcontracting to external commercial agencies and of performance measurement. This new context has resulted in a considerable growth of opportunities for designers. The increase in the outsourcing of public service delivery to private contractors has resulted in a more complex and intense network of parties involved. And as the demand for more efficient and innovative approaches in the public sector has grown, so designers have been used with increasing frequency to aid this process.

The speeding up and intensifications of actions, both in the New Economy and the New Public Management, has meant that creativity and innovation (and, indeed, creative practitioners and innovators such as designers) take on symbolic roles in addition to their functional purposes. Such assumptions about the nature and purpose of creative work have infiltrated the self-image and practices of designers. In her study of London-based fashion designers, for example, Angela McRobbie (1998; 2002) shows how their working patterns were typified by the requirement to network, to be visible and available virtually on a twenty-four-hour basis – patterns of labour that resonate with the emergent entrepreneurialism of the New Economy. Meanwhile business studies academics Scase and Davis (2000: 23) take this notion further to claim that the creative economy is at the ‘leading edge of the movement towards the information age [as] their outputs are performances, expressive work, ideas and symbols rather than consumer goods or services’. Arch supporter of New Economy thinking, the American magazine Fast Company, supported the claim that business leaders should not only understand design but work creatively as if they were designers (Breen 2005). This championing of the creative industries and of ‘creative’ methods of thinking and working has effects in quite disparate sectors, both public and private.

In order to fulfil a functional role in the New Economy, the rhetorics of creativity and innovation, however, are de facto contingent upon their management. Hence, for example, writing in the Harvard Business Review, Anthony et al. (2006) suggest that, like American football plays, innovation and creativity can be pre-planned, strategized and mapped in order to field and respond to rapidly changing business challenges and scenarios. Similarly, our interest is less on the popular representation of the work of designers as a serially isolated ‘one-off’ creative acts. Our focus falls more on iterative creative work where designers habitually process projects. As such, creativity in design may be understood to involve the adoption and iterative development of repertoires of action – or what we later term ‘scripted improvisations’ – that are deployed in response to varying briefs and client demands. In the speeded-up context of the New Economy, this system becomes a kind of ‘fast routine’ whereby creative processes and solutions can be rolled in a business environment where, as we will shortly see, returns on creative labour time have diminished.

‘Creativity’ may indeed be the a priori currency of designers. However, the coordination of design labour – the management of design – is a necessary action to ensure its successful outcome. In this context, tracking, communicating and evaluating its inputs and outputs becomes more sophisticated and, for the sake of its management and internal and external articulation, more subject to codification. At the same time, the intangible work of designers increases as the ‘knowledge’ element of their activities grows. Consequently, making explicit exactly what they do involves greater articulation. Repertoires of action may not necessarily be a way of organizing the everyday functioning of a design studio. They may also be translated into schema for helping clients understand the process and value of what they get from different design consultancies.

Within the neo-liberal form of advanced capitalism, design plays a key role in product and service differentiation, and in giving competitive advantage to its clients. This is as evident in its role in helping an urban centre achieve its aims in regeneration as in helping a corporation achieve greater market share. Equally, beyond any aesthetic outcome, designers seek to achieve differentiation in the way they present themselves, in their design processes and in what they bring to their clients. This is partly the result of the design profession’s highly varied landscape. Unlike architecture, for example, design is not a profession that is beholden to normative standards. To practise as an architect in Europe, stringent guidelines have been laid down regarding adherence to professional qualifications (Directive 2005/36/EC). By contrast, there are no set qualifications for being a designer. The heterogeneous and nonconformist nature of the design industry may, perhaps, be read as emblematic of many of the diverse and unregulated characteristics of advanced capitalism. Yet this in turn leads to variation in the techniques by which designers represent themselves to clients and other audiences. It also results in a lack of standardization in the ways by which design processes are organized and accounted for. What follows from this is that the respective processes of design firms then invariably become part of the currency by which they differentiate themselves from one another and market themselves, as opposed to the formal outcome of their labour.

There is a compelling dialogue here. On the one hand, the design profession is committed to differentiation and non-normative action. The lack of professional norms and the rhetorics of ‘being creative’ conspire to continually variegate and fragment the working processes and self-presentation of designers. Partly due to its rapid evolution, design is structurally quite fragmented and heterogeneous. On the other hand, design is subject to increasing levels of audit, measurement, accountability, codification and systematization, both for the purposes of commercial strategy (as individual firms try to distinguish themselves from their competitors) and as the result of external demands (as both private and especially public sector clients expect greater transparency and evidence of how value is created). How creativity is valorized, managed and practised in these circumstances becomes a matter of renewed scrutiny and attention.

## Creative Practice

One of our major concerns in what follows is with the ways in which the greater emphasis within government policy and business on ‘creativity’, the creative industries and the management of innovation has impacted upon the internal organization of design studios and design work. By this, we do not simply mean the ways in which relationships between designers and clients are managed (although these are important too, and are dealt with in a number of chapters here), but also the more ‘micro’ relations that obtain within specific sites of design production. These might include the layout of work spaces, the technologies employed to assist and monitor production, and the ways in which working processes have been systematized and encoded in company documents or proprietary techniques and models.

In thinking about the management of design in this way, we have been influenced by work in the areas of science and technology studies and economic sociology which draws attention to the new presence and relevance of nonhuman objects to social life (Knorr Cetina and Bruegger 2002). Work in this field has paid particular attention to the ways in which objects, such as documents, scientific instruments, computer technologies or consumer objects, may be said to have agency (e.g. Muniesa et al. 2007) and may intervene in the construction of particular sites of practice or expertise; whether by ‘helping’ or ‘forcing’, the argument here is that ‘devices do things … they articulate actions; they act or make others act’ (2007: 2). In this formulation, agency is seen as split or distributed; rather than residing ‘in’ people or things, it is seen as an outcome of their mutual entanglement, and of the ‘compound agencements’ (ibid.) they make within particular contexts.

Although some of the most important work in this area thus far has been focused on scientific research or relatively ‘expert’ terrains of economic action such as foreign exchange markets (see Knorr Cetina and Bruegger 2002), we believe that such approaches are also appropriate to the analysis of design practice and research, and perhaps especially in its more systematized and ‘managed’ forms. This is in part because design seems to share with many other areas of work that have been approached in this way a significant dependence on complex objects and systems. Similarly, its own ‘object’ (whether a brand, a magazine, a piece of public art or a service system) is likely to exist simultaneously in a variety of forms (e.g. drafts, sketches, prototypes, updates) (Julier 2006) and thus exhibit the distributed, partial or unfinished quality (Knorr Cetina 2001) of other ‘objects of knowledge’. At the same time, while design is not subject to normative professional entry requirements or codes of conduct, it shares with other areas of ‘expert’ work the fact that its practitioners typically need to be familiar not only with particular design instruments and technologies, but also with processes, orientations, forms of ‘envisioning’ and ways of accounting for their work that they share with a community of other practitioners, but from which client organizations may be relatively excluded (see Soar 2002). Objects and technologies are, we would argue, central to the ways in which this expertise is assembled and deployed.

Another useful contribution of this literature, from our point of view, is its insight into the forms of practice that may exist within certain types of objectcentred ‘expert’ work. Knorr Cetina (2001), for example, notes that existing conceptions of practice (as found in Bourdieu, for example) tend to emphasize its habitual and rule-governed features (2001: 175) and the acquisition of schemes of perception that are then deployed in specific situations. Yet she goes on to note that such a conception may be inadequate in the context of occupations and organizations with a significant knowledge component. Here, she suggests, practice is less likely to be habitual and routine, and more likely to be ‘looped through objects’ in ways that promote ‘moments of interruption and reflection’ in the creative process. To follow this argument is to work with a conception of creative practice that is neither about the simple implementation of established routines and processes, nor about a series of pure ‘innovations’ that punctuate an otherwise stable tradition (Ingold and Hallam 2007). Rather, it is to see creative work as emerging from an ongoing engagement with a material environment that provides both specific problems to be addressed (the ‘object’ of any given design project) and a material infrastructure through which that process may take place (the various devices that make up the designer’s working environment).

While it is beyond the scope of this book to consider the extent to which this in turn may promote new ways of relating to objects and new forms of sociality (but see Knorr Cetina 1997), we would argue that the tension between routine, habitual ways of working and the ‘creative and constructive practice … that obtains when we confront non-routine problems’ (Knorr Cetina 2001: 175) is a useful way to think about the organization of contemporary creative work, and the role of objects and technologies within this. On the one hand, many of the technologies now used by designers may hasten, ‘routinize’ or even automate aspects of practice, significantly reducing opportunities for reflection and critical or creative engagement. This may have tangible consequences for creative industries, not least in terms of the way in which their work is valued by clients. Yet at the same time, such technologies and devices may also ‘open up’ creative work, providing new volumes of information with which designers must engage creatively, while also making the various iterations of creative work more widely available both within and beyond the organization. The ease and speed with which various iterations of a design project can be shared with clients, for example, can simultaneously create new opportunities for critical and creative practice, while also distributing such opportunities more widely, with interesting implications for notions of creative authorship and autonomy, and for the processes of value attribution (see e.g. Adkins 2005; Lury 1993). Such developments, we suggest, are closely linked to a situation of dropping margins for design agencies and studios, and greater pressures – both internal and external – for rapid turnover of projects. According to the British Design Valuation Survey (British Design Innovation 2006), fee income in the design industry has dropped markedly since 2001, while the actual numbers of designers and design firms practising has not changed significantly. Its conclusions are that savings made by designers through, for example, increased technological efficiency or quicker turnaround of projects are being passed on to clients. Designers, in other words, are being more productive for the same money. Designers retain or chase clients by keeping their prices keen or by throwing in added extras. Design consultancies are ever trying to trim their sails to provide more efficient workflows, so their marketing budgets and strategies are increasingly important in the bid to maintain recognition.

Finally, we would follow Knorr Cetina in noting that more object-centred forms of work are not without their elements of power and domination (1997: 11). Indeed, if we turn to the management of creative work within the studio or agency context, one cannot fail to note the ubiquity of technological systems and types of management software (for example Harvest and Oracle Workflow) for monitoring designers’ work and accounting for ever-smaller components of their time. These may be thought about in terms of surveillance or control, subjecting workers to new levels of scrutiny and accountability, while also providing new means for connecting workers’ efforts to the profitability of the organization. Such systems are also important contributors to the process by which clients and agencies develop new ways of attributing value to different parts of (and actors in) the design process. While there is variation in the extent to which agencies exploit the potential of such systems, they have nonetheless become an accepted part of the creative workplace and one of the major means by which creative work is organized and measured.

## Design and Audit

In thinking about the origins and impact of new forms of management on the organization of design work, it is useful also to consider the body of writing that has emerged around the idea of ‘audit culture’. This term, most strongly associated with the work of Michael Power, refers broadly to the ‘institutionalization of checking mechanisms’ and more specifically to the ‘control of control’, whereby new, higher-level organizations are set up in order to check on already existing lower-level checking processes (Power 1997: xvi). Debates about audit culture are closely linked to debates about New Public Management in so far as one of the key features of an audit culture is deemed to be the extension to the public sector of the more rigorous audit regimes typically associated with the private sector. Yet the wider context is of greater levels of auditing, and associated techniques for checking and accountability, across all sectors of economic activity, itself grounded in ‘transformations in the conceptions of administration and organization which straddle, or … dismantle the public–private divide’ (Power 1997: 10).

Although few of the design agencies or specialisms discussed in this book are subject to the more extreme levels of external inspection described by Power, there are a number of ways in which the themes of audit are relevant to design work. Firstly, Power himself makes it clear that ‘audit is an idea as much as it is a concrete technical practice’ (1997: 4), and that the term is not only used descriptively to refer to particular practices, but also ‘normatively in the context of demands and aspirations for accountability and control’ (1997: 6, emphasis in original). In this respect, any organization that demands high levels of accountability from its workers, or experiences such demands from external agencies, is brought within the orbit of audit culture and its normative claims and demands. Assessing how this new normative environment impacts upon different parts of the design industry is one of the major projects of the book. In fact, almost all of the contexts explored here are characterized by some type of demand for accountability and checking by or on behalf of clients, and in many cases (particularly those involving the public sector) such demands have increased notably in recent years. At the same time, Power suggests that the normative extension of audit means that one may also speak of an ‘audit implosion’, whereby organizations themselves have become more reflexive, and where company directors, for example, have taken on new responsibilities for internal control systems and risk management (1997: xviii). As Marilyn Strathern (2000) notes, there are many situations in which audit is less about external inspection and checking, and more to do with ensuring that internal controls and monitoring techniques are in place – and that workers within organizations are adapted to audit and are able to monitor themselves. A related development in the creative industries is the fact that many organizations have voluntarily developed new systems for making their work more transparent to clients, and for facilitating the kinds of checking and accountability processes typically associated with the external auditor’s role.

How, then, might we think about the ways in which ‘audit culture’ impacts upon the organization of the design industry? One of the strongest claims made about the negative effects of audit is that it transforms the more substantive practices of organizations to fit the needs of audit itself. This may mean prioritizing those aspects of a practice that can be effectively measured over those which cannot. This is argued to have dysfunctional or unintended consequences, as for example when academic research priorities are reordered to take account of new external auditing demands (Power 1997: 100). This ‘colonization’ of practice by the mechanisms devised to check it may also be seen, according to several authors, in the way in which it creates, over time, ‘new mentalities, new incentives and perceptions of significance’ (Power 1997: 97), and new interpretive schemes for the conduct of everyday work. Indeed, even when audit is viewed as a kind of ‘add-on’, adopted only for the purposes of external legitimization, and effectively ‘decoupled’ from core activities (e.g. Meyer and Rowan, cited in Power 1997: 96), it may still produce new but enduring types of organizational behaviour. Thus practitioners in certain organizations may engage in new types of ‘performance’ designed to make some (auditable) activities visible while others remain hidden (Strathern 2000: 8) or may adopt aspects of audit as part of a technology of the self directed towards specific types of professional publicity (e.g. Pels 2000).

In terms of the design industry, we would argue that the latter perspective makes most sense; few design agencies and studios are subject to such a degree of external monitoring that core activities are fundamentally altered, but there is nonetheless a widespread acceptance of the demand for new levels of accountability and transparency at the level of both the organization and the individual. Creative workers, for example, generally comply with the demand that their working day is monitored in ever smaller increments and that their work-inprogress is made publicly available for scrutiny (as in AnneMarie Dorland’s chapter), while studios and agencies frequently adopt new forms of institutional presentation and promotion designed to showcase particular types of professional accountability to clients (as in Paul Springer’s account of a London advertising agency). Indeed, as Dorland suggests in her chapter on graphic design studios in Canada, the institutionalization of such processes and checking mechanisms can directly influence the ways in which designers think about and organize their practice and ‘perform’ that work for different audiences.

Despite these developments, it is also helpful to retain an awareness of the fact that audit is not a one-way process, and that general shifts towards greater levels of systematization and accountability may also produce new areas for debate, reflection and ethical engagement. Georgina Born (2002), for example, has shown in her study of the BBC in the 1990s that alongside an ongoing debate between the government and the BBC about the introduction of new mechanisms for external accountability, there existed a parallel set of voluntary, informal reflexivities among workers driven by ideas about professional ethos and by ethical, aesthetic and political concerns (2002: 81). In this sense, she notes, the institutional space of the BBC was in fact characterized by great complexity, with new techniques of rationalization and accountability able to co-exist with diverse forms of resistance that supported an ‘evolving Reithianism’ and new discourses about genre, aesthetics and the conditions for creativity (2002: 68).

In a similar vein, Peter Pels (2000) has argued that the rise of audit may give a new urgency to debates about whom a particular activity is for. Writing in the context of academic auditing and its impact upon the discipline of anthropology, he suggests that the various codes of conduct for research drawn up since the 1960s have reflected a shifting sense of whether the ‘client of their expertise’ was the group of people studied, the research sponsors or government, or academic colleagues. The constitution of the ‘professional self’ has therefore demanded different techniques and orientations over time. There are similar dilemmas in design, where work is usually done ‘for’ a client, whose interests and demands are not, however, always symmetrical with those of the ‘end user’, citizen or consumer who may purchase, or be subject to, particular products and services. This situation may be further complicated by recent shifts in the organization of creative work. In fields characterized by general insecurity, short-term contracts or persistent freelancing, and in which individuals seek a ‘big hit’ that will enable them to move into a more secure environment (see McRobbie 2007), an employee’s material interests may be even further at odds with those of their employer, as well as those of clients and end users. This is surely an important backdrop to the rise of audit cultures, to the extent that these tend to be characterized by institutional lack of trust, anxiety about the ‘moral hazards’ of individuals acting against institutional interests (Power 1997: 5), and the development of a set of strategies by those ‘interested parties’ (such as the state) who imagine that they ‘need … protection from the individual who acts with his or her own ends in mind’ (Strathern 2000: 293).

We are not, then, suggesting that design has been ‘colonized’ by audit culture or by related mechanisms for managing or measuring creative work. Rather, we want to emphasize a more general sense in which the normative dimensions of audit – its broader ‘demands and aspirations for accountability and control’ (Power 1997: 6) – resonate in the uneven but clearly discernible trend towards greater systematization, routinization, accountability and measurement procedures in creative work. This trend is not ‘caused’ by audit; it is, as we have suggested, linked more directly to a series of developments – material and social – emerging from the greater economic role for design in advanced capitalist societies. Our point instead has been that debates about the consequences of audit culture have raised important issues about what happens to ‘creative’ institutions and practices when these are subject to a greater degree of measurement and surveillance. These questions have guided our own thinking and analysis, and shaped the contributions presented here.

## Creativity and Scripted Improvisation

Similarly, although creative design work is the focus of this book, is not our intention in what follows to offer a detailed analysis of the concept of ‘creativity’ itself, nor to propose new accounts and formulations. Indeed, in tracking contemporary formations of the design industry, our interest has been less with the nature of creativity than with the ways in which work deemed to be ‘creative’ has been organized and reorganized within economic systems that see it as a driver of economic growth or as a capacity to be nurtured in order for citizens to compete in the global economy.

Nonetheless, in reading what follows it is useful to have a sense of the ideas and philosophies that underpin particular conceptions of creativity, how these have emerged, and how they have been linked to ways of measuring, managing and valuing creative work. Historically, creativity has been associated with novelty, and in particular with novel ‘fusion[s] of disparate cultural configurations’ (Liep, cited in Ingold and Hallam 2007: 16). As such, work that follows a template continues a tradition, or operates within a relatively prescribed set of rules or procedures, has tended not to be seen as involving either novelty or creativity. This distinction between novelty and formula, routine and tradition can be seen in part in the various informal status hierarchies that persist between different creative industries and roles, while the way in which ‘creativity’ functions not as an absolute descriptor but as a relative term with significant discursive power can be seen in the fact that all manner of quite mundane, and in some cases exploitative, forms of labour may be deemed ‘creative’ to suit both personal and institutional ends (McRobbie 1998, 2007; Nugent 2005).

It is also part of the political and economic history of creativity that it has frequently been seen as a unique capacity that human beings either do or do not ‘have’. Sometimes this capacity is seen as something that individuals may acquire (for example through education and training); sometimes – perhaps more often – it is seen as an innate ‘gift’ or talent that can only be nurtured. In any case, accounts that see creativity as distributed, or that locate creativity in complex social relationships and formations have, in recent history at least, been rather rare. This has begun to change slightly as national and local governments have come to see creative work as more central to economic prosperity. Hence the emergence of accounts of creativity that see it as residing in particular types of urban formation (‘creative cities’) or relationships between individuals and groups (‘creative networks’). Even here, however, there is still an implicit sense that creativity itself is a property of individuals, and that the role of the interested party – whether government or business – is to put in place an infrastructure or set of conditions that will allow them to access, ‘unlock’ or cultivate individual capacity in order that it may realize itself in the form of a creative outcome or product.

The economic underpinnings of current accounts of creativity can also be seen in the fact that while the ‘purest’ forms of creativity are, very often, those that appear to be relatively economically disinterested, the idea of creativity as an individual possession or capacity is in fact strongly linked to an economic history in which a high value was assigned to innovation and its role in the production of new commodities (Ingold and Hallam 2007). This was as true for the invention of mechanical devices during the period of industrialization as it is now. Indeed, as Ingold and Hallam (2007) suggest, definitions of creativity and innovation have tended to be made by reading ‘backwards’ from particular products or outcomes to their purported ‘originators’, rather than ‘forwards’ in terms of particular practices or behaviours. This is, of course, also closely linked to the emergence of typically modern (and typically Western) ideas of possession, property rights and authorship (e.g. Leach 2007).

Alternative conceptions of creativity may, therefore, take as their starting point the idea that creativity is less a matter of outcomes than of processes. This is the approach taken by Tim Ingold and Elizabeth Hallam (2007), who suggest that creativity is a forward-moving process of improvisation, best understood in terms of generative, relational and productive movements that are relatively unscripted, and which may involve a good deal of tradition (or ‘keeping things going’) as well as novelty and rupture. At the heart of their idea of creativity-as-improvisation is the notion that improvisation is a kind of cultural ‘bottom line’, animating both the ‘studied reflections’ of art and literature and the conduct of our ordinary activities. Improvisation is generative because even when it is involved in imitating or reproducing an existing model it involves ‘a complex and ongoing alignment of observation of the model with action in the world’ (2007: 5), in which creative alterations may be made. It is relational because it involves ways of life that are ‘entangled and mutually responsive’, and because it exists not in the form of an individual agency but in ‘the dynamic potential of an entire field of relationships to bring forth the persons situated in it’ (2007: 7).

While this account of creativity – as a form of practice that is ordinary, improvisational, relational and generative – is persuasive, what follows from it, as Hallam and Ingold suggest, is that it is most productively analysed in terms of ‘the social relations and cultural formations that guide it and in terms of which it has effects’ (2007: 20). That is to say, while it may be useful in broad terms to think of creativity (and design) as improvisatory, to understand how this improvisation takes shape in practice one must pay attention to specific instances and see how such improvisatory skills are shaped and guided by particular social and material forces. For as Hallam and Ingold note, ‘There is no script for social life … [but] there are most certainly scripts within it’ (2007: 12, emphasis in original). While creativity is ‘emergent in ongoing social action’, it is also ‘marked and framed’ and ‘configured, narrated and reflected upon in discourse’ (2007: 20). It is these concrete instances of the organization, narration and framing of a general process of creativity within more specific contemporary design contexts – what we would call its ‘scripted improvisation’ – that are the focus of what follows.

## Structure of the Book

Part I of this book focuses on the relationship between public policy and design. In particular, it highlights the way that design has been instrumentalized to fulfil a number of roles in the context of the New Public Management. Thus its role in reconfiguring the users of public services as ‘consumers’, its contribution to urban social and economic regeneration targets, and its symbolic value in stimulating creative industries all come into view here. Part II focuses on the management of design and creativity within predominantly commercial contexts. These include not only the emergence of new techniques in design management, but also critical questions about the nature and role of creativity itself. Part III comprises a series of interviews with practitioners, and a concluding chapter summarizing the insights and arguments of the book as a whole.

In the first chapter, Liz Moor examines the ways in which the growing interest in design among governments and policy organizations is linked to changing philosophies of government and new approaches to public service delivery. She shows that a widespread political interest in ‘empowering’ and educating citizens, and in reshaping their relationships with the state, has tangible outcomes for the design industry in the form of an expansion of certain types of design work and new volumes of public sector clients for particular organizations. At the same time, she also assesses the practical and normative implications of transposing design techniques that have been successful in commercial contexts for the delivery of public services and public goods.

Similarly, Guy Julier follows with a chapter that reviews the role of design in the context of urban regeneration. By focusing on public policy shifts in the past ten years, he shows how urban design has been employed both in the physical and symbolic renovation of cities. Given the complex sets of interests involved in the negotiation, development and implementation of urban design schemes, the emergence of design guidelines and statements and the subsequent the ‘codification’ of design, Julier’s focus here is on the newly important processes of mediation between urban designers and non-design specialists.

Katie Hill and Guy Julier’s co-authored chapter looks at the way that creativity and innovation is handled in the context of New Public Management. It uses a case study of how central government directives on the creative development children’s play policies comes into conflict with the complexities and contradictions within local government bureaucracies. Due largely to a lack of capacity to carry out ambitious national programmes, local authorities may employ creative consultancies – which include the skills and techniques of trained designers – to help develop strategies and their implementation.

In the following chapter, Doug Sandle critically examines the processes of evaluation that have come into play with respect to public art in design-led urban regeneration. He shows how art in the public realm has been expected to move beyond its mere aesthetic elevation and to contribute to social and economic objectives in the transformation of towns and cities. The way its impact is measured, Sandle argues, becomes an increasingly complex and contested issue.

This section on design and policy is concluded with a chapter by Jane Pavitt. This takes the exhibition and other initiatives of London’s Victoria & Albert Museum as a case study to show how public museums and galleries policies have become oriented towards supporting government notions of ‘creative industries’. Thus the museum becomes not just an exponent, collector or creator of the outcomes of creativity, but also the patron and client of leading-edge design. In so doing, she shows how the museum is recruited to help to broadcast certain values of creativity to the wider public, while its presence and impact within the creative industries is at the same time carefully monitored and evaluated.

The second part of the book deals with the management of design in specific contexts. It begins with AnneMarie Dorland’s study of graphic design studios in Canada. She shows that while stereotypical notions of the playful, unstructured ‘creative workplace’ continue to have considerable purchase, and indeed are widely exploited for promotional purposes, this contrasts with what are in fact highly regulated and systematized forms of working practice. Basing her analysis on interviews with both studio and freelance designers, she shows that designers typically respond to the ubiquity of formal review processes and tracking systems by orienting their work towards different audiences at different stages, whilst also employing various shortcuts and ‘routines of production’ to hasten workflow within organizations characterized by tight deadlines and careful monitoring of individual productivity and efficiency.

Paul Springer’s chapter focuses on the ways in which tracking and review processes have developed within advertising and communications design agencies in London. He shows that growing client demands for transparency and accountability have led many agencies to develop their own tracking procedures and measurement techniques, both for the purposes of promotion and to ensure client ‘buy-in’ at an early stage in the process. He goes on to show how greater client involvement in the creative process, combined with new possibilities to incorporate information from the digital profiling of consumers, has had the effect of shifting both the scope and nature of ‘creative’ work, creating new opportunities in some areas while dramatically reducing them in others.

Nitzan Waisberg discusses the role of researchers within innovation, design and market research consultancies based in the United States. Her chapter examines how these specialists contribute to ‘design thinking’ in their engagement in a systematic path to innovative breakthrough solutions for their clients. She identifies three roles for the design researcher in this process. The first is in developing and managing a routinized and structured approach to user research that is of use to designers. Second, then, their work involves finding ways of communicating back and forth between research data or endusers and design action. Finally, there is a performative element to their work, in which the work of researchers plays a symbolic role in so far as it communicates a certain status of the design and innovation consultancy as the undertaker of systematic, informed, risk-reduced innovation.

Lucy Kimbell’s chapter focuses on the relatively new area of service design. In contrast to other chapters in this section, she is concerned less with the internal processes of service design organizations, and more with the broader factors influencing the consolidation and formalization of this area of practice into a distinct discipline. In this regard she identifies three factors as of particular importance: first, the growing attention paid to design and design management in organizational theory; second, the continuation or otherwise of the trend towards greater employment of service designers in the development of public services; and third, the implications of service designers’ involvement in ‘capacity building’ for other organizations. In this way, Kimbell’s chapter resonates with perspectives developed in the first part of the book, which suggest that the growing interest in the values and processes of design work from government and the public sector are a critical force in the development both of particular specialisms and the degree of formalization in their practice.

By treating cinema as a design object and process, Damian Sutton’s chapter reveals the way that mainstream Hollywood movies are tightly orchestrated around many more aesthetic markers than merely narrative and cinematography. His discussion leads us through the complex world of networked firms, revealing that creative ownership of film studios in the post-Fordist era of film production resides in their access to, and the coordination of, these. In turn, he argues that movies are carefully fashioned to stimulate the ‘add-on’ franchising market for related merchandise. Design plays a crucial role in fixing the intellectual property that lies at the heart of this system.

The final chapter of this section, by Sarah Owens, deals with the area of editorial design, and takes as its focus the question of where creativity is located, and how it is to be understood, within contexts characterized by clearly prescribed rules and templates and tight deadlines for production. While her chapter illuminates one of the general themes of the book – namely the practical organization and management of design in situations where it is critical to economic success and organizational reputation – its further contribution is to remind us (as in Hallam and Ingold’s work) that creativity often resides less in ‘big’ projects and interventions, and more in the smaller day-to-day ways in which people work within structures and constraints towards the continuation of a project and its evolution over time.

The final part of the book is a collection of short interviews with designers and others currently employed in design firms. As with the other chapters, these do not represent a clear cross-section of the design industry as a whole, but they do reflect organizational and disciplinary specialisms that we believe are of particular interest within a context of greater systematization, formalization and codification of working practices, and greater attention to predicted outcomes or values. We have included these more mundane perspectives in an explicit attempt to complement – or counterpoint – the perspectives offered in the main chapters of the book. Our aim is to offer readers the opportunity to make connections between, on the one hand, the broad trends and issues outlined in the more systematic reflections of specific chapters and, on the other, the kinds of preoccupations and reflections that emerge in a more direct and unmediated way from those involved in design work. Interviewees were chosen who broadly represent the design sectors covered in the main chapters of the book. Three of these provide experience from Finland, California and New Zealand, and it is interesting to note that their responses in many areas are similar to those found in the UK, thereby underlining, perhaps, the globalizing of design action and thinking.

Ultimately, our motivations in editing and co-authoring this volume are threefold. Firstly, we believe it is important to understand the agency of design in reinforcing particular ideological priorities that are made within neo-liberal economies and governance. In so doing – and secondly – we hope to show the links and disjunctures between these latter notions and the everyday actions and dispositions of designers. We have a concern to show the dignity (and indignities) of the particular. Thirdly, our hope is that by providing this investigation into design and creativity in their relationships and multiple contexts, the reader will emerge equipped with further understandings. And it is through understanding that new markers for practical steps or experimentation might arise.

## References

Adkins, L. (2005), ‘The New Economy, Property and Personhood’, Theory, Culture and Society, 22 (1): 111–30.

Anthony, S. D., Eyring, M. and Gibson, L. (2006), ‘Mapping Your Innovation Strategy, Harvard Business Review, 84 (5): 104–13.

Born, G. (2002), ‘Reflexivity and Ambivalence: Culture, Creativity and Government in the BBC’, Cultural Values, 6 (1–2): 65–90.

Breen, B. (2005), ‘The Business of Design’, Fast Company, 93: 68.

British Design Innovation (2006), ‘The British Design Industry Valuation Survey – 2006 to 2007’ (report), Brighton: BDI.

Bruce, M. and Daly, L. (2006), ‘International Evidence on Design: Near Final Report for the Department of Trade and Industry’ (report), Manchester: University of Manchester.

Dicken, P. (2003), Global Shift: Reshaping the Global Economic Map in the Twenty-First Century, London: Sage.

European Union (2005), ‘EU Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 September 2005 on the Recognition of Professional Qualifications’, Official Journal of the European Union 30 September 2005, L255/22–140.

Howkins, J. (2001), The Creative Economy: How People Make Money From Ideas, London: Allen Lane.

Ingold, T. and Hallam, E. (2007), ‘Creativity and Cultural Improvisation: An Introduction’, in E. Hallam and T. Ingold (eds.) Creativity and Cultural Improvisation, Oxford: Berg.

Julier, G. (2006), ‘From Visual Culture to Design Culture’, Design Issues, 22 (1): 64–76.

Knorr Cetina, K. (1997), ‘Sociality with Objects: Social Relations in Postsocial Knowledge Societies’, Theory, Culture and Society, 14 (4): 1–30.

Knorr Cetina, K. (2001), ‘Objectual Practice’, in T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina and E. von Savigny (eds.), The Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory, London and New York: Routledge.

Knorr Cetina, K. and Bruegger, U. (2002), ‘Traders’ Engagement with Markets: A Postsocial Relationship’, Theory, Culture and Society, 19 (5–6): 161–85.

Lash, S. and Urry, J. (1994), Economies of Signs and Spaces, London: Sage.

Leach, J. (2007), ‘Creativity, Subjectivity and the Dynamic of Possessive Individualism’, in E. Hallam and T. Ingold (eds.), Creativity and Cultural Improvisation, Oxford: Berg.

Lupton, E. and Miller, J. A. (1999), Design Writing Research: Writing on Graphic Design, London: Phaidon.

Lury, C. (1993), Cultural Rights: Technology, Legality and Personality, London: Routledge.

McRobbie, A. (1998), British Fashion Design: Rag Trade or Image Industry, London: Routledge.

McRobbie, A. (2002), ‘Clubs to Companies: Notes on the Decline of Political Culture in Speeded-Up Creative Worlds’, Cultural Studies, 16 (4): 516–31.

McRobbie, A. (2007), ‘The Los Angelisation of London: Three Short-Waves of Young People’s Micro-Economies of Culture and Creativity in the UK’, Transversal. Available at http://eipcp.net/transversal/0207/mcrobbie/en [last accessed 9 January 2008].

Muniesa, F., Millo, Y. and Callon, M. (2007), ‘An Introduction to Market Devices’, in M. Callon, Y. Millo and F. Muniesa (eds.), Market Devices, Oxford: Blackwell.

Netherlands Design Institute (1994), Design Across Europe: Patterns of Supply and Demand in the European Design Market, Amsterdam: Vormgevingsinstitut.

Nugent, E. (2005), ‘Building a Creative Persona’, Ph.D. thesis, Goldsmiths College, University of London.

Pels, P. (2000), ‘The Trickster’s Dilemma: Ethics and the Technologies of the Anthropological Self’, in M. Strathern (ed.), Audit Cultures: Anthropological Studies in Accountability, Ethics and the Academy, London and New York: Routledge.

Power, M. (1997), The Audit Society: Rituals of Verification, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Ray, P. (2001), The Cultural Creatives: How 50 Million People Are Changing the World, New York: Random House.

Rigby, R. (2007), ‘Can Design Inject Some Creativity into China’s Karaoke Economy?’, Design Council Magazine, 3: 22–9.

Scase, R. and Davis, H. (2000), Managing Creativity: The Dynamics of Work and Organization, Milton Keynes: Open University Press.

Soar, M. (2002), ‘An Insular Profession: Graphic Design and Consumer Culture’, Journal of Consumer Culture, 2 (2): 271–5.

Strathern, M., (ed.) (2000), Audit Cultures: Anthropological Studies in Accountability, Ethics and the Academy, London and New York: Routledge.

WTO (World Trade Organization) (2007), International Trade Statistics 2008, Geneva: World Trade Organization.