## CHAPTER 1

# Designing the State

## Liz Moor

When we think of the relationship between design and the state we tend to think of big, dramatic building projects or high-profile pieces of public art and architecture. We think of historic buildings and we may know a little about the contexts in which these were commissioned – often for explicitly political ends, perhaps for symbolizing national success, for the purposes of social and economic regeneration, or for reinvigorating a sense of national or regional identity. The public debate surrounding projects like the Millennium Dome in Britain, or François Mitterand’s grands projets in France suggests most people are aware that national governments or regional authorities tend, from time to time, to commission pieces of design work with such goals in mind, and this in turn can lead to controversy about the use of public funds. Indeed, as other parts of this book suggest, the perception that such projects are funded directly by citizens is one of the reasons why creative design work in the public sector is subject to such complex accounting and legitimization processes.

We are less inclined to notice the imprint of the state in smaller or more mundane aspects of our material culture and environment, such as the design of tax forms, the posters in doctors’ waiting rooms or the leaflets that come through our doors. Indeed, in some cases it may be that the point of such objects is to be relatively unobtrusive or to slip by unnoticed. Yet such objects make up a significant part of our material world, and as Michael Billig (1995) has pointed out in his analysis of ‘banal nationalism’, even small objects such as emblems and coins can be part of the construction of a ‘national habitus’, part of the way in which the state is folded into our everyday activities. More recently, the literature on place branding has drawn attention to the ways in which such projects have included as one of their aims the effort to shift the habitus of local citizens, not only through large ‘statement’ pieces of art or architecture, but also through smaller interventions (such as new street furnishings, for example) that aim to provide designed ‘cues’ to alter perceptions of the built environment and the identity of a town, city or region (see e.g.

Julier 2000; 2005). Designed objects, in other words, are very often part of the making up of national subjects (Moor 2007).

In this chapter I want to focus on a further example of the relationship between design and the state, to do with the ways in which designers have been used by the state and government agencies in Britain in the delivery of public services and policy initiatives. The British state’s interest in design, so I want to argue, has not been limited to its role in creating potent national symbols, nor simply to encouraging the development of creative industries because of their potential contribution to national economic competitiveness or local regeneration, but has in recent years expanded to include the possibility that designers may have a significant role to play in redesigning public services, communicating government policy and – indirectly – shaping political subjectivities and forms of citizenship. As we shall see, these policy developments underpin many of the issues addressed in this volume – about the pressures on designers to account for their practices, to explain and measure the value of their work, and to review their own processes in the light of such concerns – but they also, in this instance, raise normative questions about who should be involved in the design and delivery of public services and under what kinds of terms, and how the use of design fits in with particular philosophies of government. In this chapter, therefore, I seek to describe two areas of government activity – awareness-raising campaigns and public service delivery – in which designers are newly prominent, and, drawing on a wider social science literature on neo-liberal governance, to sketch out a preliminary account of the political role of designers in neo-liberal societies. My aim, however, is neither to focus on specific policies nor to provide a detailed account of how these efforts work out in practice (both of which are addressed elsewhere in the chapters that follow) but rather to examine the broader political context driving new uses of design and designers by the state.<sup>1</sup>

## The Political Context: Marketization

To put the social and public role of design into context, it is necessary to understand the transformations that have occurred within British public sector organization and management from the 1980s onwards. Public service reforms during this period have been driven by a number of themes, including the presumed superiority of the market over bureaucratic and state mechanisms of coordination, and a new centrality of managerialist language and practice to conceptions of governance (Clarke and Newman 2007). There has been a much greater emphasis on the creation of markets and ‘choice’ in the provision of public services, with public, private and voluntary organizations all being invited to compete for contracts to provide particular services. At the same time, the figure of ‘the consumer’ or ‘user’ has become more central to government discourse, indeed the figure in whose name such market reforms are undertaken. As Tony Blair put it in 2001: ‘We are proposing to put an entirely different dynamic in place to drive our public services; one where the service will be driven not by the government or by the manager but by the user – the patient, the parent, the pupil and the law-abiding citizen’ (cited in Clarke and Newman 2007: 740). This ‘user’ is imagined in terms that mirror the image of consumers in commercial transactions; in place of the supposedly ‘passive’ and ‘dependent’ consumers of the past (and previous models of public services), the new consumers are ‘self-directing and self-possessing individuals … exercising choice in pursuit of self-realizing lift projects’ (Clarke 2007: 160–61). Yet at the same time – as some commentators have pointed out – such consumers are not simply pre-existing; they are to be ‘remade’ through new types of state-led initiatives. Through education and information they are to be ‘empowered’ to make decisions; through the exercise of choice they are to be made responsible for their own direction and life chances, a process which, according to the market logic of many such initiatives, should in turn force service providers to become more sensitized and responsive to their needs (Malpass et al. 2006).

Although such developments may seem removed from the practices of commercial design agencies, they have influenced their work in several ways. Firstly, there is simply more work available to be undertaken for public sector clients. A survey in 2008 estimated that the amount of work being outsourced to private and voluntary organizations had doubled over the previous decade (Timmins 2008). This includes ‘everything from National Health Service treatments to bin emptying, IT, back-office functions and RAF pilot training’ (Timmins 2008), but also, of course, various types of design work. The Design Council’s (2005) Business of Design survey showed that ‘public administration, health and education’ make up 22 per cent of the total clients for design businesses, while the British Design Industry Valuation Survey shows a steady rise in the number of design businesses doing work for public sector or non-profit clients over the past few years: in 2000–01 (the first year of the survey), 25 per cent of agencies did this kind of work; by 2004–05 it was 49 per cent. (BDI 2003; BDI 2006).

Secondly, these developments have led to growth in particular types of design work. The emphasis on user-centred approaches in the delivery of public services has benefited design agencies specializing in service design, particularly where they are able to demonstrate strengths in the area of ‘user insight’. Indeed, as we noted in the introduction, areas such as ‘service and proposition creation’ and strategic design consultancy have grown in recent years (BDI

2006), and while this is not solely attributable to public sector demand, it has played a significant role. Similarly, the emphasis on information, education and ‘empowerment’ has created new volumes of work in communications design and graphics. Statistics on the design industry do not break down type of work by type of client, but it is worth noting that communications design (including ‘graphics, brand, print, information design, corporate identity’) is the largest single category of all design work done in Britain, and that the number of agencies doing such work has risen from 48 per cent in 2000–01 to 65 per cent in 2003–04 (British Design Innovation 2003; 2004). These figures can, of course, be set alongside the statistics above showing a greater volume of work done by all design agencies for public sector and non-profit clients.

Finally, as developments within the public sector have created more work for private design companies, they have also been an important influence in the use of new techniques of measurement and accounting within those organizations. Although sophisticated measurement and auditing techniques are usually associated with private sector institutions seeking reassurance about return on investment and ‘value added’, the spending of public money on design solutions increasingly demands even greater levels of accountability and proof of ‘effectiveness’, and design agencies have had to respond to this. Indeed the shift to a more pervasive ‘audit society’ (Power 1997) is typified by the widespread adoption of such techniques by non-commercial public sector institutions; Michael Power, the arch theorist of this shift, notes that ‘The audit explosion has its conditions of emergence in transformations in conceptions of administration and organization which … dismantle the public–private divide’ (1997: 10). As we shall see, public sector demands for accountability have forced some (private) design consultancies to improve their methods for demonstrating ‘effectiveness’ and, in some cases, to develop new techniques for measuring non-financial aspects of such effectiveness.

In looking at the relationship between design and the state in Britain, then, we can see that a particular form of governance characterized by marketization, ‘choice’, outsourcing and the promotion of active citizenship has reconfigured government’s relationship to the design industry, with greater volumes of work being made available in the first place, a particular emphasis on design work that involves the transformation of services or the promotion of particular ways of thinking and acting by citizens, and a new incentive for design agencies to find ways of measuring the ‘value’ of their work and its effects. In the remainder of this chapter, I want to concentrate on the last two of these: the role of design in trying to forge a political subjectivity among citizens that is consonant with broadly neo-liberal philosophies of government, and the forms of measurement and accounting that have been developed to support this kind of work.

## Design for Governance: Awareness-raising Campaigns

Changes in the organization of governance in Britain have not only altered the volume of work available to independent design agencies, but also what design is called upon to do. I have already noted that more work is available for designers specializing in strategy, services and ‘user insights’, but there has also been a growing role for communications design. Of course governments have always used designers to produce printed materials (booklets, posters and so on) advertising their services and initiatives, but there has, so I want to argue, been a shift in the ‘tone’, as well as the volume, of such materials, which are now expected to work on citizens in new kinds of ways. Increasingly, design for government is expected to promote not just the availability of a given service or facility, but also particular types of relationships between government and its citizens, as part of ‘a determined effort to recast the balance of responsibility between the state and its citizens’ (Malpass et al. 2006: 3).

The effort to ‘responsibilize’ citizens is, in turn, part of what Nikolas Rose (cited in Malpass et al. 2006: 6) describes as a trend to ‘de-socialize’ modes of governance, where the goal is to act on individuals and their self-regulating behaviour as consumers, rather than to institute broader-based policy measures or incentives. This is linked to the idea of ‘stakeholder citizenship’, in which ‘everyone is responsible’ and in which citizens are seen as the bearers of responsibilities as well as rights (Rose 1999; Harvey 2005). Such ‘de-socialization’ can be seen in a number of areas. These include, for example, what Hajer and Versteeg (cited in Malpass et al. 2006) describe as the individualization of food risks that has developed through the move towards product labelling and web-based information services. Here, rather than prohibiting certain potentially dangerous or unhealthy ingredients – a move that would involve direct state intervention in public choice, and potentially bring the government into conflict with powerful business interests – the government increasingly sees its role as one of encouraging citizens to educate themselves and become personally responsible.

Given this emphasis on individual responsibility through education and ‘empowerment’, there has, unsurprisingly, been a corresponding emphasis on the role of communications design in informing and encouraging would-be consumers and users. Many policy statements and think-tank reports have drawn attention to the importance of ‘positive and inspirational messages’ and ‘high-profile national communications’ in ‘developing a new inspirational goal and a branded statement’ to harness the activities of diverse groups of stakeholders (Defra 2005: 32). Malpass et al. (2006) have argued that such documents and reports typically emphasize a renewed place for the ‘art of influencing’ and see a role for government in ‘influencing behaviour … through the classical arts of rhetoric’ (Malpass et al. 2006: 7, emphasis in original). Yet such documents are often highly contemporary in their approach to communications. A 2003 Demos/Green Alliance report for Defra, for example, paid explicit attention to ‘the growing focus on “brand”, and the need to create an identity that resonates with the consumer’ (Collins et al. 2003: 7), noting that ‘Straightforward advertising as information provision … is long gone, and has been replaced with more sophisticated campaigns’ (2003). There is, in other words, a heightened emphasis on the work of communications design in educating and informing ‘citizen-consumers’ (Clarke and Newman 2007), and a particular emphasis on forms or models of communication borrowed from the more commercial sides of graphic design, such as branding.

This new emphasis has led to a higher volume of work being available to such institutions, in part because government does not have sufficient staff or expertise – either numerically or in terms of skills – to do this work itself, but also because of an ideological commitment to efficiency, markets and choice in the provision of services. The introduction of ‘Best Value’ legislation and guidance since 1997 has imposed on local authorities a legal duty to secure ‘continuous improvement’ in service delivery, prohibiting them from delivering services directly where ‘other more efficient … means are available’ (Martin 2002: 131) and insisting that they promote a ‘mixed economy of provision’ and cultivate interest from private and voluntary sector providers. As we shall see in the following section, getting good value for money may now include the requirement that design agencies provide ‘capacity building’ for government employees, but one of the more fundamental concerns in awarding contracts in this area is that they must include ways of measuring effectiveness and outcomes. The outsourcing of public services to non-state actors has, as I have noted in the previous section, led to concerns about accountability and the mechanisms through which this might be achieved (Bevir and Trentmann 2007: 2), and the need for public sector institutions to be seen as responsible in their use of public money has been one of the principal drivers of various kinds of auditing and measurement practice within the creative industries.

Design projects undertaken within this new system are many and varied. While the Design of the Times (Dott 07) programme, led by the UK Design Council and focused primarily on services, is considered to be a model of best practice (see Hill and Julier, in this volume), others include promotional campaigns aimed at encouraging children to walk to school, various health websites, recycling campaigns, campaigns against knife crime and information packs about healthy eating. The extent to which designers are required to demonstrate the ‘effectiveness’ of such projects may vary according to a number of factors. These may include clients’ own demands for accountability, but relate more often to the cost or scale of the project. It is also the case that some types of design intervention lend themselves to measurement more easily than others, at least on the surface. So for example a campaign to improve rates of recycling in a particular area can be measured against actual increases in recycling rates over time – even if those increases are not in fact directly linked to the promotional campaign. In any case, while the specific demands placed on agencies may vary according to context, the general trajectory is towards a greater level of accountability, even in areas where the aim of the project is to shift attitudes or perceptions – and where ‘effectiveness’ is therefore hard to assess. This has led, in some cases, to the development of techniques for capturing moments of contact between consumers and information, so that these can be measured. One way of doing this has been to include more interactive opportunities in awareness-raising campaigns; these may now encourage people to send a text message, call a helpline or visit a website in order to request further information. Such interactive opportunities are useful because they can be recorded and measured, creating new types of information and ‘facts’ that can be used to indicate ‘effectiveness’ in terms of reaching an audience, as well as helping to break down cost per user. Furthermore, to the extent that such interactive features require action by citizens, they make it possible to claim that citizens have become ‘engaged’, motivated and ‘empowered’ through information and action – precisely the kinds of outcome that many policy-makers want to see. Yet of course such measures cannot measure more complex qualities such as attitudes and intentions, and they should therefore be seen as proxies whose use and value lies in their legitimacy – that is, their shared acceptance by other actors in a field – rather than their accuracy (see Arvidsson 2006: 134).

The emphasis on awareness-raising and information dissemination arises from the policy context described in the previous section, and has both normative and practical implications. As Andrew Barry has suggested, ‘the extraordinary range and quantity of information that citizens and institutions are expected to process’ is a characteristic feature of contemporary government (Barry 2001: 153). Such information, he claims, is more than simply ‘raw data’ because it implies an audience who should be informed. It also, he goes on to note, generally has regulatory effects; its existence ‘is thought to imply a transformation in the conduct of those who are, or who should be, informed’. This is very clear in the kinds of awareness-raising campaigns undertaken by designers for government; these are not simply alerting citizens to particular facts, risks or dangers. Rather, they carry the implication that since the citizen is now – in the very moment of reading – ‘informed’, responsibility for such risks and dangers is henceforth his or her own. Similarly, for Barry, interactivity is more than ‘a particular possibility inherent in the development of media’, but something seen as having the capacity to transform the person (Barry 2001: 129). Interactive technologies and devices have been seen as ‘a key resource in the making up of citizens’ (127) through their presumed ability to ‘foster agency … thus enhancing the self-governing capacities of the citizen’ (135). Technologies that appear to be about ‘empowering’ citizens, in other words, are more accurately seen as technologies to create particular models of citizenship and to endow citizens – whether they like it or not – with particular types of responsibility.

There are a number of problems with this effort to ‘empower’ and ‘responsibilize’ citizens. Perhaps the biggest concern is that such campaigns, like the commercial advertising campaigns on which they are frequently modelled, tend to be aimed at changing individual attitudes and behaviour, rather than addressing the broader economic, cultural or systemic factors that may determine matters such as responsiveness to healthcare messages, propensity to carry knives, and so on. At the most basic level, this means that such campaigns may not ‘work’, in the sense of promoting any substantial or durable shift in behaviour. There is a big difference between the kind of tasks that design and marketing communications are called upon to perform in a commercial context (e.g. persuading a consumer to switch from one brand of baked beans to another) and the kind of work they are asked to do in a public or social context (e.g. persuading an entire population to overhaul its diet). While it may be expedient, if not strictly accurate, for commercial interests to conceive of the society or group that makes up their ‘market’ as an aggregate of individual decision-makers, the same cannot be said of the social groups targeted by public awareness-raising campaigns. Indeed campaigns aimed at shifting behaviour often fail to recognize that moving from the level to the individual to that of the group, community or population is precisely not simply a matter of aggregating individual choices, but in fact touches upon more complex extended social networks, where the ‘consumers’ they address are enmeshed in relationships – to other people, but also to institutions – that implicate them in circuits of influence and obligation, and constrain them in numerous ways. On the other hand, even when a more complex social basis for attitudes and behaviours is acknowledged, there remains a reliance on forms of communication aimed primarily at individuals presumed to be relatively free and autonomous.

This transfer of techniques from the commercial to the public sector has normative dimensions too. While ‘information’ appears to be neutral and universal, and the individualist logic of these campaigns implies that responsibility for action falls equally upon all actors (Barnett et al. 2004), there are also entrenched inequalities in people’s ability to respond. Just as the ideology of the free market – in which consumers are free to choose from a range of goods – conceals the fact that social and economic inequalities place significant practical constraints on that freedom, so too does the ideology of ‘neutral’ information and equal responsibility conceal the fact that some people are in a better (economic, social, structural) position to respond to government injunctions than others. This, as Nikolas Rose points out, can produce new categories of ‘problem’ citizens and consumers, and ‘anti-communities of the depraved or the poor’ (Rose 1999: 189), who are then subject to renewed observation and measurement, so that their ‘pathologies’ can be charted and their values and behaviour further worked upon (ibid.).

## Design for Governance II: Services, Experiences and Encounters

If the presentation of information to ‘educate’ and ‘empower’ citizens through various types of communication and awareness-raising campaign is one of the ways in which designers have been implicated in the shaping of political subjectivities, another is through the effort to work on people’s experiences with the state and its services. Such work has taken a variety of forms, from involvement in redesigning healthcare services to the design of environments (such as schools and hospitals) so that they create positive feelings and sentiments. As we shall see, some work in this area has been important in generating new metrics by which the ‘value’ of design can be understood. In other cases, however, it shares with the communications design work outlined above some problems associated with the over-reliance on values from commercial marketing. This, I want to argue, may undercut the usefulness of some aspects of design’s contribution to government and public service.

Service design, although still not especially well established in Britain (see Kimbell, in this volume), has grown considerably in recent years. Although many of its clients are from ‘traditional’ service industries such as banking and personal finance, a significant proportion come from the public sector, and in some cases these make up the majority of the client list.<sup>2</sup> To understand why service design is appealing to government, it is useful to recap some of the points from the previous section. The emphasis on the ‘user’ in recent public service reforms – as someone to be empowered, and someone to drive efficiency within organizations – is an obvious outgrowth of the emphasis on markets and competition; in some contexts the term is used interchangeably with the term ‘consumer’. But it also chimes with the emphasis in contemporary design literature on the idea that design should serve to enable particular types of experiences (see e.g. Press and Cooper 2003), and that it should do this by focusing on the needs of the user. What dedicated service design consultancies bring to the traditional design process is a greater than usual emphasis on user needs and experiences,<sup>3</sup> and on those aspects of a service – often called ‘touchpoints’ – through which services are encountered in tangible form by users. This is because services are understood primarily as a type of interaction between customers and providers (Sisodia 1996; Parker and Heapy 2006) rather than a product or commodity. Agencies offering service and experience design have therefore emphasized user research, prototyping and testing with target markets, all of which makes them appealing to government agencies that may lack the means to do this themselves, but which have an ideological commitment to ‘empowering’ the user or consumer, and to reforming services along these lines.

So what do service designers do for the state? As I have suggested, one key area has been in the development and redesign of public services such as healthcare. As Lucy Kimbell outlines in her chapter in this volume, the agency live|work was involved in reviewing and redesigning an NHS smokingcessation service. Its work involved interviews with managers, observation of the service operating in pharmacies, projects to map the ‘customer journey’ and a review of the service’s ‘touchpoints’ – that is, those points where the service took a concrete form that was visible and tangible to customers, and with which customers had some element of interaction. The same agency has also done work with jobless people on behalf of a local council in the north of England, and in London for getting homeless people into accommodation. In all cases, the contribution of service designers has been to advise not only on usability, functionality and aesthetics, but also to assess the viability of an entire product-service system, and to suggest new models and blueprints for service delivery.

As I noted at the beginning of the chapter, the involvement of private design companies in the shaping and delivery of public services has demanded higher levels of accountability and in some cases driven the development of new techniques for measuring outcomes and effectiveness. In their project with jobless people in Sunderland, live|work needed to find ways of demonstrating the value of its work to the local council in order to justify investment. This meant assessing the current cost of jobless people to the state, and calculating how far their work could reduce these costs. They did this by prototyping a service and testing it on a small group of users, in order to devise a metric for measuring design intervention. When the ‘uplift’ to clients (getting them back into work) reached a level where it overtook the cost of the design work, the company could claim a positive return on investment. They point out, ‘By showing ROI at a project level, we could also demonstrate that the project would add to GVA [gross value added] and that, if scaled up, the benefits would be massive’ (Løvlie et al. 2008: 76). In other areas, however, live|work have moved beyond purely financial measures of return on investment, and used techniques based on the concept of the ‘triple bottom line’ (Elkington 1999) to develop new ways of measuring value. Their work with Streetcar, a (private) car-sharing service, used this strategy to measure the impact of the company (and their own contribution to it) in terms of its environmental and social, as well as economic, contributions. This involved generating estimates about the reduction in levels of private car ownership and use, and the likely reductions in carbon dioxide emissions. It also involved generating ‘soft’ indicators of social impact, assessing the likely extent to which the existence of the service could ‘rethink a behavioural norm’ or expand people’s sense of their travel options (see Løvlie et al. 2008).

Clearly there are reasons to be cautious about the adoption of social and environmental auditing techniques by private clients such as Streetcar, for whom they may serve as a type of marketing or promotional material aimed at building brand identity and reputation among a target market. Any measure that demonstrates even marginal positive social and environmental benefits would reflect well on their company, and they therefore have an indirect financial incentive for adopting them. It is less clear that such measures would be adopted by companies competing in other sectors – particularly when doing so is entirely optional. Yet the development of such techniques by live|work and other agencies may have a significance beyond its importance to specific clients. If design firms can be seen as agents with interests, projects and values that sometimes extend beyond simple profit maximization (Swedberg 2003), their role in developing techniques for measuring non-financial value may be viewed in a more positive light. Furthermore, since such agencies operate within networks, and are increasingly involved in ‘knowledge transfer’ or ‘capacity building’ projects with public sector clients, they may have the capacity to disseminate their techniques across a range of institutions, providing a method for making those institutions’ social and environmental impact knowable and visible. This may turn out to be especially important for the public sector, where market competition and economic efficiency have recently dominated debates about the delivery of public goods.

Yet there are other examples of non-financial measures of value being adopted or proposed by policy professionals, where a clear link to substantive social values is harder to discern. In these cases, promotional concerns sometimes appear to take on a life of their own and become abstracted from social dimensions of value, or enduring ideals of public service or public goods, and connected instead to a set of narrow technical or instrumental aims. One recent example of this can be seen in a joint project between the left-wing think-tank, Demos, and the service design consultancy, Engine (Parker and Heapy 2006). Explicitly aimed at bringing insights from commercial service design consultancies into debates about public service reform, its authors criticize the early Blairite emphasis on markets, managerialism and efficiency measures in public services, and argue instead that reform should put ‘people and places, not targets and key performance indicators (KPIs) at its heart’ (2006: 9). Yet their suggestions for doing this involve, in essence, simply borrowing customer service techniques and auditing strategies from commercial organizations, with little rationale for how or why these would represent an improvement on ‘the detached measurements of customer satisfaction and proxy measures of performance such as waiting times’ (2006: 67–71). In fact, while the authors place great emphasis on the need to build ‘relationships’ with public service users, or find ‘new ways of connecting intimately’ with them (2006: 8), their reasons for suggesting this move between the instrumental – that it provides a framework in which users can be ‘mobilized, coached and encouraged’ (13) – and the more obviously promotional – that it can build legitimacy for public services (16) or contribute to a ‘sense that the service is supporting you’ (10). What this suggests is that, far from representing a break with earlier political impulses, such accounts are more appropriately located at the point where neo-liberal social philosophies intersect with new brand management techniques based on relationship marketing and ‘experiential’ communication.

One of the areas where this promotional influence is most visible is in Parker and Heapy’s discussion of measurement. Arguing that public services could usefully learn from the ‘experience metrics’ of the commercial sector to assess the ‘customer experience’ of public service users, the authors mention the ‘propensity to recommend’ measure used by Orange, the ‘customer journey’ maps used by BUPA, the ‘customer value metrics’ used by Tesco, and the ‘mystery shopper’ techniques used by Pret a Manger.<sup>4</sup> In the latter case, interactions between customers and staff are assessed through metrics such as ‘Did the barista look you in the eye and smile? Did they tell you how much change you were receiving?’ (Parker and Heapy 2006: 67). As in the previous section, borrowing techniques from retail and consumer-oriented service organizations means that public service users are imagined as relatively atomized individual consumers who are, nonetheless, free to choose, rather than as more fully social beings who may be constrained in various ways. While Parker and Heapy acknowledge that many of their ideas ‘originally grew out of organizations seeking to reinforce their brand in ways that went well beyond marketing and mass advertising campaigns’ (Parker and Heapy 2006: 26), they fail to note the extent to which service design in these organizations is therefore very tightly bound up with service marketing, and the attempt to use service delivery as an additional site for the building of brand loyalty (see Witz et al. 2003). There is, in other words, no sense of how public and private organizations might differ in substance or purpose, nor any discussion of whether, or how far, a promotional mode of address – that seeks to reinforce brand values through carefully designed ‘customer experiences’ – is appropriate in public sector institutions.<sup>5</sup>

This example is not intended to dispute the potential value of service design to public and non-profit institutions. Rather, the point is to demonstrate that such applications may be over-determined by quite narrow political concerns, which in turn may inhibit effectiveness in the delivery of social or public goods. The use of design by governments has, historically, very often been bound up with the search for a ‘technical fix’ to problems that are more fully social or structural in nature; typically associated with liberalism (Otter 2007), its more recent manifestations have included the ‘nudge’ philosophies and ‘libertarian paternalism’ adopted by some elements of the British Conservative party (Thaler and Sunstein 2008; The Economist 2008), and the neo-liberal emphasis on individual ‘empowerment’ and responsibility adopted by the Labour party and outlined here. While both rely on the attempt to ‘design in’ particular outcomes, they are distinguished from their predecessors by the way in which design is now married to promotion. The technical solutions that designers appear to offer are thereby supplemented with a tone or mode of address taken from commercial marketing and branding, which implicitly or explicitly addresses citizens as sovereign consumers pursuing individual wants. Yet this is very often not how service users see themselves; a recent survey of health service users conducted by Clarke and Newman (2007) found very limited public identification with the terms ‘customer’ or ‘consumer’; these terms, according to the authors, ‘are not the primary categories through which they live, and think about, their connections to public services. The consumerist model does not describe who they [are] – or who they want to be’ (2007: 753). Rather, interviewees described themselves in terms that relied more heavily on collective imaginaries and a sense of belonging (‘member of the public’, ‘patient’, ‘member of the local community’). While some designers may be highly sensitized to such insights from service users, the broader policy context often has rather different goals. How far this actually matters at the level of individual design projects may depend upon the extent to which design firms are able to pursue their own interests and how far they are constrained by the need to account for their practices along the lines I have set out above.

## Conclusion

In this chapter I have argued that the state’s use of design has, in recent years, involved a change of emphasis and tone; rather than simply informing people that a service exists and encouraging them to make use of it, designers are increasingly employed to provide communication materials to inform, ‘educate’ and ‘empower’ citizens, and to encourage them to take responsibility for their own behaviour – to see matters ranging from their health and education, to the levels of recycling in their borough or the degree of antisocial behaviour on their streets, as matters of individual responsibility. As governments have developed these kinds of approaches, they have looked for communications techniques that actively engage their target audience, and which can be proven to do so. Hence more ‘interactive’ techniques such as websites, sending text messages and so on, are useful because they provide a proxy measure for ‘effectiveness’ (by proving that someone has taken an action in response to a message), whilst also fostering some kind of agency – even if that agency is only sending a text message. This is one of the ways in which a compulsion to measure effectiveness now gets built in to the design process and the choices made about techniques and materials.

In following this line of argument, my aim has been to show how a changing vision of the value of design among government agencies has been an important driver of change in design agencies themselves, most notably in relation to the greater volume of work for design agencies and consultancies, the shift towards particular types of work, the increased amounts of time spent on measuring outcomes and effectiveness, and the effort to devise new techniques for measuring value. Designers routinely note that work with public sector clients may be more laborious than with private clients because of the greater number of people needed to ‘sign off’ on a project. While policy shifts that see a new role for design have led to greater volumes of public sector work available for agencies, they have also meant that designers may spend more of their time liaising with various ‘stakeholders’ on the client side, getting ‘buy-in’ from these stakeholders, and devising accounting and measurement techniques that demonstrate outcomes and effectiveness.

Although it has not been a focus of this chapter, the increase in the amount of time spent with ‘stakeholders’ and in devising measurement techniques that can establish the agency’s legitimacy in the eyes of the client may also impact upon the creative process itself. On the one hand, there is now some evidence (see for example Ennis and Julier, in this volume) of a ‘cut and paste’ approach to design for public sector clients, particularly where turnaround time is tight, where designers are balancing a number of projects or where the vast number of stakeholders who must give permission drives designers to follow schemas that have previously been successful with other public sector clients. There may also be a tendency towards ‘design by committee’, where the large number of stakeholders not only have the potential to veto a project, but also feel able to request changes and influence the final form that the design project will take. The need to ‘get a project past the client’, in design as in other creative industries, may ultimately militate against the more ambitious, uninhibited and innovative projects that are typically associated with traditional notions of ‘creativity’.

Yet nor has my aim been to defend traditional definitions of creativity or the creative process – certainly there is plenty in those formulations that can be criticized, and there may in any case be plenty of ‘creativity’ in the ways that designers conduct and implement user research or find novel ways to measure the value of their inputs. The point rather has been to show how a broader political context and set of policy preoccupations may channel the work of design industry down particular paths, create new opportunities for some types of design work rather than others, and provide the impetus for new forms of reflection within the design firm, including new modes of self-assessment, accounting and valuation. In doing this, I have sought to show that the relationship between design and the state is characterized not only by practical issues of industry organization, structure and accountability, but also by larger normative questions of social responsibility, fairness and the nature and purpose of public goods and services. If we look behind the contemporary drive to measurement and accountability in the design world – and the ways in which this is propagated, reworked or resisted by particular design firms – we may trace a more fundamental debate going on, about competing definitions of the design user, the nature of his or her social ties, and about who and what, ultimately, design is for.

## Notes

1. While neo-liberal philosophies of government take different forms in different places, my aim here is to draw attention to some of their broader impulses and general manifestations in the British context.

2. The service design consultancy Participle, for example, was set up explicitly to work with public sector clients.

3. While most design agencies emphasize user research and insight generation as a key stage in their creative process, there is growing evidence that such stages are often treated rather briefly and informally within specific sectors of commercial design, primarily because of time or budgetary constraints (see e.g. Dorland, in this volume), or because it is believed that employees can ‘stand in’ for the target audience or user. By contrast, the nature of service design work is such that agencies and consultancies are more frequently called upon to provide proof of user research, testing and insight generation.

4. Orange, BUPA, Tesco and Pret a Manger are all private retail and/ or service companies operating in Britain.

5. Parker and Heapy’s recommendations would clearly have consequences for public sector workers as well as users, potentially subjecting their interactions with users to higher degrees of scrutiny and surveillance. In this regard, it is interesting to note that in 2008 the UK government announced the launch of a ‘compassion index’ in the National Health Service, to measure levels of compassion and care among nurses, and to include reference to how frequently they smiled at patients (Carvel 2008).

## References

Arvidsson, A. (2006), Brands: Meaning and Value in Media Culture, London and New York: Routledge.

Barnett, C. et al. (2004), ‘Articulating Ethics and Consumption’, Cultures of Consumption Working Paper Series, No. 17. Available at www.consume.bbk.ac.uk/ publications.html.

Barry, A. (2001), Political Machines: Governing a Technological Society, London and New York: Athlone Press.

Bevir, M. and Trentmann, F. (2007), Governance, Consumers and Citizens: Agency and Resistance in Contemporary Politics, Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Billig, M. (1995), Banal Nationalism, London: Sage.

British Design Innovation (2003), BDI Design Industry Valuation Survey 2002–03. Available at www.britishdesigninnovation.org [last accessed 5 April 2006].

British Design Innovation (2004), BDI Design Industry Valuation Survey 2003–04. Available at www.britishdesigninnovation.org [last accessed 20 July 2007].

British Design Innovation (2006), BDI Design Industry Valuation Survey 2005–06. Available at www.britishdesigninnovation.org [last accessed 22 January 2009].

Carvel, J. (2008), ‘Nurses To Be Rated on How Compassionate and Smiley They Are’, The Guardian, 18 June.

Clarke, J. (2007), ‘Unsettled Connections: Citizens, Consumers and the Reform of Public Services’, Journal of Consumer Culture, 7(2): 159–78.

Clarke and Newman (2007), ‘What’s In A Name? New Labour’s Citizen-Consumers and the Remaking of Public Services’, Cultural Studies, 21(4–5): 738–57.

Collins, J. et al. (2003), ‘Carrots, Sticks and Sermons: Influencing Public Behaviour for Environmental Goals’, Demos/Green Alliance for Defra.

Defra (2005), ‘Securing the Future – UK Government Sustainable Development Strategy’. Available at http://www.sustainable-development.gov.uk/publications/ukstrategy/index.htm.

Design Council (2005), The Business of Design: Design Industry Research 2005, London: Design Council.

The Economist (2008), 26 July, p.40.

Elkington, J. (1999), Cannibals With Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of 21<sup>st</sup>-Century Business, London: Capstone Publishing.

Harvey, D. (2005), A Brief History of Neoliberalism, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

Julier, G. (2000), The Culture of Design, London: Sage.

Julier, G. (2005),‘Urban Designscapes and the Production of Aesthetic Consent’, Urban Studies, 42: 689–888.

Løvlie et al. (2008), ‘Bottom-Line Experiences: Measuring the Value of Design in

Service’, Design Management Review, Winter: 73–9.

Malpass, A., Barnett, C., Clarke, N. and Cloke, P. (2006), ‘Problematizing Choice: Responsible Subjects and Citizenly Consumers’, paper presented to conference on ‘Citizenship and Consumption: Agency, Norms, Mediation and Spaces’, Cambridge, March.

Martin, C. (2002), ‘Best Value: New Public Management or New Direction?’, in K. McLaughlin, S. P. Osborne and E. Ferlie (eds.), New Public Management: Current Trends and Future Prospects, London and New York: Routledge.

Moor, L. (2007), The Rise of Brands, Oxford: Berg.

Otter, C. (2007), ‘Making Liberal Objects: British Techno-Social Relations 1800–1900’, Cultural Studies, 21(4–5): 570–90.

Parker, S. and Heapy, J. (2006), The Journey to the Interface: How Public Service Design Can Connect Users to Reform, London: Demos.

Power, M. (1997), The Audit Society, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Press, M. and Cooper, R. (2003), The Design Experience: The Role of Design and Designers in the Twenty-First Century, Aldershot: Ashgate.

Rose, N. (1999), Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

Sisodia, R. J. (1996), ‘Designing Quality into Services’, Design Management Journal, 3(1): 33–9.

Swedberg, R. (2003), Principles of Economic Sociology, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Thaler, R. and Sunstein, C. (2008), Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth and Happiness, New Haven and London: Yale University Press.

Timmins, N. (2008), ‘UK Outsourcing to Private Sector Doubles’, Financial Times, 9 July.

Witz, A., Warhurst, C. and Nickson, D. (2003), ‘The Labour of Aesthetics and the Aesthetics of Organization’, Organization 10(1): 33–54.