## CHAPTER 3

# Design, Innovation and Policy at Local Level

Katie Hill and Guy Julier

## Introduction

During the past two past decades, local government across much of Europe, the USA and Australasia has engaged with the so-called New Public Management. In brief, this form of public sector organization includes a shift towards more entrepreneurial management, explicit standards and measurement of performance, an emphasis on output controls, decentralization of services, the promotion of competition, a stress on private sector styles of management and the disciplining of resource allocation (Osborne and McLaughlin 2002; Du Gay 2004).

The stereotypical era of large-scale, monolithic and mostly unchanging bureaucracies of local government – the public administration approach – may have ended in the 1980s. This does not, however, mean that it has been replaced by wholly light-touch, decentralized and flexible systems. In fact, according to Hoggett (1996), the New Public Management displays three interlocking layers of strategy that are, perhaps necessarily, in conflict. First, operational output may be decentralized from national to local levels but also outwards from local authority level to subcontracted companies or groups – what Whitfield (2001, 2006) calls ‘agentification’ – while policy and strategy are increasingly centralized to the national government. Second, the introduction of competition running through this quasi-decentralization process becomes the dominant model for coordinating it. Third, performance management and audit have emerged as ways to measure and give accountability to the first two strategies.

At the heart of much thinking behind this ‘shake-up’ of local authorities is the demand for a move towards greater innovation on the part of local government (and, indeed, all other aspects of state, including policing, healthcare and education). In Australia and the UK, this was clearly embedded into government thinking from the late 1990s (Considine and Lewis 2007). The UK

Government’s White Paper, ‘Innovation Nation’ (Dept. for Innovation, Skills and Universities 2008), lists climate change, the ageing population, globalization and higher expectations of public sector users as drivers of the need for innovatory approaches to service delivery. Within this paper, the UK Design Council’s ‘Design of the Times’ (henceforward referred to as Dott 07) programme of eight design and social innovation projects is cited as a best-practice case. Dott 07 prototyped, among many themes, new forms of welfare service delivery and energy consumption reduction strategies in north-east England. This is a typical example of a central government’s supporting ‘best practice’ examples of modernization ahead of legislation (Newman et al. 2001) – an entrepreneurial initiative is championed as a ‘beacon of excellence’ for other localities to follow, regardless of whether the infrastructural support for this exists elsewhere or not. More generally, the role of design and its contribution to a new culture of innovation in both private and public sectors is mentioned on just about every page of the ‘Innovation Nation’ document. It would seem that designers might be well poised to play a central role in this new culture of public sector innovation.

This chapter therefore reviews the tensions that exist between central government concerns to embed design and innovation into local authority and the de facto management context of their implementation. In particular, it takes the case study of a national programme to develop local government policies for children’s play in England, in which a clear requirement for innovation was made, as a way of tracking the process of trickle-down of centrally generated policies to their local implementation. In this way, it draws attention to the way that, despite a rhetoric of the need for the localization of decision-making in order to derive sustainable benefits and local ownership of innovation, New Public Management conspires to ensure a recurrent centralization of expertise. At the same time, the complexities of working in multi-agency environments of local authority governance, and the roles of creative consultancies therein, are revealed.

The agentification process certainly leads to the production of more design artefacts as the move from centralized delivery of services and infrastructure by local authorities becomes outsourced to external companies. Independent firms delivering such things as school meals, hospital cleaning or traffic monitoring all require promotional literature, uniforms or Internet platforms to be designed. Furthermore, the demand for ‘best value’ (Martin 2002) and for pursuing continuous improvement in the way functions are exercised, provides opportunities for design consultancies to create money-saving systems. An example of this is the UK graphics company Corporate Document Services, which provides print management services that help local authorities reduce their costs and the efficiency of their publication processes (CDS 2008). Local authorities have increasingly engaged consultancies, including service design specialists, discussed in the chapters by Moor and Kimbell in this book. In addition to service design consultancies, a heterogeneous range of firms – such as Erskine, Heads Together, UsCreates or Participle – do not necessarily place design at the centre of their identity but engage the expertise of creative practitioners, including designers, in innovating public sector service delivery. It is this latter category of consultants that this chapter addresses.

This chapter’s co-author, Katie Hill, is a design graduate who has worked in this specialism. Based in Leeds, UK, she built up a portfolio of work in design for communities, working directly for grass roots organizations doing graphic and theatre set design, and for housing associations facilitating workshops for services users, designing creative evaluation systems, and engaging users in designing facilities. In 2006 she began working for the regeneration consultancy, Erskine Corporation LLP. Erskine describes itself as a firm that ‘thinks differently’, specializing in creative research and policy development for regeneration, the built environment and children and young people. At Erskine she worked directly with several local authorities across England on policy development and community engagement for new facilities, play provision and childcare. She was at the front end of policy development, seeing at first hand the application of national policy at local level, and became involved in aiding the implementation of the Children’s Play initiative. Much of the empirical data for this chapter is drawn from her experience of working with Erskine in developing programmes within this and other public sector initiatives.

## Innovating Children’s Services

The Children’s Play initiative began in 2006 with a commitment from the UK’s Big Lottery Fund to invest £155 million in play provision and infrastructure as a response to the UK government’s 2004 report, Getting Serious About Play (Department for Culture, Media and Sport, 2004). This report cited ‘activities for young people’ as the most requested improvement for local authorities, and a range of concerns about the state of children’s play as being the reasons for proposing action in relation to improving children’s play opportunities. As well as concern about children not playing outdoors as much as they used to, the report argued that parents were increasingly concerned with children’s safety and less likely to let children go out and play independently. Equally, play providers, including local government, were afraid of litigation and blame culture and therefore more reluctant to provide play opportunities. Consequently, play facilities had become a low priority when it came to local policy and allocation of funding. According to its aims and objectives, the Children’s Play initiative in England (2006–7) was developed with creativity and innovation at its heart. Its second published aim was to ‘support innovation and new ways of providing for children’s play’ (Big Lottery Fund 2006a).

A large proportion of its £155 million fund – £124 million – was dedicated to the generation of new children’s play facilities to be provided by local authorities. In order to be able to apply for this funding, each interested local authority had to go through a prescribed process to produce a five-year play strategy for the area, which would set out how it would be supported through various council activities, including the projects that the Big Lottery Children’s Play fund would pay for. The process was set out in a book of guidelines called Planning for Play (National Children’s Bureau/ Big Lottery Fund 2006). After producing the strategy, they also had to complete a Big Lottery Fund application form and submit both documents to them in a bidding process.

A sum of £15 million was allocated for the setting up of Play England, a network of regional play experts with a remit of supporting and developing the infrastructure within which the projects would be created. The remaining £16 million was intended for an ‘innovation programme’ entitled ‘Playful Ideas’ (Big Lottery Fund 2006b), which town and parish councils and the community and voluntary sector (but not local authorities) could apply for. Across the whole of the Children’s Play initiative, there were no explicit guidelines around engaging creative industries in developing the policy documents and project proposals that would shape these services. It was expected that the creative industries, including designers, were to be brought into the latter stages of this project once briefs had been formed for specific projects.

The scheme is an example of how the public sector struggles with the concept of innovation. There were demands for innovation in funding calls for local authorities, town and parish councils, and the voluntary and community sector. The responses to the calls for funding showed that rather than a multitude of novel approaches to play, which would be expected from a call for creative and innovative projects, most applications were for a limited range of projects. Throughout the duration of their appointment as consultants to local authorities, Erskine undertook regular analysis of play projects that had been funded through the scheme in order to be able to advise authorities on what projects had been successful. It became clear from an early stage that funded projects fell into a few recognizable categories. For example, mobile play projects, skate and BMX parks and play rangers were the most common types of play projects proposed.

Examining the type of projects that have already been funded through a particular scheme is common practice amongst funding advisers. It improves the likelihood of a funding application being successful if the applicants know that they are proposing the type of project that funders have already been prepared to support. This creates a tension between the applicants’ desire for innovation, and therefore the submitting of novel proposals to funders, and the anxiety felt by applicants (and their supporting consultants) around applying for funding for an idea or project for which there is no precedent. There would be no evidence to show that either the funding application or the project is likely to be successful.

Ultimately, the ‘Planning for Play’ guidelines provided a default position for local authorities lacking the capacity or ambition to develop their own innovations. Redolent with ‘checklists’, bullet-pointed ‘essential elements’ lists, a suggested play audit typology and a pre-prepared implementation structure, it is hardly surprising that local authorities would largely stick to the prescribed script within the bidding process. Thus the enthusiasm for innovation in this programme may, in fact, be tempered by centrally produced guidelines, as well as anxiety around meeting the requirements of funding bodies.

‘Playful Ideas’ was a fund within the scheme, directly targeted at developing innovation in play. However, throughout the duration of the project the definition of innovation was softened as organizations struggled to generate innovative ideas about play. The guidance stated that, ‘Projects seeking funding from this programme must display a creative and novel approach to addressing an identified problem within the field of children’s play’ (Big Lottery Fund 2006b: 8). This statement did not change throughout the duration of the call; however, its interpretation, as mediated to applicants by the Play England regional advisors, did. While local authorities themselves could not apply to this fund, many were keen to support their local town and parish councils and their community and voluntary sectors. As part of their contract with Erskine, they commissioned support for applicants to this fund. Over the course of several months, Erskine delivered support for ‘Playful Ideas’ applicants and were in conversation with Play England on how applicants could successfully apply to the fund. It was through these conversations that the changing definition of innovation was conveyed, and in turn Erskine passed that on to the local authorities and potential ‘Playful Ideas’ applicants.

The early implication was that design propositions within funding applications for play should be unique and original. However, within a year of its launch, as town and parish councils and the voluntary and community sector grappled with this challenge, often lacking the internal expertise to deliver a meaningful response, so applications for this funding dropped off. In response, the parameters of ‘innovation’ were changed. Successful proposals subsequently could promise ‘uniqueness’ to the respective locality rather than on the basis of ‘never having been done before, anywhere’, allowing for bestpractice models from elsewhere to be adopted and reproduced.

## The Bureaucratic Context of Local Authorities

In order to develop a critical understanding of the ‘fit’ between national government aspirations, local authority implementation and the role of creative consultants such as Erskine who sit between these, it is first useful to understand the roles and structures of local government within which demands for innovation reside. Local government in England, as in most of the developed world, assumes responsibility for the delivery of the majority of the infrastructure and services that we use in our daily lives, although admittedly not as much today as fifty or so years ago. While decisions about broad political directions are made centrally by national government, most of the day-to-day provision of services and running of our towns, cities, villages and rural landscapes is done by local government.

According to the National Association of Local Councils (NALC), local authorities in England employ 2.1 million people, making them one of the largest employers, and are one of the largest purchasers of goods and services in the country. Local authorities undertake an estimated 700 different functions, but primarily they are responsible for the local implementation of national government initiatives as well as the running of some local services which include education, waste management, transport, social services, planning, housing and cultural provision.

In recent years, many traditional services have found their remit strategically widened. Many schools have opened their facilities and services to the wider community through Extended Schools Services, and libraries have incorporated community halls, cafés, sports and recreation facilities into their services. Erskine has seen this shift at first hand through working with both Extended Schools Services as part of their work on play and childcare, and through working with library services to develop new facilities. In 2006 Erskine began working with a small community library in Leicester on the development of proposals for a new library building. Erskine provided support for funding applications and designed and carried out community engagement processes. Katie Hill designed the second phase of community engagement, the consultation on the plans for the new library and community centre. The proposal included a café, community training kitchen, community rooms and music studios as well as the library. Working with the city architects, central library services as well as local librarians and other local service providers, the process brought to light the increasingly interdisciplinary context within which local authority officers work.

This diversification of services means that the roles and responsibilities of the officers working in local authorities are shifting. The larger authorities are better equipped to deal with this, having a larger pool of staff and therefore greater expertise to draw upon, but for smaller authorities this can mean that individual roles can change dramatically according to shifts in policy.

This raises issues around the capacity of authorities’ human resources to respond to the changing demands of national policy. For example, when developing play policies across different authorities, Erskine worked with several different departments in different authorities including those of parks, regeneration, sports and leisure, youth service, and of course children’s services and play departments where they existed. Some authorities had full teams dedicated to play services, while for others it was just one part of a council officer’s role to oversee the development of the play policy. However, central government placed the same demands on all authorities, regardless of size or capacity (although, admittedly, the larger authorities had larger amounts of money to bid for and therefore more projects to set up). The differing background and expertise of the departments that led the projects influenced the types of projects proposed.

The capabilities of authorities are therefore by no means standardized. This is one reason why the government provides such strict guidelines along with its directives and demands for policy development. No matter what the capacity of the local authority, there are guidelines to follow that make policy development foolproof. Such centralization may help the smaller or weaker authorities where capacity is lacking. The challenge is that such guidelines discourage authorities from making their own local policies or innovating their own approaches.

Gyford, Leach and Game (1989) discuss the challenges to professionalism amongst council officers who once had enjoyed a position of being relatively unchallenged and seen as the experts who should be listened to. Officers no longer have the influence on decisions that they used to. In a climate where the demands made upon officers are constantly changed and diversified, it is almost understandable that the government resorts to over-regulation to make sure that its directives are carried out. The notion of valued expertise has shifted from being that held by local officers with local knowledge, to that held by national subject experts who can advise more strategically across the whole country. Furthermore, Newman et al. (2001) suggest that some see the demand for innovation as an opportunity to embrace new practices (typically those more closely aligned with central government’s political agenda), whilst others undertake innovations more through ‘compliance’ – a need to be seen to be doing something as a way of gaining recognition and influence. A corollary to this is that this search for legitimacy leads to ‘innovations’ that are largely symbolic. Thus public consultation becomes, in their words, ‘fashion following’ rather than a desire to use it to drive innovations.

Within the enormous body of work that local authorities undertake across the country, it would be impossible to say which is the dominant response to adoption of innovation. One illustration of a situation where genuine adoption of innovation seemed to be embraced was again in library services, where within a particular authority the push for the merging of services was implemented both by widening the remit of what the libraries themselves do (the approach suggested by central government), but also by enabling other services to act as libraries. In this case the Children’s Centres (where services for children under the age of five years old and their families are located) were equipped to operate as libraries themselves. It is not unique for Children’s Centres to provide books for children; however, this is not normally integrated into the formal library service. In this instance, the Children’s Centre computers were fitted with the software to work on the local library system, and staff were trained to operate the system so that users of the centre could register and borrow books as they would at a regular library. This seems to be a local innovation driven mainly by the commitment and inspiration of local library service staff rather than any national precedent. This was a recognition by local officers that the government approach to broadening the appeal of libraries and making them more approachable would still not meet the needs of some of the most vulnerable targeted library users – that is, families with young children – and that an innovative solution would be to take the services out of the library all together and put them where those people will use them.

## ‘Designing’ National Policy into Local Government Implementation

Government in the UK comprises of between two and four tiers of separate organizations, depending on the location. The development of authorities has been largely due to evolution rather than design, resulting in a complex system across the country. As well as the issues of capacity raised by standardized directives trickling through a tiered system that is not standard, the complexity of structure also raises the issue of multiple agendas. As policies move from central to local government levels, they pick up agendas and priorities from each tier of government. For those local authorities that have two or three levels of policy above them, the scope within which they can address local needs becomes more restricted. Because the passing on of agendas from one level to another carries resources with it, particularly money, the local authorities at the bottom of the chain have little choice but to adhere to the agendas of those tiers of government that sit above them, and the agendas of the partners with whom they work. The actual delivery of local services is, therefore, a result of a combination of different factors, agendas, hierarchies and commercial, political and practical pressures. This complexity means that service delivery is often the result of a highly negotiated and contested process, where there is little room for creativity. The following section follows the trickledown of political agendas through the tiers of government that impact on one of Erskine’s clients, a London borough.

Policy and strategy documents are the thread that connects the different tiers of government to one another, and enables the transfer of ideas and resources down the hierarchy of government from national to local level. At the same time, policy at all levels has to be based on identified need within the community. Policy development usually involves public consultation processes where the relevant communities are asked what their needs are in relation to the specific policy areas. This means that, at least in theory, as policy directions flow down through the tiers of government, rather than simply repeating through the layers of policy, each tier introduces an element of local knowledge and consultation to draw out and refine the policy to suit local needs.

As with the organizations themselves, policies fall into a tiered system, and are often referred to according to their position in the hierarchy; for example, you might hear that ‘This policy falls under that policy’, or ‘This policy sits above that policy’. The policies at the top of the tier system are the national policies, and in the case of the Children’s Play initiative it would be ‘Every Child Matters: Change for Children’ (HM Government 2004). This level of policy outlines the aims of the government for the whole country for every issue relating to children, and all policies that come under the national policies have to relate directly to their aims and deliver their objectives. Already, at national level, regulations are beginning to form, and much of the guidelines and stipulations that come with national policies are aimed at ensuring that local policies deliver national objectives, without leaving room for error.

Erskine worked for several London boroughs on the implementation of the Children’s Play initiative. For London boroughs, the next tier of policies below the national level are the mayor of London’s policies – in the case of policies concerning children such as play policy, the ‘Making London Better for All Children and Young People’ strategy (Greater London Authority 2004). These carry forward the national policy aims and expand on them as appropriate for the specific context of the London boroughs. Most of the ‘action points’ in ‘Making London Better for All Children and Young People’ relate to the mayor’s office placing requirements upon the boroughs concerning the way that they carry out the work that they are responsible for; for example in relation to planning guidance and play, ‘The mayor will encourage the London boroughs to involve young Londoners in planning, developing and designing their play, recreational and leisure services’ (Greater London Authority 2004: 82). This downloads responsibility for delivering on national policy aims through the mayor’s office to the borough authority.

The tier of policies that follows is the borough policies themselves, and in most cases these policies are the ones that contain the most specific information about what will actually be done in that borough, and what services the general public will see delivered in their own neighbourhoods. Within the borough policies there are still a number of different levels and types of policy that all work together.

The top tier of borough policy would normally be a general policy such as a Community Plan. This will be a long-term strategy (ten or fifteen years) produced by a local partnership including all of the organizations that are responsible for delivering public services in that borough, including the borough council, other public service organizations such as the police force and healthcare trust, and local businesses. These plans tend to divide areas of responsibility into different sections, or strategic priorities, and create separate (but interdependent) plans for things such as children and young people, community safety, health, the environment, transport and employment. Below the community plan is the Local Area Agreement (LAA), which draws together funding from partnership organizations in an agreement of how the Community Plan will be implemented. The LAA provides the basis on which subsequent evaluation and measurement is undertaken and it is therefore subject to frequent progress reports on its implementation.

The next tier of policy is that of the business plans for the organizations in the partnership, each organization having a separate business plan that focuses on their area of responsibility. This is usually a shorter-term plan, for around three years, and it outlines in detail the aims, budgets and targets for all of the council’s tasks in delivering the broader Community Plan.

Funding for policy delivery is again complex, coming from a range of partner organizations as well as grant funding and private finance. For the Children’s Play initiative, the involvement of the funding organization was paramount. The initiative was led by the Big Lottery Fund and was a direct response to the government’s Getting Serious About Play (Department for Culture, Media and Sport 2004). It required the production of a local authority policy on play in order for authorities to apply for funding, and it also funded Play England, the successor to The Children’s Play Council as the national advisory organization for children’s play. This merging of policy development and non-public grant funding brought together two highly regulated areas.

Once areas of responsibility and sources of funding have been defined in the LAA and the council’s business plan, there is a final layer of policies which are specific to areas of work and contain detailed action plans that will be implemented ‘on the ground’. For example, this is where the play policies generated as part of the Children’s Play initiative would normally sit. Other related strategies on this level might also include policies concerning sport and leisure, health, youth justice, obesity and community safety, all of which might refer to the play strategy (and vice versa). The connection between policies is often articulated within policy documents and is referred to as ‘strategic fit’. The better the fit, the more likely a policy is to have resources allocated to it. For example, within a play policy, a proposed project that can also address objectives in health or community safety policies will be more likely to be prioritized for funding allocation within the authority: play provision targeted at teenagers might be prioritized if it is placed in an area with an established antisocial behaviour problem.

We can see, in the above example, how policies are increasingly specific as they move down the hierarchy. The most local level of policy can come down to neighbourhood level, where neighbourhood plans set policy priorities for very small, specific areas.

Within the Children’s Play initiative, the impact of the levels of policy not only existed on paper, but through the involvement of members of higher tiers of government, as well as partner organizations, in the Play Partnerships. Play Partnerships were part of the infrastructure required for the development of the play policy and projects stipulated by central government in Planning for Play. One of Erskine’s key roles was to recruit and manage the Play Partnerships for authorities, including inviting members, drafting terms of reference, and organizing and chairing initial meetings. The organizations involved in the Partnerships had political influence on the local authority policy, both through their involvement on the committee that made decisions about the writing of the policy and design of projects, and through the influence of their policies and related resource allocation and priorities.

It is also apparent, in this example, that in order to differentiate themselves, councils often adopt individual titles for their policy documents. Rather unhelpfully, the terms ‘policy’, ‘strategy’ and ‘plan’ seem to be used interchangeably. Policy documents are also often given catchy titles or strap lines, so a whole language of strap lines, abbreviations and acronyms develops around policies in different authorities, making discussing policy a linguistic minefield.

This in itself raises questions of accessibility and transparency (glossaries are rare, and officers often have accepted shorthand names with which they refer to their own policies). If these strap lines are about differentiation, then this also raises the question of how truly local the local authority policies are. Subtleties of language are used to create local ownership of policies that are in effect a repetition of centralized policy. At times, the processes which local authorities go through to create policy are more about generating ‘buy in’ and ownership of national policy directives than truly investigating what an effective local strategy might be. At a strategic level, all share similar needs that are chiefly characterized by being a rural coastal area, resulting in similar policy aims. Yet to create local ownership and support for the policy, authorities try to embed particular local characteristics in the language used to articulate their policies.

As a consultant working within this environment, the need to participate in this local differentiation of policies through the seemingly superficial means of language and style was embedded into working practices in several ways. Firstly, the ability to quickly assimilate the relevant titles and abbreviations of local policies, and to use them in conversation with the officers, was a crucial part of being accepted as someone who understood the local situation and was qualified to produce policy for that authority. It was also necessary to participate in the generation of the individual strap lines and concepts for policies. It could be compared to developing a brand for each policy, and on final presentation the local ‘brand’ would be articulated through the presentation, the title, the colour and font of the final document. Some authorities required Erskine to develop this for them, and others required policies to be produced by in-house graphics departments within the authorities, according to an inhouse style guide. A common preoccupation voiced by clients was that Erskine was working on multiple policies for different authorities (as were most other consultants working on the scheme). They were concerned that their policy would be too similar to other policies in other areas. Meanwhile, the questions asked of the community through consultation processes are often so generic that the same priorities appear across different authorities. Even after comprehensive consultation has been carried out and embedded in policies, the differences are subtle and the policies reflect more of national guidelines and the accepted wisdom of national experts than local differences.

## Expertise

With regards to the Children’s Play initiative, its policy guidelines for local authorities were authored by the country’s leading experts on the subject of play, for example Tim Gill, Issy Cole-Hamilton and Adrian Voce, all dominant national voices on play. The guidelines were highly prescriptive, outlining the process through which local authorities should produce their strategy and the key issues that those policies should address. The level of detail included suggested a table of contents for policies, and suggestions for components of the action plan. At the same time, as we have already identified, a competing demand for creativity and innovation was embedded into this centralized policy. Creativity becomes an auditable demand that nonetheless sits within a highly structured and prescribed set of values. The question of expertise, who has it and how knowledge of the policy area is distributed or supported, goes back to the issue of capacity.

Local authorities frequently bridge the capacity gap by bringing in consultants to work on specific projects. The consultancy was often brought in very late in a process, close to deadlines. Often, authorities had tried to do the work in house, but were not able to meet central government deadlines (and, importantly, would miss out on funding) without a consultancy’s support. Nonetheless, there was frequent political resistance to the use of consultants, who were seen as parasites on traditional domains of public service. Erskine worked for one authority which, during its appointment, had issued an election promise to ban consultants. This was a relatively small authority where the workloads of the officers were already enormous and diverse, and the resources were low. The prospect of them not completing planned work without additional capacity made the services in that area look precarious. Ironically, it would seem that whilst being unpopular amongst the public and to some extent amongst authorities, the capacity that the consultancy sector provides is necessary for local authorities to deliver on targets set by the national government.

## Designers and Public Sector Innovation

The centralized demand for creativity and innovation could be the obvious opportunity for designers to lend consultancy support to local authorities. Erskine was predominantly a research organization, but had a strong emphasis on design. Designers were engaged, particularly for community engagement and for the presentation of policies. Erskine also had a sister company, which has become the larger part of the business, called Erskine Design – a ‘socially responsible’ web design company. The policy development team was able to incorporate the work of Erskine Design by using blogging as a consultation medium, developing specialized databases for data storage and analysis, and for supporting online collaboration between client and consultant. Erskine understood the potential connections between design and policy research, and the application of designer’s skills to this area of work. Furthermore, the presence of designers within the team served to orientate Erskine’s research towards more in-depth qualitative and creative processes. Research methodologies therefore incorporated those developed from user-centred design, such as ‘cultural probes’ (see Gaver et al. 1999), narratives and diaries that sought out more personal and emotional issues of human experience in relation to local authority service users. In turn, this data helped support strategy development while working for a number of local authorities.

At the same time, consultancies such as Erskine were reliant on finding obvious alignments between their recommendations and local authority action plans such as the Local Area Agreement. By identifying specific points of coincidence, so the consultancy could then make a stronger case to be employed in order to undertake further follow-up work in terms, for instance, of developing strategy implementation. Resources will only follow up action points – it is, after all, delivery on action points that provides the evidence for accountability.

The experience of Erskine demonstrates the resistances that are embedded into the complex scenario of local authority governance. Put most briefly, they attempt to bridge the conflicting demands of central government’s enthusiasm for innovation and entrepreneurialism, enshrined in the New Public Management, and the reality of the normative systems of the bureaucratic order of local authorities and the culture of audit that this entails. By contrast, the Design Council’s Dott 07 project represents a much more unbounded, carte blanche attempt to show how a networked approach to public sector interests in a location produces innovative solutions and processes within public sector concerns. By bringing together designers, a range of agencies, community organizations and local authorities, the programme demonstrated how effective solutions to social, economic and environmental challenges could be derived. Its core funding was modest for its scale. However, its £610,000 budget drew a further $\mathcal { L } 7 \mathrm { m }$ from its mostly local partners, making it a strong example of multi-agency, cross-sector collaboration. Importantly, the programme was directed by John Thackara, a stalwart champion of the engaging of social innovation through co-creation methods of design (see Thackara 2005), where stakeholders and developers work collaboratively in problem-solving.

Dott 07 may therefore be interpreted as an example of so-called ‘network governance’. Here, ‘The role of the state is to steer action within complex social systems rather than control solely through hierarchy or market mechanisms’ (Hartley 2005: 30). In the public sector, this has been identified as a third phase of local authority management. Evolving from the New Public Management, it is expected to resolve the tensions between centralization and decentralization. It is also a classic case where central government releases resources for experimentation and collaboration to orchestrate the interests of different stakeholders. Policy creation and its implementation are not necessarily undertaken either through stratified bureaucratic systems of ‘public administration’ or within the entrepreneurially driven and consumerresponsive context of the New Public Management. Instead, programmes are coordinated rather than managed; their outcomes are safeguarded through reputation rather than legal recourse.

In this context for network governance, project delivery involves mutually dependent, individual firms or agencies operating together as a single entity. This system may lend itself well to projects that engage creative industries. After all, labour in this sector has been typified as being highly engaged in socalled ‘network sociality’ (McRobbie 2002). Designers, it is claimed, are adept at working in teams that bring together various sectors and interests, and the role of social connections between these is paramount to their success.

Erskine’s involvement in the Children’s Play initiative tells a different story, however. The call for ‘compulsory’ creativity and innovation as part of its bidding and funding process clearly laid pressure on local authorities and the consultants involved in its delivery. The inclusion of designers in Erskine’s processes may have helped in the development of substantive responses within this programme. Their skills in using user-centred approaches and in their interpretation into creative proposals may well have helped local authorities develop design-led innovation processes and outcomes as well as funding bids to support these. However, the complex bureaucratic structures of local government, the variation of organization and enthusiasm for innovation amongst them, and the need to justify resource allocation in the context of frequent and rigorous auditing often mitigated against this.

## Conclusion

We have already noted the tendency of central governments to produce ‘best practice’ examples ahead of legislation. Programmes such as Dott 07 are both laboratories for new design practices as well as markers of innovation that it is expected that local government should adopt. However, this sequencing means that where calls for innovatory approaches are made elsewhere, the necessary infrastructure of governance to support their successful implementation may be absent. Local authorities combine modes of governance. ‘Public administration’, ‘New Public Management’ and ‘networked governance’ often overlap (Hartley 2005). Thus designers involved in strategy development for the implementation of nationally prescribed policy are often working in three-speed situations. Furthermore, the heterogeneous nature of local government means that some may be well equipped to deal with centrally generated calls for the innovation of service delivery, while others may suffer expertise shortages. In either case, innovations are still required to address pre-prescribed local authority action points in order to be worthy of resourcing. To add to this complexity, the motivations for the adoption of innovation in local authorities may be varied. Some may embrace it wholeheartedly. Others may be going through the motions. This does create opportunities for consultancies that can navigate this complex environment to deliver on calls for innovation, however the experiences of Erskine show that even where the capacity and motivation for innovation are there, the structures within which local authorities operate still restrict the creativity of output. As central government policy measures trickle through to local authority level, so its language may be given a ‘local dialect’ in order to generate buy-in amongst its participants. However, the content remains largely the same. At other times, the prescriptive nature of national guidelines that are authored to help the development of strategies at local level leave little room for manoeuvre in determining new approaches to problems. This is exacerbated in local authority contexts that, again, do not carry sufficient capacity to develop their own approaches. In this climate, it is small wonder that expertise, including that of designers, continues to be concentrated at the national level while opportunities for grass roots innovations remain more of an aspiration than a reality.

## References

Big Lottery Fund, (2006a), Planning for Play, London: National Children’s Bureau/Big Lottery Fund.

Big Lottery Fund (2006b), ‘Children’s Play Programme: Guidance Notes’ (report).

CDS (2008), ‘CDS Wins Essex Local Authorities’ Print Framework Contract’. Available at http://www.cds.co.uk/news.asp#essex [last accessed 22 December 2008].

Considine, M. and Lewis, U. (2007), ‘Innovation and Innovators Inside Government: From Institutions to Networks’, Governance: An International Journal of Policy, Administration, and Institutions, 20(4): 581–607.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport (2004), Getting Serious About Play, London: Department for Culture, Media and Sport.

Dept. for Innovation, Skills and Universities (2008), Innovation Nation, London: HMSO.

du Gay, P. (2004), ‘Against “Enterprise” (But Not Against “Enterprise”, For That Would Make No Sense)’, Organization, 11(1): 37–57.

Flynn, N. (2002), Public Sector Management, Harlow: Pearson Education.

Gaver, W., Dunne, A. and Pacenti, E. (1999), ‘Design: Cultural Probes’, Interactions: New Visions of Human-Computer Interaction, Jan–Feb.

Gibson, G. (2006, updated 2008), Careers in Design: Doing the Business, London: Design Council.

Greater London Authority (2004), ‘Making London Better for All Children and Young People’ (report), London: Greater London Authority.

Gyford, J., Leach, S. and Game, C. (1989), The Changing Politics of Local Government, London: Unwin Hyman.

Hartley, J. (2005), ‘Innovation in Governance and Public Services: Past and Present’, Public Money and Management, 25(1): 27–34.

HM Government (2004), ‘Every Child Matters: Change for Children’ (report). Available at http://www.everychildmatters.gov.uk/publications [last accessed 25 January 2009].

Hoggett, P. (1996), ‘New Modes of Control in the Public Service’, Public Administration, 74 (1): 9–32.

Horton, S. and Farnham, D. (1999), ‘New Labour: Legacies, Impact and Prospects’ in S. Horton and D. Farnham (eds.), Public Management in Britain, London: Macmillan, pp.247–58.

Macauley, C. (2003), Job Mobility and Job Tenure in the UK, London: Office for National Statistics.

Martin, Steve (2002), ‘Best Value: New Public Management or New Direction?’, in K. McLaughlin, S. Osborne and E. Ferlie (eds.), New Public Management: Current Trends and Future Prospects, London: Routledge, chapter 8.

McRobbie, Angela (2002), ‘Clubs to Companies: Notes on the Decline of Political Culture in Speeded-Up Creative Worlds’, Cultural Studies, 16(4): 516–31.

Newman, J., Raine, J., and Skelcher, C. (2001), ‘Transforming Local Government: Innovation and Modernization’, Public Money and Management, 21(2): 61–8.

Noble, M., McLennan, D., Wilkinson, K., Whitworth, A., Barnes, H., and Dibben, C. (2008), The English Indices of Deprivation 2007, London: Communities and Local Government.

Osborne, Stephen P. and McLaughlin, Kate (2002), ‘The New Public Management in Context’, in McLaughlin, Kate, Osborne, Stephen P. and Ferlie, Ewan (eds.), New Public Management: Current Trends and Future Prospects, London: Routledge, chapter 1.

Sanderson, I. (2001), ‘Performance Management, Evaluation and Learning in “Modern” Local Government’, Public Administration, 79(2): 297–313.

Stewart, J. (2000), The Nature of British Local Government, New York: St Martin’s Press.

Thackara, J. (2005), In the Bubble: Designing in a Complex World, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Whitfield, D. (2001), Public Services or Corporate Welfare: Rethinking the Nation State in the Global Economy, London: Pluto Press.

Whitfield, D. (2006), New Labour’s Attack on Public Services, Nottingham: Spokesman.