## CHAPTER 4

# Public Art, Design-led Urban Regeneration and its Evaluation

Doug Sandle

Notwithstanding its problematic sub-texts, the term ‘the lipstick on the gorilla’, which suggests a superficial glamorization or makeover, has often been cited as criticism of public art and design, especially when such is used as addon attempts to improve the quality of the built environment. Contributing to a debate in the pages of the magazine of the Australian Architectural Association, Newton (2001) suggests that the use of regional design review panels to improve the environment, particularly if reduced to a policing role, is potentially limited ‘to putting lipstick on the gorilla’. More concretely, John Dales (2008) of the UK’s Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE), states that:

I’ve had numerous schemes featuring fancy paving materials, shiny stainless steel and exquisitely manicured landscaping presented to me as examples of good urban design practice when, to be honest, they’re no more than ‘lipstick on a gorilla’.

The phrase – as do its companions ‘plop art’, ‘plonk art’, ‘the turd on the plaza’ and ‘corporate baubles’ – has a particular specificity and legitimacy in referring to those sculptures and street ornaments of the middle and following decades of the twentieth century that adorned shopping malls, corporate entrances and civic spaces without too much consideration for their aesthetic, semiotic or sustainable relationship to either their surroundings or users. Moreover, they did little for the creative integrity of their artists. This was not confined to the UK or the developing urban environments of Europe. Hughes (1990), for example, summarizes the impact of modernist examples of public art in American cities

as abstract ironmongery and sculpture that means nothing but is part of the perfunctory etiquette of urban development, most of it larger than it needs to be.

Locked in a losing battle with the big-city environment, it manages to look both arrogant and depleted.

While Brecknock (2002: 2) suggests that historically the momentum for modern public art was a response by artists to Herbert Read’s 1948 clarion call for sculpture to come ‘out in the open, into the church and the marketplace, the town hall and the public park’ and for their work ‘to rise majestically above the agora, the assembled people’, the working practices, objectives and the short-term attitudes of developers, planners and civic councils must bear much of the responsibility for the more mundane, dispiriting and intrusive examples. However, it also fair to state that much of contemporary public art has tried to be more diversified, engaging and innovative, and part of a more challenging intervention by artists and designers into public space. Accordingly, what is now often referred to as ‘art in the public realm’, a term used to reflect its broad range of activities, purposes, scope and methodologies, requires more than an overused metaphor for its assessment, particularly given the rapid growth of public art in Britain during the last ten years or so.

This chapter discusses the roles of public art within wider strategies of design-led urban regeneration. As such, it sees public art as part of a set of material and visual interventions into the public realm that include urban design, architecture, landscape architecture and visual communication, and their instrumental deployment towards economic, cultural and social improvement. Hence, ‘design-led urban regeneration’ also refers to the specific objects that are developed for this process as much as to their role as signifiers for internal and external audiences of urban centres. With this instrumentalization of public art towards a number of regeneration objectives comes issues of the evaluation of its impact, policy, management and commissioning. The roles of public art and the way these are evaluated are issues that strike at the heart of debates concerning the ownership and use of creativity.

## Public Art, the Creative Industries and Urban Regeneration

The impetus for the recent development of public art has been driven by a number of factors, including the expansion of artist-in-residence schemes, the utilization of art in the growing heritage sector and the notion of ‘Per Cent for Art’, where it is argued that a percentage of capital expenditure on new buildings and environmental construction, usually between 0.5 and 2 per cent, should be devoted to new art and craft design. The advent of European funding for social and environmental regeneration, the National Lottery, and the professionalization of public art through the emergence of consultants, agencies and specialist local authority public art officers, have also significantly contributed to the growth of public art. No longer confined to statues or abstract structures, public art embraces temporary as well as permanent work, uses new media such as digital sound and light, incorporates film and performance, and is often as much concerned with process as with the end product. Public art is a growth industry, with many cities and regional councils adopting strategic policies, employing public art officers and hiring consultants to devise, implement and evaluate their programmes.

While some public artworks continue to be ‘plonked’ into place, there is nonetheless a growing recognition of the need for artists to work intrinsically with architects, planners and construction engineers from the initial stages of a project, as exemplified by Bridlington’s award-winning South Promenade, where the artist Bruce MacLean contributed from the early conceptual stage in a partnership with the architects, Bauman Lyons. Such a working process has since been encouraged by the initial art and architecture scheme of the Royal Society for Arts and, more recently, its successor, PROJECT, which was conceived ‘to widen the artist’s remit and involvement, not just to working with architects and architecture, but to include planning and urban design, working directly on masterplanning with developers’ (Minton 2008: 3).

The most powerful driver for the recent expansion of public art has been its use in environmental and social regeneration and also its often-presumed consequential role in the branding, promotion and the signification of cities, towns and regions. With the increasing role of public art in physical regeneration, there has also been a contingent emphasis on its potential social value, particularly when it engages with community needs (Sharpe et al. 2005). Accordingly, claims for the social efficacy of public art are found in an increasing number of policies, planning guidance strategies and mission statements throughout the country. However, while it is ‘perhaps the perceived potential of contemporary public art to work on multiple levels and its adaptability that gives it such cultural viability’ (Sharpe et al. 2005: 1004), such can be problematic. A study by the University of Westminster (Roberts et al. 1993) draws attention to a comment by an American critic, Plagens (1986), who argued that public art was being asked to carry an impossible burden by being required to be popular, inoffensive to minorities, profit-inducing, civically enhancing and aesthetically pleasing. The end result, it was suggested, was too often one of mediocrity. A review and survey of public art in Wales noted that:

Public art has often been required to serve a range of cultural and social needs as well as satisfy different stakeholders and conflicting interests. Whether it be regeneration, social welfare, community health or heritage and tourism it is frequently the case that the artist is required to play different roles and meet a diverse range of expectations, often at the expense of his or her own creativity and aesthetic integrity. (Roberts et al. 2003: 1)

As Belfiore and Bennett (2008) demonstrate in their intellectual history of the social impact of the arts, a belief in the social instrumental usage of the arts, and the opposing belief in their intrinsic aesthetic value, has a complex historical and philosophical provenance. However, in more recent decades, the former has been both a contributor to, and an expression of, an increasingly political and policy-driven agenda. Bell, O’Connor et al. (2007), Hall and Robertson (2001), Heartfield (2005), Holden (2004) and Selwood (2002, 2006), for example, highlight the political shift from a view of culture as having intrinsic values to an increasingly instrumental agenda, particularly with regard to the use of the arts to address environmental regeneration and social exclusion. Selwood (2002) documents various policy initiatives – from 1979 with the new Conservative government’s concern for ‘value for money’, to the cultural interventionist policies of New Labour. Regarding the latter, Holden (2004) notes that although ‘New Labour was committed to supporting culture for its own sake, it sought various ways in which to justify this commitment, assume managerial control over cultural spending, and to audit the results’ (2004: 15). In 1999, a report on arts and sport to the Cabinet Office Social Exclusion Unit by the Policy Action Team 10 (PAT10), highlighted the contribution of both to neighbourhood renewal, improving health, employment, crime prevention and individual pride. In turn, the Arts Council of England (1999: 1), perhaps mindful of the source of its funding and the increasing impetus for accountability, responded with a framework document entitled Addressing Social Exclusion: A Framework for Action, in which it stated, ‘The arts have a vital role in community development – delivering tangible social and economic benefits such as jobs, improved skills, and learning opportunities.’ If this agenda was operationalized through the Arts Council and its grant-awarding powers, the political impetus came from a complex positioning of culture and the arts, which on the one hand economically were reformulated as part of the cultural industries, on the other as a social service. With regard to the latter, as Heartfield states, New Labour’s Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) ‘promised to make cultural provision accessible to “the many not just the few” and cast cultural institutions in the role of “centres for social change”’ (Heartfield 2005: 12).

A number of key studies and publications that purported to demonstrate, highlight or advocate the instrumental contribution of the arts to economic, environmental and social development were also influential in both contributing to and expressing this political agenda. With regard to the arts generally, Reeves (2002), among several, draws attention to the importance of

Myerscough’s (1988) often cited work, The Economic Importance of the Arts in Great Britain, which she states, ‘had a far-reaching impact on the cultural sector and strengthened its argument for the economic impact of the arts as a powerful justification for continued public funding’. Reeves highlights later key work on the economic status and contribution of the arts and the cultural sector generally, such as O’Brien and Feist (1995), Casey, Dunlop and Selwood (1996), Pratt (1997) and the DCMS (2001).

While the cultural industries sector is much broader and diverse than just the arts, such reports on its purported economic contribution added to the growth of the instrumentalist agenda for art, as did those publications that set out to demonstrate the contribution of culture to social, community and personal development, particularly as located within the policy framework of social inclusion. In this respect, Reeves highlights the work of the consultancy organization Comedia – which, supported by the Arts Council, resulted in the discussion document The Social Impact of the Arts (Landry, Bianchini et al. 1993), and also work by Galloway (1995), and Landry et al. (1996). As do many other commentators, Reeves draws particular attention to the influential work of Matarasso (1997), whose Use or Ornament? The Social Impact of Participation in the Arts was particularly influential with the Labour government and the DCMS. Heartfield (2005: 12) summarizes Matarasso’s influence on the social inclusion agenda, as follows:

Matarasso invested the arts with extraordinary qualities … The real purpose of the arts, he wrote, was to contribute to a stable, confident and creative society. Participation in the arts could promote tolerance and contribute to conflict resolution, provide a route of rehabilitation and integration for offenders, help people feel a sense of belonging and involvement, be an effective means of health education, and extend involvement in social activity.

With particular regard to public art and environmental design, Hall and Robertson (2001) cite the influence of the Arts Council’s Art into Landscape initiatives of the 1970s (Arts Council of Great Britain, 1974, 1977), Petherbridge’s Art for Architecture (1987) and the 1988 Action for Cities Programme, in which ‘the significance of the arts as a route to urban regeneration was first enshrined’ (Hall and Robertson, 2001: 6). Stakeholders within the public art constituency thus found themselves literally placed and grounded within the social and community arena, and accordingly endeavoured to fulfil such purposes. While enthusiasm for such may well have been driven by a genuine sense of altruism, the instrumentalist agenda and its application to environmental and social problems also provided a means for the advocacy of public art, the promotion of professional interests and for the financial benefits of ‘policy attachment’, a concept identified by Gray (2002) as a process used by the cultural sector generally as a ‘strategy that allows a “weak” sector with limited political clout to attract enough resources to achieve its policy objectives’.

## Evaluating Public Art

However, with the instrumental use of the arts there was a price to pay, as there was also a concomitant political and pragmatic imperative to demonstrate their efficiency and effectiveness in fulfilling that role and to justify the advocacy that developed around it. While this was largely in response to the best value and economic efficiency politics of accountability of both the Conservative and Labour governments (Selwood 2002), such an imperative was also reinforced by those eager to demonstrate the validity of their advocacy. In particular, if through a strategy of ‘policy attachment’ the arts gained more public funding, this nonetheless had to be justified and shown to be efficiently deployed as for any other government-funded sector. As Selwood (2006) notes, with the Labour government’s establishment, in 1997, of the DCMS, there was an imperative that increases in funding ‘would be linked to recipient organizations meeting its expectations’ as part of the DCMS’s closer control over its political agenda.

On a more local level, whether funded by the public or private sector, if a commissioned work of public art is ‘required’ to contribute to tourism, to regenerate a particular environment, or to bring some socially fragmented community together, it might seem reasonable for such to be demonstrated as being achieved or otherwise. For example the brief for an evaluation of the ‘Welcome to the North’ public art programme requires evaluations of both the particular constituent projects, and an overview evaluation of the pan-regional programme. Despite the methodological complexity, such evaluation is required to demonstrate whether as a result of the programme and its projects there has been improved quality of place(s), increased positive perception of the North of England nationally and internationally, growth in the number of visitors to the North of England, and increased economic impact.

It is not surprising, therefore, that a culture of individual project and programme evaluations is accompanied by a growing body of overviews, reviews, evaluations of evaluation itself and a consideration of whether they justify, demonstrate and argue for the efficacy of instrumental interventions by art (and the arts generally) into the physical and social environment. Government agencies, consultancies, researchers and academics, and commissioning bodies have initiated such endeavours, which are variously characterized by a literature review, a summary of policy context, the identification of good and/ or bad practice, a closer look at particular case studies, a consideration of methodological and practical issues, a call for more research and sometimes the production of a tool kit for evaluation. For example, the Arts Council of England and the Scottish Arts Council commissioned reviews of the arts and social exclusion (Jermyn 2001; Goodland, Hamilton, and Taylor 2002), the DCMS itself commissioned a review of the contribution of culture to regeneration by researchers at London Metropolitan University (Evans and Shaw 2004) and also a research study by Leeds Metropolitan University on the dimensions of social inclusion through culture and sport (Long, Welch, Bramham et al. 2002).

Generally, attempts to produce hard empirical and quantifiable evidence to evaluate the success or otherwise of arts instrumental interventions, except for some notable exceptions, have been found to lack validity and reliability through flawed methodology. Reeves (2002) identifies such methodological weaknesses as including a lack of conceptual clarity and narrow conceptualizations of social and economic impact, the use of small samples, the reliance on self-reports with little corroborating evidence of impacts, over-reliance on official statistics, lack of methodological transparency, especially with regard to sampling frames and methods, simplistic and naive explanations for attributing positive outcomes to arts projects, a lack of baseline data and the need for longitudinal research and also additionality. The latter refers to the extent that arts interventions might achieve outcomes that are more efficient or economic than other kinds of intervention. Another often cited issue is that of attribution, where it cannot always be assumed that where an outcome has been demonstrated, it has been achieved by the project under evaluation rather than by another unrelated cause.

In public art this is particularly problematic where particular works are an integral part of an overall design intervention. It may be difficult to desegregate and attribute any found outcomes to the artwork alone, or identify its particular contribution to this. Some particular assumed outcomes of public art and its economic impact are also oversimplified – tourism being an example (Allnott 2000). Apart from the requirements of surveys to clarify whether ‘tourists’ or ‘visits’ are being counted, distinctions between chance encounters and those sought out for the tourist gaze need to be differentiated.

There are other practical concerns with regard to the evaluation of instrumental interventions by cultural initiatives and the arts in general, which also apply to public art. For example, the process of evaluation has a tendency not only to be cumbersome and time-consuming, but often neither budgeted nor timetabled into projects by sponsors or commissioners. Evaluation guides for public art projects still remain time-consuming and, for example, the evaluation toolbox provided by the public art thinktank Ixia, while rationalizing and standardizing, still requires either a facilitator or some training. Conversely, attempts to systematize evaluation can also result in a tick box mentality, which can lead to a superficial involvement by project workers. Long et al. (2002: 81) from their review of the projects they examined, comment that:

Projects are more concerned to demonstrate that they are delivering the services that they committed themselves to than to engage in the complexities of evaluation. Indeed, evaluation of outcomes capable of ‘proving’ the case may be beyond the resources/capacity of projects like these. They have to address competing priorities on limited resources and keep funding agents happy with a view to extending the life of the project (and in some cases their own employment).

## Problematizing the Instrumental Roles of Public Art

However, apart from the pressures of delivery there is also, among the arts constituency, some resistance to the very notion that art projects can be measured or evaluated to produce evidence-based policy, a view also reflected by some researchers and academics. Among Reeves’s list of reasons for the lack of robust research and evaluation there is ‘lack of interest by the arts world (outside the context of funding relationships) in developing evaluative systems through which to prove its value’, and ‘negative perceptions of evaluation by those involved in arts projects, who often regard it as intrusive’ (Reeves 2002: 34). Such resistance can reflect deeper philosophical and critical differences regarding the nature of aesthetic values and art practice, particularly where aesthetic experience is regarded as having intrinsic qualities that are not regarded as accessible to evidence-based justifications. Belfiore and Bennett assert that:

The production of measurable evidence that might throw light on the claims made for the transformative power of the arts is particularly problematic. For a start, the idea of transformation is so complex that it is impossible to imagine how it might be reduced to a set of measurable attributes ... The aesthetic encounter, above all, is an individual subjective experience and, although it can be shown that certain elements of this are historically and socially determined, there are very real limitations to the extent to which further meaningful generalizations can be made … Whatever economic contribution the arts might make, and however much they might promote social cohesion and community empowerment, these are not the primary characteristics of the aesthetic experience. (Belfiore and Bennett 2008: 6–7)

Moreover, there are a set of other issues that also have implications for the instrumental role of the arts, and public art in particular, which challenge the very rationale for such practice and consequently the status of its evaluation. Hall and Robertson (2001), for example, remind us of the assumed essentialism of much of the language and concepts of urban design and public art, particularly with regard to notions of space, place, public and identity (issues that have also been identified from multidisciplinary discourses such as cultural geography and the interrogation of modernist notions of the city and urban space). They question public art’s claim to turn ‘space into place’ and ‘invest the abstract with social meaning’, whereby such meaning is assumed to be consensual, unique, and trans-historical.

For some, however, the very association of art with urban and environmental regeneration, and its instrumental application as a ‘sticking plaster’ for the problems of social exclusion and deprivation, is itself flawed. Merli (2002: 5), in her criticism of Matarasso’s Use or Ornament?, asserts that his methodology only allows him to gather ideas and information from his respondents and not ‘to evaluate real modifications in their daily conditions of existence in relation to specific social issues’. Moreover, she likens his and other policymakers’ interest in participatory arts to the behaviour ‘of “new missionaries” who play guitar with marginalized youth, the disabled and the unemployed, aiming at mitigating the perception which they have of their own exclusion’ (Merli 2002: 7–8). With reference to the kind of outcomes his research sought to establish, she argued that:

It does not seem that, feeling differently … about the place where one lives will transform slums into wonderful places, nor that just helping ‘transform the image of public bodies’ … will transform the reality of public bodies, nor that having ‘a positive impact on how people feel’ … will change people’s daily conditions of existence – it will only ‘help’ people to accept them. However, making deprivation more acceptable is a tool to endlessly reproduce it (Merli 2002: 8).

Malcolm Miles (1998, 2000) is also critical of public art’s collusion with some of the problematic outcomes of regeneration, such as the anti-democratic nature of its gentrification and commodification. For example, he writes of ‘the phoney facades of London’s Gabriel Wharf’ as representing ‘the city as a space for the tourist gaze and mini shopping mall, both setting up relations of consumption rather than sociation’, and accuses public art as a means of ‘legitimizing public enclaves’, and that ‘the importation of art or heritage to ‘humanize’ developments such as Docklands contradicts the erasure of the real histories of work and dwelling of such sites’ (Miles 1998: 20). Miles is also critical of the hegemonic professionalization and mystification of urban design and architectural practice in imagining and designing the city. Cities, he argues, are a product of planning and design professions, which ‘serve a dominant ideology’ and whose methodologies are also ‘ideologically constructed around particular attitudes to society’.

However, the very notion that environmental regeneration programmes and the cultural interventions that increasingly accompany them are always necessarily divisive, exploitative and socially dysfunctional, has been questioned. In particular, it might be argued that in some cases the use of culture can have a more fundamentally positive contribution in enabling such programmes to be both rooted within the needs of places and their communities, and to be effective in addressing them. Steven Miles (2005) sees a dynamic and positive relationship between the cultural and historical roots of the Newcastle Gateshead Quays area of the North-East and its regeneration programme. He suggests that Broudehoux’s assertion that ‘the imposed readymade identities of regeneration can often reduce several different visions of local culture into a single vision that reflects the aspirations of a powerful elite and the values, lifestyles, and expectations of potential investors and tourists’ (Broudehoux 2004: 26) reflects a rather static image of city life and the meanings people attach to it. Conversely, the iconic redevelopment of the Newcastle Gateshead Quays, he suggests, connects with a particular history and culture that is located within the experience and identity of its local inhabitants, and which both shapes and is embodied by the particular redevelopment. He argues that to describe such a process as depoliticizing, underestimates the degree to which the meanings that people invest in such developments are ‘individualized and place-specific’.

Similarly Bailey, Miles and Stark set out ‘to take issue with Zukin’s suggestion that culture-led regeneration actively undermines urban distinctiveness’ (2004: 49). They accordingly suggest that culture-led regeneration may be most successful ‘in those circumstances in which it, intentionally or unintentionally, teases out that distinctiveness’. Bailey et al. reach their conclusions, as does Miles, from a consideration of the early results from a ten-year review and evaluation programme of the Newcastle Gateshead Quays regeneration, undertaken by the Cultural Investment and Strategy Impacts Research (CISIR) at Northumbria University. From their analysis of the CISIR’s early findings they suggest that:

Perhaps successful urban regeneration is not about a trickle-down effect at all, but in fact almost the reverse: it is about revitalizing cultural identities in a way which represents a counter-balance to broader processes of cultural globalization. In other words, culture-led regeneration perhaps provides a framework within which, given the right conditions, local people can re-establish ownership of their own sense of place and space and, perhaps more importantly, of their own sense of history. (Bailey et al. 2004: 49)

Significantly, Bailey et al. regard the contribution of the Angel of the North as the key that allowed the potential of the Quays to be to be unlocked, and accordingly public art is an integral element in their regeneration.

The work of the CSIR addresses some of the failure of evaluation to take account of longitudinal impacts, and provides an opportunity for a comprehensive investigation into the cultural, environmental and social interventions of a major regeneration programme involving public art. Consequently, it provides an opportunity to addresses some of the weaknesses and methodological flaws of evaluation as previously highlighted. While reviews and meta-analysis of the evaluation of instrumental art interventions have clearly highlighted such weaknesses, there continues to be refinements and developments that seek to improve the effectiveness and validity of evaluation through the development of more appropriate qualitative methodologies, the use of Scientific Realism (Jackson 2007) and logic models. Holden (2004), for example, with reference to what he has termed ‘Cultural Value’ (a concept he develops in part as an attempt to avoid the assumptive language of essentialist notions of art), claims that:

The type of measurement that may be used in the calculus of Cultural Value will display wider and more holistic characteristics than current measurement systems. They will tend to include a greater emphasis on qualitative measures and pay more attention to public perceptions. They will also tend to be more open-ended and future-focused rather than being engaged in tracking outcomes against predetermined expectations.

Equally, Merli (2002) also suggests modifications in evaluation, such as less reliance on questionnaires and more on the use of in-depth interview, which she regards as more appropriate for assessing the impact of participatory art programmes on social deprivation in that they enable the ‘interviewer to understand and not simply measure’ (2002: 13). Merli’s critique explicitly highlights the relevance and importance of theory in contextualizing the sociological nature of deprivation, its impact and consequences and the role of the arts and their evaluation. The lack of theoretical grounding in such is regarded by Merli as a major problem and she acknowledges the importance of a theoretical underpinning from sociology and other disciplines, such as theories of creativity and art perception and empirical studies in cognitive psychology on the effect of the arts on behaviour.

While such underpinnings are rare, Lister (2007) draws upon the ethnographic theories and research of Prus and Simmel to identify, produce and monitor processes and mechanisms that both govern and indicate stages of both social exclusion and social engagement. Such an approach acknowledges the importance of societal, cognitive and phenomenological responses to both the work and processes of art and its interventions into the social and physical environment, and accords with an increasing recognition of the importance of interdisciplinary approaches to their critique and evaluation. Along with a recognition of the dynamics and complexities of concepts such as ‘space’, ‘place’ and ‘public’, this takes us back to a consideration of reception of, and responses to, public art and also environmental design in general. This may be understood in respect to the observation by environmental psychologists Proshansky, Fabian and Kaminoff (1983), who argue that the processes by which a person defines him/ herself in a society are not restricted to making distinctions between oneself and significant others, but also include objects and things, and the spaces and places in which they are found.

## Conclusion

Just as the policy and professional grounds of urban regeneration have widened, so art in the public realm has become a more diverse discipline. Regeneration involves the interlocking of a number of concerns, which may include pressure to provide an urban scenario that attracts inward investment, an ambition to lay down ‘attitudinal markers’ that communicate place identity, and to engage citizens in a collective re-imagination of their locality. Public art has increasingly become absorbed into a government instrumentalist agenda that sees such aspects of the creative industries as necessary to achieving regeneration aims. It has become part of wider remit of ‘design-led regeneration’ alongside other creative practices in the built environment. As an instrumentalist process, contributing to wider environmental and social regeneration aims, public art has become increasingly subject to audit and measurement, while the multi-layered demands of regeneration and the diversity of art practices it involves make this process potentially problematic. Concurrently, the practices of public art have also become more complex, moving beyond the simple ‘dressing’ of public space to a wider range of engagements and uses of media, which might conform to or challenge such agendas. At the heart of these developments, it seems, is the question of ownership over creativity and, indeed, its evaluation.

Public art and the problems of its evaluation highlight the complexity of space and place, its public perception and the sociocultural processes involved in public reception and ownership. Art and design, and their interventions into the environment and their evaluation (including critical discourse of their aesthetic value), need to be framed and contextualized within an understanding of the wider cultural, social and psychological processes that characterize and determine the interrelationships of practice, public response and ownership. Ultimately, and in common with many chapters in this book, this ownership, however, may be distributed across actors and ‘actants’, across structures and networks of people and things. It is the alignment and orchestration of these and, indeed, the struggle to wrest power over this process, where the tensions between policy and its management are revealed.

## References

Allnutt, D. (2004), ‘Review of Tourism Statistics’, National Statistics Quality Review Series, Report No. 33, London: Department of Culture, Media and Sport.

Arts Council of England (1999), Addressing Social Exclusion: A Framework for Action, London: Arts Council of England.

Arts Council of Great Britain (1974), Art into Landscape, London: Arts Council of Great Britain.

Arts Council of Great Britain (1977), Art into Landscape, London: Arts Council of Great Britain.

Bailey, C., Miles, S. and Stark P. (2004), ‘Culture-Led Urban Regeneration and the Revitalization of Identities in Newcastle, Gateshead and the North-East of England’, International Journal of Cultural Policy, 10(1): 47–65.

Belfiore, E. (2006), ‘The Social Impacts of the Arts – Myth or Reality’, in Mirza, M. (2006) (ed.), Culture Vultures: Is UK Arts Policy Damaging the Arts?, London: Policy Exchange. Available at www.policyexchange.org.uk/Publications.aspx?id=164 [last accessed October 2008].

Belfiore, E. and Bennett O. (2008), The Social Impact of the Arts: An Intellectual History, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Bell, D., O’Connor, J., Taylor, C. and Gonzalez, S. (2007), ‘Yorkshire Cities and Culture. A Review of Current Thinking’ (report commissioned by the Yorkshire Cultural Observatory and the Yorkshire and Humber Key Cities group), Leeds: University of Leeds.

Brecknock, R. (2002), ‘This Place – This Time – This Culture’ (report), Brecknock Consulting, Darwin. Available at: http://www.brecknockconsulting.com.au/ 07\_downloads/AILA-Darwin-Brecknock.PDF [last accessed August 2008].

Broudehoux, A. (2004), The Making and Selling of Post-Mao Beijing, London: Routledge.

Casey, B., Dunlop R. and Selwood, S. (1996), Culture as Commodity? The Economics of the Arts and Built Heritage in the UK, London: Policy Studies Institute.

Dales, J. (2008), ‘The Best Schemes Are Not Necessarily the Biggest or the Most Beautiful’, Resource for Urban Design Information. Available at RUDI, http://www.rudi.net/node/19641 [last accessed September 2008].

DCMS (2001), Creative Industries Mapping Document 2001 (2nd ed.), London: Department of Culture, Media and Sport.

Evans, G. and Shaw, P. (2004), The Contribution of Culture to Regeneration in the UK: A Review Of Evidence, London: DCMS.

Galloway, S. (1995), Changing Lives: The Social Impact of the Arts, Edinburgh: Scottish Arts Council.

Goodland, R, Hamilton, C. and Taylor P. D. (2002), ‘Not Just a Treat: Arts and Social Inclusion’ (report to the Scottish Arts Council, Scottish Centre for Cultural Policy Research and Department of Urban Studies), Glasgow: University of Glasgow.

Gray, C. (2002), ‘Local Government and the Arts’, Local Government Studies, 28(1): 77–90.

Hall, T. and Robertson, I. (2001), ‘Public Art and Urban Regeneration: Advocacy, Claims and Critical Debates’, Landscape Research, 26(1): 5–26.

Heartfield, J. (2005), ‘The Creativity Gap’, Blueprint Broadside, May. Available at http://www.design4design.com/broadsides/creative.pdf [last accessed July 2008].

Holden, J. (2004), Capturing Cultural Value: How Culture Has Become a Tool of Government Policy, London: Demos.

Hughes, R. (1990), Nothing if Not Critical: Selected Essays on Art and Artists, London: Collins-Harvill.

Jackson, A. (2007), Evaluation of Public Art: A Literature Review and Proposed Methodology (evaluation report for Yorkshire Culture), Bath: Annabel Jackson Associates.

Jermyn, H. (2001), The Arts and Social Exclusion: A Review Prepared for the Arts Council of England, London: The Arts Council of England.

Landry, C., Bianchini, F., Maguire, M., and Worpole, K. (1993), The Social Impact of the Arts: A Discussion Document, Stroud: Comedia.

Landry, C., Green, L., Matarasso, F. and Bianchini, F. (1996), The Art of Regeneration: Urban Renewal Through Cultural Activity, Stroud: Comedia.

Lister, R. (2007), ‘The Arts of Survival: Defining the Participatory Arts as a Tool of Social Change’, unpublished thesis in part requirement of the award of M.Phil., University of Lincoln.

Long, J., Welch, M., Bramham, P., Butterfield, J., Hylton, K. and Lloyd, E. (2002), ‘Count Me In: The Dimensions of Social Inclusion through Culture and Sport’ (report for the Department for Culture, Media and Sport), Leeds: Centre for Leisure and Sport Research, Leeds Metropolitan University. Available at http://www.leedsmet.ac.uk/carnegie/countmein.pdf [last accessed November 2008].

Matarasso, F. (1997), Use or Ornament? The Social Impact of Participation in the Arts, Stroud: Comedia.

Merli, P. (2002), ‘Evaluating the Social Impact of Participation in Arts Activities. A Critical Review of François Matarasso’s Use or Ornament?’, International Journal of Cultural Policy, 8(1). Available at http://www.culturaldemocracy.net/paperview.php/1 [last accessed September 2008].

Miles, M. (1998), ‘Strategies for the Convivial City: A New Agenda for Education for the Built Environment’, Journal of Art and Design Education, 17(1): 17–25.

Miles, M. (2000), ‘After the Public Realm: Spaces of Representation, Transition and Plurality’, Journal of Art and Design Education, 19(3): 253–61.

Miles, S. (2005), ‘“Our Tyne”: Iconic Regeneration and the Revitalization of Identity in Newcastle Gateshead’, Urban Studies, 42(5/6): 913–26.

Minton, A. (2008), ‘The Project Initiative’, in Artists and Places: Engaging Creative Minds in Regeneration, London: CABE (Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment).

Myerscough, J. (1988), The Economic Importance of the Arts in Great Britain, London: Policy Studies Institute.

Newton, C. (2001), ‘Putting Lipstick on the Gorilla?’ Architecture Australia, May/June. Available at: http://www.architectureaustralia.com/aa/aaissue.php?article=16&issueid= 200105 &typeon=3 [last accessed September 2008].

O’Brien, J. and Feist, A. (1995), Employment in the Arts and Cultural Industries: An Analysis of the 1991 Census, ACE Research Report No. 2, London: Arts Council of England.

Petherbridge, D. (1987), Art for Architecture: A Handbook of Commissioning, London: Department of Environment.

Plagens, P. (1986), ‘The New Patronage and the New Public Art’, Art Criticism, 5(1): 19–33.

Pratt, A. C. (1997), The Cultural Industries Sector: Its Definition and Character from Secondary Sources on Employment and Trade, Britain 1984–91, London: London School of Economics, cited by Reeves (2002).

Proshansky, H., Fabian, A. and Kaminoff, R. (1983), ‘Place-Identity: Physical World Socialization of the Self’, Journal of Environmental Psychology, 3(1): 57–83.

Reeves, M. (2002), Measuring the Economic and Social Impact of the Arts: A Review, London: Arts Council England.

Roberts, G., Ball, S., Entwistle, T., Sandle, D. and Strange, I. (2003), A Review of Public Art in Wales 1998–2003, Cardiff and Leeds: RKL/The Arts Council of Wales.

Roberts, M., Marsh, C. and Salter, M. (1993), Public Art in Private Places: Commercial Benefits and Public Policy, London: University of Westminster Press.

Selwood, S. (2002), ‘The Politics of Data Collection: Gathering, Analysing and Using Data About the Subsidised Cultural Sector in England’, Cultural Trends, 12(47): 15–54.

Selwood, S. (2006), ‘Unreliable Evidence. The Rhetorics of Data Collection in the Cultural Sector’, in Mirza, M. (ed.), Culture Vultures: Is UK Arts Policy Damaging the Arts?, London: Policy Exchange. Available at www.policyexchange.org.uk/ Publications.aspx?id=164 [last accessed October 2008].

Sharp, J., Pollock, V. and Paddison, R. (2005), ‘Just Art for a Just City: Public Art and Social Inclusion in Urban Regeneration’, Urban Studies, 42(5/6): 1001–23.