## CHAPTER 6

# Routinized Labour in the Graphic Design Studio

AnneMarie Dorland

When clients ask me what kind of place a design studio is to work, they expect stories of playful days, an unpredictable and creative team of co-workers, and long hours filled with crumpled paper balls and ideas scrawled on walls. But for many of them, even our law, engineering and accountancy clients who work within highly systematized social environments, a day in the life of a designer in a studio setting would be surprisingly full of audit, measurement and management structures. In reality, the contemporary design studio is not a space of play and unstructured work, but one of regulation, measurement and multiple daily audit practices, where the time and output of individual designers is graded against a wide variety of metrics for success. Although the typical studio setting is a creative and generative space, designers are affected daily by a growing range of audit and measurement techniques. This chapter explores the demands placed on graphic designers by the internal structures of their workplaces, and by the framework of audit and accountability within which they are enmeshed.

## Research Background

The research for this chapter was conducted while I myself worked as an account manager in a large Canadian design and branding firm, in a role that involved liaising between clients and a creative team of designers to ensure that design projects were delivered on time, on brief and on budget. I occupied a very specific place in the design studio setting: as a past graphic designer turned account manager, I had the daily task of implementing the wide range of management and auditing tools that directly impacted upon the practices and procedures that make up the creative work of graphic designers. The majority of the research for this study was completed between 2005 and 2008, and draws on interviews with six freelance graphic designers, six full-time studio-based graphic designers, and observational research conducted in graphic design studio settings in Toronto and Calgary.<sup>1</sup>

By interviewing these designers, and observing the unique studio settings, I have attempted to explore the topic of how auditing procedures required to manage creative design in a commercial context influence individual practice within what is understood as a ‘creative space’. How are complex audit and time measurement systems used by studios to create value for clients? And how do time and financial pressures lead designers to devise various routines and forms of practice in order to accommodate the management restrictions within which they create?

## Pubic Conceptions of Work in the Studio Space

The design studio is culturally imagined not as a space of audit, structure and management, but as a creative space of play, a conception fostered and nurtured by the design industry. In the promotional material created by design studios, graphic designers (and creative workers in general) are often positioned as playful subjects or adolescent adults playing at work; popular notions of the creative workforce feature an extremely youthful group of self-actualizing high achievers (Maslow 1954). Even the vocabulary used within the studio setting is centred around a playful practice: whether playing with software, playing with a concept, or playing out an idea with a client, the self-descriptive language of the studio-workplace suggests many spaces and times for unstructured play/work. A playful studio is also assumed to be a successful one. Many Canadian studios have marketed a description of their space as playful and unstructured to great effect. The most wellknown example may be that of Bruce Mau, head of Bruce Mau Design (based in Toronto) who is such a proponent of the designer’s work as a form of play that he published his incomplete manifesto for growth, encouraging play as a practice in ‘serious’ graphic design (Mau 1998). Other design firms, such as the American group Tolleson Design, market their success at developing creative work for clients as being based on an undirected, unmanaged, playful practice, explaining their group holidays, paintball tournaments, cook-offs and pyjama parties as important elements of the design process (see Tolleson 1999).

This description of the studio as a creative and playful space is not entirely unwarranted; many practices used by designers are intentionally developed to encourage unique response, collaborative work and original thinking. This development of ‘play’ techniques is often fostered in the design education system, where the term ‘play’ often replaces ‘experimentation’ as a methodology of creative exploration.

A ‘playful’ creative workspace can even be presented as a valuable element of a successful business plan. As Andrew Ross explains:

In new media companies, neo-leisure [is] not simply tolerated as an unavoidable cost of doing business in the information age; it [is] actively encouraged as a way of adding value to an employee’s output. Play [is] valued as an activity that [can] catalyse ideas and serve as a battery source for recharging flagging energies at the workstation. The permissive workplace [can] take a playful turn at any moment, and however spontaneous the result, it [is] still part of the business plan. (Ross 2003)

Although Ross is, in this case, critical of the idea that play is solely an organic and spontaneous creative tool, framing it instead as a business tool used to increase productivity, his argument is persuasive. It is not only the case that a ‘playful’ studio space is a productive one, but also that ‘play’ is a marketable feature in the competitive industry of graphic design, both as a differentiator of the type of work done within the studio space for client groups, and as a draw for creative workers and clients. Yet in many cases, the inclusion of ‘play’ in the work day often disguises the lack of more traditional or quantifiable benefits for creative workers in the design studio workplace. Ross’s argument about ‘play’ as a productivity tool in disguise has been corroborated in every studio setting in which I observed.

But how does the practice of design within a studio setting actually work?<sup>2</sup> In my observation, the highly structured series of methodologies implemented by the design worker, and enforced by the studio structure, is very different from the intuitive creative process marketed to clients as the ‘studio way’. Even design studios that present their process to the public as including more than just play or creative work often fail to mention the multiple layers of audit and management tools implemented during the design process. In internal guidelines and promotional writing, one Toronto-based design and branding studio very briefly describes their creative process as beginning with ‘the creative briefing and end[ing] with the delivery of final art’, but does not address the internal structures in place which guide and shape the work of the designers (SFP 2004b).

Contrary to the ways in which the ‘creative workspace’ is marketed by design studios, designers in the studio setting commonly work within an elaborate series of measurements and audit procedures. They are asked to continually record and project their time needs for each stage of the design process, to tailor their creative solution to the expectations and needs of diverse internal audience groups, and to find quicker and more effective work practices to substitute for lengthy explorations and creative generation practices. These processes are perhaps best described by outlining the journey of a creative project from initial client request to final solution and delivery to client.

## The Intersection of the Creative Process and Audit Practices

A typical project in my own studio would begin not with the designer or creative director, but with the account management team, who would meet with the client and gather pertinent information about the project at hand (whether a new brand development, a piece of corporate communication, an annual report or any other printed, interactive or display project). This information is then translated into meeting notes and a creative brief document, which is approved in writing by the client and held as a quasi-legal agreement outlining the scope of work and specific expectations for the project. Having determined the budget for the general project (based on market value of the final designed deliverable, budget tolerance of the client, cost of previous projects, size and scope of project and size of team required), the account manager allocates a specific numbers of hours to each creative team member. During a weekly scheduling meeting, the account manager then plans how the creative team will use their time for various projects in the week ahead, a schedule that is then electronically generated and sent to designers. By the end of this stage, an average of two hours of conversation (on the phone and in meetings), seven e-mails and five key documents have been exchanged between the account management group and the client, constituting the initial stages of systematization and management of the designer’s process.<sup>3</sup>

It is only now that the project itself is presented to the designer, in the form of two templated working documents: a budgeted allocation of billable hours, and a creative brief (most often presented in a briefing meeting by the account manager). The creative brief outlines the ‘design objective’, who the project is directed to (the end audience), and the deadlines and considerations that the design must meet. Also within this brief are the unspoken social and technical expectations entailed in the decision-making process, such as the secondary effects of the design work (a logo, for example, must not only convey the name of the company or product, but also the cultural position and aspirational values of the brand). The brief may also mention the ‘tastes’ to be indulged (whether of the client or the end-user) and the specific expectations of the client regarding the way the work will be realized.

Undocumented information, such as the working relationship between the design team and the client, assumed understandings of the behaviour or habits of the end-user audience, the aesthetic conventions acceptable for the type of work to be produced, the family of work that this project must fit into, and the working structures within the studio, are all conveyed to the designer though meetings with clients, with account executives and via the social environment of the studio as a place of practice. It is ideally with all of this information, documented and undocumented, that the graphic designer enters into the series of encoding and decoding couplets that constitute design work within a large firm (Hall 1980). Indeed, it is by defining the practice of graphic designers as, at least in part, one of encoding messages and information for a ‘decoding’ audience, or end-user (Hall 1980), that we can see how the work of graphic designers is distinct from that of their decoding ‘audience’.<sup>4</sup>

At this point, the designer begins entering data into an online timerecording program (in six-minute increments), choosing one of hundreds of open dockets for internal and external work, documenting time spent on a project with a written description of activities and selecting sub-categories of tasks within which to list hours worked. With this, the designer begins work on the design of the communication solution to the presented brief. According to the designers I spoke to in one particular studio, there are three main activities that take place during this stage: group brainstorming, individual development of what the designers called ‘the big ideas’, and mood or concept boards.<sup>5</sup> However, brainstorming – despite being promoted as an ideal element of this studio’s service offering by directors and company literature – is notably vulnerable to time and client restrictions, and thus is not always pursued for ‘bread and butter’ projects, such as repeat advertising based on templated designs, brochures modelled on past creative work, or other lowbudget and quick turn-around work. In this studio, brainstorms frequently took the form not of large, formal meetings, but of informal gatherings around someone’s desk or the collecting of inspirational material from other designers. Similarly, mood/ concept boards were likely to appear not as finished presentations, but as piles upon tables, collections of previous work, or doodles on meeting notes. In many cases, therefore, the highly valued practices of brainstorming and background research are in fact given far less time than is advertised or described to clients.

As the design project progresses, work is monitored by the account team, and creative workers design for an internal audience of co-workers from both the design and account management sides of the office, pitching their solutions by referring to the technical aspects of the work when addressing the production staff, the marketing and client-pleasing aspects when talking to the account management staff, the cost-effectiveness and ease of implementation when talking to the directors, and most frequently, the aesthetic or ‘look-andfeel’ when addressing co-designers. This stage of internal review and approvals reinforces the management and systematization practices at work in the studio, as well as the measurement process of time and budget allocations. It is worth noting that in the studio setting, designers must account for their work in many different ways, and to many different audience groups. However, such accounting practices also contribute to the way designers think about their practice, forming what I will later describe as a ‘product image system’ (Ryan and Peterson 1982).

At this stage, the design (or deliverable) will not yet have been shown to the client, but will have undergone several rounds of internal revisions. Two to three solutions are often generated, based on brand standards, understandings of audience profile and details provided in the creative brief. These solutions are presented through the internal decision-making hierarchy in the studio: project manager, account manager and creative director. Changes are requested at each stage, and made by the designer so that the design slowly becomes a collaborative effort involving one graphic designer and at least three outside sources. Throughout this process, the designer continues to complete timesheets, which are monitored by the account manager. Schedules are revised, budgets adjusted and scope of work documents updated by the account management team.

The updated design solutions are then presented to the client by the account manager (or creative director) perhaps, but not necessarily, with the designer in attendance. Questions and change requests are noted by the account manager in an update to the creative brief, and as a contact report that is sent to the client. The design is then revised as requested, and returned to client, a process that is repeated until the client is satisfied with the result. Although it is not often acknowledged as a practice, in studio settings I observed, the initial brief is quickly left behind as a guideline for design, and the client is held as the only arbitrator of success. This, in itself, presents a form of constraint on designers, since work initially done for multiple audience groups (such as the internal creative team, the creative director and, perhaps most importantly, the end-user), is ultimately selected and judged by an audience group who may be uneducated about the process, and who may be using personal criteria for judging success that have not been shared with the designers themselves. It was not uncommon, in my observation, to hear choruses of complaints about the ignorance of client groups from designers. One freelance designer described the process of client approvals as:

A client is somebody who comes to you for your expertise and you give them your professional opinion, and but at the same time it’s always a challenge […] If I change something from red to blue, I don’t know how that is going to affect the client […] you are just using fuzzy logic, or just feeling your way through things a lot of the time, and to use words to sell them to the client becomes really important. (Graphic Designer A 2005)<sup>6</sup>

Having presented several solutions, each with an elaborate rationalization, to the client-audience, a direction is chosen and the designer begins the development of a final solution. This stage often requires multiple presentations by the account management team to the client-audience, each with varying degrees of revisions, which are often undertaken by a junior designer and supervised by a senior designer.

## Formalized Audit and Evaluation Techniques

Once the final design direction has been signed off, a formal approval form is submitted to the client, and the designer gathers his or her working files to be transferred to a production artist for a ‘final build-out’. This includes a full overhaul and checking of the digital files provided by the designer, and preparation of those files for the printer or publisher. Timesheet entries are reviewed by an account manager, and if the designer has worked beyond the allocated hours, the billable time is reduced by the account manager to balance the budget, decreasing the designer’s salary to profitability ratio, and impacting on his or her profit-sharing and salary negotiations in the future. Final files are generated, and archived in an online system. Clients are billed, using an invoice system that always reflects the budgeted value of the project rather than the hourly rate of the designer.

Design solutions are then put into practice by the client, and evaluated based on various testing metrics and internal/external feedback, including ‘disaster checking’ (used only to check for failure, rather than to evaluate success),<sup>7</sup> from which the client is able to assess the value of the end result. But other than this client-led ‘disaster checking’, what structures are used in the graphic design studio setting to measure, quantify and audit the final creative solution? In both studio settings, the value of the creative work was measured for client groups as a Return on Investment (ROI). This is calculated based on the value of the design ‘investment’ (measured by client and account management teams), and the value of the final solution from the client’s perspective (increased share price, increased market awareness, improved employee recruitment or improved internal work procedures). According to one account manager, the majority of time spent on ‘research’ for a design solution is often not based on generating information, but on evaluating findings, focusing on justifying the price of an end product to a client group. As one account manager put it: ‘No one wastes time they don’t have on research

before. You just need to show how good it was after. Then they come back.   
Do it before … you can’t get the money for that’ (Account Manager A 2008).

Occasionally, design solutions are also evaluated (by both design studio and client) using the concept of the ‘triple bottom line’, a measurement of the environmental, economic and societal impact of a design solution (McDaniel 2003). This form of evaluation removes the labour of the designer from the equation completely, factoring in only the measured effectiveness (as assessed by the client using their own internal metrics) of the outcome. It is most often used in cases where the project involves public funding (such as governmentassisted projects and not-for-profit or charitable work), and is usually delivered as a designed document and a formalized group presentation conducted by the design firm’s account team. A final project evaluation is then completed by the account management group using a visual mapping program that allows the account manger to document variations in profitability based on size of team, time spent, and tasks completed. In many cases, clients assess the success of a project using very few factors, often tied directly to measured exit survey results. Increases in sales or issue awareness are often considered the only reliable markers of success from a client’s point of view. These findings are fed back into the studio setting in one key way: through repeat business.

For the studio, success is evaluated using client feedback and testimonials, awards given by the design community, and the contribution a project can make to the overall studio portfolio. Projects are also evaluated based on their profitability ratio and speed of completion. Exit surveys are completed with clients, while standard testing of click through rates, in-market focus group testing, media survey analysis or user-survey feedback may be requested by the account team. In the studio settings in which I observed, the profitability of a project is the strongest indicator of success, as it determines whether projects of that specific kind, and for that specific client, can be taken on again without an increase in required team size or budget.

## Technologies of Audit in the Design Studio Setting

This example of the lifespan of a typical project demonstrates clearly the multitude of auditing, management and measurement techniques that impact upon the creative process of designers. Designers are subject to time auditing practices (timesheets, budget allocation, work forecasting and scheduling meetings), internal hierarchy approvals (creative approvals, creative veto held by account managers, approval of creative work by clients), external hierarchy of approvals (testing, client feedback, disaster checking), budget management restrictions (‘write-downs’ or performance review punishment for overuse of time), and systematization in their design process (such as a lack of involvement with external audience research and the development of the brief and a dependence on design standards and brand standards). These practices of measurement, audit and management have a profound impact on the creative practice of designers.

The structures of audit and accountability also become a technology at work within the design studio. I use the term ‘technology’ here to describe the ever present computers and scanners that make up so much of the physical space of the design studio, as well as Ursula Franklin’s definition of technology as a system, entailing ‘far more than its individual material components. [It involves] organization, procedures, symbols, new words, equations and most of all, a mindset’ (Franklin 1990: 12). In an industry where (billable, budgeted) time is literally money, these structures or ‘technologies’ can of course provide a profitable and beneficial framework for studio administration, allowing work to be done quickly, measured according to brand standards and assured of success, in turn guaranteeing repeat clients and dependable income for the studio. As one full-time graphic designer described it:

It’s not, you know, it’s not what you would think at school, but it’s the same for freelance, studio … you need to work in the system. And you need to work quickly, and to get it right the first time. [There is] nothing worse than having to go back and do it again and again: the client gets to be the creative at that point, and then you’ll never get it right. So you use the timesheets and the budget and the rest to help you … (Graphic Designer B 2008)

But how do these individual structures come to collectively define the process of creative work? And what practices or structures have designers developed in order to successfully create work within this social context of audit and management techniques? Based on my observations, two key ‘technologies’ of practice emerge as a result of the structural conditions within which designers work. Firstly, designers describe their work in different ways to appeal to different audiences (both internal and external), thus speeding their creative process through the multiple stages of internal approval and demonstrating a constant awareness of budget and time constraints. Secondly, designers work to create solutions that adhere to expected brand or design standards, building on examples of previously accepted work and relying upon repetition of a library of ideas to create quickly and avoid costly time spent on creative generation.

## A Re-imagining of the End Audience: The Product Image System

Let’s first examine how designers use the expectations of their different audiences to make creative decisions within a structured hierarchy of approvals. One graphic designer described her hierarchy of audience groups, and its impact upon her working processes, as follows:

You can’t just make something you know the client will like; we don’t have room to do a million versions, so you make a set of comps that you know can get past the account guys. Then, once you have that, you tweak them so that the creative director won’t have too many changes. Then … you know the client loves this or that, so you add a little of that right at the end. And if you are lucky, it gets through and you don’t have to start from scratch or make some – you know – major changes. (Graphic Designer C 2008)

When working in this way, designers are employing a concept of ‘the product image’, as described by Ryan and Peterson (1982) in their study of country music songwriting. In this study, the concept of the ‘product image’ is presented as a system of creative production, whereby the creation of a single product is divided into a series of smaller products, each with a separate target audience in mind. Each of these stages then represents a product image: a defined imagining or set of expectations generated by a particular audience group (Ryan and Peterson 1982: 23). In this model, Ryan and Peterson describe the product image as the determining factor within the hierarchical decision-making chain, providing a space for the integration of various, equally important audiences into an understanding of creative production.

Using this model, we can divide the production of a design project, such as a book cover design, into smaller cycles of production. The project changes from a sketch to a pitch, a proposal, a comp and, finally, a proof before being described as a book cover. Each of these stages represents a product image: a defined imagining or set of expectations generated by a particular audience group. An analysis of production work as a ‘product image’ system also allows us to understand the emergence of standardization within creative practice. As Ryan and Peterson explain: ‘The most common way of doing this is to produce works that are much like the products that have most recently passed thought all the links in the decision chain to become commercially successful’ (Ryan and Peterson 1982: 25).

Referring to creative work as a series of products also provides a way of acknowledging the role of smaller routines of production at different stages of a project, as well as the various audiences invoked in the creative process. In the studio setting, and with freelance designers, this manner of producing work using pre-accepted strategies (or routines) can lead to the development of, if not a house-style, then certainly a common aesthetic tone throughout a design portfolio.

The breaking down and dividing of design work into smaller pieces, each meant for a separate audience group, is a defining aspect of the structure of creative decision-making followed by graphic designers. During my observations in one studio space, I attended a meeting between a senior designer and a junior account representative about a rebranding assignment for a postsecondary educational institution in Toronto. Throughout the discussion, the design work was never described as a whole, but as a series of stages. First, designers referred to the ‘sketch’ (for which the audience was the rest of the internal design team), then the ‘comp’ (which was produced for an audience comprising the client), followed by the ‘proof’ (which was directed at a high level within the client organization), and finally the ‘deliverable’ (a finalized piece directed at an audience of teenagers and their parents contemplating college choices within the Toronto area). By using the ‘product image’ system to work within the highly managed decision-making process of the design studio, designers are able to create work that satisfies their twin (imposed) goals of creative approval, and quick and efficient time use.

This reliance on the product image system can be seen particularly in the design of branded corporate communication pieces. As one studio-based designer described, creative innovation in many cases is not imperative, and is often trumped by the importance of previously approved brand standards, and accountability or time measurement metrics.

For something like this, it looks like each thing would be so hard to come up with. But you don’t have time for that, and if you did, this is just not the project you want to spend some of that time on. So you jam it through, make something that works for everyone along the way; you know what they all want, it’s really not hard. Then you can get to the good stuff; I mean that’s why God invented brand standards, right? (Graphic Designer D 2008)

In the studio spaces that I observed, designers implemented their own ‘product image system’ when confronted with routine, last-minute challenges, or with projects which strongly adhered to a previously developed brand standard, often working without the advantage of a clear brief (forsaken by the account manager for the sake of time or efficiency). Work in a design studio must be done quickly (on average, the freelancers I spoke to budgeted 45 per cent more time for a specific project than their studio-based counterparts), and is better assured of success if it is created using these structures.<sup>8</sup>

## The Systematization of Creative Practice: The Use of Occupational Formulae

Although the system of ‘product image’ is one way in which designers are able to create design solutions that move quickly and expediently through the internal approval hierarchy of the studio, they also work within a system that encourages repetition of ideas in order to expedite the delivery of their solution to the client and to create in a more profitable manner.

In order to create work quickly, to present solutions that adhere to expected standards and to avoid spending costly time on creative generation, designers employ a range of practices. One corporate communications designer described the annual cycle of work through a studio as follows:

Every year you come up against the same issues … I mean, there are the same projects, you know: annuals, sustainability reports, same campaigns, new look. Which is fine, but … so you have your list of bits, and you know this works for them, and this works for them. And you can guarantee that if you give them what got approved last year, with new lipstick on it, it goes through. (Graphic Designer E 2008)

In contrast to the common focus on originality and unique creative solutions for individual clients publicized by design studios and freelance designers alike, budget restrictions and client guidelines often forced the designers I observed to rely upon standard and tested solutions, pushing them towards what Negus has described as the ‘habitual, un-reflexive and uncritical adherence to well-established production and occupational formulae’ (Negus 2002: 510). In these cases, standardized and tested solutions may include the reuse of work that has been previously accepted or approved (by the client in question, or by another similar client group). This may also include formulaic or risk-free solutions such as traditional layouts, popular photo choices or current trends in colour palettes.

In this way, designers in studio and freelance settings employ what Negus (2002) has termed ‘occupational formulae’, a way of understanding creative practice as a series of repeated and formulaic steps within work. I use the term here to describe the systematically determined work practices of graphic designers, in conjunction with a similar term offered by Ettema (1982: 91), of ‘routines of production’. Describing the working practices of television producers, Ettema uses the term to refer to the various shortcuts or corporate habits that ‘energize the producer’s creative abilities’ (Ettema 2002: 47). Ettema builds here on the work of Hirsch (1977), who explains that what we commonly understand as individual ‘creative’ input is often in fact the result of a production routine. These routines of production, according to Ettema, serve to create a perspective in the workplace that is conducive to fulfilling specific tasks, creating a shared organizational vocabulary and socializing new recruits.

An example of such routines in the day-to-day practice of graphic designers can be seen in a typical project planning meeting that I observed at one studio, attended by an account manager, a project manager, a designer and a creative director. The project manger and account manager led the meeting, guiding a discussion about plans for a new Corporate Sustainability Report (CSR), to be designed by the designer in attendance and led by the creative director. The brief presented by the account team included information about the current initiatives and status of the client’s company, their current activities that would be featured in the report, and the end uses of the document (presentation to government stakeholders, landowners and employees). The brief also included an outline of basic limitations, as well as the ‘deliverable’ elements of the design work (including page count, printing requirements, budgets and the availability of banked client images used in previous pieces). The choice of designer was based solely on the designer’s experience in creating approved solutions for this particular client successfully and quickly in the past. It was the account team that suggested the general creative direction, and they who held the creative veto on behalf of the client. The ‘look and feel’ of the piece had been predetermined in meetings between account management and client, copy and headlines were pre-written, and previous examples of successful applicable work had been gathered and awaited review on the table.

This is striking, because it counteracts many assumptions about the creative process in major studios. One might assume that the creative team would present ideas to the account executives, and yet the design work here was prescribed by the account manager to the designer, who was tasked simply with ‘making it happen’. The language of the meeting was at all times focused on marketing terms rather than on the design and aesthetic of the finished work. In this meeting, as in many others, the end-user audience was identified only in terms of their status in relation to the client group. Similarly, it was the case here, as in many other cases I observed, that designer engagement with the project, with background research, and with the client, was dependent on the budget allocated, and in this case was reduced to two meetings (both used to personally present proposed creative solutions to the client for approval). Moreover, continuous references were made to project work that had been done for the same client years before, which could be repackaged and updated for this particular task, and to designers who, having completed something similar, could offer guidance and suggestions for cost-cutting and timesaving strategies.

In this meeting, the structural imperatives of time and budget dictated the creative solution presented by the designer in more ways than just paper choice and time spent on outsourcing elaborate photography. The designer in this case was deliberately asked to engage in the use of ‘occupational formulae’, recycling previous solutions or previous concepts for use in this project. Since the designer was not given time to explore or to generate new creative solutions, he was forced to rely upon updating past work in order to satisfy the time and budget restraints. When asked about the end solution, this designer replied:

Well, it’s just … it’s what they want. And they pay the bills, don’t they? And [they] would never go for something like that, so there is no point fixing what isn’t broken. You just update: that’s what design is. Accessing the library in your head. You get good at it: you can remember bits of other recipes and come up with something that feels … you know, modern. New. Not like leftovers. That’s what being good at this job means. (Graphic Designer F 2008)

This reliance on formulaic solutions for repeat or ‘bread and butter’ work extends to the freelance world as well: ‘Sometimes, you know – I admit it – I do [work] like that too. You kind of have to, when you are banging out ideas and your time is billable’, admitted Jon. He went on to explain:

I think the worst thing that a designer can do… I think one of the worst things… is just scour through [Communication Arts] magazine or something like that. But a lot of people do, it’s just what happens, you know, time constraints; they just want a sampling of… I call it – well [we] call it – ‘turntablism’, where it’s like you are just looking for a quick style that they can ape. (Graphic Designer A 2005)

By employing these ‘routines of production’, freelance designers are able to hasten the process of creative production, reducing their workload and guaranteeing an acceptable design solution for their client. Only one of the freelancers that I spoke to expressed misgivings about relying exclusively upon their own personal ‘formulae’. Other freelancers focused their concern primarily on over-reliance upon routines derived from design publications. In fact, by working alone, outside a social network of designers, freelancers are forced to rely upon such external sources (design magazines and samples of successful design from outside their group of colleagues and friends) to find their ‘occupational formulae’. This differs from the practice of studio-based graphic designers that I spoke to, who also relied upon formulaic solutions, but were able to do this through discussions with co-workers and through the institutional structure of the studio space.

## Conclusion

In order to have a more complete picture of the practice of graphic design in both traditional studio settings and, to a lesser extent, as a freelancer, it is necessary to supplement ‘public’ conceptions of the graphic design studio (as a space of irreverent ‘play’) with an understanding of the various audit and accountability structures that make up the contemporary studio space, including time restrictions, accountability metrics, multiple levels of hierarchy and approval, client constraints, and the necessity of reliance on routines of practice and occupational formulae. The ways in which design work is audited, accounted for and assigned, and the patterns of practice within the studio space, all shape the creative practice of graphic designers in ways that we are only beginning to uncover.

In fact, if one looks closely at the multitude of audit and management structures put in place to value and manage design work in a commercial setting, it is not surprising that the creative practice of designers is substantially shaped by its management context. To work within a structure of time and profitability audit, to generate creative work that will win approval by a complex and multi-layered hierarchy of audience members, and to create within a system that requires the reuse and borrowing of past concepts, directly affects the ways in which designers make choices and produce creative design work. This does not mean that such constraints go unchallenged, or that they do not elicit frustration and sometimes debate – but they are, for the most part, an accepted aspect of commercial design practice. As one designer put it, ‘That’s just how the studio works. It’s just a few hoops … not to say, you know, [that] you don’t get tired of jumping through them’ (Graphic Designer B 2008).

## Notes

1. In this study, all full-time graphic designers were practising in traditional studio settings, consisting of production, design, creative direction and account management teams. All were between the ages of 24 and 50, with an even gender balance. The freelance designers ranged in their practice from full- to part-time, and were of similar ages and gender splits to their studio counterparts.

2. Ross has renamed the new corporate culture ‘no-collar’ in reference to the gold collar employee force, as well as the re-imagined corporate culture. This differentiation of the type of workplace as new and different has taken hold, and is naturalized in the promotional design of most large-scale firms throughout the USA.

3. These time measurements are based on an average of one month’s worth of projects completed in the studio in one Canadian graphic design studio, as measured by account management timesheet entries.

4. In ‘Encoding/Decoding’ (1980), Stuart Hall provides a model for understanding the productive practices of designers, describing the communication of information not

as a straight line between sender, message and receiver, but rather as a series of articulations, or intersections, between spheres of production, circulation, distribution, consumption and reception. According to Hall, this process is completed through the transformation of produced information by decoders (in the case of the production of graphic design, by the audience or target market). In this model, a specific audience removed from the culture of production is held as the primary understanding of ‘decoders’. Hall holds two events within the communication of information to be determinate: moments of encoding and moments of decoding. It is the moments of encoding, or the encoding work of the graphic designer (using Hall’s terminology) that I am focusing on here in this research project, and it is primarily practices of encoding to which I refer when I discuss the practice of graphic design production. Using the two determinate moments of encoding and decoding, Hall explains degrees of understanding and misunderstanding of messages as degrees of symmetry within the process of media production and consumption – relationships of equivalency between the positions of the ‘personifications’ of encoder-producer and decoder-receiver (Hall 1980). The lack of symmetry between the interests, intentions and perceptions of encoder and decoder allows for a diversity of response to media texts – multiple readings that, while never individual and private, are simultaneously possible, defined by the social situation of receivers.

5. Concept or mood boards consist of swatches and sketches presented informally by the tasked team to an internal audience of co-designers in order to generate a unifying idea and aesthetic for the project.

6. At the request of designers interviewed, all names have been removed from their accompanying statements. All designers, account managers and creative directors are currently employed at one of two major Canadian design studios. Designers and creative directors interviewed have a minimum of eight years’ experience working within a studio setting.

7. This ‘disaster checking’ or post-production research for preventative purposes was referred to at SFP as ‘due diligence’. In the market in which the designers I interviewed worked, this type of research is often carried out by private companies, and was usually implemented by the production manager or the creative director, not the designer. The one area of design production that is not tested or ‘disaster checked’ is the creative process of the graphic designer. As we saw at SFP, the designer is asked to work in isolation, employing an unquestioned series of practices to emerge with a final solution for the first of their audiences. Methods of testing the effectiveness of the designers’ practice are not used, and this lack of testing is unquestioned in the design industry.

8. This figure is based on a survey of the budgets and timelines of graphic designers who work within a traditional studio setting, but who have also worked freelance. In 2007, ten designers with a secondary freelance practice were asked to document what they would request from clients for fees and schedule as a freelance designer, and this was compared against similar projects completed within the design studio.

## References

Dornfeld, B. (1998), Producing Public Television, Producing Public Culture, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Ettema, J. S. (1982), ‘The Organizational Context of Creativity: A Case Study from Private Television’, in J. Ettema and D. Whitney (eds.), Individuals in Mass Media

Organizations: Creativity and Constraint, London: Sage.

Franklin, U. (1990), The Real World of Technology (CBC Massey Lectures series), Concord, Ontario: House of Anansi Press.

Hall, S. et al. (1980), Culture, Media, Language, London: Hutchinson.

Hirsch, P. (1977), ‘Occupational, Organizational and Institutional Models in Mass Media Research: Towards an Integrated Framework’, in P.M Hirsch, P.V. Miller and F.G Kline (eds.), Strategies for Communication Research , Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, pp.13–42.

Maslow, A. (1954), Motivation and Personality, New York: Harper.

Mau, B. (1998), ‘An Incomplete Manifesto For Growth’. Available at http://www. brucemau.com.

McDaniel, J. B. (2003), ‘The Paradox of Design Research: The Role of Informance’ in B. Laurel (ed.), Design Research, Methods and Perspectives, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Negus, K. (2002), ‘The Work of Cultural Intermediaries and the Enduring Distinction Between Production and Consumption’, Cultural Studies, 16(4): 501–15.

Ross, A. (2003), No Collar: The Humane Workplace and its Hidden Costs, New York: Basic Books.

Ryan, J. and Peterson, R. A. (1982), ‘The Product Image: The Fate of Creativity in Country Music Songwriting’ in J. Ettema and D. Whitney (eds.), Individuals in Mass Media Organizations: Creativity and Constraint, London: Sage.

SFP (2004a), Spencer Francey Peters Celebrates 25 Years of Connecting the Dots, selfpublished.

SFP (2004b), Toolkit Document No 0.0, Creative Process, unpublished document.

SFP (2004c), Toolkit Document No 0.0, Brainstorming, unpublished document.

SFP (2004d), Toolkit Document No 0.0, Creative Set-Ups and Presentations, unpublished document.

SFP (2005), Creative Brief, unpublished document.

Tolleson, S. (1999), SpinRinseWashSoak: Tolleson Design, New York: Princeton Architectural Press.

## Interviews

Account Manager A (2008), personal interview, 4 May 2008.

Creative Director A (2008), personal interview, 8 January 2008.

Graphic Designer A (2005), personal interview, 3 May 2005.

Graphic Designer B (2008), personal interview, 2 February 2008.

Graphic Designer C (2008), personal interview, 2 February 2008.

Graphic Designer D (2008), personal interview, 12 April 2008.

Graphic Designer E (2008), personal interview, 12 April 2008.

Graphic Designer F (2008), personal interview, 8 January 2008.