## CHAPTER 11

# Visual Continuity and Innovation in Editorial Design Practice

Sarah Owens

## Introduction

Editorial design, considered by some to be ‘one of the most exciting and innovative areas of design at the moment’ (Zappaterra 2002: 8) is, paradoxically, also one of the most systematized and standardized design specialities. The fact that commercial magazines and newspapers require regular – daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly – production and publication has encouraged the standardization of both work procedures and the resulting printed object. Tightly scheduled deadlines thus govern the production not only of daily newspapers and weekly magazines, whose design departments rely heavily on pre-formatted page layouts, but also that of publications appearing less frequently: monthly and quarterly magazines, despite their assurances of complete creative autonomy and attempts to tailor each page to its editorial content, are nevertheless bound to highly structured production processes.

All design practice to some extent involves routine tasks and procedures. Corporate designers may, for example, spend a significant amount of time applying the principles of a design programme to various media, hence simply ‘following the rules’ prescribed by a company’s style manual. Usually, such tasks require neither a development of, nor experimentation with, new concepts and visual ideas. What differentiates a speciality such as corporate design from editorial design is that in the former, less routinized tasks gain their uniqueness through the project-based nature of the speciality, through the fact that the corporate designer interacts with the client and responds to his/her particular needs. Editorial designers are not responsible to a client in this sense, but communicate only indirectly with an audience that may or may not have been clearly defined through market research. On a day-to-day basis, editorial designers instead deal with the requests of editors, marketing directors, production managers and, occasionally, the publisher. The immediate goal of this collaboration is to produce the newspaper or magazine as efficiently as possible in order to ensure a steady output; in the longer term, it aims to create a loyal readership, to increase newsstand sales and paid subscriptions, and to secure profitable advertising campaigns.

This chapter is based on in-depth interviews conducted with editors and designers, and on insights gained from the author’s own experience of working in the German publishing industry. It aims to provide a detailed analysis of systematized work processes and their impact on editorial design practice. It examines the tension between continuity and innovation, exploring the way some of the risks associated with stylistic innovation are managed in practice. In particular, it shows how institutional or structural pressures to ensure regular production and brand loyalty among consumers are reflected in the development of stylistic conventions, while periodic redesigns provide the opportunity for creativity or visual innovation. The chapter concludes by suggesting that the tension arising out of the need for both visual continuity and innovation may, under certain circumstances, actually fuel creative production, even while such creativity is tightly and carefully managed.

## Continuity

Although the majority of newspapers and magazines published in Germany are produced by the same few large publishing houses, titles remain remarkably numerous and diverse. In 2007, the newspaper market saw the publication of 352 dailies, ranging from tabloids to high-quality broadsheets, thus placing Germany first in a comparison with other European countries, followed by Spain with 140, and the United Kingdom with 104 daily newspapers (Bundesverband Deutscher Zeitungsverleger e.V. 2007). Over 6,200 magazine titles, including 2,450 consumer magazines, were published in Germany in 2006; the German magazine market is, however, markedly smaller than – for example – its North American and British counterparts, with totals of 19,419 and 8,558 titles respectively (Verband Deutscher Zeitschriftenverleger 2007, Magazine Publishers of America 2008, PPA 2008).

The publishing industry in Germany, like in other countries, relies in part on national editions of international publications, such as Financial Times Deutschland or the relatively recently introduced German version of Vanity Fair. These editions are often produced locally, and cater to particular tastes in editorial content and design – thus, for example, despite adhering to transnational branding specifications, Vogue Italia recognizably differs from Vogue Brasil. While such differences may be easily identified, the question of whether there exist characteristic national styles, which link publications of a particular geographic region, is more difficult to answer. On one hand, the graphic design industry might be compared to that of fashion, which occasionally discusses the concept of national style, but is generally dominated by a cross-cultural avant-garde leading the international market. Style might thus depend more on the influence of several individuals, whose geographical positions may vary, but who share similar lifestyles determined by age, class and media exposure. On the other hand, German graphic design builds on a rich national history of theory and practice, the latter of which ‘reflects a distinctive national ability to exploit the creative tension between tradition and innovation’ (Livingston and Livingston 2003: 96). Magazines such as Twen, for example, designed by Willy Fleckhaus in the 1960s, and the contemporary business publication brand eins, by Mike Meiré, have been influential both within and beyond Germany.

Conversely, the nature of working practices in editorial design depends not so much on national context as on the publication genre and frequency, as well as the size of the publishing house. At large publishers, production parameters require design work to be broken down into controllable and manageable portions; thus, work procedures are fragmented into smaller and well-defined processes, and responsibilities assigned to several departments. This results in a continuous, highly structured and regulated workflow commencing in the editorial department with the development of stories and commissioning of authors, and concluding in the production department with the preparation of the publication for print. The fragmentation of design work necessitates not only an efficient coordination of staff, but also the involvement of a large number of specialists: art directors are responsible for managing the design department and ensuring visual continuity, coherence and quality; designers lay out pages; sub-editors improve or rewrite copy; picture editors commission photographers and deal with image licensing; production managers work out schedules and prepare documents for printing. Sections of newspapers and weekly magazines are developed simultaneously by several designers, and it is usually only at monthly or quarterly magazines that a single designer deals with complete issues. The entire process, from the gathering of content to the delivery of the publication to newsstands and subscribers must, for instance at weekly magazines, be completed within a few days. Monthly magazines, which only seemingly allow more time for production, as they often contain a greater number of pages to be designed, work with a similarly tight schedule up to three months in advance – at any given moment, there is one issue in print, another one being designed and assembled, and a third one in preparation. Naturally, this has implications for the timeliness and relevance of a publication. A chief editor on a monthly magazine for instance recalled the difficulties of conducting interviews with politicians based solely on speculations concerning future events and outcomes – there was always the chance that by the time of publication, the interview would have become irrelevant (Interview Chief Editor A).

The comparatively short turnaround time of editorial design work further limits the capacity and usefulness of introducing new design concepts with each issue. Instead, these remain valid for longer periods of time, spanning several issues and evolving until a more radical design intervention, a so-called ‘redesign’, is decided upon by the publishing house. Apart from being more workable in terms of effort and time, this strategy also ensures the visual continuity of a publication. Newspapers and commercial magazines in particular depend on visual continuity in order to be immediately recognized amongst hundreds of other periodicals – if one assumes that most consumers will not tolerate endless searches for their favourite publication at the newsstand. Thus, commercial publications largely abide by genre conventions and publicationspecific principles, utilizing instead opportunities for moderate deviations provided by special issues and sections. Periodicals which need not succumb to the commercial pressures of the newsstand, such as newspaper supplements, customer magazines, and publications positioned outside the profit-oriented mainstream, are in this sense privileged: they may choose to ignore market rules, and thus possess more freedom to experiment on a textual and visual level.

## Routine

Systematization and routine permeate the everyday practice of editorial designers. The production of a magazine, for example, typically begins with an advance-planning meeting between chief editor(s), copy editors, picture editors and the art director, in which the visual and editorial direction of features and standard pages are determined. Subsequently, freelance illustrators and photographers, most of whom are well accustomed to tight work schedules and short deadlines, are commissioned. When faced with additional work in the form of seasonal or special issues, monthlies or quarterlies with a small core staff may furthermore choose to hire freelance designers and interns. Several teams – each consisting of one copy editor, one picture editor and one designer – then develop features and standard pages on the basis of the approach agreed during the planning meeting. While layouts are being completed, the magazine structure is continuously re-evaluated and changed accordingly.<sup>1</sup> It is only after the complete issue has been approved by the editorial and design departments that it moves into the final stages of production, which involve sub-editing, retouching, colour corrections, proofing and delivery to the printer.

The systematization of editorial design work is also reflected in the use of electronic publishing systems to administer text and design documents. These systems link editorial, design and production departments, store document versions and allow the assignment of tasks and responsibilities to users in each department. After a designer has laid out a page in a desktop publishing programme, he/she deposits it into the publishing system, which automatically creates a backup of the document on a central server. Thereafter, each time the designer works on a document, he/she will retrieve it from the system, modify and re-deposit it. With each retrieval and deposit the designer is able to change the status of the document, indicating for example whether it is currently in progress, needs to be edited or signed off, or is ready for production. All others involved in the assembly process, including the chief editor(s) and art director, copy editors, sub-editors and production manager(s), may also access the document via the system, and after completing their tasks, change the status to a further level. Thus the publishing system eases communication and shortens the physical distance between departments, aids and expedites the handing over of documents, and structures workflow. In addition, it keeps track of responsibilities by recording information concerning document modifications. This information, along with the time used for each document, is made visible to all system users via a query window. Thus, if a production manager spots a mistake, he/she is immediately able to attribute it to a specific editor or designer. Similarly, the art director is able to single out those taking a disproportionate amount of time to complete designs. Although most editors and designers view the publishing system mainly as an aid to manage their own documents and to conveniently access the documents of others, it thus also possesses a regulative function. As a consequence, assessments and criticism pertain more to the individual rather than to his/her department.

The way in which design tasks are assigned and classified within the design department relies largely on creative hierarchies, which are more or less explicitly articulated. Art directors are granted the highest level of creative autonomy. Apart from overseeing and coordinating the work of designers, they commonly deal with the most important design tasks – at newspapers, these include the design of feature pages; at magazines, the design of covers and special issues. It is further the duty of the art director to ensure that the designers are working as a team, to minimize idleness and to sustain communication with other departments.<sup>2</sup> Designers are attributed lower levels of creativity, as they carry out tasks assigned to them by the art director, who might guide them by elucidating content and suggesting possible ways of visual treatment. The way a creative hierarchy is played out on a day-to-day basis depends, however, on the temperament and management style of the art director. It is not unusual for senior designers to lighten the art director’s workload by taking over some of his/her responsibilities, such as the commissioning of illustrators or the supervision of junior designers. Similarly, although the art director has the final say, designers’ individual talents and personality may be allowed to pervade their work. Such opportunities for personal creative expression mean that ‘what used to be a life of unrewarding “slog” is now a possible site for personal fulfilment. Ideologically, work is turned into a source of reward through the emphasis on creativity, no matter how irregular the earnings and regardless of how long the hours’ (McRobbie 1998: 83).

Many art directors prefer working with a handful of experienced photographers and illustrators, ones who are familiar with the ‘house style’ and therefore able to reliably produce and promptly deliver desired images. Due to their position of seniority, these freelancers are, like art directors, granted a relatively high amount of creative freedom. In one instance encountered by the author while working at a newspaper supplement, the well-known illustrator of a regular column decided to abandon his pictorial, narrative style of drawing in favour of a more abstract, associative one. Despite initially fearing a negative response by loyal readers, the magazine’s art director and chief editors chose to rely on the illustrator’s experience and prestige. Indeed, even conservative readers eventually accepted the modification. Conversely, experiments of this kind by inexperienced illustrators and photographers were frequently associated with insecurity and a lack of personal style. In order to permit a gradual familiarization with a publication’s preferences, illustrators and photographers with less experience are therefore commissioned mainly for standard work.

## Conventions

As stated earlier, structural and institutional pressures to ensure regular production generate an intense workload that demands a high level of concentration and often calls for the implementation of routine procedures and techniques. These lead to the development of stylistic and graphic conventions – visual manifestations of systematized work processes. Newspaper articles and magazine sections thus follow prescriptions, expressed either tacitly or explicitly, regarding the style and placement of elements within the publication, while a distinctive use of format, grids, white space, fonts and colours guarantees visual continuity. Numerous design decisions are also guided by principles equated with ‘good practice’, which are acquired through formal education and/or several years of experience. Moreover, market research ratifies and validates visual conventions such as specific colour schemes, attributes such as clarity or accessibility, and details such as the pose of the cover model.

Covers of commercial women’s magazines thus typically feature close-ups of female celebrities or fashion models, and for cover lines and logotypes employ colours perceived as feminine, such as pink, orange and red. Remarkably, even non-mainstream women’s magazines frequently follow these rules, but at the same time aim to keep to a minimum the number of cover lines ‘selling’ the publication, as a larger number of lines implies a greater commercialism.<sup>3</sup> Decisions regarding the number and placement of cover lines in particular are guided by marketing considerations – a common absurdity that this leads to is the request of marketing departments to include cover lines on publications that are not even sold at the newsstand, such as customer magazines and newspaper supplements. More generally, a compliance with graphic norms demonstrates a publication’s need to conform to its genre, thus it is in many ways desirable for a daily newspaper or commercial magazine not to contradict, but to resemble its competitors. ‘Most identifiable genres,’ Rob Waller notes, ‘start with relatively unarticulated rules, and members of the genre only belong through a coincidence of purposes and constraints. But in time, rules may be articulated and, although the original functional imperatives have moved on, the genre is effectively frozen. Thus the more rule-bound genres change relatively slowly, while the less rule-bound genres change as needs, technology or fashion allow’ (Waller 1999: 5). Newspapers and commercial magazines, by following ‘ritualized but loosely articulated’ design rules, belong to a genre that may gradually change and evolve; fashion and avant-garde magazines in contrast exemplify a genre that is even less rule-bound, and therefore more amenable to stylistic innovation.

The following of conventions established by publishing firms and market research affects not only a publication’s microstructure, but also its macrostructure, by influencing the placement of features and standard pages within issues. These tried-and-tested choreographies set out important sections (such as editorials, letters, news, features, reviews and so on) in a specific order, and are employed because they are thought to best keep the reader’s attention, and to reflect the relative importance of the editorial content. Most newspapers are thus structured into sections containing current and international news, commentaries, features, reviews, notices and classifieds, sports reports and, optionally, regional news. Depending on its sub-genre membership, a magazine may either be partitioned into several sections, each introduced by a feature filling several pages and followed by shorter articles, columns, reviews and listings, or it may compile larger stories in a so-called ‘feature well’ flanked by shorter editorial elements. A standardized structure, signposted by characteristic graphic elements, helps readers navigate, and regular readers will often know where to find favourite columns or relevant articles. As a consequence, a newspaper or magazine grows comfortable and familiar; this familiarity in turn encourages and supports brand loyalty.

Publication-specific conventions are articulated in design templates, which through grids and placeholders determine the density and placement of graphic elements on a page. These are created by art directors or external consultants when a publication is first developed, or when a redesign requires new specifications. They detail particular ways in which headlines, stand-firsts, subheads, bylines, credits, body copy, captions, pull quotes, page numbers and other textual elements are to be typeset, the way images may be incorporated and juxtaposed, and the way colour, spacing, panels, boxes, sidebars, rules or other means of typographic structuring, highlighting and signposting may be used. Newspapers rely heavily on design templates, since standard pages are often assembled by editors. Yet it is also the case in magazines that standard sections such as reviews and columns are commonly defined in such detail that images need only be inserted at the prescribed position, and accompanying texts shortened or lengthened.

Despite their ostensible rigidity, editorial design templates are not as fixed and absolute as specifications contained in corporate design or branding manuals, which must be meticulously observed. The primary purpose of employing design templates is simply to ensure that a publication visibly follows an overall design aesthetic. An interesting example inadvertently testing the limits of this strategy is the Swiss weekly magazine Die Weltwoche, which subjects all sections to a similar typographic style, anchored by a strict and highly functional grid, the use of only a few images and a single typeface. Thus, the magazine’s editorial design alludes to the seriousness of newspaper design and its own history – it was formerly published as a broadsheet.

## Innovation

Design templates and principles are not, however, always meant to be followed slavishly. When composing a page, a designer may choose to obey the grid while simultaneously disregarding more general typographic conventions, and vice versa. The degree to which a design may flout rules hinges on the editorial approach of a publication, its readership and the publisher. Visual continuity further demands that a design contributes to an overall style; all modifications must therefore be ‘legitimate’. Describing the principles of Marquesan folk art, Alfred Gell argues that style:

is the complex formed by the relationships which hold between all these transformations or modifications. That is to say, the constraints governing the production (innovation within culturally prescribed parameters of style) of ... artworks were constraints governing the possibility of transforming a motif or form into related forms; only if such a transformation is possible can a motif or form be said to ‘belong’ to [this] style. (Gell 1998: 215)

The task of gauging appropriateness within prescribed parameters of style emphasizes that editorial designers do not simply ‘make pages look nice’, but add further levels of significance and meaning to the content. They link production and consumption as ‘cultural intermediaries’ (Bourdieu 1984; du Gay et al. 1997) and re-negotiate meanings between market and readership, in effect increasing a publication’s cultural and economic value. Furthermore, ‘cultural intermediaries’ who, alongside designers, include those ‘whose jobs entail performing services and the production, marketing and dissemination of symbolic goods’, ‘do not seek to promote a single lifestyle, but rather to cater for and expand the range of styles and lifestyles available to audiences and consumers’ (Featherstone 2007: 19, 26). Thus, designers have in the past succeeded in disseminating and legitimizing ‘arbitrary’ forms of culture, such as fashion, cosmetics, decoration and furniture through notions of ‘good’ or ‘tasteful’ design (Bourdieu 1990).

In practice, the actual modifications and adaptations made by editorial designers are often microscopic and noticeable only to the regular reader. While a periodical may change ever so slightly with each issue and thus gradually evolve in its design, its visual continuity is systematically and more fundamentally disrupted by periodic redesigns. These are attempts by the design and production staff to continuously reinvent and reinterpret the style and perception of a publication. They aim to propel a newspaper or magazine forward in terms of visual and editorial content, and allow opportunities for creative innovation and experimentation, thus providing even highly standardized publications with a form of creative autonomy. Redesigns are essentially balancing acts between the provision of familiar content for the reader (continuity) and the development of new visual standards (innovation). In other words, a redesign should simultaneously be as similar and as different to the previous design as possible. This paradox is rooted in the fact that a newspaper or magazine aims to remain familiar by conforming to its respective genre, while concurrently seeking to establish itself as a unique and distinctive brand within this genre. Redesigns therefore give rise to the question of how far a publication can be altered without alienating its readership or risking the chance of not being recognized at the newsstand.

The redesign of one of Germany’s leading newspapers, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, for instance, was met with great resistance by regular readers. Its previous, rather austere design approach was characterized by large amounts of text, the almost complete absence of images and the use of black-letter fonts for some of its headlines. The earlier introduction of a small red box on the title page for many readers signalled an impending vulgarization – in spite of these fears, and due to a drop in circulation, the newspaper nevertheless decided on a change. In the end, an approach that was neither too innovative nor too cautious was implemented by, amongst other changes, introducing a colour image on the title and banning the ‘old-fashioned’ blackletter typeface from its interior pages (Brauck 2007).

Publications are often redesigned when they start becoming unprofitable – cancellations of subscriptions and a drop in circulation numbers are usually an indication of a gradually developing unpopularity that must be counteracted with a new visual and editorial approach. The New Yorker magazine for instance, which had retained and followed certain visual conventions for several decades, evolving only gradually with the introduction of new graphic elements, was only redesigned more substantially when sales dropped in the 1990s. More radical modifications in the design of a publication may also be motivated by a change in editorial direction, readership or technology, or by the wish to keep up with current stylistic movements. The importance of redesigns is reflected by the fact that most are executed by art directors or external design consultants, rather than by in-house designers. After a redesign has been completed, it is not uncommon for external consultants (who are often former art directors specializing in the redesign and development of publications) to temporarily join the design department in order to oversee the implementation of suggestions and specifications. Magazines are almost certainly redesigned when a new art director is introduced – like a newly appointed professor holding an inaugural lecture, a new head of design must make public his/her aesthetic vision for the publication.<sup>4</sup>

## Creativity

Continuity and innovation play crucial roles in everyday design practice. Processes ensuring continuity include routine tasks, using work formulae and following design templates – they are processes that utilize previous knowledge and experiences, are reliable in terms of time and effort, and are required by the market. Processes associated with innovation create the unconventional, the new and unexpected, find new relationships between well-known elements, and may be likened to the discovery of new methods for solving problems. They further the graphic design discipline by bringing forth new means of expression, expanding or modifying existing canons and vocabularies of forms, and challenging established conventions and meanings. These processes are, however, also relatively labour-intensive, unreliable in terms of time and deterring to those who favour stability.

In order to ascertain how these processes may interrelate in creative practice, it is useful to initially examine the ‘creative act’ itself, the psychological aspects of which, according to Arthur Koestler, include:

the displacement of attention to something not previously noted, which was irrelevant in the old and is relevant in the new context; the discovery of hidden analogies as a result of the former; the bringing into consciousness of tacit axioms and habits of thought which were ... taken for granted; the uncovering of what has always been there. This leads to the paradox that the more original a discovery the more obvious it seems afterwards. The creative act is not an act of creation in the sense of the Old Testament. It does not create something out of nothing; it uncovers, selects, re-shuffles, combines, synthesizes already existing facts, ideas, faculties, skills. (Koestler 1989: 119–20)

This means that if they are to function as a repository for a synthesis of this kind, facts and ideas must be learnt and internalized, and abilities and skills developed and mastered until they acquire a routine-like quality.

Henri Lefebvre (2008) makes a more general distinction between ‘repetitive’ and ‘inventive’ praxis, the former consisting of ‘stereotyped and repeated actions’, and the latter of the creation of novel objects or novel practice. His definition was expanded by Agnes Heller, who claims that inventive praxis or thinking may include any intentional solution of a problem – i.e. a solution ‘construed as acquisition of experience, broadening of opinion, the taking of decisions’ (Heller 1984: 128). Such intentional solutions may also arise out of the interaction with and experience of a situation – a notion taken into account by Carl R. Rogers: ‘My definition ... of the creative process is that it is the emergence in action of a novel relational product, growing out of the uniqueness of the individual on the one hand, and the materials, events, people, or circumstances of his life on the other’ (Rogers 1967: 350). Repetitive and inventive praxis do not rule each other out, but constitute necessary and complementary parts of creative practice. What drives creative practice is consequently the tension between repetition and invention, continuity and innovation. The requirement to balance the old with the new, to abide by general conventions while trying to break the rules, to conform to a genre while aiming to establish a unique selling proposition – all these provide opportunities and incentives for original and creative thought.

Such requirements need not be considered limiting, as most designers are well accustomed to dealing with constraints, such as those resulting from systematization and regulation, in their work. ‘Remove these and it is like putting an engine out of gear suddenly, it returns to idling speed, or feels purposeless when accelerated’ (Potter 2002: 47–8). It is the job of the designer to make the best out of limitations – and to infuse each routine activity with a dose of inventive thinking. In the case of editorial design, the fact that constraints may benefit creative practice is evident in the way in which publications create artificial limitations, which often develop into publication-specific conventions. The lifestyle magazine i-D, for instance, depicts each cover model with one winking or obscured eye as a visual pun on its title. Thus its art director must, for the purposes of visual continuity and stylistic innovation, for each issue devise new and clever ways of fulfilling this condition.

Other magazines derive additional creative impetus from the diversity of editorial content and/or external material. The German youth supplement jetzt, which was published by the Süddeutsche Zeitung from 1993 to 2002, was known for its emphasis on reader participation – in an effort to create a community, the supplement incorporated readers’ diaries and photographs. This required a clearly defined and structured framework, thus the staff specifically requested diary entries of a certain length or images of certain topics. A higher heterogeneity of formal characteristics of the material would have resulted in chaos – the supplement was, like any other periodical, bound to the constraints and limitations set by a tight publishing schedule. However, as a former chief editor of the magazine confirmed (Interview Chief Editor B), it was the friction between routine and spontaneity, the task of balancing the required level of efficiency with unique ways of incorporating reader input, which continuously inspired the magazine makers’ creative production.

## Conclusion

This chapter has examined how the systematization and regulation necessitated by commercial and institutional imperatives affect editorial design practice. It has shown how efforts to meet these demands lead to standardized work procedures, which reflect departmental structures and creative hierarchies, and to the development of genre- and publication-specific conventions. Furthermore, it has explored the importance attributed to visual continuity and innovation in this field, arguing that the interrelation and tension between them may fuel creative production. Under circumstances such as those prevalent in editorial design, creative practice then involves more than traditional notions of creativity suggest. The emphasis in the latter on inventive processes and the ability to devise novel ideas and products, which is commonly attributed to artistic ‘genius’, is dampened by an awareness of how routine and systematized tasks contribute to creative work. As has been argued, inventive and repetitive processes do not exclude each other, but constitute complementary, related modes of thought and action. It is their interplay that can, in fact, drive creative practice. Moreover, the observation that creativity emerges from an individual’s interaction with his or her environment highlights the social and collaborative aspects of creative processes. As Richard Florida notes, ‘Creativity flourishes best in a unique kind of social environment: one that is stable enough to allow continuity of effort, yet diverse and broad-minded enough to nourish creativity in all its subversive forms’ (Florida 2002: 35). Thus, while editorial design practice remains highly systematized and standardized, a broader notion of creativity, taking into account the contribution of routine and collaborative activities, confirms that it is, nevertheless, a genuinely creative and innovative design speciality.

## Notes

1. After page designs have received the consent of the art director and chief editor, they are assembled in so-called ‘bibles’ (folders containing print-outs) or ‘flatplans’ (miniature print-outs pinned to a wall). Regularly updated and incorporating advertisement, bibles and flatplans allow the evaluation of the publication structure and strength of narrative.

2. To this purpose, art directors attend planning meetings, and often discuss and debate with chief editors the appropriateness of specific visual ideas, as well as commenting on and intervening in editorial matters. Editorial design is always a collaborative effort between departments and, more often than not, a compromise.

3. A commercial attitude, however, does not necessarily affect the visual quality of the cover, and commercial magazines with high production values are often able to reconcile a considerable number of cover lines with good design.

4. One art director at a monthly lifestyle magazine recounted having completed eight or nine redesigns to date, most of which were prompted by his appointment at various magazines (Interview Art Director A).

## References

Bourdieu, P. (1984), Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste, trans. Richard Nice, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Bourdieu, P. (1990), ‘The Social Definition of Photography’, in Photography: A Middle-Brow Art, Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Brauck, M. (2007), ‘Ratz “FAZ” ’, Der Spiegel, 39: 90–92.

Bundesverband Deutscher Zeitungsverleger e.V. (2007), ‘Zeitungen und Ihre Leser in Stichworten 2007’. Available at http://www.bdzv.de/1826.html [last accessed 8 November 2008].

du Gay, P., Hall, S., Janes, L., Mackay, H. and Negus, K. (1997), Doing Cultural Studies: The Story of the Sony Walkman, London: Sage.

Featherstone, M. (2007), Consumer Culture and Postmodernism, London: Sage.

Florida, R. L. (2002), The Rise of the Creative Class: And How It’s Transforming Work, Leisure, Community and Everyday Life, New York: Basic Books.

Gell, A. (1998), Art and Agency: An Anthropological Theory, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Heller, A. (1984), Everyday Life, trans. G. L. Campbell, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Koestler, A. (1989), The Act of Creation, London: Arkana.

Lefebvre, H. (2008), Critique of Everyday Life, Volume II: Foundations for a Sociology of the Everyday, trans. John Moore, London: Verso.

Livingston, A. and Livingston, I. (2003), The Thames & Hudson Dictionary of Graphic Design and Designers, London: Thames & Hudson.

Magazine Publishers of America (2008), The Magazine Handbook, New York: Magazine Publishers of America.

McRobbie, A. (1998), British Fashion Design: Rag Trade or Image Industry?, London and New York: Routledge.

Potter, N. (2002), What Is a Designer: Things, Places, Messages, London: Hyphen.

PPA (2008), ‘The Number of Magazine Titles’. Available at http://www. ppamarketing.net/cgi-bin/go.pl/data-trends/article.html?uid=164 [last accessed 8 November 2008].

Rogers, C. R. (1967), On Becoming a Person: A Therapist’s View of Psychotherapy, London: Constable.

Verband Deutscher Zeitschriftenverleger (2007), ‘Der Deutsche Zeitschriftenmarkt’. Available at http://www.vdz.de/branchendaten.html [last accessed 8 November 2008].

Waller, R. H. W. (1999), ‘Making Connections: Typography, Layout and Language’, Proceedings of the 1999 Autumn Symposium, American Association for Artificial Intelligence.

Zappaterra, Y. (2002), Editorial Design for Print and Electronic Media, Crans-Près-Céligny and Hove: RotoVision.

## Interviews

Art Director A (2005), interview by author, 14 October 2005.

Chief Editor A (2005), interview by author, 12 October 2005.

Chief Editor B (2005), interview by author, 23 September 2005.

## CHAPTER 12

## Kobus Mentz

Director of Urbanism Plus, Specialist Urban Design Practice, Auckland, New Zealand, December 2008

Kobus Mentz provides, in this interview, many views of urban design in New Zealand, which are coherent with experiences in other countries. Much of this is down to the issue that it is very much an emergent profession that, equally, does not have such a mature clientele in terms of commissioning experience as, perhaps, other design sectors. It also reveals how urban designers are involved in a range of many activities beyond site design that have to align with complex bureaucratic systems.

Guy Julier (GJ): The Urban Design Group lists ‘Site and Area Design’ as just one of seven areas in which the urban designer might work. What are the main other areas that you give most attention to?

Kobus Mentz (KM): I would say that at least 40 per cent of our remaining time and energy is given over to managing the implementation of urban design and then about a quarter devoted to writing design policies for development plans. And then you’ve got the rest, outside designing, which covers giving design advice, preparing design guidance, statements and codes and raising design awareness amongst clients and the public.

GJ: Do you use any internal or externally set procedures or practice guidelines as part of the design process, for example, the Urban Design Compendium? If so, what role do set procedures play for you?

KM: We do not formally use step-by-step set procedures based on external documents, although we have developed internal procedures and checklists for generic projects such as growth studies and regeneration projects, which often have complex workshop processes attached.

GJ: In referring to the plethora of urban design guidelines, statements and ‘best practice’ guidance in the UK, architect Martin Crookston has quipped, ‘We’ve got the best guidance, but the worst practice in Europe.’ Is there a danger that the production of so much design guidance ends in a ‘tick-box’ approach to design or as a way of cutting corners in the process? What advantages do design guidelines have?

KM: Having developed some of the first guides in this country, I have always only seen them as a guide or aide-memoire and never expected them to replace the need to regard each project as different; obviously components of activity are repeatable between projects. However urban designers are at different levels of development and will gain in different ways. [I] fully agree that ticking the boxes doesn’t guarantee quality – but it may raise base standards.

GJ: If at all, how do you see the role of urban designers having shifted in the past decade?

KM: In New Zealand and Australia it has moved from general, broad ‘conviction-based’ advocacy – convincing the regulatory and development communities of the basic value of urban design and the need to change – to an ‘evidence-based’ approach with clearer strategies to deliver the outcomes. Sadly in both countries, as urban design gains prominence (and a planning/legal prerequisite), more urban designers are for hire, often twisting arguments – making good use of the above mentioned guidelines – to often support unsustainable projects, such as new developments which may have good urban features but are in inappropriate locations and will worsen travel patterns and promote social isolation etc. etc.

GJ: Who have your clients been and who do you compete with? Is there a common kind of profile to your clients?

KM: My clients vary from government or state agencies [to] local authorities and developers or landowners. The profiles vary between the public and private sectors. In the public sector areas I compete mostly with planning-/engineering-/landscape-based urban design practices and in the private sector I compete with architecture-/landscape architecture-/land surveyor-based urban design firms. There are few pure urban design firms in New Zealand or Australia, although they are on the increase. My competition comes mostly from New Zealand teams which have combined with known overseas urban designers.

GJ: Are there any ways that your interactions with clients have changed over the years that you have been working? Do they expect different things from in the past?

KM: I expect that there will be a more explicit focus on how strategic projects such as growth plans, regeneration strategies, guidelines etc. are going to be delivered in planning or legal and market feasibility terms. Urban designers are often good at creating expectations and generally less rigorous or multi-skilled to deal with implementation.

GJ: Equally, does you client relationship change as you have longer working relationships with them?

KM: Yes, if you deliver, trust builds and more opportunities are offered. The test is often whether you can translate aspirations into action plans and whether you have taken the community and stakeholders with you, especially with local authorities, which are answerable to communities.

GJ: Can you tell us a bit about how you cost projects for the client end? Are there times where non-chargeable elements, for example, extra research, or a project that could be strong for your studio profile purposes, come into a project that you either have to take into account or ignore?

KM: We always endeavour to cost projects in great detail and share this with the client. We also outline items specifically excluded. This way downstream difficulties are avoided. Extra work such as research etc. is usually readily paid for if excluded in a clearly defined scope. We do, however, at the beginning of each project, ask ourselves how we can end up with additional skills, new typologies or new methods and bid accordingly. On occasions we do carry overruns. These are usually due to oversights in our own project management.

GJ: How do you keep track of the design process? What are the practical constraints in terms of budgets, time and how long you’ve got to do it? Do you audit parts of the design process in order to demonstrate its costvalue relationship?

KM: The majority of our strategic urban design work takes place in a workshop environment and the issue doesn’t apply as much. Fixed fee master planning projects rely on the internal discipline of checking the proportion of production progress against the proportion of fees spent; claims for extra money again relies on how well the deliverables have been defined in the fee proposal. The detail is important – how many concepts, to what scale and quality – such as CAD, 3D or Freehand etc.

Time-based projects depend on accurate, detailed recording of tasks performed on timesheets. I have found my client relationships around fees to have evolved over time. I now seldom find myself at odds and our fees are seldom questioned, although often the highest – this may be because our work is usually at the front end of the process, for example achieving a Plan Change or Court or Council approval. In other instances it may be because we specifically target the most complex projects; higher fees are usually more acceptable here and competition more limited.

I have come to believe that the most important business decision is whether one takes on a project at all. We think carefully about whether the client is reputable, [whether] we will lose money, [if] it will add to our portfolio and [if] we can do it justice. We often (politely) turn work away. We also seldom reduce our fees without reducing the scope. I would rather lose money sitting on the beach! We don’t do work at risk.

GJ: Can you tell us a bit about how you apportion work within the studio? How do you allocate tasks, time, budget and aims?

KM: We do allocate tasks and review resources regularly. All projects are project-managed from mid-level staff. They have to translate the proposal budgets, where tasks are listed and costed, into a project plan (tasks, individuals, dates), which is reviewed against the budget as the project progresses. We try and keep it simple and accounts staff give support.

GJ: How have you arrived at your particular studio size?

KM: The size of our studio, which is currently ten, is really determined by a number of factors.

• As a predominantly ‘expertise-based’ (as opposed to ‘experience-[based]’ or ‘efficiency-[based]’, according to David Maister) practice, we are mostly focused on undertaking complex agenda-setting work. This requires a strong presence of the leadership, or in other words experts within the firm, as opposed to with more routine urban design jobs. The ratio of staff to leaders is therefore a consideration. Leaders can only front so many jobs; currently my senior associate fronts around one-third and I [front] the rest.

• Depth of market is also important. We have, for instance, undertaken all the growth plans for the four largest cities in New Zealand; they will only be redone in five to ten years’ time.

• We can also afford to remain small, yet do very large projects (the

Melbourne growth strategy which we led encompassed growth for 500,000 people and involved over fifty professionals), as we operate a tight core–wide network organizational model.

• We do not want to be more than twelve as it will be difficult to maintain social cohesion.

• We need enough resources, of varying skills and seniority, to service our projects (which also vary in nature); the blend of skills includes architectural concept design, urban design site design, graphics, 3D modelling, report writing, workshop participation, project management and client management.

• In addition there is admin or finance and company management.

GJ: Do you outsource elements of your work, for example to freelances or to other specialist firms? When does this happen and how do you coordinate this process?

KM: We collaborate – as opposed to outsource – with several specialists as part of the tight core–wide network organizational model. These specialists are highly skilled at workshop processes and usually cover transport, employment, [and] town centre, environmental or open space design. In addition to the core collaborators, we often have to coordinate outside consultants – usually under our umbrella as lead consultant.

GJ: Urban design is invariably viewed as an ‘in-between’ discipline. Quite literally it deals with the spaces between buildings. It also finds itself between architecture, planning, and highways agencies ... but also in between civic demands for sustainability and social inclusion and the commercial concerns of property developers. Would you agree with this viewpoint? How would this intermediary role impact on the way you approach running Urbanism Plus?

KM: This dynamic is a cornerstone of our approach and probably our most distinguishing feature. Good knowledge of other disciplines and an ability to integrate and synthesize ensures we usually lead projects. It is a virtuous cycle: the more you work in an integrated environment, the more confident and informed you become across the disciplines, [and] the more you get asked to lead.

GJ: Do you think that urban design should be subjected to a normative professional status (e.g. be subject to professional institute recognition), as does architecture or town planning? How might this affect your relationship with clients and other stakeholders?

KM: I have mixed feelings about this. On the one hand I fundamentally believe [that] at a strategic level, professionals from any discipline should be able to be urban designers/leaders. When writing New Zealand’s first guide on urbanism, People + Places + Spaces, for the Ministry for the Environment, I insisted on calling it a ‘design guide for urban New Zealand’ as opposed to ‘an urban design guide for New Zealand’. I caution against yet another clique forming, with increased competition between disciplines instead of integration.

The other risk is that as a formal body it will have to accept anybody and thus, philosophically, have a ‘broad church’, watering down the focus on finding more sustainable approaches. Many firms will mostly be joining for marketing purposes.

On the other hand, everyone calls themselves an urban designer, often without [an] urban design qualification, and many of those who do have the qualifications cannot design. In many ways, the title ‘urban designer has become meaningless.

I think if the normative status route was pursued, it must be linked with training, with an emphasis on the fundamentals of sustainability across all disciplines, and design as a skill. I constantly see the need in this country, having delivered the National Urban Design Training Curriculum, training urban designers and other professionals under the Urban Design Protocol. It was a one-off, however, and [I] am currently, with the New Zealand Planning Institute, working towards a professional certificate in urban design. This will, out of necessity, have to focus on many basic craft skills such as general drawing and designing before progressing into complex interdisciplinary sustainable urbanism. As a sponsor of the only urban design award in Auckland I see, first hand, the poor skills levels of graduates.

GJ: Once your work is finished for a client, do you have a process for measuring the impact or success of a project?

KM: Some larger projects are peer reviewed, organized by the client; all my training courses are appraised by attendees. We do review projects internally; however, being a small practice, this is done informally and as an ongoing discussion (usually over breakfast), not an end of project event. We simply ask how we can do things better, more efficiently and more profitably.

GJ: How does your experience of private and public sector clients differ?

KM: We trade on our knowledge of both sectors. Public sector clients want best sustainability practice and guarantees that public good will be achieved. They also want resource consent processes that can be managed by low-level planners. This poses a challenge between achieving easily understood explicit planning rules versus allowing for the often complex solutions required to make good urbanism or respond to future (unknown) market needs. They seek solutions from us that reconcile these issues and rely on our private sector knowledge. Private sector clients want certainty around the yields they will be able to achieve; they also want [the] flexibility to be able to respond to future (unknown) market needs. They trade on our standing with the authorities.

GJ: Do you ever find pressure on the sequencing of urban design projects, in terms of a political or policy need, to give priority to some parts over others – for example, in the interests of securing follow-up funding support? I was thinking in terms of project delivery sequencing. Through interviewing other urban designers and planners in the UK, an issue that came up was how local authorities put pressure on the process sometimes, to ensure that the more visible elements of a scheme are done first. This is so that further funds can be drawn in to support the wider scheme but also as a public relations job with the wider public. Sometimes this results in poorly considered urban design, as detailing is specified in haste. For me this is an interesting issue, as it points to the constant compromises that urban designers have to undertake in order to align themselves with complex demands.

KM: We have not had this experience, possibly because we have far less funding from agencies outside the local authorities to draw from. We actually encourage smaller, easier – low-hanging fruit – projects to commence quickly, but this is to help maintain momentum after expectations have been raised. Our biggest issue is when local authorities break the continuity of a project; this often happens due to personnel or political changes, unrealistic concepts, poorly devised implementation plans – which good consultants should facilitate – or lack of buy-in by client body. Consultants often find strategies being tampered with, without being consulted around the original consulted and agreed logic.

Just to add … many urban designers involved in strategic design such as growth plans, regeneration strategies etc. – as opposed to master plans for construction – seem to be letting themselves and the profession down [by] producing strategies or concepts which are not readily deliverable. So many of these projects get redone, with very little built from the previous study.

This is often because the conceptual/aspirational work is not thoroughly tested for fundability, buildability, marketability or public acceptance. Urban designers are getting good at the soft stuff but remain weak at the hard and often boring stuff. Urban design practice is often undertaken with far less rigour and accountability than the conventional professions.