## CHAPTER 14

# Jason Severs

Senior Design Analyst, Industrial Design Department, Global Innovation Firm, New York, January 2008

In this interview, Jason Severs gives further perspectives on the role of the design researcher in mediating quantitative and qualitative data within the design process. Severs’s mediatory role is also to be found within the design studio itself, smoothing the transition of the development of a project through the studio while also acting as an important bridge between the studio and clients.

Nitzan Waisberg (NW): You refer to yourself as a generalist. You’re a designer really, right?

Jason Severs (JS): You know, my undergraduate degree is in fine art – painting and sculpture – and then I kind of got to do video work, and I kind of moved out from there doing freelancing as a Flash developer in the very early days of Flash 3, 4. And I moved into thinking how new media communicates to people, and I got interested in instructional design and technology; that’s when I got my first dose of what it meant to be a designer, not in the sense of a graphic designer, but to do design thinking, iterative design thinking. Which you kind of intuitively do as an artist in a lot of ways, except you are not working within a series of plans and constraints in the same way, but the creative process is the same. So I did that and got into doing usability research when I was doing my master’s in inner cycles of developing education applications. I got really interested there, and I ended up going to the Bruce Mau studio in Toronto; while [I was] there we were working on this global communications project called Massive Change, and in doing that there were a lot of interesting … ad hoc approaches to doing research that you kind of have to do on the fly … You are almost, in a sense, a journalist in some ways – not with the skills of a journalist, but some of the approaches were similar to the way a journalist would approach a story. But at the same time we were producing outcomes and visualizing the stories in the form of a book and a website and an exhibition – communicating the complexities of the story. In a sense like building a strategic model to [give] businesses a way to think about design, but then also creating vehicles of communication to communicate the story.

NW: When you say ‘design’, do you mean the process of design? Or design research within design?

## JS: Both.

## NW: So to be able to quantify and qualify every corner radius?

JS: Exactly, yeah. I think there are still those messy grey areas that are important to have. They give you the space to think and solve problems. Because at the end of the day, we often have this kind of conflict, where the company that is working with us will start to think of us as a research firm – because we are doing design research. But we always have to come back and say, we are not just doing research, we are making things. And our end goal is to make things that are an expression of your business case or whatever, your strategic vision. And that gets lost sometimes. So they expect us to act like a research organization.

## NW: How does that express itself?

JS: I think [that] thinking about design in terms of return on investment is the big thing. So it’s like ‘I want you to be able to tell me how this design will help me meet these end goals for the next two years’. And we spend a lot of time trying to match those two things up and it often is very hard to do; … [we] can, to a certain extent, [from] what we know about consumer behaviour and attitudes, and needs and wants, we can design to those things, but at the end of the day, you are never really going to know. That is the beauty of design research – at the beginning it gets people, users, consumers, whatever you want to call it; it gets them involved earlier in the process. Or just in the process, period … I love [the] model that Donald Norman thought up, [in] which you have the designer’s mental model, you have the user’s mental model, and in the middle you have this idea of a system image, and that is the expression of whatever you are making; and the designer has a mental model of how that thing will work, and designs to that. And the user has a mental model and that is how they will think: their perception of it, and … their intention [of how] to use something – and it’s like a guessing game on the designer’s part to try and guess what the user’s mental model is. Well, you know, we don’t have to guess any more. We can go … and … figure out what that mental model is, and make a good hypothesis and observations about what that mental model is. And that informs the design of things. And that intersection is really interesting.

NW: I agree; I think it is a huge thing and historically it has happened in a fairly short period of time.

JS: Yeah. And I can remember doing some Flash work in the late 1990s – when you [got] the creative briefs … [that were] heavily informed by market research, and those [were] very driven by these large quantifications of people’s attitudes towards things, and you [were] meant to come up with some kind of creative expression of that [laughs]. It is a bit abstract and strange, you know.

NW: Very abstract and strange. Tell me a bit more about that. You’ve been in this area long enough, and experienced different expressions of it; how is what is going on in Frog Design, in terms of translating – if that is the correct metaphor – findings and observations and understanding people and users, how is that translated into form and function and design?

JS: The final expression? I think the big part of that is the way a researcher works within the studio. Myself, coming into the studio … I originally started working in the digital media design department and there were a lot of large retainer clients at the time. So we were doing a lot of B2B websites when I first joined Frog. And there [are] a lot of standard usability things there. And that stuff is fairly easy to translate into design. It is a fairly task-based approach to figuring out how things work and how usable they are, and there are a lot of big practices around that. But when I started working with the industrial design team, I found the area was a lot more grey, and one of the things I felt [I had] to kind of implement at Frog is bring designers into the research process. So, designing a research programme so that designers can come in and understand the users’ mental model, to benefit them, I think is part of where I saw my role at Frog, in terms of being a design researcher. And that has been a big help, actually, in making design part of design research, at least at Frog.

NW: From my experience of working in research consultancies, I found that having a background in product design was making me popular with creative clients, because they were having terrible conflicts with conventional researchers. But I was having conflicts with them as well. I’m wondering if having combined these two sensibilities, do you find you are in conflict with yourself sometimes?

JS: No, because I started as a designer. I don’t have those conflicts now. I think on product design, or service design, I have that conflict less because it is very easy to translate the way an analyst would communicate ideas, and then you have on top of that the facility to visualize things, to enhance that communication. It fits very well talking about design languages, shaping strategy around projects, visioning products in terms of scenarios, and especially service, when you think about lifecycles and visioning those things and the scenario planning aspects of that. Where it became a conflict for me was when I was working in digital media design and there was a lot of intense specification and things that happen there. You start to become more of an analyst in the sense of being an information architect. It is more of an analyst’s role and less of a designer’s role. I feel like design research processes fit a lot easier with those guys, than [they do] into the visual media component, because you are always moving towards this intense specification. To me, that is a little different to the mechanical engineering side. Something about the industrial design process, this Bill Buxton idea of … sketching and what is generated through a sketch, and combining user experience into that; I think it is such a natural fit.

NW: You have spoken about how respondents, people, were looking at mockups and they were sitting with the designer and really even locating buttons, and they might draw on a mock-up. That seems like very highresolution input. How did the designers deal with it? How did the designers use what they are saying and their input about very designerly things?

JS: In terms of – take a button for instance … the usability factor of that is easier for designers to accept. They go: ‘Well, actually everybody said this was more comfortable, so that is something I can live with.’ When we get more into the subjective things, like form, that is when it starts to get messy for designers. You have a style you want to communicate, and that style is informed by a culture that you understand and a history you understand, and it is something you want to project in this thing. That is why I brought in those mapping exercises in terms of the way people were perceiving things, in terms of the brand attributes, or just general formal attributes, and usability attributes. Because it was another way; instead of just looking at that sketch on the prototype, it was another way of visualizing the thinking of the group. But those were not meant to quantify brand attributes to design language to get to the client and say, ‘OK, this brand attribute matches to this curve, so this is the best way to go in terms of business.’ It is really to just map the thinking of the people in the room [on] that particular day. So it is another component that designers can look at to analyse their reactions to those insights that are being gathered.

NW: It was interesting to see how you were using these very visual things, which I think actually are rarely used in qualitative research. These were the types of things you might see in quantitative research. I’m wondering, how do clients react to this, and do designers use this? What do you see as the value of using these visualizations?

JS: Visualizing things in design research is so critical. Some of the exercises [make it] easier to do that. Like you take a mood board exercise and you have people sort and collect images or do collages or drawings; those things are obviously easier to visualize. But behaviours and attitudes get a bit more tricky.

NW: So, you are using these same representations to talk to designers and, say, brand managers or whatever.

JS: Yeah, and a lot of the times it is a language, especially in market research; it is kind of a language they understand, but you have to heavily caveat it, and I’m always saying it in presentations, and I’m always putting it in the text, because I had a market researcher ask me one time how can we do this on a large scale. And I was like … you can’t really do that [on a] large scale. There probably could be some adaptation with final concepts, but I don’t know what the value would actually be because it’s the combination of what you hear in the room and what those visualizations say. It is those two things coming together that are where the magic happens. In the actual analysis and synthesis process that happens in the studio, those things are anchor points that help focus.

## NW: Do you conduct any quantitative research?

JS: [Laughs.] That is the holy grail, right? To mix qualitative and quantitative. We have a few people in the office now who think about how you scale a quantitative research programme out of qualitative [research], to provide an extra layer of metrics to our clients. And that is generally for buy-in, organizational buy-in, because when they start to see numbers attached to things, they … and we want those numbers to be real numbers, but it’s like this integration of a person with a particular set of skills into the way we do things as designers in the studio. So they have to understand our goals, our qualitative goals, and more importantly our design goals, and what we are actually intending to make, and then how to translate that into kind of a quantitative … but we don’t do that very often.

NW: I had a chance to work with a lot of behavioural segmentations, but what was going on in the consultancy that I was working at was they began to really think in terms of these segmentations for other clients who didn’t have the budgets to do quantitative research and get these segmentations for their market sectors. We had really stopped talking about demographics and we had these kind of archetypes, almost, for different sectors. I’m wondering if that is something that is emerging in your research?

JS: Yeah. You can take those behavioural segments, and you can add variations to that. There are archetypes. In the healthcare industry you have like this idea of the mature maverick or the young [unclear]. So someone who is a risk-taker, … in extreme sports, things like that. Segmentation could translate into product design.

NW: You were talking about stories and journalism, and I think of these segmentations as archetypal heroes who go through a user journey or experience. I’d just like to hear more [about] why you described your work as kind of like journalism, and the significance of storytelling?

JS: That is the main thing: you are always trying to communicate the essence of people. So when you are doing contextual interviews or ethnography, or whatever you want to call it, there are so many things that you observe, that aren’t expressed by an individual and I think that is what a journalist does. They kind of read between the lines of what people are saying and they understand the environments and the context in which people live. It’s kind of interesting what journalists do, because they walk a beat, you know. They have a territory that they kind of understand, a sector and a zone they kind of understand. And back to the idea of archetypes, I always thought that design researchers could have that as well. Like they could walk a beat, understand that segmentation; and they would react to lots of different things, to lots of different kinds of product lines, different kinds of experiences. I think in some sense you end up working in particular industries for a long time, so you do start to walk a certain kind of beat and understand a certain kind of territory a little better than others. But when I say working like a journalist, it is obviously just my assumption of what it means to be a journalist. But I think the other thing is, something we gain as designers, is we understand how to communicate things visually, whereas journalists have a real facility with … language. They understand the nuances of words, whereas we understand the nuances of visual expressions. I think that is the new thing that design research brings; [it] is visualizing storytelling as well. Even though designers in general need to [laughs] … their facility with language. But it is not a part of our training.

NW: It’s almost a prerequisite to hate reading …

JS: [Laughs.]

## CHAPTER 15

David Scothron

Director of Product First, Product Design and Strategy Consultancy, London, December 2008

Among many insights, David Scothron shows how a turn towards more strategic work in product design has gone hand in hand with a more flexible approach towards project teams. As the firm’s core membership has reduced in number, so specialist input to projects is sought outside it more frequently. As a result, the actual design office has become less important to their creative work. The interview also reveals the impact of growing and changing client use of design, so the different departments of a client with which Product First interact may now be more varied and numerous.

Guy Julier (GJ): Can you tell us about what Product First does and how it came about?

id Scothron (DS): Product First was formed in 1987 by John Boult, Graham Thomson and myself, specializing in the creation, design and development of manufactured goods. Initially a team of four people, we quickly grew to twelve, comprising ‘in-house’ complementary marketing, design and engineering skills. John and I are now the remaining directors of Product First and we currently operate a highly personal, ‘hands-on’ service, collaborating with long-term associates on a projectby-project basis, as appropriate.

The consultancy offered a total product development service – from initial concept through engineering detailing [and] prototyping to final manufactured product. Put simply, we wished to design stylish and innovative products that tackled user issues of appearance, functionality and ease of use within practical, cost-effective manufacturing parameters. ‘Commercial creativity’, if you like.

We have worked with companies throughout the world, with projects ranging from fast-moving consumer goods, consumer durables, industrial products, medical and scientific equipment to one-off signage systems and tea bags.

From day one we had a desire to apply creative input to corporate strategy and product planning, undertaking initiatives such as form and functional forecasting, technology communication, design research, think-tank, future concepts – essentially, exploring product futures for those clients (such as Apple, GEC, Unilever, 3M, Corus) who wished to use design as a strategic tool within their organizations, rather than using us merely to solve an immediate product design problem.

Over time, we have chosen to focus more on this strategic aspect of our work, leading us to redefine our offer. We now describe ourselves as an ‘innovation consultancy based on design thinking’. We still believe the drive for great ideas, or putting the product first, is the starting point for successful innovative companies, but today recognize you also need to develop, in parallel, the right enabling culture. We help companies do both these things – create great ideas and build sustainable innovative cultures.

## GJ: And what kind of clients do you work with?

DS: Our clients range from large multinational corporations [to] small companies, ‘start-ups’ and individual entrepreneurs. The common feature of our work is the clients’ desire to produce successful products and recognize that design can be an agent of change within their organizations. Our FMCG work has tended to be for large, multinational brands (Shell, BP, Unilever, P&G, Coca-Cola), whilst our product design portfolio spans a range of market sectors and sizes of company (Siemens, Kango, London Transport, Lego, Racal, Filofax, Jordan, Ross Electronics etc., and numerous SMEs and technology start-up companies). Recently, our more strategic work has also involved working with organizations like local Business Links and Regional Development Agencies to national bodies such as the Design Council, NESTA and SEEDA.

## GJ: Who are your competitors and how do you view your competition?

DS: Obviously, there are – and have been over the years – numerous competitors within the product design sector. I would say the consistent players have been firms like Seymour Powell, IDEO, Factory, Priestman Goode – though it’s fair to say all of us have had to refine and adapt our business model over time. Interestingly, we now find ourselves competing, in the strategic market, not only against some traditional design groups (PDD and Kinear Duffort) but also new specialist service innovation consultants (Engine, Plot, Radar Station), or creative innovation consultants (What If, Via Dynamics). The market is saturated with competitors and the need to clearly differentiate your offer is becoming increasingly difficult.

## GJ: What made you specialize in your sector of design?

DS: I met John and Graham at the Michael Peters Group, which was a large multidisciplinary design firm at the time. They had been brought in specifically to set up product design as a distinct discipline within the group’s design portfolio – part of an overall plan to become a creative ‘one-stop shop’. Within that particular brand-driven environment we quickly recognized there was a market for a more creative approach to product design (as opposed to the existing, traditional ‘engineering’- driven consultancy model) – so decided to set up Product First. The name deliberately communicates our area of specialism.

We now specialize less in the actual ‘design’ of artefacts but focus more on helping companies become more innovative for themselves. We have a situation where anything is possible really – the problem lots of companies have now is ‘What should we be doing, and how can we go about doing it?’

We’ve gravitated towards this sector because firstly we, as people, are getting older and didn’t necessarily want to design another toaster! As individuals, we needed new challenges and stimulus. John and I are both active in design education, which in turn gives us an opportunity to blend, perhaps uniquely, real-world experience with academic insight and knowledge.

Design has always been about ‘problem-solving’ – still the same old Bauhaus ‘Form follows function’ mantra – it’s just that now the function we’re dealing with has changed. And we have reacted to that need within the marketplace.

GJ: Are there any major differences between the areas of your work?

DS: Essentially, our clients either have a specific problem or need help defining what their problem actually is. Although we see our strength now as helping companies and organizations solve the latter, we still sometimes get asked to ‘design’ a new product or structural pack. So, yes, there are major differences (or the skill sets needed) between the ‘doing’ and the ‘analytical’ aspects of our work.

GJ: How have things changed over the years for you in terms of the interactions you have with clients?

DS: I would say that the overall level of engagement – with product development issues – within organizations has increased. There is a positive sense of inclusiveness within development teams and an emerging collective responsibility. The introduction of design managers within some companies has significantly improved awareness of the power of design thinking – and consequently raised clients’ expectations from their development partners. Historically, we have generally enjoyed access to key senior personnel – the decision-makers – in both our design and strategic work. Interestingly, product development is no longer seen as just the remit of the marketing or technical teams. For example, human resources is emerging as a client when issues of cultural change within organizations are being discussed and implemented upon.

GJ: What are the benefits to you of retaining clients?

DS: To be honest, we always strive to establish long-lasting relationships with our clients – rather than have a ‘one night stand’ affair. That way, we feel we become part of their team, gain mutual trust and respect for our capabilities, and often end up reaching further into their organization. In practical terms, this means we can often short-circuit the way in which we interact together, often enabling us to present and discuss our work in a less formal way. The relationship becomes intuitive and means we can work faster and delve deeper into their problem. Personal relationships are obviously an important factor in successful outcomes and we are conscious of this when we assign the team members. Of course, it still hurts when, after a recognized success story, the client then chooses to engage another consultant for the next project!

GJ: How do you manage the costing of projects with clients?

DS: Projects tend to be ‘time based’ and costed accordingly. All our work is structured in stages and is against an agreed written proposal incorporating the client brief. The first stage is a fixed price, with subsequent stages re-evaluated and discussed, based upon the outcomes of stage 1 (although ‘guestimate’ costings would be intimated in the initial proposal). We generally plan the project as a totality and factor into the proposal any specialist external inputs we would need to tackle the problem, having previously obtained costings from specialist suppliers or partners. There have been occasions, however, where we have absorbed additional costs if we believed they were crucial to the success of the project – though these are very rare.

GJ: And what about the management of design projects? How do you

## organize the design process and keep track of its costs versus price?

DS: As I say, all projects are time based and individuals are allocated a specific number of hours or days to work on the project. A director would project-manage the team and is ultimately responsible [for bringing] in the project on budget. Timesheets form an effective check on hours – but in our case the team is small [and] it is not a major issue to control and monitor. Having said that, we are not obsessive about this – we take a holistic approach, believing a task has a certain worth and value, and we strive to deliver work that matches our own expectation levels and are prepared to invest our time to achieve that – obviously within reason! We work very much as a team, bringing together individual specialisms and complementary skills. During the preliminary stages of a project, we encourage ideas and insights from everyone within the company – the fact that we have always been a small consultancy makes this a realistic option. As we work through the subsequent stages, specialist team members would then assume responsibility for specific aspects of development.

GJ: Is the way you work reflected in the layout of your offices?

DS: We have been through many studio formats and sizes throughout our existence, reflecting changes in the physical make-up of Product First, the technologies needed to meet client demands and [the] personal aspirations of the directors. Increasingly flexible working practices and the reduced size of the consultancy has meant that, over time, the office has become less important. The nature of our work means that we now almost exclusively visit clients. It’s more cost-effective for us to visit them, than them sending large teams of project members to us.

GJ: Can you tell us a bit about how you subcontract design work?

DS: Yes; traditionally we have always outsourced model-making or prototyping and supplemented our technical expertise with a close-knit network of collaborators. Also, we seek specialist inputs to projects – such as market research or unique knowledge acquisition where appropriate. Whilst believing our collective experience is a key element of what we offer clients, we also recognize that alternative, younger inputs are essential to many projects. So, we have access to a wide network of challenging design thinkers to shake us up a bit!

GJ: Can you tell us a bit about how you see the differences between private and public sector work?

DS: Basically, both sectors either have a specific problem to solve or need help to identify and initiate new opportunities. Public sector projects tend to be larger, longer and often more complex in scope and delivery. More emphasis is placed upon a considered presentation deliverable in the form of a universal discussion ‘document’ or equivalent for extensive distribution throughout the organization. In a sense, there is a need for more accountability and recording of the process and outcomes.

GJ: How do you give your clients a sense of ‘quality assurance’ … that your offer has a professional value?

DS: Well, we don’t follow any formalized ‘standard of service’. People either ‘get it’ or they don’t! Clients have to ultimately like something about you, or what you’ve done for other people and want a bit of ‘it’ for themselves. We obviously try to present ourselves as a professional organization based upon the range of work we have produced for an extensive range of well-respected brands and organizations. Also, collaborating with, and endorsed by, establishments such as the Design Council implies that we are serious about what we do and assumes a quality standard. The fact that we have worked for companies such as Shell International, BP, Apple, Unilever, Procter and Gamble etc. tends to position you somewhere in the professional food chain I would hope.

GJ: And on completion of a design project … what happens next in terms of measuring its success?

DS: We have always had a desire to continue the dialogue with clients after finishing a project. We tend to be quite proactive about PR opportunities, competitions etc., and often help coordinate or prepare material to this end. ‘Success’ can be measured in many ways. This can be through increased sales, market position, brand perception and awareness, [and] internal cultural change to quite literally ‘saving the company’. We try to establish, in conversation with the client, how the project has impacted upon their business. This information enables us to then communicate our skills and services to potential new clients within a business context and so, hopefully, show how we can add value to their product development process.