5. A dragon with a human head set on the wrong way. 6. St. Peter awaked by the angel in prison; full of spirit, the prison picturesque, with a trefoiled arch, the angel eager, St. Peter startled, and full of motion. 7. St. Peter led out by the angel. 8. The miraculous draught of fishes; fish and all, in the small space. 9. A large leaf, with two snails rampant, coming out of nautilus shells, with grotesque faces, and eyes at the ends of their horns. 10. A man with an axe, striking at a dog's head, which comes out of a nautilus shell: the rim of the shell branches into a stem with two large leaves. 11. Martyrdom of St. Sebastian; his body very full of arrows. 12. Beasts coming to ark; Noah opening a kind of wicker cage. 13. Noah building the ark on shores. 14. A vine leaf with a dragon's head and tail, the one biting the other. 15. A man riding a goat, catching a flying devil. 16. An eel or muraena growing into a bunch of flowers, which turns into two wings. 17. A sprig of hazel, with nuts, thrown all round the quatrefoil; with a squirrel in centre, apparently attached to the tree only by its enormous tail, richly furrowed into hair, and nobly sweeping. 18. Four hares fastened together by the ears, galloping in a circle. Mingled with these grotesques are many sword and buckler combats, the bucklers being round and conical like a hat; I thought the first I noticed, carried by a man at full gallop on horseback, had been a small umbrella. This list of subjects may sufficiently illustrate the feverish character of the Northern Energy; but influencing the treatment of the whole there is also the Northern love of what is called the Grotesque, a feeling which I find myself, for the present, quite incapable either of analysing or defining, though we all have a distinct idea attached to the word: I shall try, however, in the next volume. ## 9. WOODEN CHURCHES OF THE NORTH. I cannot pledge myself to this theory of the origin of the vaulting shaft, but the reader will find some interesting confirmations of it in Dahl's work on the wooden churches of Norway. The inside view of the church of Borgund shows the timber construction of one shaft run up through a crossing architrave, and continued into the clerestory; while the church of date, and exactly the same plan; quatrefoils filled with grotesques, but somewhat less finished in execution, and somewhat less wild in imagination. I wrote down hastily, and in their own course, the subjects of some of the quatrefoils of Lyons; of which I here give the reader the sequence: — 1. Elephant and castle; less graphic than the St. Zeno one. 2. A huge head walking on two legs, turned backwards, hoofed; the head has a horn behind, with drapery over it, which ends in another head. 3. A boar hunt; the boar under a tree, very spirited. • 4. A bird putting its head between its legs to bite its own tail, which ends in a head.