Urnes is in the exact form of a basilica; but the wall above the arches is formed of planks, with a strong upright above each capital. The passage quoted from Stephen Eddy's Life of Bishop Wilfrid, at p. 86. of Churton's "Early English Church," gives us one of the transformations or petrifactions of the wooden Saxon churches. "At Ripon he built a new church of polished stone, with columns variously ornamented, and porches." Mr. Churton adds: "It was perhaps in bad imitation of the marble buildings he had seen in Italy, that he washed the walls of this original York Minster, and made them 'whiter than snow.'" ## 10. CHURCH OF ALEXANDRIA. The very cause which enabled the Venetians to possess themselves of the body of St. Mark, was the destruction of the church by the caliph for the sake of its marbles: the Arabs and Venetians, though bitter enemies, thus building on the same models; these in reverence for the destroyed church, and those with the very pieces of it. In the somewhat prolix account of the matter given in the Notizie Storiche (above quoted) the main points are, that "il Califa de' Saraceni, per fabbricarsi un Palazzo presso di Babilonia, aveva ordinato che dalle Chiese de' Cristiani si togliessero i piil scelti marmi;" and that the Venetians, "videro sotto i loro occhi flagellarsi crudelmente un Cristiano per aver infranto un marmo." I heartily wish that the same kind of punishment were enforced to this day, for the same sin. ## 11. RENAISSANCE LANDSCAPE. I am glad here to re-assert opinions which it has grieved me to be suspected of having changed. The calmer tone of the second volume of "Modern Painters," as compared with the first, induced, I believe, this suspicion, very justifiably, in the minds of many of its readers. The difference resulted, however, from the simple fact, that the first was written in great haste and indignation, for a special purpose and time; — the second, after I had got engaged, almost unawares, in inquiries which could not be hastily nor indignantly pursued: my opinions remaining then, and remaining now, altogether unchanged on the subject which led me into the discussion. And that no farther doubt of them may be entertained by any who may think them worth questioning, I shall here, once for all, express them in the plainest and fewest words I can. I think that J. M. W. Turner is not only the greatest (professed) landscape painter who ever lived, but that he has in him as much as would have furnished all the rest with such power as they had; and that, if we put Nicolo Poussin, Salvator, and our own Gainsborough out of the group, he would cut up into Claudes, Cuyps, Ruysdaels, and such others, by uncounted bunches. I hope this is plainly and strongly enough stated. And farther, I like his later pictures, up to the year 1845, the best; and believe that those persons who only like his early pictures do not, in fact, like him at all. They do not like that which is essentially his. They like that in which he resembles other men; which he had learned from Loutherbourg, Claude, or Wilson: that which is indeed his own, they do not care for. Not that there is not much of his own in his early works; they are all invaluable in their way; but those persons who can find no beauty in his strangest fantasy on the Academy walls, cannot distinguish the peculiarly Turneresque characters of the earlier pictures. And, therefore, I again state here, that I think his pictures painted between the years 1830 and 1845 his greatest; and that his entire power is best represented by such pictures as the Temeraire the Sun of Venice going to Sea, and others, painted exactly at the time when the public and the press were together loudest in abuse of him. I desire, however, the reader to observe that I said, above, professed landscape painters, among whom, perhaps, I should hardly have put Gainsborough. The landscape of the great figure painters is often majestic in the highest degree, and Tintoret's especially shows exactly the same power and feeling as Turner's. If with Turner I were to rank the historical painters as landscapists, esti- Turner. Tintoret. mating rather the power they show, than the actual Masaccio. value of the landscape they produced, I should class John Bellini, those, whose landscapes I have studied, in some such Albert Durer. order as this at the side of the page ;—associating Giorgione. with the landscape of Perugino that of Francia Paul Veronese, and Angelico, and the other severe painters of Titian, religious subject. I have put Turner and Tintoret Rubens, side by side, not knowing which is, in landscape, Correggio. the greater; I had nearly associated in the same Orcagna. manner the noble names of John Bellini and Benozzo Gozzoli. Albert Durer; but Bellini must be put first, for his Giotto, profound religious peace, yet not separated from Riiffaelle. the other, if but that we might remember his Perugino\* kindness to him in Venice: and it is well we should B B