## 20. SHAFTS OF DUCAL PALACE. The shortness of the thicker ones at the angles is induced by the greater depth of the enlarged capitals: thus the 36th shaft is 10ft. 4^ in. in circumference at its base, and 10 „ C£\* in circumference under the fillet of its capital; but it is only 6 „ If high, while the minor intermediate shafts, of which the thickest is 7 ,, 8 round at the base, and 7 „ 4 under capital, are yet on the average 7 „ 7 high. The angle shaft towards the sea (the 18th) is nearly of the proportions of the 36th, and there are three others, the 15th, 24th, and 26th, which are thicker than the rest, though not so thick as the angle ones. The 24th and 26th have both party walls to bear, and I imagine the 15th must in old time have carried another, reaching across what is now the Sala del Gran Consiglio. They measure respectively round at the base, The 15th, 8 „ 2 24th, 9 „ 6£ 26th, 8 „ 0£ The other pillars towards the sea, and those to the 27th inclusive of the Piazzetta, arc all seven feet round at the base, and then there is a most curious and delicate crescendo of circumference to the 36th, thus: The 28th, 7 „ 3 The 33rd, 7 „ 6 29th, 7 „ 4 34th, 7 „ 8 30th, 7 „ 6 35th, 7 „ 8 31st, 7 „ 7 36th, 10 „ 4} 32nd, 7 „ 5 The shafts of the upper arcade, which are above these thicker columns, are also thicker than their companions, measuring, on the average, 4 „ 8^ in circumference, while those of the sea fa9acle, except the 29th, average 4 „ 7^ in circumference. The 29th, which is of course above the 15th of the lower story, is 5 „ 5 in circumference, which little piece of evidence will be of no small value to us by-and-by. The 35th carries the angle of the palace, and is 6 „ 0 round. The 47th, which comes above the 24th, and carries the party wall of the Sala del Gran Consiglio, is strengthened by a pilaster; and the 51st, which comes over the 26th, is 5 „ 4J round, or nearly the same as the 29th; it carries the party wall of the Sala del Scrutinio; a. small room containing part of St. Mark's library, coming between the two saloons; a room which, in remembrance of the help I have received in all my inquiries from the kindness and intelligence of its usual occupant, I shall never easily distinguish otherwise than as "Mr. Lorenzi's." \* \* I shall often have occasion to write measures in the current text, therefore the reader will kindly understand that whenever they are thus written, 2 „ 2, with double commas between, the first figures stand for English feet, the second for English inches. I may as well connect with these notes respecting the arcades of the Ducal Palace, those which refer to Plate XIV., which represents one of its spandrils. Every spandril of the lower arcade was intended to have been occupied by an ornament resembling the one given in that Plate. The mass of the building being of Istrian stone, a depth of about two inches is left within the mouldings of the arches, rough hewn, to receive the slabs of fine marble composing the patterns. I cannot say whether the design was never completed, or the marbles have been since removed, but there are now only two spandrils retaining their fillings, and vestiges of them in a third. The two complete spandrils are on the sea facade, above the 3rd and 10th capitals (vide method of numbering, Chap. I., page 30.); that is to say, connecting the 2nd arch with the 3rd, and the 9th with the 10th. The latter is the one given in Plate XIV. The white portions of it are all white marble, the dentil band surrounding the circle is in coarse sugary marble, which I believe to be Greek, and never found in Venice, to my recollection, except in work at least anterior to the fifteenth century. The shaded fields charged with the three white triangles are of red Verona marble; the inner disc is green serpentine, and the dark pieces of the radiating leaves are grey marble. The three triangles are equilateral. The two uppermost are 1 „ 5 each side, and the lower one 1 „ 2. The extreme diameter of the circle is 3„ 10^; its field is slightly raised above the red marbles, as shown in the section at A, on the left. Aa is part of the red marble field; ab the section of the dentil moulding let into it; b c the entire breadth of the rayed zone, represented on the other side of the spandril by the lineC/; c d is the white marble band let in, with the dog-tooth on the face of it; b c is 7f inches across; c d 3|; and at B are given two joints of the dentil (mentioned above, in the chapter on dentils, as unique in Venice) of their actual size. At C is given one ot the inlaid leaves; its measure being (in inches) Gf 7|; C h f; f g f; \* I cannot suffer this volume to close without also thanking my kind friend, Mr. Ilawdon Brown, for help given me in a thousand ways during^my stay in Venice: but chiefly for his direction to passages elucidatory of my subject in the MSS. of St. Mark's library.