Acknowledgments Cooking over many years, the compost pile of colleagues, students, and friends who have made this book possible is promiscuous, layered, and hot. While the holobiome that makes up this book is full of human and nonhuman critters to think and feel with, I especially need to thank Rusten Hogness, Susan Harding, Anna Tsing, Scott Gilbert, Vinciane Despret, Isabelle Stengers, Bruno Latour, Marilyn Strathern, John Law, Jim Cliford, Katie King, Chris Connery, Lisa Rofel, Dai Jinhua, Carla Freccero, Marisol de la Cadena, Jenny Reardon, Beth Stephens, Annie Sprinkle, Helene Moglen, Sheila Namir, Gildas Hamel, Martha Kenney, Karen DeVries, Natasha Myers, Maria Puig de la Bellacasa, Megan Moodie, Margaret Wertheim, Christine Wertheim, Val Hartouni, Michael Hadfield, Margaret McFall-Ngai, Deborah Gordon, Carolyn Hadfield, Thelma Rowell, Sarah Franklin, Marc Bekof, Rosi Braidotti, Allison Jolly, Adele Clarke, Colin Dayan, Cary Wolfe, Joanne Barker, Kim TallBear, Thom van Dooren, Hugh Rafles, Michael Fischer, Emily Martin, Rayna Rapp, Shelly Errington, Jennifer Gonzalez, Warren Sack, Jason Moore, Faye Ginsberg, Holly Hughes, Thyrza Goodeve, Eduardo Kohn, Beatriz da Costa, Eva Hayward, Harlan Weaver, Sandra Azeredo, Eric Stanley, Eben Kirksey, Lindsay Kelley, Scout Calvert, Kris Weller, Ron Eglash, Deborah Rose, Karen Barad, Marcia Ochoa, Lisbeth Haas, Eileen Crist, Stefan Helmreich, Carolyn Christov-Bakargiev, Sharon Ghamari, Allison Athens, Bettina Stoetzer, Juno Parreñas, Danny Solomon, Raissa DeSmet, Mark Diekhans, Andrew Matthews, Jake Metcalf, Lisette Olivares, Kami Chisholm, and Lucien Gomoll. Every one of these companions has given me something special for this book; there are so many more I should name. My home at the University of California at Santa Cruz nurtures vital research groups and centers that are stem cells in the marrow of my bones. Both visitors and ucsc people of the Center for Cultural Studies, the Science and Justice Research Network, the Center for Emerging Worlds, the Research Cluster on Crisis in the Cultures of Capitalism, the Institute of Arts and Sciences, and the History of Consciousness Department shape Staying with the Trouble profoundly. Many of the chapters began as lectures and workshops, and the people who participated infuse my thinking in obvious and subtle ways. I especially want to thank Kavita Philip, Gabriele Schwab, the Critical Theory Institute at uc Irvine, and Jennifer Crewe of Columbia University Press for the opportunity to deliver the Wellek Lectures in 2011. Over four years, I participated in a writing workshop on Worlding, in which both the writing and the generous critical comments on my own scribblings by Susan Harding, Anna Tsing, Katie Stewart, Lesley Stern, Allen Shelton, Stephen Muecke, and Lauren Berlant remolded the figures, voice, stories, and textures of this book. Vinciane Despret invited me to Cerisy in Normandy in 2010 to take part in a week-long colloquium asking how we know with other animals. When meals were announced, the staf called our gaggle at the chateau “les animaux” to distinguish us from the more strictly humanistic scholars that summer, and we felt proud. Isabelle Stengers invited me back to Cerisy in the summer of 2013 for her weeklong colloquium called “Gestes spéculatifs,” an extraordinary afair marked for me by afternoons in the speculative narration workshop. People I worked and played with at Cerisy inhabit every chapter of Staying with the Trouble. I can’t name everybody, but want especially to thank Jocelyn Porcher, Benedikte Zitouni, Fabrizio Terranova, Raphaël Larrère, Didier Debaise, Lucienne Strivay, Émelie Hache, and Marcelle Stroobants. Growing partly out of discussions at Cerisy, the Thousand Names of Gaia / Os Mil Nomes de Gaia in Rio de Janeiro in 2014 refocused my thinking about the geographies, temporalities, and human and nonhuman peoples of our epoch. Thanks especially to Eduardo Viveiros de Castro, Déborah Danowski, and Juliana Fausto. Marisol de la Cadena invited me to participate twice in her amazing Indigenous Cosmopolitics Sawyer Seminars at uc Davis in 2012. I am grateful for the chance to make string figures with her and her colleagues and students, and with Marilyn Strathern and Isabelle Stengers. I have special debts to Joe Dumit, Kim Stanley Robinson, James Griesemer, and Kristina Lyons from these events. Both at ucsc and in Denmark, my work has been shaped by the ferment of aura (Aarhus University Research on the Anthropocene), organized by Anna Tsing with a core group of researchers in biology and anthropology. My thanks go especially to Nils Bubandt and Peter Funch, along with Elaine Gan, Heather Swanson, Rachel Cypher, and Katy Overstreet. The graduate students and faculty in science studies at uc San Diego entered my book at a special time in 2013, and I want particularly to thank Monica Hofman and Val Hartouni. Multispecies studies have surged in many forms around the world, and I owe a special debt to the people of British, Australian, New Zealand, South African, and U.S. animal studies and environmental humanities. Perhaps the fact that all of us inherit the trouble of colonialism and imperialism in densely related, mostly white, Anglophone webs makes us need each other even more as we learn to rethink and refeel with situated earth critters and their people. Invited twice to address the gatherings of the British Animal Studies Network, including the gang assembling for Cosmopolitical Animals, I want to thank especially Erica Fudge, Donna Landry, Garry Marvin, Kaori Nagai, John Lock, and Lynda Birke. Annie Potts, Thom van Dooren, Deborah Bird Rose, Lesley Green, Anthony Collins, and others make me remember that thinking about these matters from the “global South” can help undo some of the arrogance of the “global North.” And then I remember too that this problematic “North” is the “South” for the decolonial struggles of humans and nonhumans of the indigenous circumpolar North, a perspective I owe especially to Susan Harding. sf people are crucial to this book, both as writers and as colleagues, especially Ursula K. Le Guin, Kim Stanley Robinson, Octavia Butler, Vonda McIntyre, Gweneth Jones, Julie Czerneda, Sheryl Vint, Marleen Barr, Sha La Bare, Istvan Csicsery-Ronay, Helen Merrick, Margaret Grebowicz, and, always, Samuel R. Delany. Colleagues in Sweden, Norway, and the Netherlands contributed richly to this book with their generous responses to my lectures and seminars, as well as by their own research. Thanks especially to Rosi Braidotti, Piet van de Kar, Iris van der Tuin, Tora Holmberg, Cecelia Åsberg, Ulrike Dahl, Marianne Lien, Britta Brena, Kristin Asdal, and Ingunn Moser. The think tank on Methodologies and Ecologies on Research-Creation in 2014 at the University of Alberta in Edmonton helped me rethink a chapter at a critical time. I am in debt to Natalie Loveless and her extraordinary colleagues and students. I also want to thank the people at the Institute for Humanities Research at Arizona State University in 2013, as well as Laura Hobgood-Oster and her colleagues at the 2011 meetings of the American Academy of Religion for their innovative thinking about humans and other animals. The Children of Compost in this book owe a great deal to the gathering of the American Association for Literature and the Environment in June 2015, with the theme Notes from Underground: The Depths of Environmental Arts, Culture and Justice. Thanks especially to Anna Tsing, my partner in tunneling, and Cate Sandilands, Giovanna Di Chiro, T. V. Reed, Noël Sturgeon, and Sandra Koelle. I heartily thank the smart, skilled, and generous people of Duke University Press, especially Ken Wissoker and Elizabeth Ault. Their warmth as well as their intelligence sustained me in making this book. Saving me from some real bloopers, the astute blind reviewers made me less blinkered. Without the extensive and mostly invisible work of such reviewers, scholarship would come undone. ## Publication Histories Chapter 1, “Playing String Figures with Companion Species,” is lightly revised from “Jeux de ficelles avecs des espèces compagnes: Rester avec le trouble,” in Les animaux: Deux ou trois choses que nous savons d’eux, edited by Vinciane Despret and Raphaël Larrère (Paris: Hermann, 2014), 23–59, translated by Vinciane Despret. Chapter 2, “Tentacular Thinking: Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Chthulucene,” is significantly revised from “Staying with the Trouble: Sympoièse, figures de ficelle, embrouilles multispécifiques,” in Gestes spéculatifs, edited and translated by Isabelle Stengers (Paris: Les presses du réel, 2015). A greatly abbreviated version of chapter 3, “Sympoiesis: Symbiogenesis and the Lively Arts of Staying with the Trouble,” will appear in Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet: Stories from the Anthropocene, edited by Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, Nils Bubandt, Elaine Gan, and Heather Swanson, forthcoming from University of Minnesota Press. Chapter 4, “Making Kin: Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene, Chthulucene,” is lightly revised from Environmental Humanities 6 (2015). Chapter 5, “Awash in Urine: des and Premarin® in Multispecies Response-ability,” is lightly revised from wsq: Women’s Studies Quarterly 40, nos. 3/4 (spring/summer 2012): 301–16. Copyright © 2012 by the Feminist Press at the City University of New York. Used by permission of The Permissions Company, Inc., on behalf of the publishers, feministpress.org, all rights reserved. Chapter 6, “Sowing Worlds: A Seed Bag for Terraforming with Earth Others,” is lightly revised from Beyond the Cyborg: Adventures with Donna Haraway, edited by Margaret Grebowicz and Helen Merrick, 137–46, 173–75, copyright © Columbia University Press, 2013. Chapter 7, “A Curious Practice,” is lightly revised from Angelaki 20, no. 2 (2015): 5–14, reprinted by permission of the publisher (Taylor and Francis Ltd., tandfonline.com). Chapter 8, “The Camille Stories,” is published for the first time in this volume.