«FOCUSED» — Current Design Research Projects and Methods

Swiss Design Network Symposium 2008

30–31 May 2008

Mount Gurten, Berne

Switzerland

04

Alain Findeli Denis Brouillet Sophie Martin Christophe Moineau Richard Tarrago

Universities

Université de Montréal & Université de Nîmes   
Université de Montpellier III   
MO Design office, Uzès   
Hôpital Local d’Uzès   
alain.findeli@unimes.fr

# Research Through Design and Transdisciplinarity: A Tentative Contribution to the Methodology of Design Research

<sup>↦</sup> methodology <sup>↦</sup> research through designKeywords <sup>↦</sup> terminology <sup>↦</sup> multi-, inter- & transdisciplinarity

## 1. Some necessary clarifications

In our proposal, we stated that the purpose of the paper consisted in “a conceptual and methodological clarification of the so-called ‘research through design’ approach”. Furthermore, the title of our paper indicates that it is likely to be considered a contribution to the methodology of design research and that our argument will be based on the concept of transdisciplinarity. Our proposal also warns that the paper is not a report of a specific research project although, as we will see, its argument is strongly grounded in a study case. As a consequence, the paper is structured in the two following parts. Firstly, a long introduction where we found necessary to clarify our terminology and specify our conceptual background. Its general tone is therefore didac tic and, inevitably, somewhat dogmatic. Secondly and in a much more narrative style, a short description of the early phases of a research project devoted to the contribution of design to the improvement of Alzheimer patients’ daily activities, where the principles discussed in the first part are implemented and illustrated.

1.1 Methodology and the Epistemological Issue in Design Research By “methodology” is meant the science of methods, i. e. the very general field of inquiry dealing with the identification, description, comparison, implementation, validation and criticism of methods. In this respect, the methodology of design research is the field of inquiry concerned with the methods susceptible to be used to conduct research projects in the field or discipline of design (in our terminology, the expressions “research in design” or, more plainly, “design research” are synonymous). Methodology of design research is not to be confounded with methodology of design tout court, i.e. of design practice, which is another important field of inquiry, at first sight quite unrelated to the former<sup>1</sup>.

Methodology of design research is a subset of the methodology of [scientific] research in general, and as such its statements, specifications, validation criteria, etc. should be consistent and congruent with the general principles of the latter, as accepted and discussed by the international scientific research community. The field of general [scientific] research methodology has grown so wide and dense that, in a research education context, it has become unthinkable to adequately deal with all the available and recommended methods and tools. In the literature of the so-called qualitative methods alone, there are currently more than fifty different methods listed. The spectrum is quite large and this variety has become necessary due to the epistemic characteristics and complexity of the diverse objects (or subject-matters) that constitute the target of the various existing scientific disciplines.

As an example, the objects of paleoastrophysics are very different from those of ethnobotany and for this single reason, one realizes that the method(s) used to observe their respective objects and frame them within a proper theoretical apparatus will be different. Such is indeed also the case for the objects of design, considered as a discipline (as is admittedly the case in academia)<sup>2</sup>. Since one of the main purposes of methodology is to identify the method(s) best fitted to carry out the research activity in a given field or discipline, and to justify that choice, what will interest us in this paper, and in design research more generally, is to identify the proper method(s)

to carry out our research task, considering the specificity of our objects and, one must add, the legitimate expectations of the design community in general (and not only the design research community, if such distinction is still meaningful or even desirable).

The construction of a consistent and coherent methodology of design research has been an ongoing concern of our – still young – research community. The program of our symposium is more proof that the field of design research methodology is currently in effervescence. We believe that this phenomenon is not foreign to the trends and drifts of the wave of methodologism that has been affecting the larger scientific community for roughly a generation. We further believe that this excess of focus on the search for the right or ideal method(s) is doomed to be unfruitful if not backed by a necessary, unbypassable, preliminary epistemological query. Unless we are clear about what exactly is the target of our research, there is no point in discussing, debating, arguing and contending about the right or ideal method. The epistemological issue in design research is far from being settled at the present time. We think this is so because there is a persistent confusion between the targets of the research and the design projects. Strange as it may seem, the central question as to what could or should be the target of design research is still on the agenda. It can be broken down into the following, recurring, set of questions<sup>3</sup>:

What exactly are the objects of design considered as a scientific, academic discipline?

What are the phenomena of the world we are interested in observing and understanding, that are not already the “property” of other disciplines?

What do we intend to say about these phenomena that is not known yet and that other disciplines cannot know or at least that design claims to know better?

## 1.2 Research through Design as Project-grounded Research

With great reluctance we include an n<sup>th</sup> commentary on this topic. We understand that the Swiss design community has had an overdose of this “research in, for, about and through” stuff and we certainly do not want to worsen its case. However, since we have partly contributed to this debate<sup>4</sup>, and since this typology of design research practices has received very diverse, sometimes contradictory, and not always helpful, interpretations, we feel compelled to clarify our definition once again<sup>5</sup>. Let us first recall that our definition of the method of “research through design” is derived from a methodological critique of the two most current methods practiced in the field: research for and about design. The argument we developed unfolds in the following manner.

## 1.2.1 Research for Design

Research for design is highly relevant for design practice, since its purpose is to make sure that the various parameters on which the output of the design process depends (technological, ergonomic, economic, aesthetic, psychological, etc.) are adequately handled, i. e. that the design project is properly and responsibly informed. It is however not considered scientifically acceptable for various reasons, such as:

It usually draws on already available knowledge

When new knowledge is produced (for instance, after interviews, field observation, comparative analysis, etc.), it is usually not done with the rigor expected by scientific standards, either because the ‘researcher’ does not have the necessary qualifica tions, or (and more often) since time constraints do not permit

As we all know, it is mostly tacit and not meant to be published or discussed by the design research community; indeed, in many instances, it is even kept confidential<sup>6</sup>.

Does this mean that the work of design practitioners has no value whatsoever, and that they should be considered second range after the scientists? Of course not, it just means that design practice and research differ in their respective aims, validation and assessment criteria, as well as public and contexts, and consequently that the one should not be evaluated with the other’s standards.

## 1.2.2 Research about Design

Research about design is normally performed by various disciplines, other than design, according to scientific standards. Indeed, the fact that it is published is, normally again, the proof of its rigor and acceptance by the scientific community. The problem we encounter with this kind of research is its relative lack of relevance for design. By “design” is here meant design practice, design education or design research. Why is that so? Well, because the research is carried out about design (i. e. about its objects, its processes, its actors and stakeholders, its meaning and significance for society, business, culture, etc.) by scientists (like anthropologists, archaeologists, historians, cognitive psychologists, management scientists, semio ticists and many others) whose main goal is to contribute to the advancement of their own discipline, not particularly of design. More precisely, they have not been trained to figure out how and make sure that the knowledge they produce in their research is relevant for design, even if they sometimes hope so. It is in fact designers who are better placed to decide if such knowledge is relevant for them and, if such is the case, how it may be implemented in their respective practices<sup>7</sup>. A simple case tells it more boldly. A social historian conducting research in the history of medicine (or design, for that matter) is usually not expected by his/her research community to prove that his/her conclusions will contribute to the practice of medicine (or design) and to explain how. In contrast, a design researcher studying some aspect of the social history of design (for instance in the framework of a PhD) should<sup>8</sup>.

## 1.2.3 Research through Design

The previous observations leave us with two important criteria design research must satisfy: it must be rigorous, i. e. stand up to the usual scientific standards; it must be relevant, i. e. contribute to the improvement of design practice. Research through design is our answer. As such – and this is the critical point – it must be understood as having the virtues of both research for design and research about design. Contrary to many wrong interpretations, our position is not a “neither one nor the other” but a “one and the other” situation. Proper research through design could thence be defined as a kind of research about design [more] relevant for design, or as a kind of research for design that produces original knowledge with as rigorous [and demanding] standards as research about design. For reasons that are explained in the text we refer to [see footnotes 4 and 5], we call this approach project-grounded research (recherche-projet).

We trust these clarifications are helpful to settle our terminology and identify what we consider the key necessary conditions for a research that does justice to the specificities of the field or discipline of design. These led us to propose, not only one, but three domains where the conclusions of a design research project would be assessed. The first is common to any research project in any discipline: an original and significant contribution to knowledge, in our case to design knowledge. The second is: an expected improvement of design practice and consequently of user satisfaction. The third: some fruitful consequences for design education<sup>9</sup>.

Now that we have recalled the principles of what we define as research through design, namely project-grounded research, the following two additional reservations need to be made:

i) The above conditions are necessary, but not sufficient. We still need to better define what this research through design actually consists of, how it is to be contrived and implemented. The operational concept for this, as will be argued shortly, is transdisciplinarity.

ii) The above typology only includes three types of possible research in design. Are there other types one could or should consider? The two first types (“for” and “about”) result from an observation of actual practice of design research as it has been conducted roughly in the four last decades. The third one (“through”) has been constructed logically (our first published model is in 1997; Frayling’s famous typology dates back in 1993 and Archer’s in 1981). What we have witnessed since then is the following.

On one hand, the idea of research through design has gained sufficient credit to lead to actual research projects carried out along these lines. Also called “practice-based research”, “practice research”, “action research in design”, “clinical research”, or “project-grounded research” as we do, it still struggles for methodological soundness and scientific recognition. The relative dispersion of the semantic space indicates that interpretations of the idea and principles of research through design may diverge and that no real consensus has been arrived at yet<sup>10</sup>. We maintain that the main obstacle, here again, is of epistemological nature. Most if not all promoters of the research through design method agree upon the fact that the design project should have its place within the research project but that the latter can and must not be confounded with the former. Where metho dology scholars differ or are silent is on the [epistemic] function to be assigned to the design project within the research, i. e. within a process of rigorous and relevant knowledge production in design. This is indeed one of the most crucial questions in the design disciplines, and for that matter in all professional disciplines. Behind that question dwells the perennial philosophical riddle of the relationship between theory and practice. For it is one thing to claim that practice is important and necessary for theory building, but it is another, more challenging one, to explain how this contribution of practice to theory is to be contrived and operationalized.

On the other hand, another type of research is emerging and trying to find its place in academia: the so-called “creation-based research” (recherche-création). It is the scholars of the art disciplines who have been supporting and promoting, sometimes vehemently, this type of research. In the design research community, they are represented by colleagues who tend to dismiss the distinction between the de - sign project and the research project, who therefore consider that design practice is in itself already a kind of design research and should be acknowledged as such. Although at first discredited for their poor or lack of epistemological and methodological argument in favour of their claims, they have recently strengthened their justifications<sup>11</sup>. We have already expressed our own reservations about the dominant rationale supporting this method and pointed out that, provided some basic methodological and argumentative precautions were secured, it could well be integrated into the previous methodological typology and toolbox<sup>12</sup>. In this respect, we consider that no special dispensation needs to be requested from the scientific research community any more in the name of the alleged highly specific and impenetrable originality of the art disciplines.

## 1.3 Design Knowledge and Design’s Research Program

As previously mentioned, design knowledge is the concern of epistemology. “What is design knowledge about and after?” sums up the issue. In order to orientate ourselves in this issue, we propose to turn back to the purpose of design research and to the three criteria we expect any research project in design will satisfy. Three “end-users” of design research are interested in its output: the design research community, the design practice community, and the design education community<sup>13</sup>. The type and part of knowledge relevant to and valued by each of these communities differ, therefore the necessity for design researchers to bear this in mind when constructing their protocols and writing their conclusions or final reports. Expressed in conventional terminology, the researchers’ community is interested in “fundamental” or “theoretical” knowledge, the practitioners’ community in “applied” and “useful” knowledge, and the educators’ community in “teachable” and “applicable” knowledge. This means in particular that there is no point carrying on design research if it does not end up improving the act of designing and consequently the lives of those addressed by the act, i. e. presumably all of us inhabitants of the world. Consequently, the purpose of design research is directly tied to the purpose of design tout court, which, in a nutshell, is: to improve or maintain the “habitability” of the world, in all its dimensions (physical, psychical, spiritual).

In the so-called “Bremen Model”l<sup>14</sup>, we showed that design knowledge dispatches itself along two main dimensions, corresponding to the ‘conception’ and ‘reception’ spaces of the design project. The latter concerns the description and understanding of the users’ act or, better said, project of “habitating” the world, i. e. more precisely the relationship between people and their environment (in all its dimensions: physical, psychical, spiritual), whereas the former focuses on the description and understanding of the act of improving or maintaining these relationships, i. e. the very act of designing.

Keeping in mind the structure of this model, we see that behind every design situation and project, there is potentially:

i) An anthropological issue, meaning by that an issue related to the way an individual or a community inhabits or wishes to inhabit the world. In short, nothing that concerns the relationships between humans and their environments should be foreign to design in principle.

ii) An opportunity to contribute to the already available knowledge about the design act. If conducted in a reflective manner, every design situation is an opportunity to reveal something new about what is at stake in design practice, or at least to confirm an aspect of the “designerly way of knowing” that has already been observed, described and theorized.

In other words, in project-grounded research, one should take the habit of looking beyond the immediate output of the design project (without for all that neglecting the latter). The challenge for design researchers and research teams is to “realize” the above two potentialities in the form of adequate and handy research problematics. In such a framework, there are of course innumerable potential research objects and projects available. Contextual circumstances will help determine which is or are the most appropriate for the planned research.

This is indeed a huge research program! Is such an ambitious claim acceptable? No, indeed, if design scholars pretend it is their own private turf. But yes, if design scholars believe they have a word to say in this very serious business of describing and understanding how we inhabit the world and how some pretend to improve it. Our task now is to characterize what this word could or should be, and how it is to be spoken, so that we have an idea of the feasibility and manageability of our ambition.

One possible entry into the puzzle is to realize that the two above potential issues are indeed not the private turf of design. It is a fact that almost no scientific discipline is completely foreign to our human condition and to the way humans, individually and collectively, relate to the world. If we adopt as wide a definition of design’s objects of knowledge as above, then we definitely share them with various other disciplines. To try to isolate a specific part of the world phenomena and appropriate it in the name of design’s scientific claims is maybe not the only possible way to secure a specific knowledge domain. We believe instead it is the kind of questions design asks about these phenomena that constitutes the originality of our discipline<sup>15</sup>.