# References and Endnotes

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Research：《through design and transdiscipl》\Research：《through design and transdiscipl》\Research：《through design and transdiscipl》\auto\Research：《through design and transdiscipl》.md

## References and Endnotes

<sup>1.</sup> If we accept Ranulph Glanville’s serious argument that scientific research processes are but a subset of design processes, then the field of design methodology also includes that of design research methodology. See Glanville, R., “Researching Design and Designing Research”, Design Issues, XV, 2, Summer 1999, 80–92.

<sup>2.</sup> The problem with design, as we shall see, is that it is not sure what its objects are and in which measure those are shared with or borrowed from other disciplines.

<sup>3.</sup> As stated at the beginning of this paper, our argument is mainly didactic. In this respect, we do not want to suggest that the epistemological issue has not been tackled at all in the design research community. Numerous distinguished colleagues have indeed taken this issue at the centre of their concerns. Even a cursory look at the records of our main research societies or at the archives of our journals on this topic will yield a more than sufficient harvest.

<sup>4.</sup> Findeli, A., “Die Projektgeleitete Forschung: Eine Methode der Designforschung”, in R. Michel (ed.), Swiss Design Network – Erstes Design Forschungssymposium, Basel, HGK Basel, 2004, 40–51. French version available at [www.din.umontreal.ca/findeli.html] under the title: “La recherche-projet: une méthode pour la recherche en design”, 21 pp. <sup>5.</sup> Our most discriminate description of the “research through design” method, which we name “project-grounded research”, is to be found in Findeli A. & Coste, A. “De la recherche-création à la recherche-projet: un cadre théorique et méthodologique pour la recherche architecturale”, Lieux communs, 10, 2007, 139–63.

<sup>6.</sup> “Publication isn’t relevant: shipping a product is” is Donald Norman’s most incisive catchphrase in his discussion on applied science and design. In “Applying the Behavioural, Cognitive, and Social Sciences to Products”, he insists upon the sharp difference between the respective needs, aims, contexts, etc. of the scientific and design communities. http://www.jnd.org/dn.mss/applying\_the\_be.html, p.3. Retrieved 04.28.08.

<sup>7.</sup> The problem, writes Norman, is that “the relevant scientific fields have made no attempts to package their findings in this way”, i. e. in “[stressing] the practical implications of the findings” and “methods for making use of them”, ibid., p. 9. <sup>8.</sup> Of course, it would be quite different if the social history of medicine project were conducted with an action-research method. But that is exactly what research through design is about.

<sup>9.</sup> Actually, all students in the Design & Complexity research Master’s program of the University of Montreal are expected to outline and critically discuss, in the final chapter of their thesis, what the import of their conclusion is for 1) design knowledge, 2) design practice, and 3) design education. See [www.gradient.umontreal.ca/desco/pmwiki.php]. <sup>10.</sup> Available literature is currently overabundant on these topics. The most quoted sources are the UK Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC), the UK Research Assessment Exercise (RAE), and the UKCGE paper on Practice-based Doctorates in the Creative and Performing Arts and Design. The PhD-Design list has hosted numerous threads on this highly recurrent but now overexploited topic. In the Wikipedia “Screen media practice research” article, one reads that “practice as research (PAR) and practice-based research (PBR) – and ‘research through practice’, ‘research by prac - tice’, ‘performance as research’ – are contested terms that resist close definition. Practice as research and practice-based research are frequently used interchangeably to suggest a relationship of research between theory and practice”. http://en.wikipedia. org/wiki/Screen \_media\_practice\_research.html, p. 2. Retrieved 04.28.08.

<sup>11.</sup> Since creation-based research is addressed specifically in this symposium, it will not be developed further. See Lechot-Hirt L., “CreaSearch – Methodologies and Models for Creation-based Research Projects in Design” (in Track 2 of the program). <sup>12.</sup> See reference in footnote 5, paragraph titled “La recherche-création”.

<sup>13.</sup> The primary addressees are of course the very users of design products, systems, services, interfaces, environments, etc. As will be argued in the paper, they are included in our general theory of the design project. They may as well be considered as direct participants of the design practice community.

<sup>14.</sup> The so-called “Bremen Modell”, first presented at the Bremen EAD Conference in 2004, embraces all dimensions of design knowledge, in both the conception and recep - tion spaces of the design project. It may therefore be considered and used as a genera theory of the design project. Findeli A. & Bousbaci R., “L’éclipse de l’objet dans les theories du projet en design (The Eclipse of the Object in Design Project Theories)”, The Design Journal, VIII, 3, 2005, 35–49.

The issue of design knowledge has of course been thoughtfully addressed by various design scholars. One example amongst others: Michael Bigg’s editorial of volume 2 (2002) of the Working papers in art and design, titled “The concept of knowledge in art and design”

(http://www.herts.ac.uk/artdes/research/papers/wpades/vol2/intro02.html, last retrieved 04.01.07), as well as his “Rigor and Practice-based Research”, Design Issues, XXIII, 3, Summer 2007, 62–69.

<sup>15.</sup> Although we have already gathered substantial and convincing evidence in support of this hypothesis, its thorough exploration is not in order here. This will actually be the central theme of a coming conference to be held in Berlin next October 2008 under the initiative of the Germany-based Design Research Network (DRN). Conference website: www.designresearchnetwork.org/drn/thought/441.

DRN website: www.designresearchnetwork.org/drn/.

The originality of design’s scientific positioning is to be explored somewhat differentl depending on whether one looks at the conception or the reception phase of a design situation or project. Concerning the former, a good methodological starting point could be the comparative analysis delivered by Bolan R.J. & Collopy F. in their Managing as Designing, Stanford University Press, 2004 (why wouldn’t design scholars achieve the same type of work?). See also the whole issue of Design Issued, XXIV, 1, Winter 2008. Concerning the latter, we recommend the fine study made by Ingram J., Shove E. & Watson M.: “Products and Practices: Selected Concepts from Science and Technology Studies and from Social Theories of Consumption and Practice”, Design Issues, XXIII, 2, Spring 2007, 3–16.

<sup>16.</sup> In the present context, “multidisciplinarity” is but a generic concept without furthe meaning as to how the “multi-” is structured. When differentiation becomes necessary, we will use the prefixes “pluri-”, “inter”, or “trans-”. It follows that all three of them are to be considered a species of multidisciplinarity.

<sup>17.</sup> In the case of a PhD research project, the team is usually reduced to the candidate, who is the one actually actively conducting the research (notwithstanding the supervisor’s and advisory committee’s contributions of course). The issues of multi - disciplinarity are then raised within the capacities of a single individual rather than spread among a research team. Individual inter- and transdisciplinarity are extremely difficult stages to achieve, but there could be no better initiation for a reflective designer-researcher.

<sup>18.</sup> Our argument is tempered by our wish to be as concise as possible and we therefore avoided all referencing in the wide field of multidisciplinarity. We do however hold the following work paradigmatic of what inter- and transdisciplinarity, as defined in this paper, could mean in a design context. We consider the authors’ insistence on the term “integration” and their definition of it totally to the point and opportune in the context of our paper. Tress B., Tress G., Fry G. & Opdam P., From landscape research to landscape planning: aspects of integration, education and application, vol. 12, Wageningen (NL), Wageningen UR Frontis Series, 2005. Downloadable at http://library.wur.nl/frontis/landscape\_research/index.html. Also available in book form.

<sup>19.</sup> Brouillet D. & Syssau A., La maladie d’Alzheimer, Paris, PUF, coll. Que sais-je?, 2005 (3rd rev. and compl. ed.).

<sup>20.</sup> The research proposal is currently (May 2008) still in the reviewing process, and therefore somewhat confidential. Only a brief outline may be given at this point.