# Affording Meaning: Design-Oriented Research from the Humanities and Social Sciences Julka Almquist and Julia Lupton

User studies, whether conducted through qualitative ethnographic interviews or through more clinical and behaviorist analyses of specific affordances and interfaces, have remapped design research from a study of things to a study of people. Some design researchers have even argued that without the user, design does not exist.<sup>1</sup> Although this focus on users might appear to benefit the consumers of design by celebrating their personal experience and finding new ways to maximize their pleasures and productivity, critics of the user model, whose diverse ranks include Johan Redstrom,<sup>2</sup> as well as Ellen Lupton,<sup>3</sup> Peter Lunenfeld,<sup>4</sup> and Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby,<sup>5</sup> have argued persuasively that user studies ultimately construe the human subject of design as a predictable bundle of reflexes and impulses that can be torqued, tuned, and tweaked in order to do the bidding—and the buying—prescribed by a consumersavvy cabal of designers, engineers, and marketers. The word “user” itself communicates the terrors of addiction as well as the triumphs of functional mastery. In a landscape of diminishing economic and natural resources, the vision of the user promoted by mainstream design research is in dire need of revision. Meanwhile, consumers themselves are striking back, not only in the form of the D.I.Y., fair labor, and green movements, but also by simply withdrawing, out of sheer economic necessity, from the relentless rhythms of getting and spending that dictate our modern “user” lifestyle.

3 Ellen Lupton, Thinking With Type (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2004).

5 Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, Design Noire: The Secret Life of Electronic Objects (Basel: Birkhäuser, 2001).

In this essay, we link the critique of the user (launched both within design studies and in the larger culture) to the specific methodological aim of bringing together methods from the social sciences—which have organized their vision of the user around the idea of affordances—and the humanities—which have by and large focused on the subjective, cultural, and ideological meanings of material things. Design research has no single definition. It is an interdisciplinary form of inquiry categorized in multiple ways, including: research with a focus on theory, practice, and/or production,<sup>6</sup> as design epistemology, design praxiology, and design phenomenology<sup>7</sup>, and humanities-based design studies.<sup>8,9</sup> In this article, we focus on design research that addresses artifacts and the people who interact with them as its central focus—research that either does or could benefit from the combined resources of social-scientific and humanistic forms of inquiry that would bring together the search for utility with an appreciation of context, significance, and ideology.<sup>10</sup> For design researchers in the social sciences, utility is the essential question, namely “how things work . . . the degree to which designs serve practical purposes and provide affordances or capabilities,”<sup>11</sup> while significance tends to describe a secondary set of acquired features: “how forms assume meaning in the ways they are used, or the roles and meaning assigned to them, often becoming powerful symbols or icons in patterns of habit and ritual.”<sup>12</sup> Humanist interpreters of design, working in fields such as art history, visual studies, cultural studies, and English and comparative literature, tend to emphasize meaning and interpretation at the expense of affordance and use. Derived from nineteenth-century historicism, hermeneutics, and philology, humanistic methods and sensibilities are organized around the historical specificity of cultures as well as the distinctiveness of individual responses to the designed world. The main contributions of the humanities to the study of design has thus been to understand the meaning of objects in particular moments of time, for particular groups and interests.<sup>13</sup> For most humanists, the idea that design might have “universal” applications, or that affordances might precede or subtend cultural differences, is a species of ideology that must be exposed and chastened.

Could humanists integrate aspects of universal design— based on the concepts of affordance and use—into their interpretive inquiries? And could design researchers trained in design, engineering, and the social sciences integrate their studies of use into a more nuanced account of meaning in its social and collective dimensions? In many design studies, a design succeeds if it is used correctly; any meanings brought to a design by a user are arbitrary and personal rather than a lived dimension of the object as a signifying thing in a complex network of meaningful exchanges. For many design researchers, meanings are simply subjective icing on the cake rather than shared codes baked into the object itself, connecting designer, producer, user, and the culture at large in a shared world. To continue the metaphor: might it be possible to have our cake and eat it too, to develop paradigms that envision the human endpoint of design as something more than the “user” of a specific, quantifiable function, while also conceiving of the meaning of objects in terms that allow for universal applications? Finding common ground between affordance and meaning could offer a collective space for interdisciplinary collaboration and new ways to approach both making and studying designed artifacts. Moreover, design itself, as a form of human making that crosses artistic and technological categories, poses to these disciplines the question of their own identities. This essay, co-authored by a humanist and a social scientist, aims to reconsider these divides by addressing tensions and commonalities between affordance, use, and meaning. Our analysis of humanistic and socialscientific convergences in design focuses on the idea of the user, a concept that has at once hallowed the human subject and reduced subjectivity to the exercise of a function, as a way of establishing the ethical and intellectual stakes of this project.

## Manifest and Latent Functions and Meanings in Design

Several theoretical entrance points invite convergences between humanistic and social-scientific approaches to design. Consider, for example, Robert Merton’s adaptation of manifest and latent functions for sociology in his seminal book Social Theory and Social Structure (1968). Merton presented a new application of functional analysis to the field of sociology. The word “function” is at the heart of Merton’s analysis, and thus supports use- and user-oriented research, yet the distinction between manifest and latent meanings stems from psychoanalysis and Marxism, as well as from the hermeneutics of surface and depth associated with traditional exegetical models.<sup>14,15</sup> The purpose of Merton’s adaptation was to differentiate “conscious motivations” from “objective consequences”<sup>16</sup> and to address the obvious or manifest social consequences of a human action or process with its unintended or latent social consequences. In conspicuous consumption, the manifest function is “the satisfaction of the needs for which these goods are explicitly designed”<sup>17</sup> and the latent function is the “heightening or reaffirmation of social status.”<sup>18</sup>

Functional analysis is an appropriate framework to analyze designed artifacts, because while designers may have an intention related to how their work ought to be used or the niche it will fill in the lives of users, objects frequently take on additional roles and have unintended consequences. For example, young people transform handrails in parks into elevated tracks for skateboarding; after September 11, knitting needles were seen as potential weapons on airplanes; and phone books are often used as doorstops. None of these were the intended or manifest function of the artifact, but people who interact with the objects reveal their latent functions through acts of creativity, adaptation, and resistance.

It is important to note that designed artifacts have multiple potential latent functions. These latent functions, moreover, can also be conceived as latent meanings, understood both subjectively (the personal associations with an object that accrue over time) and intersubjectively (as part of cultural complexes of value and significance that require communities for their activation). Thus the “function” of conspicuous consumption unfolds as a primarily meaning-making activity, by which a consumer flags, brands, and publicly performs his or her place in the status landscape, which is also an object landscape. Understanding the role of conspicuous consumption in consumer choice has allowed marketers to build the struggle for status into the design and branding process. Sometimes, however, when latent meanings are rendered too visible, consumers step back, a retreat that can be signaled in satire and parody, in the hunt for “cooler” or more authentic products, or in a refusal to buy, and buy into, certain meaning systems.

19 See George Nelson’s classic defense of waste as a sign of efficiency in an industry-based society. George Nelson, “Obsolescence,” Perspecta 11 (1967): 171–76. The essay was first published in Industrial Design in 1956. For an analysis of the planned obsolescence debate in Mid-Century Modern America, see Giles Slade, Made to Break: Technology and Obsolescence in America (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2006).   
20 Jane Fulton Suri. Thoughtless Acts: Observations on Intuitive Design (San Francisco: Chronicle Books 2005).   
21 On the psychological risks of the riskfree childhood, see Wendy Mogel, The Blessing of a Skinned Knee: Using Jewish Teachings to Raise Self-Reliant Children (New York: Penguin, 2001). On the design choices of a new generation of parents, see David Keeps, “The Kids Are All Right,” LA Times 4/12/2007, “Home and Garden” section. See also “Homeland Security,” in Ellen and Julia Lupton, Design Your Life: The Pleasures and Perils of Everyday Things (New York: St. Martins, 2009), 106–9.

The systematic seeking and uncovering of latent needs by market-driven researchers creates a designed world encrusted with a superabundance of gadgetry and “extra” features. A prime example is the marketing of highly specialized play and safety devices for small children who will rapidly outgrow them. Each moment of child development has become a veritable war zone fraught with its own special risks, from simple boredom to child abduction, with an array of carefully engineered weapons of mass production ready and waiting to protect our youngest civilians, including nanny cams, voice-activated crib lights, and toilet seat locks—all destined for the landfill as soon as the hapless youngster toddles to the next front of the safety wars. In these and other exfoliations of the planned obsolescence model of product design mastered in the heyday of American consumer modernism, “user-centered design,” far from emancipating or empowering the user, marshals guilt, fear, and anxiety in order to market goods whose value is dubious.<sup>19</sup>

Yet the fact of latency also indicates the extent to which designs bear multiple kinds and levels of meaning, whose social unfoldings are multidirectional, affected by choices and actions that occur on all sides of the design equation. In Thoughtless Acts: Observations on Intuitive Design, Jane Fulton Suri of IDEO captures through digital snapshots the myriad ways in which people unconsciously exploit the latent uses of the designed environment (Image 1). She captures and then compares “uses” of the most minimal kind (a carton of milk abandoned on the edge of a rail next to an empty cup stowed at the base of a column), but the effect of these recordings is to bring forward the sense of order and efficiency that inhabits what appear to be random gestures.<sup>20</sup> The photographs themselves, left sublimely uncaptioned, become a kind of prose poetry, creating meanings through the juxtaposition of human creativity at its most accidental and unthought.

On the home front, equivalents to such spontaneous design solutions include the trend among a new generation of parents to train children to navigate table edges and stemware rather than coating their shared world in brightly colored plastic. Young people who grew up in the gated community of the child-proofed family room are now having kids themselves, and some are choosing to teach their offspring to adjust to a complex environment rife with both risks and pleasures rather than using consumer products to micromanage domestic environments that are no match in any case for the developmental leaps and lags of actual children co-existing in real space and time. These new “designs for parenting” are being generated from within households and communities rather than by manufacturers or social marketers. When built on the sensible navigation of such real hazards as choking, water danger, and car travel, these evolving parenting techniques promise not only to slow the landfill but also to nurture more resilient and creative adults.<sup>21</sup>