# EDITORS’ FOREWORD

This anthology of 12 essays interrogates the material embodiments of love, exploring the emotional potency of objects in our lives and the relationships that exist between people and objects. It discusses how objects can become symbols and representations, as well as active participants in and mediators of our relationships with each other, unpacking the ways in which objects engage our emotions subliminally, viscerally and vicariously. It forms a discussion of the ways objects can serve as intentional bearers of signifi cance through embodiment, engagement or control, and has the multifarious issues surrounding love and objects at its core.

In 2008, the editors of this volume, together with their colleague Dr Ciarán Swan, held a conference entitled ‘Love Objects: Engaging Material Culture’ at the National College of Art and Design in Dublin, Ireland. This collection draws on ideas debated at this conference, together with subsequent scholarly work related to the ‘Love Objects’ theme. With the premise that objects are endowed with agency and emotional qualities by their owners and users in ways that go beyond the physical characteristics of the object itself, this collection develops the ideas presented at that conference, building on the growing academic interest in the study of the emotions in recent years. Alongside investigating our subjective and emotional relationships with material objects, which is particularly relevant in a world where the digital is increasingly important, this anthology foregrounds the problematic nature of the concept of ‘love’ in Western culture, as discussed by esteemed design historian Victor Margolin in his introduction. Bearing in mind the increasing scientifi c interest in emotions and how they can be conceptualized and regulated, this collection adds a new perspective to the discourse on emotions, providing a commentary on an often nebulous topic, yet grounded in the physical reality of material culture and designed objects. In doing so, it utilizes one of the core strengths of research in design history and material culture, expanding the idea of ‘history from below’ to incorporate not just the voices of the owners of the objects themselves, but also ‘reading’ the normally mute object and allowing its often fragile materiality to inform the discussion.

The collection brings together international work from a range of perspectives, including Margolin’s analysis of the chapters within the collection. Presented within four interlinked themes, each section forms a dialogue about the different ways in which the slippery concept of love can be analysed, expressed, problematized and discussed. The 12 essays are focused around studies of a variety of media and object types, covering a range of geographical locations and time periods. These case studies foreground the idea that emotion is a universal human constant, while at the same time having very specifi c material manifestations, shaped by specifi c modes of exchange, performance, agency and objectifi cation. The essays are grouped according to the role that the titular objects play in the negotiation of different types of love, to create biographies, represent identities, embody emotions or negotiate relationships.

The essays within the fi rst thematic, ‘The Lives of Objects’, address in different ways the biographies of specifi c objects, the multiple meanings they can hold and the narratives they create for those who may have created, gifted or possessed them. The critical role played by objects in the representation and performance of personal, group and corporate identities is explored in the second section, focusing on the projection and subversion of sexual and gender identities. The third thematic, ‘Objects and Embodiment’, examines the ways in which objects and bodies interact, necessitating discussion of emotional relationships, whether they be religious, sexual or the affective one between the researcher and the archive. The emotional connections people have with their objects are examined in the fi nal group of essays, together with the ways in which objects can serve as a vehicle for negotiating, materializing and understanding relationships. This section highlights the importance of objects in negotiating absences such as grief, as well as deliberate decisions not to engage, not to love objects, in addition positing the question of how designers can use emotion to create affective, sustainable relationships with those objects.

Underlying each essay is a common interest in the personal and subjective nature of the object, and also in the subjective nature of any such inquiry. This consideration of the emotional weight and valence of the object widens our understanding of the material world and is particularly important at a time when ideas about the emotional durability of objects are being promoted as a way of developing a more sustainable lifestyle, whether through the deliberate creation of emotionally resonant products, or by harnessing the reappraisal of traditional handcrafted forms. It also forms an important component of creative practice, as designers and makers interrogate the world of emotions and materiality in a positive and generative manner, incorporating in varied ways the discussion of love in material form within their own practice.

In tackling a range of case studies with these issues at the forefront, this collection deals with core strands of inquiry within design and material culture – such as the relation between object and affect, (im)materiality and the discourse of sustainability, and modes of exchange, performance, agency and objectifi cation. The collection thereby demonstrates an immediate approach to the object, not just as a utilitarian or philosophical presence, but foregrounding the refl exive, ideological and ideational uses of the ‘love object’.