# ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The editors and publisher gratefully acknowledge the permission granted to reproduce the copyright material in this book.

The editors would like to acknowledge their gratitude to the following people, without whom this book would not have been possible. First, we would like to thank our authors for contributing their essays and for being such wonderful colleagues over the duration of this project; their insights, professionalism and good spirits were hugely appreciated. We are very grateful to our colleague and friend Dr Ciarán Swan, with whom we organized the Love Objects conference at the National College of Art and Design (NCAD), Dublin. We also thank the many other people who helped to organize this conference, together with those who attended, contributed to discussions and made it the success that it was. We also extend our gratitude to Niamh O’Sullivan, Professor Emeritus of the Faculty of Visual Culture at NCAD, for her generous support of the conference and this publication. Also at NCAD, we thank Professor Jessica Hemmings, the present Head of Visual Culture, and Neasa Travers. For support and assistance with various funding applications, we are grateful to Dr Siún Hanrahan and Professor Desmond Bell, former and present Heads of Research, and Margaret Phelan of the Research Department at NCAD. Also, we thank the students of NCAD’s Masters in Design History and Material Culture, past and present, for their questions, probing research and enthusiasm.

We would like to acknowledge the support of The Modern Interiors Research Centre of the School of Art and Design History at Kingston University, and thank the many libraries, archives and museums that have kindly given permission to reproduce images. We are grateful to Emily Angus for compiling our index, and to Dónal Leahy, Melissa O’Brien and Tom Cosgrave for their help and support throughout the entire process. For our front cover image we thank Rebecca Shawcross of the Northampton Museum, and John Roan of John Roan Photography.

Victor Margolin, Professor Emeritus of the University of Illinois, very kindly accepted our invitation to write an introduction to this collection, and we thank him sincerely. We also extend our gratitude to Dr Tim Putnam and Dr Valerie Swales, to whom we owe a huge debt, together with everyone we have worked with at Bloomsbury Academic, including Simon Cowell, Simon Longman, Rebecca Barden, Abbie Sharman and our anonymous peer reviewers.

The contributors would also like to thank the following individuals and institutions for their help, support and advice:

All of our interviewees; Giles Deacon; Fionn and Leah Garvey Drazin; Françoise Dupré; Tracy Emin Studio; Clare Qualmann; Lisa Obermeyer; France Scully Osterman; Mark Osterman; Garda John Reynolds; Professor Giorgio Riello; June Swann; Emma Whiting; Mrs Claire Williams; Donna Wilson; Jim Wilson; the owners and staff of Coco de Mer and Sh!; Kaywoodie; Rebecca Price of Myla; Deborah Jaeger of Tom Dixon Studio; Ryan Sadamitsu of Visvim/ Cubism; the staff of the British Museum; the Mass Observation Archive; Michelle Ashmore and Valerie Wilson of the National Museums Northern Ireland; The Metropolitan Museum of Art; the National Library of Ireland; Alex Ward and Finbarr Connolly of the National Museum of

Ireland; Rebecca Shawcross of the Northampton Museum; Dilys Blum and Joanna Fulginiti of the Philadelphia Museum of Art; Kylea Little of Tyne and Wear Archives and Museums. Mass Observation material reproduced with permission of Curtis Brown Group Ltd, London on behalf of The Trustees of the Mass Observation Archive. Copyright © The Trustees of the Mass Observation Archive.

Every effort has been made to trace copyright holders and to obtain their permission for the use of copyright material. The publisher apologizes for any errors or omissions in the above list and would be grateful to be notifi ed of any corrections that should be incorporated in future reprints or editions of this book.