## Introduction

# How Do I Love Thee? Objects of Endearment in Contemporary Culture

Victor Margolin

Love is an emotion to which countless treatises, tracts, and works of art have been dedicated from time immemorial. It is an emotion that human beings care deeply about because it touches the core of our being where the need to be regarded, accepted, or desired resides. It is an emotion that takes many forms and in the end most often eludes comprehension. We have no cultural consensus of what love is and consequently the word is freely appropriated as a fl oating signifi er, available for attachment to a multitude of feelings and the acts that follow from them. At its most extreme, love is a passion that can blind the lover to the need for discretion or the recognition of legal boundaries. Lovers have lost their lives or landed in prison because their amorous intentions have been misguided. They have also been unduly persecuted when their feelings are unjustly deemed inappropriate according to cultural norms.

Even when feelings of love are fulfi lled in ways that are socially affi rming, the mystery of the emotion remains. In social terms, human feelings are shaped by diverse external sources. First, are the primal feelings that the child develops in response to his or her parents and others who demonstrate the kinds of relational emotions that are possible. Early impressions are the strongest and when parental devotion to the child is lacking or misguided, the child forms an understanding of relationships that is at best slightly skewed and at worst warped. Second, is the understanding of relationships that we adopt through social relations with others outside the primal family, which are shaped by cultural norms that transcend unique individual characteristics. Third, are the ideas of love that are transmitted through cultural forms such as media and the objects of everyday life. Within this complex of infl uences, we strive to express emotions that are authentic; a process that requires considerable insight and self- awareness – qualities that unfortunately not everyone has the capacity to exercise.

Consequently, there is no consensus as to which cultural norms can best help us understand our emotions. Religious and spiritual texts admonish us to love our fellow human beings, but don’t explain the complex nuances of love as an emotion, in part because love can take many forms and its contemporary expression can contradict traditional defi nitions. The numerous forms of love, in fact, often challenge cultural norms, and one of the principal dynamics of culture is the adjustment of values to accommodate these forms.

The authors in this volume speak directly to the issue of how love intersects with cultural norms, sometimes aligning with them and sometimes creating conditions of critique or opposition. They embed their discussions of love objects – which are based on widely varying premises of what love means – in cultural frameworks that contribute to the ways they make their arguments about what these objects represent. The authors’ methodologies constitute a wide range of approaches to the study of material culture, the fi eld that is closest to their enterprise. The point of the essays is not to describe the objects as much as it is to reveal in a multifaceted way different situations in which love becomes central as an emotion. Nonetheless, objects become the foci of the authors’ attempts to grapple with the complexities of love as it is played out through the objects’ identities both as possessions and as props in the performative enactments of social rituals.

The research strategies of the authors differ considerably. In her discussion of gift giving, for example, Louise Purbrick relies on the Mass Observation Archive – a collection of interviews conducted with British citizens about aspects of their daily lives. From these interviews, Purbrick extracted descriptions of feelings about giving presents and framed her interpretation of these within French anthropologist Marcel Mauss’ theory of the gift. Purbrick makes a clear distinction between the gift and the commodity, noting that the commercialization of goods can be overcome by incorporating commodities into a culture of gift giving, which adds a new and signifi cant layer of meaning to them. Purbrick also asserts that commodities can become powerful mnemonic devices that evoke qualities of past relationships and thus accrue added value for their owners. In contrast to object theorists who seek to extract value from the shape or form of an object, Purbrick shows that the memory of a situation in which the object was introduced, regardless of its form, is far more important than its appearance. Her account of how gifts become valuable because of their mnemonic power relates closely to Jonathan Chapman’s call in his essay for ‘emotionally durable design’. Her account becomes an alternative to the oft stated belief that designers can make objects more emotionally valuable by creating pleasing forms or useful functions.

Where Purbrick found her stories in a historic archive, Fran Carter relied on interviews with her contemporaries to explore the reasons why women prefer to buy sexual garments and sex toys in stores designed specifi cally for them, instead of the sleazy sex shops that cater primarily to men. Carter found through her ethnographic interviews that women felt more comfortable when the lingerie and sexual performance objects were presented in a retail atmosphere that empowered them as sexual partners, rather than consigning them to participants in the ‘dominant sexual paradigm’, in which they play a subordinate role. Through her interviews with female consumers of sexual goods, Carter found, however, that her informants had differing views of the goods and retail spaces. One woman was disappointed with the normality of the retail presentations, wishing for something that would make sex more edgy, while another felt that aestheticizing the objects removed them too much from the actual experience of sexual activity. Such differences are evidence in a microcosm of how complicated the question of love is once it becomes entangled with the cultural processes that make its expression possible.

The complexities of love are addressed differently in Adam Drazin’s essay, which explores the way that Romanian immigrants to Ireland negotiate through objects a relationship with their country of immigration as well as their homeland. Like many migrants today, the several informants in Drazin’s study have not exchanged their homeland for a new country the way immigrants once did. The possibility of returning to Romania is real and infl uences the way they choose to live in Ireland. Love, as Drazin notes, is embedded in a plan that includes a stable home, a heterosexual marriage, and children. Migrants who embrace their new country or envision long- term residency, commit to spending money on their domestic environment as well as clothes and entertainment. The others live frugally and save their money in order to return to Romania and buy a residence there. The decision to remain abroad or return home determines the kinds of objects one acquires. The instability of immigrant life can complicate emotional attachments as Drazin demonstrates in his account of one Romanian couple’s divorce.

In contrast to Purbrick’s reliance on the Mass Observation Archive and Carter’s and Drazin’s ethnographic engagement with contemporary informants, Christina Edwards, an artist, makes use of a family photographic archive to create an exhibition ‘Material Memories’, consisting of family snapshots reproduced as ambrotypes, a nineteenth- century form, which consists of photographic images on glass that are viewed against a black background. Edwards’ archive is a personal one, thus the images evoke intensely personal memories whose meaning is embellished once they are introduced to the public. For Edwards, auto-ethnography – making use of one’s own experience as a basis for producing narrative content – is an essential tool. She writes about the process of making the ambrotypes as one of ‘ritual and meditation’, which help her to establish a sense of identity in the world.

The issue of identity, prevalent in many of these essays, is either the subject of the essay or else the basis for an interpretation that challenges or subverts existing cultural norms. As an example of both, Jane Hattrick draws on queer identity to foreground the sexuality of Norman Hartnell, a prominent London couturier, whose archive she studied over a period of years to produce both a Master’s thesis and a PhD. Hattrick writes that she did not set out to write about Hartnell’s sexuality, but its importance emerged after the fi rst two years of archive research. She points out that the term ‘queer’ has both open- ended and disruptive connotations, thus characterizing an approach to archival research that can identify new strategies of interpretation and yield conclusions about the subject that would not otherwise have been evident. She argues, as well, that a queer theoretical framework gives value to things in Hartnell’s archive such as sketches, decorative objects, and personal effects that might not otherwise be considered important.

Sexual orientation is also an issue in Elizabeth Howie’s discussion of nineteenth- century male portraits that depict men together in affectionate poses. Howie cautions against assuming too quickly a sexual reading of these photographs. She notes that in the twenty- fi rst century, images of men expressing affection for each other unequivocally signifi y homosexuality for many, but she cautions against assuming this. She critiques the ‘rigidifying classifi cation of sexuality’ that resulted in homosexuality as a fi xed social category. Instead, she notes that from the 1880s ‘sexualities appear to have been more fl uid, with a complex continuum of desires, from friendly to erotic to sexual, characterizing intimate relationships’.

Howie’s plea for a more open reading of same- sex portrait imagery that refl ects some form of emotional attachment, reinforces the claim that cultural norms play a strong role in characterizing and putting value on emotions such as love. Part of the dynamic of contemporary culture is the process of challenging and consequently redefi ning those norms as experience contradicts them. A similar process is at work in Jo Turney’s essay on baby knitting. Turney is critical of the way knitting has been socially constructed to denote a mother’s love for her child, especially when the mother knits blankets or booties that become emotionally charged for the child, as psychoanalyst Melanie Klein describes in her theory of object relations. Turney believes that too much love can smother a child and consequently refutes the defi nition of baby knitting as ‘making love with needles’. She sees the equation of knitting with idealized motherhood as a legacy of the nineteenth century that deserves to be deconstructed. I would not go as far as Turney in characterizing knitting as a sign of patriarchal control based on what she calls the ‘phallocentric act’ of needles penetrating loops or holes formed by yarn, but would certainly agree with her observation that knitting has been historically embedded in a labour economy of women’s domestic production without monetary compensation. Turney makes use of semiotic theory to tease out the sign functions of social acts. Knitting, as ‘a precarious act that creates strength, but can equally unravel and fall apart’, is seen by Turney as a metaphor that ‘mirrors the dilemmas of parenthood’. To continue her metaphorical reading of knitting, she adds that the holes in the knitted objects make knitting an inherently vulnerable activity. As a further gesture that deconstructs the equation of knitting and motherhood, she cites artists such as Lisa Obermeyer and Donna Wilson who produce knitted objects that disrupt the conventional connotations of knitting. For her fi nal metaphor, Turney likens knitting to an umbilical cord that must be ruptured and repaired to make the relation between mother and child healthy and dynamic.

The mediation of objects in family relations is also central to Catherine Harper’s essay on quilted bed covers. Harper moves from the personal to the speculative as she compares the difference between a quilt made by her grandmother with bed coverings that incorporate smart textile technology. Like the people interviewed for the Mass Observation Archive who equated personal memories with the gifts they received, Harper explains how her grandmother’s quilt embodies memories that speak to a consciousness of her own genealogy. The ‘unruly sewing and irregular patching of the quilt’ signify the hard existence of her grandmother who, she says, occupied both the male space of hard physical labour performed outside the home and the softer interior domestic space traditionally occupied by women. Harper’s construction of the quilt’s meaning differs from the accounts of objects that were described in the Mass Observation Archive interviews cited by Purbrick. In those accounts, neither the genealogy of the objects nor the conditions of their production was of importance. The objects’ value was based solely on the emotional quality of the exchange situations in which they were received. By contrast, Harper sees the quilt as contributing to the construction of her social identity that consists, in part, of the connection through gender and class to her grandmother. Harper’s relation to her grandmother’s quilt and the needle used to make it, demonstrates how personal relations to objects can enrich the generalized descriptions of object histories that characterize the fi eld of material culture.

However, Harper has another purpose in discussing her grandmother’s quilt. She wants to explore, on the one hand, the aesthetic potential of quilts that the art critic Sarat Mahara characterizes as their ‘ability to be simultaneously a “domestic commodity” and “conceptual device” ’. As an example, Harper cites the NAMES Project AIDS Memorial Quilt, which consists of more than 48,000 panels and has circulated to over 1,000 venues to signify the extent of the AIDS pandemic. Harper also questions whether new technologies can provide the emotional value of a traditional quilt, raising questions about the potential of new technological objects to evoke feelings of love. She wants to discover ‘how and where smart, intelligent technological textiles maintain and celebrate the simpler, slower, emotionally meaningful sensibility’. There are no easy answers to this question, but as technologically driven societies increase our engagement with high- tech industrial objects compared to simpler handcrafted or even manufactured ones, we may wonder whether human beings will still develop emotiona attachments to them that transcend their use value alone.

Harper’s reading of her grandmother’s quilt through gender and class is paralleled by Noreen McGuire’s account of amateur female shoemakers in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. McGuire’s explanation of why this activity was transgressive reinforces the strict gender and class defi nitions of occupations in the period she discusses. Female shoemaking began with embroidering shoe vamps, a traditional women’s occupation that often denoted affection, and morphed into shoemaking, which accrued the additional signifi cation of thrifty domestic management, even though, as McGuire points out, ‘[a] fashionable lady’s shoes were therefore more symbolic than functional’. Though not made exclusively for women, most shoes made by the amateur shoemakers were. They tended to be slipper- like and refi ned in design. What made shoemaking suspect in aristocratic circles was its association with the lower class, and predominantly males, at that. A backlash against women shoemakers accused them of transgressing social boundaries to pursue a hobby. Some critics linked them with sexual misconduct, at least with appearing unseemly as they pursued their craft, and they were accused of intruding into the world of business, which was seen as a male purview. The broader consequence was their exclusion from the history of shoemaking, a gap that McGuire seeks to rectify with her account. Describing the class status of objects is a conventional technique of decorative arts and material culture scholars, but raising issues about craftsmanship that counter the conventions of class introduces a new disruptive element into the categorization of objects and demonstrates, as do other essays in this volume, how objects can pose challenges to established cultural norms.

Besides challenging such norms, objects such as the briar pipe, which is the subject of Jessica Sewell’s essay, can also help to create new ones. Sewell describes the pipe as a prop in Hugh Hefner’s performance of male sexuality. As the publisher of Playboy, an American men’s magazine that fi rst appeared in 1953, Hefner embodied a suave, sophisticated, upper middleclass man whose embrace of sensual pleasure eluded the repression and conformity of the prior decade. The Playboy man was a connoisseur whose taste in clothes, wines, music, and furniture was impeccable. Sucking on his briar pipe, he exuded a sense of leisure and mastery. Women, by contrast, were portrayed by Playboy as bunnies whose principal function was to reproduce, an ironic quality since there was no room for children in the Playboy world. The objects in that world were signs of seduction, meant to connote an atmosphere of restrained modernity where everything was under control. The briar pipe too was an object to be controlled. Compared with the cigarette, which had to be smoked quickly before the tobacco burned up, the pipe bowl could house embers that smouldered for hours. A semiotician might read this as a metaphor for sexual pleasure under the man’s control, although Sewell interprets the pipe as a signifi er of male power rather than a metaphor for sex.

The pipe as a prop in the performance of masculinity is complemented by another type of performance in Ann Wilson’s account of the bleeding statues in Templemore, Ireland in 1920. Wilson’s essay places the statues at the centre of church politics in that part of Ireland, where the Roman Catholic Church sought to cement its power. More and bigger churches were built and ‘papally- sanctioned devotions’ were introduced and codifi ed as approved religious practices. The bleeding statues, which Wilson defi nes as kitsch, generated an emotional response among Catholic believers that was outside the Church’s devotional norms. The statues signifi ed, for many people, divine intervention that asserted Irish Catholic identity, protecting Templemore against attacks from British forces. Wilson shows how the statues accrued the power to heal supplicants who made special journeys to see them. Though she does not declare outright that the bleeding was fake, she does recount that a mechanism connected to a fountain pen insert that contained sheep’s blood and water was found inside one of the broken statues. In her account, the statues acquired inordinate agency by affecting the feelings of large numbers of people who were distressed by the political turmoil in Templemore. They also satisfi ed a need for physical and emotional healing due to other causes.

Since Jonathan Chapman’s concern is with the future of the planet, this essay aptly concludes the volume. Whereas the voices in these essays range generally from the descriptive to the confessional, Chapman’s is exhortatory and prophetic. He foresees the potential of a dire future and he wants readers to act on the basis of what he tells them about the status of objects in the world. His connection to other essayists in this volume is through the issue of evoking meaning. Like them, he agrees that ‘an object, material or space cannot hold meaning in and of itself – only our interpretation of these things will produce meaning’. He relates the meanings we give objects to the ways we inhabit the world through building cities, inhabiting buildings, wearing clothes, and using products. In essence, the world consists of what we have put into it and consequently what we take out of it. Chapman is concerned with the skewed relation we have to our environment, which results in a relentless pursuit of novelty and consequently overcrowded landfi lls and a general ‘crisis of unsustainability’. He would like us to consume less and establish more meaningful relations to the things around us that would increase their longevity and reduce our collective waste. Durability, he concludes, is ‘as much about emotion, love, value and attachment’ as it is about anything else.

As I stated at the beginning of this introduction, readers will not fi nd in these essays a shared assumption of what a love object is. The essayists are American, English, or Irish, and all except two are women. Gender, class, and sexual identity contribute to the divergence of these voices as they do to the nature of the issues the essayists explore. I mention this to confi rm that the cultural norms that have shaped them, as well as those that frame the subjects they have chosen to write about, are anything but universal. The forms of love the authors explore range from affection to sexual expression and even to a love of the planet. The voices range from the extremely personal to the more widely refl ective. What can carry over to a broader range of cultural situations, however, is the claim that there is an inherent tension between individual emotion and the cultural norms that shape its social expression. What unites these essays, besides the commitment to love objects as subject matter, is the relation of love as an emotion to the cultural framework within which it is expressed. As is evident in the essays, individuals and cultures are sometimes at odds and this confl ict is the basis for productive cultural change.

SECTION 1

## The Lives of Objects