by giving another gift, and that serves only to extend the debt. Gifts create cycles of exchange, enforcing solidarities of indebtedness, sustaining communities and societies. Gift transactions are irrevocable and sociable. Gifts bind people together.

# Real giving

The writings of the former nurse, retired Post Offi ce worker, factory worker and lecturer illustrate the binding together of people through given things. While the gift exists, is present, so to speak, so is the person of the giver, despite apparent physical absence. Having and holding, looking at or touching, a once given thing can overcome the separation of persons over any distance; it can connect the living and the dead. As the Post Offi ce worker explained, to take wedding presents from a cupboard is to recollect their givers, ‘many long gone’. Or, as the lecturer stated, ‘memories of the old couple who are now dead’ are held in the bone china teaset. These accounts of the attachments of people and things relate to the receipt of gifts, but Mass Observation writers also described their practices of giving. Their responses to the Giving and Receiving Presents directive, record and refl ect upon their experience of gift exchange. Both descriptive and analytical, their texts raise the matter of concern to Adorno: is ‘real giving’ still possible? To which I would add the following questions: What is affectionate material culture? Do gifts carry emotion? How can we love objects? Why do we become attached to things? What is the emotion of material culture? But fi rst, what are the patterns of gift exchange?

The Mass Observation correspondent who had worked as a nurse, who also introduces herself as a ‘widow’, writes:

As with most people my main present giving is for Christmas and birthdays. I have a small family to give to: on the English side – daughter, son and recently his fi ancé, brother, sister in law, niece and nephew. On the Dutch we decided only to exchange presents when we met because of the prohibitive cost of postage. Friends new babies get some things that I have knitted, christenings don’t seem to happen these days but I would give a gift. We used to give presents on return from holiday to the children if we had left them behind but stopped because it was such a misery fi nding something they would enjoy and we could afford . . .

By and large I give to people I receive from. I try to buy without asking for ideas from the intended recipient but if I get stuck I’ll ask. I don’t see my niece and nephew often enough to know their wants so, after talking to them I now give money. I rarely give tokens.

Ideally I give presents by hand, my brother and I meet for lunch each December to exchange gifts, the children live locally or I’ll use the post. I use a mail order fl ower service for people to whom I would like to say hallo but don’t really want to get into the habit of regular present giving, this has been very successful, people seem to like it.

L1991

The former nurse practises ‘real giving’ or, at least, she attempts it: she buys presents for a person, searching for her own ideas about what is appropriate for that person until settling upon one or getting ‘stuck’. She is, as Adorno put it, ‘thinking of the other as a subject’ (1997, p. 42). Giving began, as it should, with ‘choosing, expending time’ but falls apart when ideas for, or of, the person fade. The niece and nephew are a case in point. She knows them in their relation to her, but cannot gather enough thoughts about them to envisage a material form that might match their lives. For her they lack a specifi c subjectivity; they are simply her brother’s children. The intergenerational familial relation is sustained by a devalued form of giving wherein the space of the gift is taken up by its exchange value: money. Giving money does not conform to Adorno’s idea of ‘real giving’; it requires neither ‘choosing’ nor ‘expending time’. Money, furthermore, is a lesser material form; it lacks substance. They are acknowledged as part of the family, but less recognized as persons in a gift without content. The former nurse does recognize that something is amiss in the gift transactions with her niece and nephew. The acceptable practice of the past is brought to an end with negotiation (‘after talking to them’). The need for negotiation is often a sign that a common understanding is failing or a customary practice faltering. Giving money needs to be agreed rather than just given because it is not a proper gift in a material form; money is the exception that proves the rule.

Notwithstanding this exception, the gifting of the former nurse does, in a Maussian manner, create societies; it constitutes the contemporary family as an affective community with nieces and nephews included at its outer limits. The extent of giving reaches, although it only just reaches in its reduced form, the children of a brother and defi nes the family as a related affair, a group of people connected through the courtship patterns of siblings as well as children. As the writing of the former nurse implies, now that her son’s fi ancée has started to receive presents on ‘Christmas and birthdays’, she has become part of their family. Attachment is the work of the gift, its effect and affect; it pulls upon emotions. Through the gift, the family is cast more widely than the members of an individual household; moreover, its inner and outer limits, what is often referred to as a close and an extended family, is repeatedly reaffi rmed. All gifts are reciprocated. ‘I give to people I receive from’, writes the former nurse. Reciprocal exchanges take place twice a year, every year: at Christmas and on birthdays, which function as recurring moments of recognition of the extent of the family, keeping it together. Members of the family are distinguished by being more or less successfully imagined and materialized; the giver’s thoughts settle upon a physical present for those who are close, whereas ideas are inconclusive for those on its extended edge; these are offered the means to get their gifts. But all such exchanges are personal, given by hand in the meeting between a sister and a brother at ‘lunch each December’. In contrast, gifts to friends, the mail ordered fl owers, are deliberately distanced from the person of the giver, an arranged gesture rather than handed over. Cut plants are not intended to last; their curtailed life does not carry the continuing obligations of the gift to form permanent relationships.

One Mass Observation writer gives in a remarkably similar way to another. The retired Post Offi ce worker gives ‘to my family, husband, son and daughter, their families, especially grandchildren, to my sister and her family. ‘I knitted a “Sooty and Sweep” sweater for my granddaughter aged 6 for Christmas’ (M1571). At the time of writing, the former nurse was not a grandmother, but since she knitted for new babies, it is safe to assume that she, too, would give to grandchildren. Indeed, both Mass Observation writers demarcate the life cycle of the related family, the affective community defi ned by courtship, with gifts. As the retired Post Offi ce worker explains: ‘On marriage of course the family presents increase but then sadly with the passing of years we lose our elderly relatives but “little people” arrive at the other end of the scale so the present giving list remains fairly constant’ (M1571). The extent of her family also lay with nieces and nephews. The familial relationship between siblings and siblings’ children is reaffi rmed in a recurring pattern of perpetual gift exchanges but the retired Post Offi ce worker, like the former nurse, reluctantly gives in its emptied form: ‘I do give money to my nieces and nephews for birthdays, Christmas, Congratulations etc. for the simple reason that they live far away and its seems the only sensible option – when they were children I sent presents but now as teenagers I really can’t keep up with computers etc.’ (M1571).

Geographical distance ensures that ‘real giving’ as a practice of ‘thinking of the other as a subject’ is more diffi cult. Losing sight of the potential recipient affects the accuracy of their representation; there are no recent images to produce a clear picture. Yet, the position in the family does not alter and an outline identity is projected, a familial subjectivity conceived, from the position of the parent’s generation. The material presence of niece and nephew is a child. Their ageing unsettles the order of familial present giving; they have grown up into consumers more knowledgeable than their aunts and uncles in the market of technological commodities. Yet, the retired Post Offi ce worker still continues to celebrate the ageing of family members with a gift; she marks the rites of passage of birth and growth with material forms; she gives presents ‘for birthdays, special anniversaries, for a new baby’.

Family life cycles are at the centre of the retired Post Offi ce worker’s giving practices, but her gifting increased to include friends once she began her working life. ‘As a child I gave small presents to my sister and parents’, she recalls. ‘When I became a wage earner I set aside a little fund for presents, my present giving then increased to include friends’ (M1571). Her expanded gift relations are premised on a measure of independence, especially fi nancial independence, from the family. However, it is the emotion of the object to be given: ‘I just love to give presents, I fi nd the greatest pleasure is in choosing the present or in the case of children’s presents seeing the joy in the face of the child when the present is unwrapped’ (M1571). The joy of giving at the moment of its receipt is well known, but the retired Post Offi ce worker’s love of ‘choosing’ is closer to Adorno’s joy of ‘real giving’. Choosing a gift is a process of questioning what object is most appropriate for this person; the chooser of the gift keeps on imagining the person with the different objects until the material object fi ts the person; it is representation as materialization. Certainly, choosing is ‘expending time’ upon a person, but it is also constantly choosing what constitutes the person.<sup>3</sup> ‘I like to choose a present for a particular person’, she adds.

The factory worker also declares: ‘I LOVE GIVING PRESENTS’. The extent of her gift community is similar to that of the retired postal worker: the related family defi ned by courtship plus friends:

MOST OF THE PRESENTS I BUY ARE FOR RELATIONS, BUT A FEW ARE FOR FRIENDS CHILDREN. I ALWAYS BUY CHRISTMAS AND BIRTHDAY PRESENTS FOR MY HUSBAND, MY MOTHER-IN-LAW, BROTHER, SISTER-IN-LAW, NIECE, AUNTIE, HALF SISTER AND MY HUSBANDS SISTER AND HER HUSBAND, ALSO MY COUSINS SON. TWO OF MY CLOSEST FRIENDS HAVE CHILDREN AND I ALWAYS BUY THEM PRESENTS. I ALSO BUY EVERYONE SOMETHING WHEN I GO ABROAD ON HOLIDAY. PLUS I BUY HOLIDAY GIFTS FOR MY FRIENDS AT WORK.

THE OTHER TIME I BUY PRESENTS IS WHEN SOME ONE AT WORK RETIRES. IFIT IS SOMEBODY I HAVE WORKED WITH FOR A LONG TIME, I LIKE TO BUY THEMSOMETHING SPECIAL FROM ME, AND NOT JUST SOMETHING WHICH WE HAVEALL CONTRIBUTED TO. I ALSO BUY PRESENTS FOR FAMILY AND WORKMATESWHEN THEY HAVE A SPECIAL WEDDING ANNIVERSARY.

C2579

The affective community created by the factory worker’s gifts is wide; her family, for example, includes a cousin’s son. What distinguishes her gift practice is the generous application of intergenerational giving. While some friendships are affi rmed with gifts directly to the friend, for themselves, ‘CLOSEST FRIENDS’ receive presents for their children, an intergenerational and familial practice of giving.

The love of the factory worker for giving gifts is not matched through their receipt. Her gift exchanges do follow the reciprocal principles of Mauss and patterns of other Mass Observers. ‘MOST OF MY FAMILY WHO I BUY FOR’, she states, ‘DO GIVE ME A PRESENT IN RETURN’. There are some exceptions. Some cannot reciprocate because, she explains, ‘TIMES ARE A BIT HARD FOR THEM, ITS THE SAME FOR MY FRIENDS’. The factory worker indicates that she is relieved not to receive in return; clearly she prefers unequal or ‘asymmetrical’ (Komter, 1996) gift exchanges:

I HAVE TO SAY THAT I HATE RECEIVING PRESENTS. I FIND IT HARD AND I USUALLY BREAK DOWN IN TEARS. I NEVER HAD MUCH BECAUSE WE WERE POOR, BUT NOW, AFTER WORKING HARD AND BUYING A HOME AND BEING ABLE TO SAVE, I WANT TO GIVE IT TO MY FAMILY AND FRIENDS WHO ARE NOT SO FORTUNATE AS ME . . . MY FAMILY GIVES ME PRESENTS, AND THIS YEAR (1998) WHEN I WAS ILL, I RECEIVED ABOUT 20 BOUQUETS OF FLOWERS FROM WORKMATES AND FROM WORKMATES WHO HAD RETIRED AND WHO HAD LEARNT THAT I WAS ILL. I DO FIND IT HARD TO RECEIVE PRESENTS. WHEN I DO I USUALLY BREAK DOWN AND CRY.

C2579

Her hatred of gifts is qualifi ed later in her Mass Observation account when she states she has received ‘SO MANY OVER THE YEARS WHICH HAVE GIVEN ME SO MUCH PLEASURE’. It is possible to suggest, then, that it is not the gift she hates but the discomfort of the moment of its receipt. Tears are a sign of excessive emotion, a surfeit of feeling that cannot be contained inside the body and brims over onto its skin. The rising tide of emotions experienced by the factory worker includes the shock of present achievements contrasting with past hardships, as well as the amount of affection in a given material form: ‘PRESENT GIVING TO ME IS MOST IMPORTANT, BECAUSE SOMETIMES YOU CANNOT SHOW PEOPLE HOW MUCH THEY MEAN TO YOU. BUT BY GIVING THEM A PRESENT I FEEL THAT IN SOME WAY SHOWS HOW YOU FEEL ABOUT THEM’ (C2579). The gift expresses real feelings, to borrow Adorno’s use of the word ‘real’. Herein lies its bodily effects; its ability to disrupt the surface of a person’s appearance, causing her (or maybe even him) to cry. In front of a present, a body may fragment, if only temporarily, before pulling itself together to receive the present with a smile. The clarity of expression of the gift, the way in which it can communicate emotion so effectively, is because it is material. Its substantial nature demonstrates the scale of signifi cance of a relationship (‘SHOW PEOPLE HOW MUCH THEY MEAN TO YOU’). Its power and affection derives from its materiality.

The far- reaching affect of the gift, the emotion of material, can be revealed in reverse, when the principles of giving and receiving are not upheld. The former nurse, whose gift exchanges were similar in most respects to other Mass Observers, recalls the disaffection of failed gift exchange: ‘Presents for my mother were very diffi cult, if she did not like what she was given she would simply give it back and furthermore decline anything else, it was very painful and a real rejection’ (L1991). The pain of rejection is often manifested in a fl inch: the person reels back from the thing that caused the pain. Despite, or because, she experienced the incisiveness of pain upon of the refusal of a gift, an act that is ‘tantamount to a declaration of war’, according to Mauss (1990, p. 13), her Mass Observation account concludes with the importance of giving to human life: ‘I think present giving has an important role, human interaction is the basis of living and reciprocity underpins this. Thinking of others, and being thought of, oils the wheels and does much to both value and be valued as human beings’ (L1991).

She offers a theory of gifting, a little differently expressed to that of Adorno, but not unlike his in its confi guration of the proper relation between materiality and humanity. It is about time to return to his injunction: ‘We are forgetting how to give presents’. It seems we have not yet forgotten. Indeed, Adorno never argued that we had forgotten, but that we are always just about to forget. Our present condition lies somewhere between remembered and forgotten. Giving appears in his 1951 essays as a past practice that we struggle to complete in the present; the gift is a memory of how things should be.

## Forgetting

The lecturer is the last Mass Observation writer to be discussed here. The lecturer’s account of giving is an expression of the struggle to practise the proper giving of the past. The lecturer gives to the same people on the same occasions and, like the former nurse, retired Post Offi ce and factory workers, to the related family and a small number of friends: ‘relatives plus one or two close friends. e.g. my children, brother, sister, niece, husband, old friend, parents in law, grandchildren’ on ‘birthdays, Christmas and occasionally leaving presents when people leave work’ (S1383). The same people return gifts to her. The consistency of Mass Observation accounts suggests that reciprocal giving that maintains affective communities of around 20 people is a common and a stable social practice. However, the lecturer refl ects: ‘How things have changed over my lifetime’. She continues:

When I was a child we only got presents from our mum and dad and sometimes our brother and sister although not always. Usually presents for me were practical e.g. a new coat for Christmas, or new shoes for birthday. We would also get sweets and a little toy as well. Relatives did not give presents then and Christmas was not the nightmare it is now as we did not buy for relatives either. I do believe we were more delighted with modest gifts then than children are now as they are bombarded with expensive, often electronic toys which break down on Christmas Day.

S1383

Her Mass Observation account contains a familiar refrain on the commercialization of Christmas, especially in relation to the price and quantity of technological objects given to children:

Now I fi nd Christmas particularly worrying as I have three children, three brothers and sisters, a close friend, a niece and nephew, husband to buy presents for as well as fi ve grandchildren plus two stepgrandchildren. It is costly and diffi cult to choose. I would prefer modest fun presents for the adults with toys for the children but it never seems to work out like that so I end up buying clothes usually for my children and relatives, and toys for the grandchildren.

Working out what people like is the worst nightmare. My husband and I do not go Christmas shopping together any more as he has different views on how much to spend and what kind of presents people might like. So I do it alone and don’t enjoy it. Sometimes I give tokens or money but rarely as I feel this is a boring kind of thing to open on Christmas day and shows no imagination or thought at all. Even if you get a present you dislike someone has at least thought about it and got it wrong!

While she does not love giving presents as the retired Post Offi ce worker or factory worker do, she attempts the ‘real giving’ of ‘thinking of the other’ through time spent deciding upon an appropriate material form for a person. The choosing causes confl ict, disagreements between her and her husband; it has a high price, but she still does it. This is a kind of love: a fulfi lment of an arduous obligation. She understands the material forms of the gift as fully expressive of receiver as recognized by the giver (a person in the relationship with another) and thus the lecturer, as other Mass Observation writers, tries to avoid settling upon ‘tokens or money’ and fails. They attempt to give against a commodifi ed world.

## Keeping giving

Real giving persists, then. For some, such as the lecturer, ‘thinking of the other as a subject’ and properly fulfi lling the obligation to give is a hardship. The large numbers of lonely shoppers who crowd the streets every December share that burden: searching for ideas of a person, an intended recipient of an as yet unformed gift; they try to match an image of that person with the objects in the shops and then work out whether that appropriate object is affordable. They must give something. Whatever it is and however long it takes to fi nd it, the search for an offering is preferable to succumbing to the dehumanized condition that Adorno attributed to not giving. To give is to fend off social isolation, to try to survive as a person.

Gifts are powerful things. As described by Mass Observation writers, gifts are acts of love; they can express the signifi cance of a person that cannot be contained in words; their exchange creates attachments, acknowledges and affi rms the extent of a family; they are the cause of tears of sadness and joy. They can recall the dead. The opening citation from the retired Post Offi ce worker bears repeating: ‘I love to take things out of a cupboard and think back to the donor, relative or friend, many long gone’ (M1571). The circulation of gifts constitutes a domain of material culture that could certainly be characterized as emotional: the things given have bodily effects and affects, they produce feelings; they sustain relationships between people across families that do not see each other, negotiate the distance from nephews and nieces, keep attachments between the living and the dead. Both personhood and sociability, the social life that makes a person, are realized in this emotional domain of material culture. Here, the encroachments of the market are held at bay.

For Mauss, for Adorno, for others, the gift is the antithesis of the commodity. It is also this in practice as well as theory: gift exchanges continually dissent from commodity culture; giving is an everyday practice of opposition. The exchange of gifts has a more lasting affect than the commodity exchanges that provide the dominant paradigm of culture. They are the things to which we can become attached. For that we are grateful, both for the things and the way it makes us feel. Thus, the gift could be considered a hidden history of the commodity. The sheer quantity, never mind the signifi cance, of things sold and bought in order to be given might alert anyone who wanted to take up a dialectics of commodity culture that it is dependent upon the very thing that it has relegated to a secondary position. Paradoxically (or not), these things exert their power materially and intimately but less discursively and decisively than commodities. One way of thinking about the antithesis of commodity and gift is an object lesson in maintaining the hierarchy of market over home, capitalist culture over family life. Overcoming the diffi culties of shopping for an extended family every Christmas, as the lecturer does, in an effort to reaffi rm affectionate relationships and recognize, as far as possible, the particularities of persons, is fuel for commodity culture. We make many of our gifts from commodities. At its best, when the gift is just the right present for that person, the gift is an anti- capitalist form, a human thing. That people give and receive the very things they need every day, could be held up as routine victories over capitalism; the struggle to be a person is won through gift relationships with others. The ties that bind people together are strong. Attachment is the power of the gift. The gift is coercive; it forces inclusion across asymmetries and hierarchies of social life. Thus far, the domain of the gift, an emotional material culture, has been offered as a criticism of capitalism, but in conclusion I should say a few words of warning about the given objects of love.

## Conclusion

While there may be brief moments of equality within gift relationships, most gifting occurs in families where this is not often the case. Some family members, usually siblings, might be treated equally by being given goods that carry the same personal worth, but families are characterized by asymmetrical gift relationships. Aafke Komter has analysed the asymmetry of giving: females in families, particularly those in the role of the mother, participate in giving and receiving to a far greater extent than males, including fathers (1996, pp. 119–131). Women carry out the work of gifts and are rewarded for it: they give more and receive more, but not in equal amounts. The Mass Observation testimony bears this out. All female writers assumed responsibility for family gifting, giving on behalf of male family members for the family as a whole. Furthermore, whilst Mass Observation writers might attest to the love of gifts, an aspect of familial love is that it occurs in (or is even an affect of) the hierarchy of an older over a younger generation; parents over children. Imagine children showering parents with presents at Christmas. Children are not initially expected to reciprocate their gifts and when they do, the gift is not an equivalent. Indeed, failure to give in return or to return a less than equivalent gift is expected since acceptance of the position as a child, less than equal and dependent upon a parent, may be the gift’s desired effect (Godlier, 1999). Thus, gifts can arise from inequality and continually enforce it. An emotional material culture of the gift might dispel the market, but it does not banish hierarchy; it softens the effect of inequality, enables it to be tolerated, even embraced.

## Notes

1 Mass Observation writers are anonymized in the Mass Observation Archive and then identifi ed by letters and numbers. Excerpts from their correspondence with the Archive have been reproduced here in the written form closest to their own. In cases where the correspondent wrote in capital letters, those excerpts have also been reproduced in upper case. Mass Observation material reproduced with permission of Curtis Brown Group Ltd, London on behalf of The Trustees of the Mass Observation Archive. Copyright © The Trustees of the Mass Observation Archive.

2 See entries for the University of Sussex Special Collections held at The Keep: http://www.thekeep.info/ collections/mass-observation-archive/ and http://www.thekeep.info/collections/getrecord/GB181\_ SxMOA2\_1\_55 (accessed 17.3.14).

3 For another account of ‘expending time’ see Pierre Bourdieu’s ‘Work of Time’ (Komter, 1996, pp. 135–147), an extract from The Logic of Practice (1990).