# Performing Masculinity Through Objects in Postwar America

The Playboy’s Pipe

Jessica Sewell

## Introduction

In 1959, a newly divorced Hugh Hefner, the founder of Playboy magazine, reinvented himself as ‘Mr Playboy’, living the life promoted in the pages of his own magazine. For this, Hefner writes, he needed several ‘props’: ‘the pipe, the red velvet smoking jacket, the white Mercedes Benz 300SL and the magnifi cent mansion’ (Hefner, 1998, p. 11). Of these props, the pipe was the most visible: from this point until 1984 (when he had a stroke and gave up smoking), Hefner was virtually never photographed without a briar pipe. Each of these four props symbolized an important aspect of the playboy and the pleasure he took in life. The smoking jacket showed the world that he lived a life of leisure (although he in fact continued to work very hard). The mansion clearly showed his riches, while also serving as a setting for legendary parties. The smoking jacket and the mansion together referenced a life of sybaritic pleasure constructed against the repression and conformity of the 1950s (Hefner, 1998, p. 12). The sports car served both as a signal of his money and of masculinity, its horsepower a metaphor for his power. But what about the pipe? Why was a briar pipe a central attribute of heterosexual playboy masculinity and a totem object for Hefner? This essay explores the pipe as a material object that embodied and performed heteronormative masculinity in 1950s and 1960s America, unpacking the meanings that the pipe carried for Hefner and other would- be playboys.

The pipe is not only associated with Hugh Hefner. It appeared regularly as one of the attributes of the playboy within Playboy magazine, even before Hefner began smoking one himself. Pipes were advertised more heavily in Playboy than cigars or cigarettes, even though cigarette smokers greatly outnumbered pipe smokers among Playboy’s readers. <sup>1</sup> Pipes were also used as props in articles, pictorials and ads for other products. The briar pipe sometimes served as a stand- in for the playboy, in advertisements and centrefolds. At times, it referenced Hugh Hefner, as it was well known as his totem object. But more importantly, it suggested the presence of the reader, a fellow playboy. It became a way for a reader to imagine himself in the sophisticated world that Playboy presented, with access to the very willing girls next door. But in order to enter into this fantasy, the reader needed to be a pipe smoker, or at least think of himself as one.

## The playboy bachelor and the postwar crisis of masculinity

Both the playboy and his pipe are best understood in the historical context of what postwar sociologists and others argued was a ‘crisis of masculinity’. <sup>2</sup> In this crisis, the traditional domains in which American heterosexual middle- class men’s identity were based – work and family – were seen as no longer suffi cient. Contemporary writers blamed the crisis of masculinity partly on the conformity of corporate America (Ehrenreich, 1983, pp. 30–40; Riesman, 1950; Whyte, 1956) and partly on women (Moskin, 1959; Wylie, 1958). Men’s individuality was seen to be crushed through their experience at work, where critics claimed there was ‘no place for individuality’ and ‘teamwork and personnel relations reigned over all’ (Leonard, 1958, p. 97). Men had become corporate drones, with no space for individuality or creativity. Life was no better for the man at home. Women were understood as controlling men’s sexuality, through control over sexual limits before marriage, and control of conception and demands for orgasm after (Moskin, 1959). In addition, the wife was seen as controlling her husband’s working life, through her desire to consume to keep up with the neighbours and concomitant pressure on her husband to make money (Moskin, 1959; Wylie, 1958).

In a 1958 essay on ‘The Crisis of American Masculinity’, Arthur Schlesinger Jr. argued that for men to become men again, they needed to ‘recover a sense of individual spontaneity. And to do this, a man must visualize himself as an individual apart from the group, whatever it is, which defi nes his values and commands his loyalty’ (1958, p.  65). Visualizing himself as a bachelor, living a life of leisure, provided just such an opportunity for a man to recover his individuality. The image of the bachelor playboy, promoted most heavily by Playboy magazine, but also articulated in fi lms and other realms of popular culture, served as an alternative model of heterosexual masculinity. The playboy as imagined in American popular culture, was a professional, and thus had more autonomy than a typical offi ce (or factory) worker. As he was unmarried, his home was purely his own. Most importantly, his identity was not based on work or family, but on consumption and leisure. His identity as a playboy came from his individual, masculine consumption, quite distinct from the family- based consumption paid for by the offi ce drone.

The playboy’s masculinity is defi ned through leisure and consumption, through his acquisition of stylish things and the pleasure he takes from them. The playboy is a connoisseur, an expert on jazz, clothes, food, design and culture, and he surrounds himself with things that proclaim his confi dent masculinity as well as his impeccable taste. Even a married man with a humdrum job could participate in the playboy’s sophisticated masculine consumption and thus bolster his sense of self. He could use the same objects the playboy used – the stereo set playing jazz, the sports car, the wet bar, the briar pipe – to construct his identity as a man. Of these objects, the briar pipe was comparatively inexpensive and highly portable, which made it signifi cantly more accessible, and of particular interest to college students, playboys in training.

This essay looks more closely at the pipe in this context. Why was the pipe, as an object of material culture, important to constructing this alternative model of heterosexual masculinity in the face of a masculinity crisis? The pipe, I argue, had three important and interrelated attributes. It was understood as a particularly masculine object, expressing the masculinity of the man who smoked it. It also served as a marker of middle- and upper- middle- class status, letting others know that its user was a man on the rise. It was associated with connoisseurship and collecting, and thus expressed the expertise and cultural capital of its owner. In addition, as with the playboy’s other props, the pipe served as an opportunity for male individual consumption and was above all a source of pleasure. The pipe was important to would- be playboys because of the particular form of masculinity – cultured, leisured and worldly, based not on physical activity but on knowledge, collecting and pleasure – that it embodied.

## Smoking and masculinity

Tobacco and pipes have long been associated with men in American culture. In the context of the highly structured gender roles of the Victorian era, men were not even to smoke in the presence of women, as smoke was seen as an affront to women’s delicate natures. Men were advised not to smoke in any room that women were in the habit of frequenting, whether or not women were present; nor while walking in the company of a woman; nor on crowded promenades or fashionable streets; nor ideally while walking on any street during the daytime (Anonymous, 1865, p. 290; Green, 1904, pp. 229, 243; Humphry, 1897, p. 32; Louis, 1881, p.  225; A Woman of Fashion, 1898, pp.  177–178; Young, 1881, pp.  148, 260). Smoking functioned as a ritual of male bonding, and took place in special male- only smoking rooms at the theatre, operas, balls and parties, as well as in the dining room after dinner, once women had withdrawn to the parlour (Green, 1904, pp. 110, 229; Roberts, 1913, pp. 200, 207).

This social smoking focused on the consumption of cigars, often provided by the host. In contrast, pipes signalled a more private, contemplative sort of smoking. The pipe functioned, according to the author of Habits of Good Society, as ‘the bachelor’s wife’, ‘the worst rival a woman can have’, because it was never nagging or needy and offered calm pleasures that improved with age (Anonymous, 1865, pp. 288–289). The intimate relationship between a man and his pipe is marked by descriptions of the pipe as ‘beloved’ and a ‘comfort and companion (Roberts, 1913, pp. 207, 393). In contrast, cigars were seen as a source of pleasure, but were not described in language that suggests an intimate and long- lasting bond. Iain Gately even suggests that the pipe was, at times, confused with sex itself (2003, p. 192). The private, even sexualized associations of the pipe were such that smoking a pipe on the street was seen by some etiquette experts as beyond the pale, even when a cigar was acceptable (Anonymous, 1865, p. 290; Louis, 1881, p. 129). This shifted signifi cantly by the 1950s, when pipe smoking, while still associated to a great extent with contemplative smoking in masculine spaces in the home, was also seen as appropriate in public, particularly during outdoor leisure activities, such as fi shing, as well as ‘tooling his sports car along in a rallye, skiing, golfi ng, yachting’ (Anonymous, 1959a, p. 80).

In the twentieth century, with changes in gender ideology, women increasingly took up smoking. By the 1910s, etiquette books acknowledged women as smokers, and allowed that they might smoke in private, or in the company of women (Roberts, 1913, pp. 207–208, 268– 269, 273, 343). But when women smoked, they smoked cigarettes. Cigarettes from their origins were associated with women, as they were fi rst made out of tobacco scraps by Spanish women cigar rollers for their own use (Gately, 2003, pp.  179–180). In addition, of all the modes of tobacco consumption, cigarettes are both the mildest and require the least skill to smoke, and thus were seen as more appropriate for women than pipes and cigars. In the context of women’s adoption of the cigarette, the gendered meanings of smoking changed, but the pipe and the cigar remained as distinctly masculine modes of tobacco use, while the cigarette became relatively gender- neutral.