# War and national identity

People in Templemore in August 1920, were experiencing anything but peaceful, unremarkable times. Between January 1919 and July 1921, a volunteer Irish Republican Army (IRA) fought a war of independence against British forces in Ireland, and local newspapers reported numerous violent incidents in the Templemore area, partly because of the Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) barracks located there. In this atmosphere of heightened fear and tension, the bleeding of statues, which were already regarded as powerful Catholic mediators, became very meaningful, and could be readily interpreted by the town’s citizens as a divine communication, a physical sign of empathy from the fi gures represented by the images, weeping blood in response to their sorrows. Many saw it as signalling a longed- for positive intervention, and the presence of the statues in Dwan’s premises was regarded as having protected Templemore from complete destruction during an attack by the RIC on 20 August. It was claimed that ‘our Lady had saved Templemore’, and Walsh gathered people to kneel around the statues and recite the Rosary in Irish (Anonymous, 1920a, p. 5; Anonymous, 1920g, p. 4).

The bleeding statues were also seen as asserting the Catholic Irish identity of the population in the face of the non-Catholic British opponent, a superior spiritual power which would win out against the much more substantial, but merely worldly, advantages of the enemy. This was not the only time when international Catholic images were appropriated onto the side of the Irish. Our Lady of Lourdes, in particular, was considered by many Irish Catholics to have a special interest in, and identifi cation with, Ireland. A Lourdes grotto in Cashel, a town about 30 km from Templemore, was erected in 1918 by the townspeople in gratitude for her role in the ‘national struggle against conscription’ (Anonymous, 1921, p.  6) (see Figure  8.3 ). It was consecrated in 1921 by John Harty, Archbishop of Cashel, whose speech on the occasion expressed both his gratitude at Ireland’s avoidance of conscription, and his belief that Our Lady of Lourdes would shortly obtain Irish freedom from foreign rule. Our Lady of Perpetual Succour – a thirteenth- or fourteenth- century Byzantine painting which was (and still is) housed in the Redemptorist church of Saint Alphonsus at Via Merulana in Rome, copies of which were introduced to Ireland in the nineteenth century – was also seen as having a special interest in Ireland (see Figure  8.4 ). The Irish priest John Coyle even suggested that it might have been responsible for the downfall of the ‘infamous Cromwell’, the English leader whose army invaded Ireland in the seventeenth century:

we may take it as at least a noteworthy coincidence that in the same year, 1658, in which the hunted exiles [Irish friars who fl ed from Cromwell’s persecutions to Rome] knelt round the Picture of Our Lady of Perpetual Succour in Rome, praying for Ireland, Cromwell was called to his account, and Ireland and England rid of that bloodthirsty tyrant.

Coyle, 1913, pp. 47–48

In August 1920, the bleeding of the holy statues changed the course of events, in that it resulted in an unoffi cial truce and temporary peace in Templemore, as the RIC withdrew because of the crowds of civilians now fi lling the town, and local IRA volunteers moved in and kept order, organizing traffi c and helping the pilgrims, thus reinforcing the connection between the Catholic images and the fi ght for Irish freedom (Anonymous, 1920d, p. 1; Anonymous, 1920j, p. 6).These opportunist volunteers charged money for their services, which went into a fund for buying arms, and many of the more helpful also received tips from grateful pilgrims (Reynolds, 2006, pp. 24–25).

The IRA leadership allowed this situation to continue for about three weeks, after which they decided that it was no longer to their advantage, and that the war should be resumed. Some of the money given to the volunteers was being spent on alcohol, and discipline was loosening. They therefore brought the truce to an abrupt end by ambushing an RIC barracks on 29 September, killing two men and causing a series of reprisals which resulted in the mass exodus of pilgrims, stall- holders and other visitors. The town was emptied, and the statues stopped bleeding (Reynolds, 2006, p. 27). The extraordinary powers which they had suddenly manifested disappeared just as quickly, once the context changed.

The physical cause of the bleeding statues has never been defi nitively ascertained, nor whether it was intended as a prank or something more serious. While the majority of IRA men were practising Catholics, and many believed simply and unquestioningly in the supernatural power of the statues, the leadership of the organization was more sceptical and suspicious. A local delegation interviewed Walsh and concluded that he was either ‘mentally abnormal or a hypocrite’, and he was summoned to Dublin to be interrogated by Dan Breen, a senior IRA member, who decided he was a fake (Reynolds, 2006, pp. 25–26). A ‘bleeding’ statue, which may or may not have been one of those that performed in Templemore, was later broken, revealing inside an alarm- clock mechanism connected to a fountain- pen insert containing a mixture of sheep’s blood and water, all of which was concealed inside the statue. Whether Walsh was an agent or a victim of deception was never established, but not long after the bleeding statues phenomenon he suddenly departed for Australia, voluntarily or otherwise, and never returned (Reynolds, 2006, p. 27).

## Enchantment and agency

As well as fostering a sense of group identity and power in response to uncertainty and danger, the bleeding statues also attracted to the Templemore area large numbers of individuals with particular personal agendas, many of whom were willing to make long, uncomfortable and expensive journeys to see the images, or possibly even to make physical contact with them. The Lochs noted that the phenomenon particularly attracted ‘the sick in body and the sick in soul’, people with a need in their lives for the physical and emotional healing that they felt the objects could in some way facilitate (1922, p. 73). And, indeed, many miraculous effects were attributed to them (Anonymous, 1920d, p. 1; Anonymous, 1920h, p. 4; Anonymous, 1920i, p. 4). Cures were achieved through praying in front of or touching the statues, or by rubbing them against the affl icted area: 11-year- old Cornelius Galvin, for instance, was partially cured of ‘acute hip disease’ by having one of Dwan’s bleeding statues rubbed against his hip, and after Walsh rubbed a bleeding crucifi x on the badly injured knee of a young soldier called Martin Monaghan, the latter was reported to have regained almost full use of his leg (Anonymous, 1920b, p.  2; Anonymous, 1920k, p.  6). Such was the intensity of the communal emotional atmosphere that a Catholic RIC constable was alleged to have resigned his job and entered a religious order after a statue he owned began to bleed, and a soldier was reported to have converted to Catholicism (Anonymous, 1920c, p. 5). Other strange phenomena in the area were also noted around this time, including a number of apparitions of the Virgin and the emergence of a spring – which briefl y became known as a ‘holy well’ and was associated with healing powers – from the fl oor of Walsh’s bedroom (Anonymous, 1920d, p. 1; Anonymous, 1920e, p. 4). The Templemore incident highlights the fact that Irish Catholics were perfectly happy to combine the use of mass- produced Roman Catholic imagery with older strategies for harnessing the supernatural, instead of replacing one with the other. Therefore, as was the case before the ‘devotional revolution’, a range of apparently incompatible belief systems seems to have comfortably co- existed.

The enthusiasm with which Irish Catholics embraced devotional images, and the extent of the powers granted them, caused debate in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Some Catholic commentators saw their social power as a force for good in Irish society, enabling people to deal with the very harsh conditions of their lives. W. J. Lockington, for instance, a Jesuit priest visiting Ireland from New Zealand, was very impressed with the interaction between Irish Catholics and religious images, and in a passage which itself gives a very active role to the images discussed, describes the way this interaction helped people come to terms with their diffi cult lives:

It tore one’s very heartstrings to enter those poor rooms [of Irish cabins], and, by the fl ickering light of the shrine lamp, see our Lady of Perpetual Succour looking across the room at a worn and gasping saint lying paralysed and pain- twisted; or to see our Lady of Lourdes trying to comfort a poor widow as she kneels at the desolate hearth . . . And impossible as it may seem, our Blessed Lady does accomplish her task.

Lockington, 1920, p. 15

The writer Michael McCarthy, on the other hand, responded with ‘a feeling of disgust’ to a scene he witnessed in front of a Calvary in the Augustinian church in Thomas Street in Dublin:

I saw them tremblingly put forth their dirty right hands and rub the palms and backs of them against the coloured clay of the statue of the Virgin, moving their hands over its breast and arms and hands. And then I saw them rub their hands, after contact with the statue, against their own dirty foreheads.

McCarthy, 1902, pp. 332–333

McCarthy concluded that ‘those are the Irish who cannot get on in life. This is the teaching they get; this is the religion to which they sacrifi ce their lives’ (1902, p. 333). Both Lockington and McCarthy perceive that Irish Catholics are susceptible to enchantment, in Gell’s sense, by devotional images, as well as socially constructed and differentiated by that susceptibility, as in Bourdieu’s model. Lockington sees the resulting social agency as a force for good, helping people to cope with diffi cult circumstances, whereas for McCarthy it is pernicious, one of the factors keeping Irish people at a primitive level of social and economic development. As David Morgan has observed, the problem that iconoclasts – opponents of religious images–have with them is not that they are empty and powerless, but, as with Greenberg’s conception of kitsch, their danger lies in the fact that they are too powerful: ‘not that they are vacant signifi ers propped up by human vanity but that they possess an autonomy, a life of their own, a power over the human imagination’ (2005, p. 142).

However, many Catholic clergy also reportedly responded with reserve and caution to the bleeding statues in Templemore. The prescribed (as opposed to actual) role, if any, of religious images in the lives of the faithful has in fact always been a problematic issue for the Christian Church. From its inception, great powers were granted to them – in the seventh century, for instance, paintings of the Virgin were recorded as having saved Constantinople from its enemies (Belting, 1994, pp. 495–496). Nevertheless, in response to repeated iconoclastic challenges, the offi cial Church institution has needed to continually make a clear distinction between acceptable

Christian veneration of an image, because of what it represents, and what could very easily be perceived as unacceptable pagan idolatry of the image itself, in its own right. The decrees of the Second Council of Nicaea (AD 787), therefore, endorsed the value of using Christian images, but limited that use to ‘veneration’, emphasizing that ‘he who venerates the image, venerates the person represented in that image’ (quoted in Belting, 1994, p. 506).

In the thirteenth century, Saints Thomas Aquinas (c. 1225–1274) and Bonaventure (1221– 1274) formulated three main justifi cations for religious imagery, which have provided the basis for the institutional Church approach ever since: to educate people, especially the illiterate; to help people memorize religious truths; and to excite religious emotion. The Protestant Reformation, which began in 1517, challenged the Church structure of beliefs and practices, including the use of imagery, resulting in the fragmentation of Christianity and producing some iconoclastic Protestant groupings. However, the Catholic Counter Reformation reasserted its endorsement of religious imagery at the twenty- fi fth session of the Council of Trent in December 1563. Again, to ward off accusations of idolatry, the decrees of Trent, which formed the basis for nineteenth- century Roman Catholicism, specifi cally deny any power to images themselves, insisting that there is no question that ‘any divinity or virtue is believed to be in them on account of which they are to be worshipped; or that anything is to be asked of them’ (Buckley, 1851, p. 215). The section on ‘Veneration of Images’, written in 1910 for the Catholic Encyclopaedia, emphasized that natural law ‘forbids the obvious absurdity of addressing prayers or any sort of absolute worship to a manufactured image’, but argues that this is not a problem so long as the prototype (the thing that is represented) is worshipped, and not the sign (the representation itself), and that the two remain clearly differentiated (Fortescue, 1910).

In relation to the Templemore statues, many of the clergy became uncomfortable with the extraordinary powers with which they became associated: one priest was reported to have declared that the people were ‘stark mad’, and another spoke out publicly against the statues and advised his parishioners to shun them. The parish priest of Cashel, Monsignor Innocent Ryan, urged people in a letter to the press not to put their faith in statues or crucifi xes, but in the Blessed Sacrament, reaffi rming the centrality of the Eucharist (rather than wonder- working images) in Catholic belief and practice (Ryan, 1920, p. 6). However, when Walsh visited Ryan to show him how the miracle worked, a large crowd gathered outside, and ‘to relieve the situation, and to satisfy the devotion of the people, one of these statues was given to the public to kiss or touch in the spacious yard before the church’ (Anonymous, 1920f, p. 3). Thus the priest’s authority was forced to yield before the potency of the images, and presenting the statue to the public in front of the church can only be seen as a form of damage limitation, an effort to link its power to the Church institution, rather than vice versa. On another occasion, a group of prominent Templemore citizens gathered around the statues to offer prayers aloud in thanks for their protection of the town against RIC attacks, seemingly without the usual need for a clerical mediator (Anonymous, 1920a, p. 5).

## Conclusion

Catholic images have always had the capacity, in certain contexts, to exercise great social power. Their mass- production in the nineteenth century increased this, since there were more of them distributed more widely, while also allowing greater control and standardization of their content and style by the Church. The accessible, sentimental and repetitive aesthetic of many of these mass- produced images put them into the category of kitsch, and, if anything, enhanced rather than diminished their power to convince, reassure and enchant on a mass scale.

The Templemore phenomenon highlights the potential agency of such objects in Ireland in 1920, and how it could be harnessed by different groups with often confl icting agendas. The Church establishment successfully deployed devotional images to charm and control the population, as in Greenberg’s model, but Irish Catholics also put them to uses that suited their own needs, so that they functioned not only to console and reassure, as Binkley argues, but also to construct, bolster and assert group and national identity, suggesting, in line with Miller’s thesis, an active creativity on the part of the Catholic masses, with its potential for resisting as well as reproducing the social order, rather than a merely passive obedience.

In the tense and violent context of Templemore in 1920, the bleeding statues for a brief period greatly exceeded the limitations imposed by offi cial Church discourse on the social role of devotional images, and even those of the much wider norms of popular Catholicism, fi rst by their bleeding and then by the wave of miraculous apparitions and cures with which they were associated, to the extent that they threatened the authority of the very institution from which they derived their power in the fi rst place. Their history suggests that kitsch, in certain contexts, can be a very powerful social agent, neither good nor bad in itself but capable of being used by different groups in the service of either, or both, and also, once deployed, diffi cult to direct and restrain.