# Designing Meaningful and Lasting User Experiences

## Jonathan Chapman

## Introduction

If you were to mine a landfi ll site, you would see thick, choked geological strata of style descend before you, punctuated by zeitgeist objects whose archaeological discovery would serve to punctuate a design era more poignantly than any carbon dating methodology ever could.

As the biosphere chokes, we snigger at the fake 1970s walnut-veneered TV set lying face down in a ditch, or the recently ejected avocado bathroom suite from the 1980s, still standing earnestly to attention. Is it triumph perhaps? Affi rmation of our transcendence beyond those aesthetic faux pas that we as consumers, sitting frigidly poised on the style- islands, have fought so hard to assemble, but which now sink beneath the smoggy swath of ecological decay we brewed in the making.

If we are to move toward a more sustainable future, we must fi rst expose alternative understandings of the immaterial culture underpinning our stuff, and the manifold dialogues we are continually engaged in with the plethora of designed objects that touch our lives; arguing for an emotionally durable design approach that reduces the consumption and waste of natural resources by increasing the resilience of relationships established between people and things.

## Meaning and the made

Although we may assign particular meaning to a given object, or material, meaning cannot exist outside the body. It is within us that meaning can be found. Of course, meaning may be represented, or prompted externally through the use of systems like language, images and form, for example. However, an object, material or space cannot hold meaning in and of itself – only our interpretation of these things will produce meaning.

In this way, meaning draws from lived experience – that which has happened to you up until this point – and is typically associated with sets of abstract relations and conditions, which create a lasting impression on us. Furthermore, meaning is a highly relative term that refers to the interpretation of both material and immaterial encounters. If we are, therefore, to have a discussion about the meaning of a poppy, we must fi rst establish the various positions of the participants in that debate. To the English country gardener, for example, the poppy is a beautiful but short- lived speck of colour; to the veteran soldier, the poppy means remembrance of soldiers who died during wartime; to a Chinese mother, the meanings of the poppy are solely negative, and are to be avoided, as it is synonymous with the production of the drugs opium, morphine and heroin.

Meaning infl uences what we see in a given thing. As a preconscious state of mind, meaning gives a sense of direction for thought and potential action; a cognitive response to abstract features within a given encounter, such as experiencing a rat in a pet shop. Certain norms are at play here, of course, and a large degree of consensus delivers the meaning of this rat in a preformed state. However, meaning is also highly context- specifi c. If you take the same rat and put it in the kitchen of a hotel, then its meaning changes quite dramatically – same rat, very different meanings. So as we can see, it is not helpful to think of the object as being meaningful, but instead, the way we encounter and experience the object generates meaning, bespoke to each of us. It is the nature of these encounters that shapes and colours the meaning we preconsciously assign to such material experiences . . . not the material itself.

Whether deemed meaningful or not, the made world is a consequence – an emergent space in which the human species has progressively found ways to modify and enhance the world around us. The urban spaces we roam, buildings we inhabit, products we use and garments we wear, collectively represent our intellectual capacity to imagine a better world that is beyond our current level of experience. This innate capability to imagine a world just beyond, and then formulate (design) plans to realize those imaginings, is an essential determinant of what it is to be human – to reach beyond innate human limitations (Heskett, 2003). There is nothing new about this. Throughout human history, evidence of this enduring human characteristic can be found. Whether the selective rearing of high- yield livestock by our early ancestors, or the genetic modifi cation of a given strain of fungus- resistant barley, through millennia of striving to enhance the conditions for life, we have evolved our processes and practices beyond recognition.

## Belief

No designer ever knowingly set out to make the world a worse place. No designer ever jumped out of bed one Monday morning saying, ‘Hey, I’m going to design a really unsustainable, meaningless product today!’ The desire to produce lasting value and meaning in the world, through the things we create, is in the very DNA of all creative minds. In this way, it is clear that the shift toward designing longer- lasting products is something that most designers are already behind. On a corporate level, the desire is also evident, as customer satisfaction and consequent loyalty are tied in to such issues.

As we fumble our way through life, attempting to make sense of it along the way, our need to fi nd explanation leads our minds beyond reason, and into the supernatural. On describing memorabilia and the power of inanimate objects, Bruce Hood, author of Super Sense (Hood, 2009), undertook an experiment in which he fi rst hands out a black 1930s fountain pen, which he falsely claims belonged to Albert Einstein. Everyone in the audience is desperate to hold it, and shows great reverence and awe toward the object, as though part of Einstein’s soul somehow resides within it. Hood then holds aloft a tattered old cardigan, and asks who would be willing to volunteer by wearing it. Many offer to do so, until it is revealed that the cardigan belonged to Cromwell Street’s notorious serial killer, Fred West. Promptly, almost all volunteers lower their hands. Hood claims that this change of heart reveals something odd: audience members sitting next to one of those who keep their hand raised, and are willing to wear the killer’s cardigan, visibly recoil in repulsion of their neighbour’s openness to this (Hood, 2009). The cardigan is no longer the prime source of repulsion, but more interestingly, the person who feels fi ne wearing it, or even handling it, must be avoided also (Chapman, 2013a).

So, what does design and meaning have to do with sustainability? Indeed, it may appear that generating meaningful synthesis between such apparently disconnected ideas is like trying to nail ice cubes together.

## Meaning full

According to the director of London’s Design Museum, Deyan Sudjic, we live in a world drowning in objects (Sudjic, 2008); households with a TV set in each room; kitchen cupboard stuffed with waffl e makers, bread ovens, blenders and cappuccino whisks, and drawers swollen with a plethora of pocket- sized devices powered by batteries, which themselves are products that take several thousand times more energy to make than they will ever produce. One’s material empire – with its aquariums, TV sets, plants, phones, lamps, clocks, scarves, lawnmowers, picture frames, door knobs, computers, shoes, cameras, bicycles, screwdrivers, jackets, carpets, sinks, cars or anything else for that matter – is made up of stuff (Chapman, 2013a). Like a shadow that follows you around, this stuff defi nes you, whether you like it or not – whether you planned it or not. Perhaps due to the normalcy of innovation, material culture is adopting an increasingly expendable, sacrifi cial persona. Today, an edgy sense of instability surrounds the made world, nurtured by continual change to render its offspring fl eeting, transient and replaceable orphans of circumstance.

In this oversaturated world of people and things, durable attachments with objects are seldom witnessed. Most products deliver a predictable diatribe of information, which quickly transforms wonder into drudgery; serial disappointments are delivered through nothing more than a product’s failure to maintain currency with the evolving values and needs of their user. The volume of waste produced by this cyclic pattern of short- term desire and disappointment is a major problem, not just in terms of space and where to put things, but, perhaps more notably, for its toxic corruption of the biosphere (Chapman, 2005).

Landfi ll sites are overloaded with fully functioning products; Hoovers that still suck and freezers that still chill; all of which still perform their tasks perfectly, in a utilitarian sense. In an more emotive sense, however, waste of this nature could be seen as nothing more than a symptom of a failed relationship between the subject and the object; a failure that led to the dumping of the static one by the newly evolved other.