# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\auto\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor.md

## Introduction

When Bart Simpson’s dog shredded up the Bouvier family quilt, Bart’s mother Marge (née Bouvier) was more than upset: ‘My quilt! Six generations, ruined!’, she wept. The highly charged, intensely emotional relationship between Marge, her family’s history and her quilt typifi es much of the discussion in this essay. Love objects, indeed love subjects, have all the cultural potency of fetish, symbol, totem, devotional, index and ideology, for those on whom that power impacts. Those outwith that, by contrast, focus on their own signifi cant objects: Homer, her husband, responded thus: ‘Now Marge, honey honey, honey. Come on, come on, don’t get upset. It’s not the end of the world. We all love that quilt, but we can’t get too attached to . . . OHH!!! MY COOKIE!!!’ The Simpsons are arguably us at our all- consuming best, so why Marge’s particular trauma at the loss of an old bit of fabric?

It is creation, not consumption (I contend), that creates object attachment, and the Bouvier quilt represents the making and the perpetuation of Marge’s history and heritage, captured through six generations and held in trust for the seventh. Homer missed the point – Marge was already ‘too attached’. Her quilt’s linkage of past, present and future was its essential value, and Marge’s upset indicates just how potent the attachment and the object were.

This essay uses a methodology that insists on the readability of cloth through memory, familiar signifi cation, narrative and a kind of low history. Writing through my practice, I explore historical contexts of making and using objects that are emotionally rich and affective, in this case inherited quilts made by known ancestors. Smart textiles can – and do – complement and extend these objects. Previously established forms of object- attachment and signifi cation, and the contexts of their use – particularly the complex activities and emotions relating to bed – may be argued, then, as pertaining equally to quilts industrially produced from innovative technological fabrics and their humbler handmade counterparts. This is especially potent when textile and/or familial chronologies reference the extended linear nature of technological and intergenerational evolution.

Refl ection on personal encounters with objects that became attached to memories of class, location, skill and family enabled my reference to other objects of attachment in various cultural and historical contexts. I discovered through writing this narration, that the object I thought was my emotional link with a textile past and a technological future – the quilt – was not. It was a needle, rather, translated into an electric wire and back into a needle, shape- shifting for context, that was my attachment to my history and my anchor to the now. My needle is my textile talisman, a love object and my trade’s tool, an apotropaic and emotional attachment that protects me still.

