# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\auto\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor.md

## Introduction

In 1959, a newly divorced Hugh Hefner, the founder of Playboy magazine, reinvented himself as ‘Mr Playboy’, living the life promoted in the pages of his own magazine. For this, Hefner writes, he needed several ‘props’: ‘the pipe, the red velvet smoking jacket, the white Mercedes Benz 300SL and the magnifi cent mansion’ (Hefner, 1998, p. 11). Of these props, the pipe was the most visible: from this point until 1984 (when he had a stroke and gave up smoking), Hefner was virtually never photographed without a briar pipe. Each of these four props symbolized an important aspect of the playboy and the pleasure he took in life. The smoking jacket showed the world that he lived a life of leisure (although he in fact continued to work very hard). The mansion clearly showed his riches, while also serving as a setting for legendary parties. The smoking jacket and the mansion together referenced a life of sybaritic pleasure constructed against the repression and conformity of the 1950s (Hefner, 1998, p. 12). The sports car served both as a signal of his money and of masculinity, its horsepower a metaphor for his power. But what about the pipe? Why was a briar pipe a central attribute of heterosexual playboy masculinity and a totem object for Hefner? This essay explores the pipe as a material object that embodied and performed heteronormative masculinity in 1950s and 1960s America, unpacking the meanings that the pipe carried for Hefner and other would- be playboys.

The pipe is not only associated with Hugh Hefner. It appeared regularly as one of the attributes of the playboy within Playboy magazine, even before Hefner began smoking one himself. Pipes were advertised more heavily in Playboy than cigars or cigarettes, even though cigarette smokers greatly outnumbered pipe smokers among Playboy’s readers. <sup>1</sup> Pipes were also used as props in articles, pictorials and ads for other products. The briar pipe sometimes served as a stand- in for the playboy, in advertisements and centrefolds. At times, it referenced Hugh Hefner, as it was well known as his totem object. But more importantly, it suggested the presence of the reader, a fellow playboy. It became a way for a reader to imagine himself in the sophisticated world that Playboy presented, with access to the very willing girls next door. But in order to enter into this fantasy, the reader needed to be a pipe smoker, or at least think of himself as one.

