# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\auto\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor.md

## Introduction

Much of the work on home- making sees people as engaged inevitably in a quest for social certainty. My work among Irish-Romanians reveals something of the multiple dimensions of the notions of certainty and uncertainty in social life. Among people who have moved from Romania to Ireland – a diverse group, whose politico- economic situation in Europe has changed immensely over the last 10 years or so – the material home is not so much an expression of emotion as a negotiation of it. In the engagement with domestic material culture, emotionality seems displaced in time, either evidenced retrospectively or anticipated. A longer- term participatory engagement with people’s unfolding lives in this situation comes to be crucial.

While some ethnographic research proceeds in holistically exploring a site such as a community which has a coherence, with different people being connected by social ties or place, in this work I was surprised by the lack of interconnection between very comparable households, which was very different from my previous experience in Romania. In Ireland, my ethnographic journey moved through many different homes, and small groups, making decisions as households or families. It seemed to me as though there was an absolute divide between research among different households. While among some people, the attempt to talk about specifi c objects in the home absolutely failed, and was incomprehensible, in other households, there was clearly a lot of attention given to decor, building and other aspects of the home. Some people come to Ireland on a particular scheme to work in their vocation, such as software or engineering. This means

buying a house, stocking it with furniture, and so on. The decision to live in Ireland involves making friends, socializing, pubs, developing hobbies and learning about Ireland. My argument is that, fi rst, domestic material objects, here, are ways in which to deal with futures and possibilities in a situation where people are placed under the impossible expectation of knowing their own mind about the future. Second, the movement of objects from being simple indices of possibilities (as a bunch of fl owers indicates romance, although not necessarily that you yourself are actively romantic), to intentional manifestations of responsibilities and purposes, is signifi cant for feelings. Love and ways of being purposive are not necessarily wholly separate, nor wholly integrated, and different materialities can show us a range of ways in which they are being articulated, by people and families such as Irish-Romanians.

