# Forgetting / Keeping giving / Conclusion

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor\auto\Love objects _ emotion, design, and material culture -- Anna Moran (Editor), Sor.md

## Forgetting

The lecturer is the last Mass Observation writer to be discussed here. The lecturer’s account of giving is an expression of the struggle to practise the proper giving of the past. The lecturer gives to the same people on the same occasions and, like the former nurse, retired Post Offi ce and factory workers, to the related family and a small number of friends: ‘relatives plus one or two close friends. e.g. my children, brother, sister, niece, husband, old friend, parents in law, grandchildren’ on ‘birthdays, Christmas and occasionally leaving presents when people leave work’ (S1383). The same people return gifts to her. The consistency of Mass Observation accounts suggests that reciprocal giving that maintains affective communities of around 20 people is a common and a stable social practice. However, the lecturer refl ects: ‘How things have changed over my lifetime’. She continues:

When I was a child we only got presents from our mum and dad and sometimes our brother and sister although not always. Usually presents for me were practical e.g. a new coat for Christmas, or new shoes for birthday. We would also get sweets and a little toy as well. Relatives did not give presents then and Christmas was not the nightmare it is now as we did not buy for relatives either. I do believe we were more delighted with modest gifts then than children are now as they are bombarded with expensive, often electronic toys which break down on Christmas Day.

S1383

Her Mass Observation account contains a familiar refrain on the commercialization of Christmas, especially in relation to the price and quantity of technological objects given to children:

Now I fi nd Christmas particularly worrying as I have three children, three brothers and sisters, a close friend, a niece and nephew, husband to buy presents for as well as fi ve grandchildren plus two stepgrandchildren. It is costly and diffi cult to choose. I would prefer modest fun presents for the adults with toys for the children but it never seems to work out like that so I end up buying clothes usually for my children and relatives, and toys for the grandchildren.

Working out what people like is the worst nightmare. My husband and I do not go Christmas shopping together any more as he has different views on how much to spend and what kind of presents people might like. So I do it alone and don’t enjoy it. Sometimes I give tokens or money but rarely as I feel this is a boring kind of thing to open on Christmas day and shows no imagination or thought at all. Even if you get a present you dislike someone has at least thought about it and got it wrong!

While she does not love giving presents as the retired Post Offi ce worker or factory worker do, she attempts the ‘real giving’ of ‘thinking of the other’ through time spent deciding upon an appropriate material form for a person. The choosing causes confl ict, disagreements between her and her husband; it has a high price, but she still does it. This is a kind of love: a fulfi lment of an arduous obligation. She understands the material forms of the gift as fully expressive of receiver as recognized by the giver (a person in the relationship with another) and thus the lecturer, as other Mass Observation writers, tries to avoid settling upon ‘tokens or money’ and fails. They attempt to give against a commodifi ed world.

## Keeping giving

Real giving persists, then. For some, such as the lecturer, ‘thinking of the other as a subject’ and properly fulfi lling the obligation to give is a hardship. The large numbers of lonely shoppers who crowd the streets every December share that burden: searching for ideas of a person, an intended recipient of an as yet unformed gift; they try to match an image of that person with the objects in the shops and then work out whether that appropriate object is affordable. They must give something. Whatever it is and however long it takes to fi nd it, the search for an offering is preferable to succumbing to the dehumanized condition that Adorno attributed to not giving. To give is to fend off social isolation, to try to survive as a person.

Gifts are powerful things. As described by Mass Observation writers, gifts are acts of love; they can express the signifi cance of a person that cannot be contained in words; their exchange creates attachments, acknowledges and affi rms the extent of a family; they are the cause of tears of sadness and joy. They can recall the dead. The opening citation from the retired Post Offi ce worker bears repeating: ‘I love to take things out of a cupboard and think back to the donor, relative or friend, many long gone’ (M1571). The circulation of gifts constitutes a domain of material culture that could certainly be characterized as emotional: the things given have bodily effects and affects, they produce feelings; they sustain relationships between people across families that do not see each other, negotiate the distance from nephews and nieces, keep attachments between the living and the dead. Both personhood and sociability, the social life that makes a person, are realized in this emotional domain of material culture. Here, the encroachments of the market are held at bay.

For Mauss, for Adorno, for others, the gift is the antithesis of the commodity. It is also this in practice as well as theory: gift exchanges continually dissent from commodity culture; giving is an everyday practice of opposition. The exchange of gifts has a more lasting affect than the commodity exchanges that provide the dominant paradigm of culture. They are the things to which we can become attached. For that we are grateful, both for the things and the way it makes us feel. Thus, the gift could be considered a hidden history of the commodity. The sheer quantity, never mind the signifi cance, of things sold and bought in order to be given might alert anyone who wanted to take up a dialectics of commodity culture that it is dependent upon the very thing that it has relegated to a secondary position. Paradoxically (or not), these things exert their power materially and intimately but less discursively and decisively than commodities. One way of thinking about the antithesis of commodity and gift is an object lesson in maintaining the hierarchy of market over home, capitalist culture over family life. Overcoming the diffi culties of shopping for an extended family every Christmas, as the lecturer does, in an effort to reaffi rm affectionate relationships and recognize, as far as possible, the particularities of persons, is fuel for commodity culture. We make many of our gifts from commodities. At its best, when the gift is just the right present for that person, the gift is an anti- capitalist form, a human thing. That people give and receive the very things they need every day, could be held up as routine victories over capitalism; the struggle to be a person is won through gift relationships with others. The ties that bind people together are strong. Attachment is the power of the gift. The gift is coercive; it forces inclusion across asymmetries and hierarchies of social life. Thus far, the domain of the gift, an emotional material culture, has been offered as a criticism of capitalism, but in conclusion I should say a few words of warning about the given objects of love.

## Conclusion

While there may be brief moments of equality within gift relationships, most gifting occurs in families where this is not often the case. Some family members, usually siblings, might be treated equally by being given goods that carry the same personal worth, but families are characterized by asymmetrical gift relationships. Aafke Komter has analysed the asymmetry of giving: females in families, particularly those in the role of the mother, participate in giving and receiving to a far greater extent than males, including fathers (1996, pp. 119–131). Women carry out the work of gifts and are rewarded for it: they give more and receive more, but not in equal amounts. The Mass Observation testimony bears this out. All female writers assumed responsibility for family gifting, giving on behalf of male family members for the family as a whole. Furthermore, whilst Mass Observation writers might attest to the love of gifts, an aspect of familial love is that it occurs in (or is even an affect of) the hierarchy of an older over a younger generation; parents over children. Imagine children showering parents with presents at Christmas. Children are not initially expected to reciprocate their gifts and when they do, the gift is not an equivalent. Indeed, failure to give in return or to return a less than equivalent gift is expected since acceptance of the position as a child, less than equal and dependent upon a parent, may be the gift’s desired effect (Godlier, 1999). Thus, gifts can arise from inequality and continually enforce it. An emotional material culture of the gift might dispel the market, but it does not banish hierarchy; it softens the effect of inequality, enables it to be tolerated, even embraced.

