# Some Musical Analogies Words move, music moves Only in time; but that which is only living Can only die. Words, after speech, reach Into the silence. Only by the form, the pattern, Can words or music reach The stillness, as a Chinese jar still Moves perpetually in its stillness. Not the stillness of the violin, while the note lasts, Not that only, but the co-existence, Or say that the end precedes the beginning, And the end and the beginning were always there Before the beginning, and after the end. And all is always now. T. S. Eliot, Four Quartets ## 1 The Claims of Music ‘All art,' said Walter Pater in a famous passage, constantly aspires to the condition of music.' The existence of music, an art devoid of ostensible subject matter, an art not even serving a physical need like architecture nor rivalling nature through mimesis, rarely failed to excite wonder and jealousy. For without these supports music appeared to achieve pre-eminence both in its power over the emotions and in its appeal to the intellect. A book devoted to the Sense of Order' could hardly leave this greatest ofits achievements out of consideration, but it cannot do it justice either. Music can only be discussed in musical terms. To explain to an outsider the purpose and beauty of a particular move in chess we would first have to initiate him into the rules and traditions of the game. Something like this also applies to the elucidation of tonal patterning in its developed form. Even a deaf person can see, when looking at printed music, that certain configurations recur in one form or another on the various lines of the score, but this would not give him much idea of the correspondence or difference between visual and tonal composition. The symbolism of musical notation does not reproduce these patterns except indirectly. The recurrent time intervals marked by bars are not printed at identical distances, nor are the distances between tones exactly reflected in the distance between notes—accidentals and other peculiarities of the system result in the fact that the same phrase often looks different when it starts with a different note. It would certainly be possible to devise an isomorphic notation-one in which like intervals look alike on paper—but this would not much help the tone-deaf, because it is precisely the point of the musical system as it evolved over the centuries that the sound of the notes also depends on context. I have therefore decided to do without musical examples. Even if I had the competence to discuss them (which I have not) the length of existing textbooks of musical theory would prove the futility of the exercise. My aims in this epilogue are much more modest. I must take it for granted that the art of tonal patterning has led to some of the most miraculous achievements of the human mind. Far from wanting to explain them I shall take them as given, and merely try to probe analogies and metaphors in other forms of patternmaking for their validity and limitations. ## 2 The Rivalry of the Arts Among all the arts music has long been acknowledged as being most firmly grounded on theory, on a knowledge of numbers which, translated into sound, would sway the passions as if by magic. In the Middle Ages music alone was conceded a place in the noble ranks of the Liberal Arts in the curriculum and even placed above the linguistic skills of grammar, logic and rhetoric, the Trivium; it belonged to the more advanced Quadrivium, since it is based, like Arithmetic, Geometry, and Astronomy, on the security of measurement. Music owed this position to the discovery of Pythagoras that the sensory qualities of sounds were related to mathematical ratios. The experience of consonance we sometimes have when we hear the tones produced by two plucked strings rests on their lengths being in simple proportions. Doubling the length of the string results in an octave, the proportion 2:3 in a fifth and so on in steady progression throughout the intervals of the diatonic scale. Rudolf Wittkower has shown to what extent this discovery of the mathematical nature of harmonv inspired the great architects of the Renaissance. They hoped that similar ratios in the dimension of rooms, for instance, would lead to similar psychological effects. The buildings which resulted were undoubtedly of great beauty, but the underlying theory could not survive scientific analysis. Once the 19th-century physicist Helmholtz had come up with an explanation of the experience of consonance in terms relating exclusively to the behaviour of sound waves, the analogy ceased to be persuasive. Briefly this explanation rests on the behaviour of a vibrating string creating the pattern of air impulses that reach the ear; doubling the length of the string results in a tone one octave lower, but does not otherwise interfere with the total pattern of wave motions—causing, we must assume, the feeling of identity in difference that characterizes the octave. Opinions differ about the validity of Helmholtz' approach in the case of more complex intervals and chords; but there is no physical analogue to acoustic effects in contemplating a room the shape of a double cube. The search for the causes of colour harmonies did not fare much better. It had naturally been stimulated by Newton's discovery that there really was an analogy between colour and tones, insofar as colour, like pitch, depended on wavelength. But quite apart from the fact that the compass of wavelengths experienced as light is of a different order of magnitude to that of sound waves, the reactions of the eye differ fundamentally from those of the ear. The eardrum vibrates sympathetically with the plucked string, the retina is a composite organ. The light energies impinging on its rods and cones cause short-lived chemical changes which result, in their turn, in electrical discharges reinforcing and impeding each other along the complex pathways which lead to the visual cortex. But though the comparison between sound-waves and light-waves proved fallacious this need not mean that there are no possible explanations of the experience of colour harmony in physiological terms. We know at least as much about the causes of contrasting afterimages or the nature ofprimary' colours as we know about the laws of acoustics relating to music. But being specific to the workings of the eye, this knowledge can no more fulfil the hope of those who aspire to create a colour music, than the knowledge of musical laws could alone guide Renaissance architects. Even so this hope dies hard. Attempts to build a colour piano may go back to the sixteenth-century Milanese painter Arcimboldo and were revived in the eighteenth century by the Jesuit P. Castel, on whose instruments the touch of a keyboard produced both tones and coloured ribbons—the primary colours corresponding to the triad. The author of a poem on Painting which celebrates Castel's invention also shows himself aware of the fact that Newton had not succeeded in explaining the relation between sound and light : he appeals to the greatest French scientist of the age to make good this omission (in vain, as it turned out) : Mais quel est ce rapport du son à la lumière? D'Alembert, c’est à toi d’expliquer ce mystère. When, a generation later, a Scottish scientist took up the idea of colour music, he characteristically left explanation on one side and concentrated on the effects he hoped to achieve. I am referring to Sir David Brewster, whose invention of the Kaleidoscope was discussed in Chapter VI. In the treatise about his new apparatus Sir David reveals himself as an early pioneer of what today is called ‘kinetic art'. ‘I venture to predict,' he writes, that combinations of forms and colours may be made to succeed each other in such a manner as to excite sentiments and ideas with as much vivacity as those which are excited by musical composition. If it be true that there are harmonic colours which inspire more pleasure by their combination than others; that dull and gloomy masses, moving slowly before the eye, excite feelings of sadness and distress: and that the aerial tracery of light and evanescent forms, enriched with lively colours, are capable of inspiring us with cheerfulness and gaiety, then it is unquestionable, that by a skilful combination of these passing visions, the mind may derive a degree of pleasure far superior to that which arises from the immediate impression which they make upon the organs of vision. A very simple piece of machinery is alone necessary for introducing objects of different forms and colours, for varying the direction of the motion across the angular aperture, and for accommodating the velocity of their motion to the effect which it is intended to produce . . .' We may note in passing that Brewster does not claim to have experienced these thrills, he only expects them to come about. A generation later we find a similar optimism in the writings of Ralph Wornum, one of the reformers of design, whom we remember for his eagerness to distinguish the laws of decoration from those of pictorial representation (Figs. 36, 38)— a tendency which led to his clash with Ruskin. It was in the same context that he wrote the forecast I have quoted that the theory of design would one day be as firmly grounded as that of music, expecting, presumably, that this achievement would also enhance the status and value of the art. Writing in the same year and in the same situation, Gottfried Semper went even further in this analogy between ornamental design and music though he also hinted at the reasons why it can never be perfect. ‘The articulation of the eurhythmic configuration must conform to certain tendencies of recurrence with cadences and caesuras, with stressed and unstressed elements, which in their concatenation give rise to the completed device. In this respect musical configurations, in other words melodies, are subject to the same laws as are the visual ones, except only that the ear is able to follow and to resolve a much more complex order than the eye, which has to take in the whole simultaneously in one moment. Reading these opinions one can only admire the confidence with which their authors slide over the most perplexing issue of aesthetics—the question of where metaphors end and solid analogies emerge. Brewster remained firmly wedded to metaphor in linking the emotional effect of colours with that of sound. Language amply confirms this linkage. Colours can be described as warm, sweet, loud or cheerful, much as sounds can be characterized as bright, soft, harsh or sad. Granted that critical terminology can never do without recourse to metaphor, is it sufficient for the foundation of a theory? This is what the eighteenth-century critic Wattelet implied when he wrote in comparing painting and music: But in a way he was begging the question. The existence of such common terms only proves the elasticity of the human mind, its ability to extend categories or to create fresh classes of experience, particularly at the point where the sense modalities converge. But such synaesthesia is an elusive and subjective reaction and cannot provide a firm foundation for the creation of new arts, whether non-objective painting or kinetic art. Are we on firmer ground with some of the other comparisons adduced by Wornum and Semper? Is the term rhythm, which the former uses, a mere metaphor when applied to spatial arrangements? Etymologically it certainly is. The term is connected with the Greek word rhein, to flow, and rhythm thus relates to the flux of time, or as Aristotle says, to any regular recurring motion. Unlike Wornum, Semper, it will be remembered, acknowledges this element of time in music by remarking that the eye has to deal with configurations simultaneously in one moment'while the ear perceives a succession of elements. Very likely Semper was prompted to make this remark by the memory, from his schooldays, of Lessing's Laocoon, which tried to erect an unsurmountable barrier between the arts of space and the arts of time. Following the lead of the English critic James Harris, Lessing opposed the comparison between poetry and painting on the grounds that the one unfolds in time while the other is intended to be perceived at a glance. If he were wholly right the comparison between repeated sounds and repeated shapes would indeed be illegitimate and all attempts to find points of contact between design and music would have to wait for the realization of Brewster's machine, when configurations could recur in time rather than in space. But we have seen in the preceding chapters that matters cannot be quite so simple. The fixating eye takes in only a relatively small area, and scanning a repeat design takes time. Where Lessing and those who followed him erred was in equating perception with sensation. They thought of the eye taking a snapshot and of the ear registering successive sounds like a gramophone record. But our perception can never be explained in terms of momentary stimuli. It is not the impression we receive at any particular moment in time which determines our experience, but its relation to our memory and our anticipation. Without these resources of our mind neither the arts of space nor those of time could ever have come into being. Even the perception of a regular row of dots depends on our ability to compare what we have just seen with what we are seeing at the moment and also with the continuation that we expect. There is a genuine analogy here with the perception of rhythmical sounds, since the idea of rhythm depends on the memory of a time interval, and our ability to hold this memory in anticipation of the next sound. This capacity of the human mind to defeat the flux of time and to perceive events which, strictly speaking, no longer exist, provoked St Augustine to some of his profoundest meditations on the nature of time. He realized that even in calling one syllable long and another short we are comparing sensations which have vanished. We are no doubt aided in this feat by what has been called the iconic or ‘echo memory', the continued presence of a sensation in our consciousness before it fades and is filed in the long-term memory store. If this were not the case we could not have a mental image of a movement, a signal or a word. In this respect Wornum and Semper were not quite wrong when they compared recurrent shapes with recurrent notes. Admittedly few experiences are more difficult to put into words than is our reaction to temporal patterns. Listening to a familiar piece of music we may feel or sense the next phrase appearing over the horizon as it were; we anticipate its shape and perhaps also its mood while still listening to the notes which strike our ears. It is impossible even to hint at these elusive matters without resorting to metaphors; we need not feel guilty about this, for without this device language could never be made sufficiently supple to describe what may be called the inner world. But metaphors have a way of solidifying and being too easily accepted by the memory as hard reality. And yet it may be worth while to take this risk and to scan the preceding chapters dealing with spatial orders for what they may offer by way of genuine analogies or at least ofhelpful metaphors which could illuminate the paragone of our own days, the continued aspiration of the visual arts, both static or kinetic, to rival the miracle of music. ## 3 Song and Dance Some of the common denominators between the sense of order in its spatial and its temporal manifestations were the subject of the Introduction, where examples were given of the inestimable advantage all organic life derives from the generation of such regularities. It is because we can create orders that we also recognize them and respond to deviations. The match or mismatch between these internal pulsations and external rhythms is reflected in our fluctuating attention, which ranges from automatic assimilation to heightened awareness. The way an impression can fuse with our ongoing rhythms is well illustrated by a catching' tune which keeps running in our head as a background to all we are doing and asks to be hummed, almost against our will. Such a compulsion suggests the metaphor of a chemical union—as if the moods and movements of the mind latched on to affinities in the fow of sensory experience. On the other end of the scale there are regularities and rhythms which the mind tries in vain to assimilate because they goagainst the grain'. What also emerged in the considerations of these effects of the sense of order is the crucial role of hierarchies in the achievement of conscious control. Laughing, sobbing, jumping with joy or stamping in anger are still close to primitive reflexes, but once these repetitious elements have been fitted into larger units which are repeatable in their turn, we approach the creation of patterns in space or in time; the craftsman's skill in the movements of plaiting, weaving or lacemaking can justly be compared with the movements of a dance in which the individual steps are grouped into complex figures to be repeated or varied at will. If proof were needed that there are solid grounds for this comparison it could be found in various country dances which are accompanied by pattern-making. In one of the English Morris dances the regular crossing of swords results in the formation of a star ofinterlocking blades, which is triumphantly held aloft at the end. In certain maypole dances each of the dancers holds the end of a coloured ribbon attached in the centre and their gyrations result in the weaving of an interlacing canopy, which the second movement of the dance disentangles and dissolves. But unlike the movements of the craftsman, those of the dancer are basically movements of response. We dance to music, and we could not do so unless we had the capacity to grasp and predict the rhythm of the piece much as dancing in pairs requires sensitivity to the intentions of the partner. I have stressed the importance of forward matching, the construction of internal models which govern our anticipations and also our surprises, by citing the movement of a horseback rider who learns to move in unison with his mount. Dancing embodies more complex hierarchies of movement, but fewer than does design, for the regularities of the dance are partly governed by the laws of nature and the capacities of the human body. Watching somebody jump we expect him to come down—after all he cannot stay up in the air—and the height of his jump will be limited by the strength of his muscles. To be sure the dance, like every art form, is likely to press against the limitations of nature. The skilful dancer will seem to defy nature's laws by feats of strength and balance which surpass our expectation and make us hold our breath. What distinguishes dancing from athletics here is precisely that the performance will fit into a rhythmical sequence building up to a climax or leading away to a point of relaxation. The repetition itself betokens control. There is nothing random, nothing fortuitous in the movement of the great dancer, we can return to watch him again performing his showpiece. Where this control is most needed is in the interaction of the dancers, the interweaving of configurations which must be well rehearsed and thoroughly mastered. In all this activity music still occupies a subsidiary though essential position. It serves as guidance and support. The units of movement, the steps, follow a sequence of articulated sounds, which are sometimes enhanced and regulated by the accompaniment of stamping, clapping or percussion. What is needed is noise rather than tones. It is not unreasonable to link the distillation of noise into tone with the capacities of the human voice, and specifically with the song. It was through its marriage with language, and specifically with poetry, that music achieved its sublimation. It is in language that man has learned to select a restricted number of sounds from the vast array of noises he can produce and to shape them into phonemes, the building blocks of articulate speech. This selectivity is of the utmost importance for any discussion of pattern-making in language and therefore in music. The child first enjoys unselective babbling, the rhythmical utterances of noise which are still close to organic rhythms in laughter or in play. But with this play there also appears the pleasure in increasing mastery, to which Freud in his analysis of verbal jokes attached such importance. Baby language still bears the traces of this mastery emerging from repetition in words such as papa, mama, gee-gee or tata. But here repetition no longer serves the pure pleasure principle. It facilitates and betokens control and intention, much as we found in the function of visual signals. Not that the adult ever forgets the pleasures of sheer phonetic play. The jingle, the nonsense syllables, the ‘hey and a ho and a hey nonino' of Shakespearean songs, are the equivalent in language of the flourish in ornament and in dance. There is a natural transition here to the chant' with its tendency to rhythmical repetition as an expression of emphasis and emotion—we need think of nothing more solemn here than the ritualistic chorus for he's a jolly good fellow'which sounds quite natural, though it looks odd enough in cold print, particularly if the repetitions are lined up and counted as follows: For he's a jolly good fellow (1), for he's a jolly good fellow (2), for he's a jolly good fellow (3), and so say all of us (1), and so say all of us (2), and so say all of us (3), for he's a jolly good fellow (4) and so say all of us (4). The repeat pattern, the rhythm and the tune of this homely chant may stand for many others. The melody goes up after (3) with an ascending flourish over fe-el-low and descends to the initial baselines for the confirmation of universal assent. Humming any familiar old tune the reader is likely to recognize the same basic grouping of twice four phrases making for an ‘eight bar period'. Nursery songs like ‘Baa, baa, blacksheep'. Christmas carols like ‘Good King Wenceslas', patriotic ditties like ‘Yankee doodle' and marching songs like John Brown's body' all conform to this basic structure and so do many more sophisticated songs in strophic form. ## 4 Nature and Artifice Where music thus remains wedded to speech and speech-rhythms its freedom is limited to the kind of flourish I have mentioned, which can be carried by a word or syllable without impairing intelligibility. Even so there are the seeds of a conflict here which pervades the whole history of music—which is to be the master? The words or the music? The meaning or the form? The tensions can be productive of much artistic ingenuity, but they also led to violent debates, particularly when they were linked with the perennial issue of ‘nature' versus ‘artifice', which recurs in the criticism of all the arts. We have encountered in Chapter I such attacks on the excesses of decoration, on the display of virtuosity in ornament and design. It will be remembered that this debate had its analogue in rhetoric, where the playfulness and bombast of Asiatic oratory were contasted with the virtues of plain speaking. Music became particularly vulnerable to the charge when polyphony became a domain of the theorists in the later Middle Ages. As in the case of ornament the excessive intricacy which resulted was attacked on the authority of classical aesthetics. The Florentine ‘reform movement' which led to the evolution of opera in the late sixteenth century is a case in point. Accepting the ancient accounts of the power of music over the emotions at their face value, Vincenzo Galilei in his Dialogo della Musica Antica e della Moderna, 1581, enquires why such effects can no longer be observed and blames polyphony for this decline. He rounds on the abuses and impertinences' of the contrapuntisti, who by their ambition for novelty and their mindless artifice have corrupted the purity of song. Unjust and uncomprehending as his strictures are, we owe to the cause he championed the operatic aria, which, in its turn, was translated into instrumental music by the eighteenth-century symphonists. Notoriously it was opera, by that time, which seemed ripe for a reform according to classical ideals. Gluck's famous manifesto contained in the Preface to his Alceste (1769) echoes the principles we encountered in the Neo-classical opponents of Rococo decoration: I. . . thought that my chief endeavour should be to attain a grand simplicity, and consequently I have avoided making a parade of difficulties at the cost of clarity. Needless to say, attacks on intricacy and artifice pervade all the arts and mores of the eighteenth century, whether we think of the new epistolary style or of Wordsworth's hostility to poetic diction. But just as we noticed in discussing the eighteenth-century reaction against ornament that it stopped far short of a functional style, so the plea for naturalness did not aim at abolishing decorum, let alone art itself, either in poetry or in music. It took a long time for the pendulum to swing so far the other way. It will be remembered how these tensions between discipline and ‘nature' expressed themselves in the writings of Victorian critics, notably in those of Ruskin. The contrast on which he insisted between mechanical perfection and spontaneous expression certainly has its genuine analogy in musical criticism. Nor need we immediately resort to metaphor in applying to music the issues discussed in Chapter III, The Challenge of Constraints. The pleasure in courting admiration by pressing against the limits inherent in the materials, the instruments and even human endurance is common to artistry in all the arts. The virtuosity of the craftsman is here matched by that of the word-smith or the composer. In his classic European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages Ernst Robert Curtius gives examples of this kind of tour de force in Western poetry—no more appealing to modern taste than Grinling Gibbons' lace cravat carved out of wood (Plate 16). Thus a Greek poet of the sixth century B.C. is said to have written poems in which no s' appeared, a piece of virtuosity overtopped in late antiquity by a version of the Iliad in each book of which one letter of the alphabet did not occur. Maybe the game was not worth the candle, but both decorative art and poetry know of examples where such obedience to self-imposed rules blossomed into real mastery—it was Nietzsche who spoke of poetry as a dance in chains. Where the challenge of the medium appears to be unique in music, is in the limitations of its elements. Music, after all, does not consist of noise or even sounds, it rests on the few tones of the scale and its modifications; whether we think of the twelve tones of an octave in Western music or even of the seven octaves which make up the average compass of the keyboard, their number seems small when compared to the range of elements available to the designer, but the number of combinations is a different matter. There exists a form of tonal pattern-making somewhat distinct from music, but instructive as a point of comparison: I refer to the practice of ringing the changes'. In this tradition a series of between five and twelve church bells, tuned to the notes of the major scale, are pealed in succession according to the rules of permutation. I take the example described in Grove's Dictionary of Music as the ‘elemental basis upon which the science of change-ringing is founded': $$
\begin{array} { c c } \begin{array} { c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c } { { \texttt { I } } } & { 2 } & { 3 } & { 4 } & { 5 } & { } & { } & { 5 } & { 4 } & { 3 } & { 2 } & { \mathbb { I } } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } \\ { 2 } & { \texttt { I } } & { 4 } & { 3 } & { 5 } & { } & { } & { } & { 5 } & { 3 } & { 4 } & { \mathbb { I } } & { 2 } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } \\ { 2 } & { 4 } & { \texttt { I } } & { 5 } & { 3 } & { } & { } & { } & { 3 } & { 5 } & { \texttt { I } } & { 4 } & { 2 } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } \\ { 4 } & { 2 } & { 5 } & { \texttt { I } } & { 3 } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { 3 } & { \texttt { I } } & { 5 } & { 2 } & { } & { 4 } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } \\ { 4 } & { 5 } & { 2 } & { 3 } & { \texttt { I } } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } & { } \\ { 4 } & { 5 } & { 2 } & { 3 } & { \texttt { I } } & { } & { } \end{array} \end{array}
$$ The figure I can be seen to advance or hunt up' in the first series and to recede again (or course down) in the second. I also learn from the same entry that the number of changes possible on twelve bells is 479,001,600. Change-ringing is a somewhat extreme example ofthat enjoyment of permutations which links all the arts with elementary play, combining as it does the pleasures of variety with the pride in ingenuity and control. Both these elements are given scope in Mozart's musical dice game, in which the motifs can be shufled at random, resulting every time in an acceptable composition. A poetic analogy may be found in the story of the Moghul ruler Babur amusing himself during an illness by writing a couplet in his native Turki and then reorganizing it in five hundred and four different ways. We have seen that the opportunities of displaying similar prowess attracted designers in the 19th and 2oth centuries who produced varied sequences of serial designs (Figs. 90, 91). There is more than a loose analogy here with the musical form of variations on a theme, where we find all the resources of the medium exploited—speed, rhythm, volume, pitch, timbre, taken singly or in combination and surprising us by the exponential growth of possibilities, which far outstrips the dimensions of colour and scale in design. But just as in pattern-making we encountered the operation of stringent geometrical laws, allowing the craftsman, for instance, to cover a floor with equal triangles, squares or hexagons (Fig. 7o), but not with pentagons, so there are only a limited number of tones which can be sounded simultaneously without producing a discord. Ultimately, however, these comparisons are more telling for the differences they reveal than for their similarity. For while the geometrical grid itself is a design—albeit an elementary one—the sequence of tones or consonances itself is not a composition. The story was told in 19th-century Vienna of a foreign potentate who said that what he enjoyed most at the opera was the sound of the orchestra before the overture, in other words the tuning. Most of us expect the musical piece to be more selective. We may call it a second-order pattern, an order superimposed on the ordered sounds, much as the Islamic or Peruvian designer may change and vary the geometrical motifs with which he operates (Col. Plates IV, V). It is the interaction of the second (or third) order with the given tonal structure which leads to effects so varied that one might think of the moiré pattern as a comparison (Fig. 108), only to reject it because these fluctuating configurations are not easily predicted and controlled. It is more appropriate here to remember the feat of counterchange (Figs. 99-105), the skilful contrivance of figures which are identical with the shapes left void as ground between them. The simplest forms are chequerboard or key-patterns, which may perhaps be loosely compared to canons or ‘rounds', but the lure of complexity drove both designers and musicians to invent more subtle interlocking motifs. There is a mosaic from Cairo (Fig. 3 50) which may be said to transcend mere ingenuity. It shows the letters for Allah' arranged in such a way that they appear both as figure and ground, as if to proclaim that God is everywhere. There is a touch of sublimity here which may remind us of one of the mighty canons by a master of church music.