# List of contributors

Elisenda Ardèvol is Associate Professor in Social Anthropology at the Department of Arts and Humanities at the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya and director of mediaccions Digital Culture Research Group at the Internet Interdisciplinary Institute in Barcelona. She participates in different Master and PhD programmes in media, digital and visual anthropology and has been Visiting Scholar at the Visual Anthropology Centre of the University of Southern California and EU Centre Visiting Fellow at the Digital Ethnography Centre at RMIT University, Melbourne. She is also an active member of international research networks such as the Media Anthropology Network and the Future Anthropology Network of the EASA (European Association of Social Anthropologists) and the Section of Digital Culture and Communication ECREA (European Communication Research and Education Association). Her main research lines are related to digital culture, visuality and media in everyday life. Currently, she is exploring design, creativity and collaborative practices in digital technologies. Her publications include ‘Digital Ethnography and Media Practices’ in Darling Wolf, Research Methods in Media Studies (2014); ‘Virtual/Visual Ethnography: Methodological Crossroads at the Intersection of Visual and Internet Research’ in Pink, Advances in Visual Methodology (2012); ‘Playful Practices: Theorising New Media Cultural Production’ in Brauchler and Postill, Theorising Media and Practice (2010); editor of Researching Media through Practices (2009) and the books (in Spanish) Key Debates (2014); A Gaze’s Quest (2006) and Representation and Audiovisual Culture in Contemporary Societies (2004).

Tracy Bhamra is Pro Vice Chancellor (Enterprise) and Professor of Sustainable Design at Loughborough University, until 2015 she was Dean of Loughborough Design School. In 2003 she established the Sustainable Design Research Group at Loughborough University that undertakes world-leading research in areas such as Design for Sustainable Behaviour, Methods and Tools for Sustainable Design and Sustainable Design Education. Tracy has over 150 publications associated with her research including the coauthored book Design for Sustainability: A Practical Approach (2007). She has been awarded over £2.5m of research funding from the UK government and research councils and a number of large industrial organizations. Her recent research is focused on approaches to enable designers to integrate sustain- ability into their work, how to move towards designing sustainable services rather than products, and also understanding how design can be used to create more sustainable user behaviour.

David Carlin is a writer, Associate Professor and Co-Director of the nonfictionLab Research Group in the School of Media and Communication at RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia. He led the interdisciplinary Circus $\bigcirc z$ Living Archive research project, and co-edited (with Laurene Vaughan) the book Performing Digital: Multiple Perspectives on a Living Archive (Ashgate, 2015). He conceived and curated (with Paper Giant) the mixed media exhibition, Vault: the Nonstop Performing History of Circus $O z ,$ commissioned by the 2014 Melbourne Festival. David’s narrative nonfiction investigates questions of cultural memory, identity, narration and uncertainty; his books include the memoir/biography The Abyssinian Contortionist (UWAP, 2015) and the memoir Our Father Who Wasn’t There (Scribe, 2010), and his creative essays and articles have appeared in Griffith Review, Overland, TEXT, Newswrite, Victorian Writer, Continuum and other journals. His research interests extend across memory studies and nonfiction creative practices from the essay and memoir genres to digital media and archives. He has directed Circus Oz on New York’s 42nd St, and has written and directed award-winning films, documentaries and plays. David is co-director of RMIT’s WrICE (Writers Immersion and Cultural Exchange) research program and a co-chair of the international NonfictioNOW Conference.

Paul Dourish is a Professor of Informatics in the Donald Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences at UC Irvine, California, with courtesy appointments in Computer Science and Anthropology, and co-directs the Intel Science and Technology Center for Social Computing. His research focuses primarily on understanding information technology as a site of social and cultural production; his work combines topics in human–computer interaction, ubiquitous computing, and science and technology studies. He has published over 100 scholarly articles, and was elected to the CHI Academy in 2008 in recognition of his contributions to human–computer interaction. He is the author of two books: Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction (MIT Press, 2001), which explores how phenomenological accounts of action can provide an alternative to traditional cognitive analysis for understanding the embodied experience of interactive and computational systems; and, with Genevieve Bell, Divining a Digital Future: Mess and Mythology in Ubiquitous Computing (MIT Press, 2011), which examines the social and cultural aspects of the ubiquitous computing research program. Before his arrival at UCI, he was a Senior Member of Research Staff in the

Computer Science Laboratory of Xerox PARC; he has also held research positions at Apple Computer and at Rank Xerox EuroPARC. He holds a PhD in Computer Science from University College, London, and a BSc (Hons) in Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science from the University of Edinburgh.

Jaume Ferrer is Lecturer at the School of Art and Design EDRA and also teaches Interaction Design and Mixed Reality at the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya. Graduated in Fine Arts at the University of Barcelona, he has recently finished his PhD in the International Interdisciplinary Program in Knowledge and Information Society at the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya. He has worked for several years as an illustrator and visual artist and explored net.art as co-founder with David Gomez of the Intangibles Workshop (TAG), carrying out several artistic interventions, workshops and creative projects focused on arts network. He has also collaborated with the Experimentation on Interactive Communication Research Group (CIS) of the Audiovisual Institute of Pompeu Fabra University. He is interested in ethnography as a tool to understand the social construction of technology and as a means of creating the technology itself. He considers himself a ‘maker’ and situates his current activity at the intersection of arts, interactive digital technology and the social sciences.

Heather Horst is Director, Research Partnerships in the College of Design and Social Context and a Founding Director of the Digital Ethnography Research Centre at RMIT University, Australia. Her research focuses upon understanding how digital media, technology and other forms of material culture mediate relationships, communication, learning, mobility and our sense of being human. Her books examining these themes include The Cell Phone: An Anthropology of Communication (Horst and Miller, Berg, 2006), Hanging Out, Messing Around and Geeking Out: Kids Living and Learning with Digital Media (Ito, et al. 2010, MIT Press), Digital Anthropology (Horst and Miller, Eds., 2012, Berg) and Digital Ethnography: Principles and Practice (Pink, Horst, et al. 2016, Sage). Heather’s current research, supported by the Australian Research Council and an EU Horizon 20/20 grant, explores transformations in the telecommunications industry and the emergence of new mobile media practices across the Asia-Pacific region.

Débora Lanzeni is a PhD candidate in the Knowledge and Information Society Programme at the IN3 (Internet Interdisciplinary Institute) at the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya. Her training has been in anthropology and filmmaking and incorporates visual and digital anthropology. Her research focuses upon understanding how digital technology and its processes of creation, imagination and production are being made in the context of Urban Labs. She is currently focusing on developments at interface of Smart City and Internet of Things, the study of materiality and moral order.

Kerstin Leder Mackley is a Research Associate at the Loughborough Design School, UK, where she currently explores futures of domestic hot water consumption on the interdisciplinary HotHouse project. HotHouse draws on ethnographic research developed during LEEDR (Low Effort Energy Demand Reduction, 2010–14). Kerstin has a background in qualitative audience research from a broad media and cultural studies perspective. Her research interests include domestic energy consumption, material culture, interdisciplinary methodologies, and the wider study of media and emerging technologies in everyday life. She has published in a variety of journals, including Media, Culture and Society, TOCHI, Participations, and Sociological Research Online.

Ian McShane is a Senior Research Fellow at RMIT University’s Centre for Urban Research. His research focuses on informal and formal education systems (especially museums, libraries and schools), local infrastructure and community services, and digital technologies. Current research projects are on shared use community infrastructure and service coordination, the development of publicly accessible wireless networks in Australia and internationally, and the representational politics of cultural diversity in Australian museums. Ian has had a long involvement with the Australian museum sector, working as a senior curator at the National Museum of Australia and consulting to other levels of government on museums and culture. In 2013 Ian was appointed to UNESCO’s Creative Cities Network external evaluation panel.

Denise Meredyth has worked for some time on projects that explore links between political aspiration and the difficulties of decision-making on civic infrastructure, choice and civic capacity. She has explored this theme in relation to public education, libraries and museums, communications, local planning and community policing. Her most recent work has focused on youth media and social enterprise, on community uses of the digital and physical resources of schools and on digital literacy and information poverty. She has recently moved from positions at RMIT and the Australian Research Council to the role of Pro Vice Chancellor, Division of Education, Arts and Social Sciences at the University of South Australia.

Mike Michael is a sociologist of science and technology, and Professor of Sociology and Social Policy at the University of Sydney, Australia. His research interests include the relation of everyday life to technoscience, biotechnological and biomedical innovation and culture, and process methodology. Current research projects include the interdisciplinary use of sociological and speculative design techniques to explore energy demand reduction. Among his most recent publications are (with Marsha Rosengarten) the co-authored volume Innovation and Biomedicine: Ethics, Evidence and Expectation in HIV (Palgrave, 2013), and (with Jennifer Gabrys and Gay Hawkins) the co-edited volume Accumulation: The Material Politics of Plastic (Routledge, 2013).

Val Mitchell is Lecturer in the Design School at Loughborough University, UK. Val has over fifteen years’ multidisciplinary research experience specializing in the development of User Centred Design (UCD) methodologies for eliciting user requirements for future technologies and services, in particular understanding user needs and requirements for mobile communication and other interactive products. She is particularly interested in the communication of user needs and requirements to designers using scenarios and personas and the design of creative Participatory Design and Co-design methods for eliciting needs from users. Current research interests focus on the use of ICT to promote sustainability within both the transport and domestic sectors. She was the lead human factors researcher in the Services Aggregation Trials for the DTI under The Application Homes Initiative (TAHI). She is currently a senior researcher on the EPSRC/E.On-funded CALEBRE project which is investigating user behaviours and comfort relating to the implementation of energy-saving technologies within the home. She is also a senior researcher on the EPSRC/DoT/TSB-funded User Innovation project which is investigating how user-driven innovation can be used to inform the design of sustainable transport and travel products and services. She is Co I on the EPSRC LEEDR project which is seeking to reduce energy demand in homes through the innovative application of ICT.

Dr Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller directs the Exertion Games Lab at RMIT, Melbourne, Australia. Floyd’s research has spanned four continents, including research posts at the University of Melbourne (Australia), MIT Media Lab (USA), Media Lab Europe (Ireland), Fuji-Xerox Palo Alto Laboratories (USA) and Xerox PARC (USA). Floyd was also leading a team of twelve researchers at the Commonwealth and Scientific Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) on the future of ‘Connecting People’. He has been a Fulbright Visiting Scholar at Stanford University (USA). Floyd has also been a Microsoft Research Asia Fellow and has worked at Microsoft Beijing (China) with the research teams developing Xbox’s Kinect. Floyd’s research work was presented at the top conferences in the field of interaction design and computer games, including several best paper nominations. Floyd’s Exertion Games work has been shortlisted for the European Innovation Games Award (next to Nintendo’s Wii Fit), received honorary mentions from the Nokia Ubimedia Award, was commissioned by Wired’s Nextfest, exhibited worldwide and attracted substantial international research funding, including numerous grants from the US, Australian, UK and German governments. His team’s Exertion Games were played by over 20,000 players across three continents and were featured on the BBC, ABC, Discovery Science Channel and Wired magazine.

Narcís Parés is Tenure Associate Professor of the ICT Department of Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona. He has a PhD in Audiovisual Communication, specializing in Virtual Reality (UPF), MSc in Image Processing and Artificial Intelligence (UAB) and BSc in Computer Engineering (UPC). He is co-creator and coordinator of the Master in Cognitive Systems and Interactive Media (UPF). He has an interest in the possibilities of full-body interaction based on current embodied cognition theories in areas such as learning, play and special needs. This research is undertaken from an interdisciplinary standpoint including interaction design and interactive communication, focusing attention mainly on interaction for children and using non-invasive technologies. He is member of the Steering Committee of the ACM SIGCHI and IFIP International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, member of the IFIP TC13 – Human–Computer Interaction, WG 13.9 – Interaction Design and Children, and member of the Editorial Board of the International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction, Elsevier.

Sarah Pink is Director of the Digital Ethnography Research Centre, and Professor of Design and Media Ethnography at RMIT University, Australia, Visiting Professor in Applied Social and Cultural Analysis at Halmstad University, Sweden, Visiting Professor in Social Sciences across the Design and Civil and Building Engineering Schools at Loughborough University, UK and Guest Professor at the Free University, Berlin. Her work is usually interdisciplinary and international and brings academic scholarship to applied research problems. Her projects connect anthropological ethnography to design, engineering, documentary and arts practice. Her current focus is on the relationship between design, ethnography and futures research, working through projects that challenge conventional ethnographic temporalities. Sarah’s recent books include the co-authored Digital Ethnography: Principles and Practice (2016) and her single-authored books Doing Sensory Ethnography (2nd edn, 2015), Doing Visual Ethnography (3rd edn, 2013) and Situating Everyday Life (2012).

Yolande Strengers is a Vice Chancellor’s Research Fellow in the Centre for Urban Research, School of Global Urban and Social Studies at RMIT

University, Melbourne, Australia, where she co-leads the Beyond Behaviour Change research program (http://www.rmit.edu.au/cfd/beyondbehaviour). Yolande’s research is currently clustered around a series of applied projects which draw on theories of social practice to understand the dynamics of social and environmental change, and possibilities for intervening in the trajectories of practices. Theories of materiality and technological change are a key feature of her research across a number of sustainability domains including energy demand, water consumption, waste management, air travel and telecommunications.

Chris K. Wilson is a Research Fellow at RMIT University’s Centre for Urban Research and an Associate Member of the RMIT Centre for Communication, Politics and Culture. His expertise is in examining the historical and contemporary nature of communication infrastructure provision, its underlying social, technological, economic and governmental determinants, and downstream impact on cultural production and innovation. In 2015 he completed the doctoral project Frequently Modulating: Australian radio’s relationship with youth. He is currently engaged in two substantial programs of research: Public Wi-Fi as Urban Infrastructure examines the development of publicly accessible wireless networks in Australia and internationally; Governing for Innovation examines the impact that the liberalisation of access to radio broadcast spectrum in Australia in the 1990s had on local cultural innovation within and beyond broadcasting.

Dr Garrath T. Wilson is a Lecturer in Industrial Design and is part of the Sustainable Design Research Group at Loughborough Design School, UK. His research interests include the psychology of energy consumption and behaviour change strategies; the ethics and design considerations of behavioural interventions; design for sustainable and resilient futures; and more recently, emotionally durable design and product-service systems. Drawing upon an industrial design consultancy background, design has always been central to Garrath’s research approach, generating design concepts and physical prototypes as speculative and disruptive probes or as behavioural change agents. Garrath has written and talked internationally on the topic of Design for Sustainable Behaviour and is enthusiastic about both industry and public engagement.