# Digital materiality Sarah Pink, Elisenda Ardèvol and Débora Lanzeni

D<sup>igital</sup> <sup>Materialities:</sup> <sup>design</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>anthropology</sup> <sup>is</sup> <sup>a</sup> <sup>book</sup> <sup>about</sup> <sup>research/</sup> knowing, making/doing and intervention/designing in a world where the digital and the material are not separate but entangled elements of the same processes, activities and intentionalities. This is also a world that is shared by researchers, makers and designers – that is, by those of us who seek to learn about other people’s experiences of the world and make new ways of knowing about them; by those of us who are everyday makers – all of us, that is, who make the world as we go along and as we inhabit it; and by those of us who intentionally intervene in the world to try to make change happen in particular ways, or, put differently, to make making go in a particular direction. Sometimes those three sets of activities are part of the life and work of just one person, sometimes they are more dispersed across groups of people. Whatever the case – and we will see different variations across the chapters that follow in this book – we are interested in unpacking how they are co-implicated in processes and activities which involve what we will here call digital materiality. Collectively the contributors to this volume explore how this is happening, through interrogations of digital materialities in progress, as they grow, are made, and are activated for specific purposes.

This book is for social, cultural and technological researchers, designers, and anyone who is interested in the implications of how digital–material configurations or entanglements are emerging as part of the world that we share. It refers to, draws on and advances discussions relevant to the ways that scholars and practitioners from anthropology, design, human geography, media studies, sociology and other cognate disciplines and interdisciplinary fields are seeking to engage with change and future-making processes in environments where the digital–material is part of everyday life. Digital Materialities is written in the context of and in a spirit of commentary on an environment for academic scholarship where the increasing need for researchers to do work that has impact in the world is coupled with a growing engagement of designers with the social sciences and humanities. It presents a series of examples of how these intersections have been navigated by the contributors to this book. However, it also engages with this context, and drives towards impact, applied, public and engaged scholarship and design, at a moment where it is becoming impossible to ignore the ways in which digital media, infrastructures, technologies and content are part of our working and living environments. This, together with the demand for us to engage with the digital – as part of the materiality of the world – creates a powerful need for new understandings of the implications and outcomes of our critical research, making and interventions.

In this first chapter we open up this field of research, making and intervention to scrutiny. We also outline how the contributors to this book advance the discussion and definition and point to where we think its future lies. This book was inspired by our shared interest in what we are calling the digital materiality of the worlds we inhabit. Through our respective research agendas that sought to understand different elements of digital ‘cultures’ such as the free culture movement, smart city visions and digital design interventions for homes, we each began to understand practical everyday processes as involving the entanglement of the digital and material. Each of our research agendas in common focused on people who were engaged in processes and activities that sought to make change in the world – whether as ways of living out and improvising in their everyday lives at home or at work, as activists, as makers, or as designers deliberately making interventions to disrupt what was already happening. Our work, we realized, involved witnessing digital materiality in the making.

Contributors to existing literatures and practice have begun to work through the digital–material in a range of different ways, and from different disciplinary and practical perspectives. We discuss the advances they have made below. Here we take up this discussion to bring together digital, design and anthropological scholarship and practice and to argue that it can offer a convincing agenda through which to research and intervene in a digital material world. It is this capacity that we believe is needed for an engaged, applied or design anthropology to be able to flourish in a world where digital–material configurations are an almost inevitable element of everyday life experiences, activities and environments. The contributors to this book are precisely working at this intersection and are therefore through their own theory and practice driving towards such an agenda. Here we initiate the task of mapping out this field of interdisciplinary theory and practice, which puts digital materiality at the centre. Yet, as a disclaimer, as for any field of study or emphasis, we do not mean digital materiality in isolation, or digital materiality as the only way to look at the world. But rather we examine and show the benefits of using it as a prism through which to engage (with) wider ecologies of ideas and practices in research, design and intervention.

In this chapter we first focus in on the foundations of this approach as they have developed in the subdisciplines of design anthropology and digital anthropology and through the relationship that both might have with the older tradition of the study of human–computer interaction (HCI). Critically evaluating the trajectories of these subdisciplines, where they have focused, where they have touched on each other, and, perhaps more significantly, where they have not, we propose a formulation of digital materiality that brings together some of their key interests in the digital and material on the one hand, and in ethnography and design on the other. We argue for an approach that evades existing tendencies to both separate the digital and material as things that can then be united and to debate the relationship between anthropology and design in terms of what each discipline can extract from the relationship. It should not be a matter of using design to do better anthropology or vice versa, or a matter of understanding the digital as material, or the material in relation to how it has become digital. Instead we argue for understandings of all these rather different levels of concept and process as relational elements of a possible digital material design anthropology. To do this we explore three key themes that have emerged from our own thinking and which unite the chapters in this book: mess, engaged practice, and methodologies for knowing and intervening.

We finally suggest how the chapters of this book, which we argue are part of an embryonic version of what could be a wider commitment to the digital– material as it emerges in digital design anthropology practice, demonstrate how such an agenda might play out. This book therefore does not claim to be a resolution of this field, but a starting point or an opening out – and it is to this we turn our attention in the next section.

## Opening out: Design anthropology, HCI and digital anthropology

One of the inspirations for this book was the perception that there is a gap created and left open by recent advances in the fields of digital and design anthropology. This is not a gap that can simply be filled by a new book. Rather it is a space that calls for further exploration, further opening and ways of engaging with the questions that it poses. Putting it another way, this book has two close relatives: Digital Anthropology (Horst and Miller 2012) and Design Anthropology (Gunn, Otto and Smith 2013).

These two books respectively begin to map out a field where anthropology intersects with the digital, and with design, yet in both volumes the digital and design largely (with some notable exceptions discussed below) remain separately theorized and part of two distinct worlds of scholarship or subdisciplines. This is ironic given how, in Design Anthropology, Ton Otto and Rachel Charlotte Smith (2012: 5–6) acknowledge the origins of design anthropology that lie in human–computer interaction (HCI) research, through approaches spearheaded by Lucy Suchman and others in the 1980s (2013: 5–6). We do not recount this history as it is more than adequately documented and discussed elsewhere – not least by Adam Drazin’s excellent account in his chapter in Digital Anthropology (Drazin 2012) and by Otto and Smith, who also note the critical perspectives that emerged from this field (2013: 7), in relation to the need for design and anthropology to work in such fields on an equal footing, and towards collaborative models.

Drazin (2012) charts a trajectory of entanglement between anthropology, digital media and design, beginning with the emergence of HCI research in the previous century. His account brings to the fore a history of applied design anthropology that has been little accounted for in the emergence of media anthropology (e.g. Ginsburg et al. 2002; Brauchler and Postill 2010), although it has had a higher profile in applied anthropology literatures (e.g. Pink 2005, 2007). Drazin emphasizes the multi-dimensionality of relationships between anthropological scholarship, applied and design research, collaborations with industry, and with research/design participants and digital media – as HCI research and design flourished over the last forty or so years. As he argues, it is important to understand this relationship as being beyond the idea that anthropology might inform design. Instead he maps out a set of future questions which would set out to ask not what anthropology could do for digital design, but ‘what can this engagement do for us as anthropologists in the work of producing socio-cultural interpretations, and how has design anthropology work operated within the political field of digital technologies?’ through a focus on ‘digital knowledge artefacts’ (2012: 260). Indeed, as we see in particular in Lanzeni’s chapter (this volume), digital working provides distinctive perspectives for design anthropology, one of which is the need to resituate the ‘user’ or the ‘consumer’ as a responsible citizen and craftsperson.

Drazin’s analysis represents one strand in the history of the relationship between the digital, anthropology and design, and points to a future where digital design anthropologists have a role to navigate that politicizes design and works through an anthropological agenda. He invites anthropologists to make gains from this context for the discipline. In the context of discipline building, which involves for anthropology what Strathern has called a ‘community of critics’ (2006: 204), this is a valid exercise and we would not disagree with Drazin’s call in the sense that all disciplines need to continue to work on themselves in this way. Yet in the context of working on the relationship between anthropology and design there are also other ways to bring together design and anthropology/ethnography, for instance through approaches to design that vary from those of traditional HCI, and also vary from (and are sometimes critical of) traditional anthropology (see Pink and Akama 2015). In this sense, it would be problematic to see the history of the relationship between HCI and design anthropology as the only possible way in which a relationship between digital anthropology and design might evolve and emerge. Indeed, one of the tasks of this book is to take up such possibilities by exploring this through examples of recent practice – such as in Chapters 5 to 7 of this volume by Pink et al., Michael, and Ferrer, Ardèvol and Parés respectively.

## Design anthropology and digital media in everyday life

The connections made between digital media and design anthropology in Gunn et al.’s (2013) Design Anthropology are also different to those guided by the trajectory of HCI discussed above. For example, Smith makes a move towards digital design anthropology in her chapter discussion of ‘Designing Heritage for a Digital Culture’ (2013: 117). There she points out that ‘If museums and cultural heritage institutions wish to engage audiences in new ways using the opportunities digital media and technologies afford, they need to look more carefully at how these media provide meaning to people through their everyday lives’ (2013: 132). Christina Wasson and Crysta Metcalfe likewise bring media in everyday life to the fore when they discuss a collaboration between the Motorola company and a design anthropology class in a university. Here the research focus was on everyday uses of media technologies in kitchens (Wasson and Metcalfe 2013). These two chapters discuss digital design anthropology projects to demonstrate very well how anthropological and design practice can be brought together to do design anthropology in ways that have significant implications for our understanding of digital technologies. In several ways they suggest that new relationships between design, digital media and anthropology are developing along lines that have some things in common with the third HCI paradigm (see also Pink et al. 2013) but that are not necessarily simply emergent from it.

However, simultaneously for us, as anthropologists whose work is engaged with questions about digital media in everyday life, there is also an opportunity to connect the work of scholars operating at the interface between anthropology, digital media and design, such as Smith (2013) and Wasson and Metcalfe (2013), to the large body of literature about digital media in everyday life. There has been a recent explosion of work which creates a convergence point between anthropology and media studies. In part this encompasses or includes digital anthropology (e.g. Horst and Miller 2012) as well as the wider field of media anthropology where media studies and anthropology converse (e.g. Braucher and Postill 2010; Moores 2012; Pink et al. 2016). One of the next steps then, we argue, is for a media anthropology of digital technologies in everyday life to be brought together more closely with design anthropology. In this volume, some chapters work specifically towards this by taking a more media/digital anthropology approach to everyday activity (Pink et al., Ferrer et al., Horst), while other chapters do something similar by engaging other approaches, such as sociology or science and technology studies (STS), for the study of the everyday with design (e.g. Michaels, Strengers). As we argue in this book, a bringing together of design and digital ethnographies of everyday life needs precisely to engage not only with meanings of digital media in the world, but with the digital materiality of both everyday life and design objects, activities and processes.

Indeed in many ways this attention to the detail of everyday life is distinctively anthropological – or at least ethnographic. For Miller and Horst (2012), the ethnographic examples offered by their contributors and collaborators are instances of what a focus on the everyday ways in which digital media are shaped as they become part of people’s lives can tell us. Through the examples of migrant domestic workers (Madianou and Miller 2013) and disability activists (Ginsburg 2012), they point out that the users of digital technologies are not necessarily always those for whom they were designed, showing how we need to attend to use as emergent (Miller and Horst 2012: 9–10). This point is equally relevant for a digital design anthropology, and is advanced throughout the chapters of this book, from Strenger’s critique of the ways in which the everyday of this kind is ignored in utopian smart home visions, through McShane et al.’s account of the development of a community wi-fi system, to Horst’s ethnographies of everyday uses of mobile phones.

## Going beyond: Surpassing the digital/ material dichotomy

As we have insisted above, the digital and material should not be thought of as two separate things that already independently existed in the world and have now become entangled. However there has been a tendency towards such thinking because in academic scholarship they have been developed as two different concepts that different researchers and disciplines have, since the digital has become thought of as ‘ubiquitous’, put together in a range of different ways. We now, in this and the following sections, interrogate some of the variations through which this relationship has been constructed conceptually, show how this book contributes to the debates they raise, and continue to argue for a relational concept of digital materiality.

The material has long since been a conceptual focus for scholars across the social sciences and humanities – including from its traditional place in archaeology, museum studies and anthropology of material culture across to cultural studies and now internet and HCI research. Material culture approaches have offered researchers an entry point into analysing social worlds through their materiality. Materials have been central to the work of design, and of course have their own discipline in engineering. Indeed the making of digital material futures is inevitably a task that involves multiple disciplines, and a focus on materials offers one way in which to consider how they might come together.

Scholars across a range of disciplines have also acknowledged that digital content and technologies need to be understood in relation to materiality, and in recent years the notion and the terminology of digital materiality has been discussed across architecture, design and media studies as well as in the social sciences. Yet, we propose that further interrogation of the problematic of the digital–material as inseparable is needed. In the literature of practicebased disciplines of architecture and design, for instance, we see examples of how the digital–material relationship is presented in terms of how it becomes part of a disciplinary practice. Yet the problematic of the physicality of matter versus the intangible digital is generally overlooked. For example, in architecture the concept of digital materiality has come to stand for a particular set of practices involving digital design (see Willman et al. 2013). For instance, writing about architecture, Gramazio and Kohler use the term digital materiality ‘to describe an emergent transformation in the expression of architecture’. This, they write is a process whereby ‘Materiality is increasingly being enriched with digital characteristics, which substantially affect architecture’s physis’ (2008: 7). Thus, for them, ‘Digital materiality evolves through the interplay between digital and material processes in design and construction. The synthesis of two seemingly distinct worlds – the digital and the material – generates new, self-evident realities. Data and material, programming and construction are interwoven’ (Gramazio and Kohler 2008: 7). For these architects this way of conceptualizing the process also has implications for practice in that it is a new way of dealing with materials which transforms the possibilities and the professional scope of the architect, since ‘Digital materiality leads to a new expression and – surprisingly enough, given the technical associations of the term “digital” – to a new sensuality in architecture’ (Gramazio and Kohler, 2008: 7). In this discussion, therefore, the work of blending the digital and material, which are objects with different properties, qualities and affordances, becomes the task of the architect – indeed an element of her/his professional skill.

Similarly in the context of digital design, Tone Bratteteig writes from the position of a designer for whom ‘Design is “thinking with materials”’ (2010: 148). While we note here that the idea that design is only about materials – of any kind – is contested in that it can also be to do with services and processes (see Akama and Prendiville 2013), Bratteteig shows how digital designers have sought to understand the relationship between the digital and material in digital design in a way that recognizes the multiple dimensions of this. Through a review of this field she proposes that ‘Seeing digital design as thinking with concrete abstractions of processes, at different levels of concretizations as well as across them, suggests that digital designers should understand their material in a way that enables them to move between levels of concretization and choose the right abstraction for the actual design process as it evolves in time’. Here again, digital materiality, as for architects, seems to be something that needs to become embedded in the practice of the designer, and becomes likewise part of professional skill, in that Bratteteig concludes that ‘The many levels of digital design open up for many different competencies being involved in imagining and building possible futures’ (2010: 166).

Likewise in media studies, the question of digital materiality has been acknowledged since the first years of the twenty-first century, but neither here has it been systematically interrogated. Indeed it has been approached from different directions, depending on the purpose of the study. For instance, Fuller (2005: 2) acknowledges that ‘objects have explicitly become informational as much as physical but without losing any of their fundamental materiality’. Here, the challenge is to unpack how this materiality can be sensed, how it can be made use of, and how in turn it makes other elements or compositions tangible. The focus in Fuller’s work on the informational qualities of objects implies taking their materiality as their original state, and asking how the digital has become part of this. In contrast, for other scholars, whose focus is on the informational or communications uses of media, the question of the materiality of digital elements situates the digital as the original state and asks how materiality has developed as part of it. For instance, José van Dijck writes: ‘In the case of lifelogs, the digital materiality of the internet engenders a new type of reflection and communication. This shows traces of the former analogue genre but functions substantially differently’ (2004). Here the digital is described as the tool or platform where digital materiality is experienced and expected to be found.

In the field of anthropology, the issue of digital materiality has also been broadly discussed in particular in the areas which have a history of research in both material culture studies and design. A key point in the trajectories of the discussions that we advance in this book is the appropriation of material culture as a way to approach the world anthropologically, as developed in the work of Danny Miller from the 1980s onwards. This field of material culture studies has also intersected with design anthropology, for instance through projects led by Alison Clarke (e.g. Clarke 2010). Given this history of a material culture anthropology, it would be easy to see the digital as a new facet of a material culture approach to the world. It is clear that digital anthropology has impacted on this field, and indeed Alison Clarke reflected in her edited volume on design anthropology that ‘Digital anthropology and interaction design are poised to move the theorizing and practice around twenty-first-century object culture far beyond the remit of those early corporate design anthropologists and their preoccupation with big, green photocopier buttons’ (Clarke 2010: 13). To be fair to the early corporate anthropologists, we would note that it was Lucy Suchman who advanced an anthropology of design that was also an anthropology for design by locating design in a broader perspective than design methods to illuminate design’s relevance in contemporary societies as a practice of change, and to interrogate what constitutes transformative change and how it happens (2011: 3). However, a notable difference between the approach of Suchman and that developed by Clarke is that in terms of her approach to object culture, Suchman has been more interested in objects-inaction than in defining their ‘materiality’ (2005: 381). Moreover, as we note below, there has been little conversation in the existing literatures between mainstream media anthropology and HCI-focused anthropology, thus leaving the intersection between digital anthropology and design – at least initially – primarily in the context of material culture studies.

Since the question of how to understand the nature of the digital has been a central debate in Media Anthropology as well as Digital Anthropology, Media Studies and the Social Studies of the Internet, to understand how the digital–material relationship is being constituted in the social sciences now we first take a step back, to consider how early studies emphasized the ontological status of the things that happened in the virtual worlds constituted through digital technologies and their users. As Ardèvol and Gómez Cruz (2014) argue, in Internet Studies these online contexts were thought as a new social space, the cyberspace, where virtual communities were evolving and where disembodied identities interacted, free from the social and cultural constraints of the real world or reproducing them in these virtual realms (Turkle 1995; Baym 2000; Hine 2000; Nakamura 2002). Later on, this distinction between the virtual and the real was challenged and the relationship between online and offline activity was theorized as a continuum (Miller and Slater 2000; Leander and McKim 2003; Hine 2007) with a focus on explaining precisely the worlding of the virtual world (such as in the virtual platform Second Life) as a world apart (Boellstorff 2008). In their prologue to Digital Anthropology, Miller and Horst accurately contested ‘approaches that imply that becoming digital has either rendered us less human, less authentic or more mediated’. Instead they argue that ‘Not only are we just as human within the digital world, the digital also provides many new opportunities for anthropology to help us understand what it means to be human’ (2012: 4). One of the key ways in which the online/offline dichotomy has been challenged is through a focus on the question of the relationship between the digital and material. As Miller and Horst assess it, ‘Materiality is thus bedrock for digital anthropology, and this is true in several distinct ways, of which three are of prime importance. First, there is the materiality of digital infrastructure and technology. Second, there is the materiality of digital content, and, third, there is the materiality of digital context’ (Miller and Horst 2012: 25). In these definitions, importance is given to how the digital is materially produced. This is an important consideration for determining what digital materiality can involve and which indeed figures in the following chapters in this book. Indeed, Miller and Horst insist on the relationship between the digital and the material and treat it as one of the core principles of their approach to digital anthropology, which acknowledges ‘the materiality of digital worlds, which are neither more nor less material than the worlds that preceded them’ (Miller and Horst, 2012: 4). Their argument is that ‘the digital, as all material culture, is more than a substrate; it is becoming a constitutive part of what makes us human’ (2012: xx).

We would not disagree with Miller and Horst’s proposal. Here, however, we have a different purpose in that our own agenda is to develop the notion of digital materiality as a way to connect digital and design anthropologies. In stating a concept of digital materiality, we are not seeking to produce a new hybrid ontology by referring to an ‘empirical object’ that exists ‘out there’, configured by physical and digital properties. Rather than starting with an a priori definition about what is digital and what is material, we prefer to understand digital materiality as a process, and as emergent, not as an end product or finished object. In doing so we break down the boundaries that are assumed when questions are asked about what is digital and what is not. It is moreover not a question of whether the digital is material or not. This is because in the worlds that the contributors to this volume discuss, the digital, the material and design are not specific and separate things, but are rather more porous elements of processes of research, design and intervention. People design children’s experiences, make code, build living archives, develop interactive systems, search for more sustainable homes, rig up public wi-fi networks, create sensors for controlling air pollution, desire healthy environments, want to empower citizens, imagine possible futures. Thus, digital materiality does not define ‘something’ done, but a process of becoming. Digital materiality refers to the making and to what emerges of these entanglements, not to a state or a quality of matter.

It is because we focus on what is happening that we need a processual concept of digital materiality. Current debates about materiality have called for more materialist modes of analysis and attention to matter and processes of materialization (deLanda 2004; Bennett 2009; Ingold 2011; Hodder 2012). In particular, the New Materialism turn and the vitalism led by Jane Bennett argue for an understanding of matter as alive and as an active force in the making of the world, in sum a ‘materiality that is itself vibrant or active’ (Bennett 2010: 49). These lines of inquiry propose an ontological reorientation that takes into account post-humanist ideas (Haraway, 1991, 1999; Latour, 2005) and the notion of living matter, thus avoiding conceptualizations of humans as being apart from matter and rejecting the idea of ‘matter as an inert substance subject to predictable causal force’. This allows other ways to describe the design process by understanding it as a process of materialization ‘complex, pluralistic and relatively open’ (Coole and Frost 2010: 7) where matter is a vital force.

Media archaeologists also call for a processual understanding of matter. For instance, Parikka suggests speaking of ‘not only of objects, but also as much about non-solids and the processual materiality’. For example, this refers to dirty matter at the level of components, voltages and materials in technological media, but ‘is not just machines nor is it just solids, and things, or even objects. Materiality leaks in many directions also concretely (i.e. e-waste)’ (Parikka 2011: 98). This position resonates with Ingold’s point that ‘things are alive because they leak’ (Ingold 2008: 10), and that things, like people, are processes: ‘it is in the opposite of capture and containment, namely discharge and leakage, that we discover the life of things’ (2008: 13). Even Parikka suggests that a big challenge for new materialism is ‘to develop a media theory of things – and yet not only thing-powers, but process-power’ (Parikka 2011: 98). Beyond these claims, different scholars from philosophy, feminist studies, media and anthropology propose new ontologies that highlight processes of formation rather than discrete entities, delimited objects or final products – instead, to define matter for its living process in the world’s formation.

We maintain that digital materiality is part of this living process in the world of design. Our proposal is primarily methodological; in order to centre our attention in the process of making in the mess of everyday life, we need a processual approach to digital materiality. This creates a prism through which to examine the complex interfaces at which we engage with technologies, architectures and narratives that constitute the materiality of the everyday and how futures are imagined, forged and made.