# Mess and things: Situated ways to look for the unexpected

That the worlds we research are messy is well acknowledged in the existing literature, whether expressed precisely in that idiom (e.g. Law, 2004) or not. This point might not come as much of a surprise to anthropologists for whom their first fieldwork is likely to be a hands-on training in how to deal with research materials of different qualities and affordances. Anthropology is also a discipline for which a critical dialogue between ethnography is ongoing. This means that as anthropologists we would not expect the theoretical model which we had in mind when approaching our ethnographic site to necessarily frame what we eventually thought we found there. Rather we would expect to discover all kinds of things that would lead us to critique the theory for its universal presumptions. The notion of mess can, however, be useful for reinforcing the point that we don’t walk into neatly ordered worlds that can be readily converted into equally neat data. This point has been developed further in much excellent research that focuses on digital material worlds, notably by some of the leading scholars included in our book (e.g. Dourish and Bell 2011; Michael, this volume). However, one thing that concerns us about the contemporary enthusiasm for the idea that the world, and the research we do in it, is messy, is when researchers use their findings to demonstrate this point. Instead we would argue that the sooner researchers, designers and policy makers take up the idea that mess is what they are about to engage with at the beginning of research, design and intervention projects, rather than making mess part of their conclusions, the better. Without wanting to fall into the trap of claiming that anthropologists just knew it all along, we would point out that as part of our (always immersed in particular sites and inevitably very personal) training as anthropological ethnographers we have always been confronted with this complicated question of how to bring together series of things, processes and even other inexplicable phenomena of different kinds, types, qualities and affordances, to tell coherent and consistent stories about what is happening while also accounting for people’s self-descriptions. In particular the challenge is also to tell such stories in ways that acknowledge that what people do tends often to be inconsistent, because it is always contingent on changing sets of circumstances.

Indeed we can find similar unruliness wherever we look in research, and in particular with reference to another of the rather sticky concepts that we engage with here: ‘things’. Existing discussions in anthropology have long since shown us how things have biographies and that their meanings change as they are (re)appropriated in different contexts (Appadurai 1986; Koppitof 1986; Henare, Holbraad and Wastell 2006). Some ANT and STS scholars (Latour 2005; Pinch 2008) also attribute a certain amount of (albeit distributed or displaced) agency to things. Following this perspective, things can be thought of as ‘acting’ differently as they move through and participate in different environments.

As we have commented above, there has been a shift in the material culture studies inflected field of design anthropology (e.g. Clarke 2010) towards rethinking the object through the digital. Yet if we take this shift further to focus away from the concept of an object towards that of a ‘thing’, the relationality between the digital and material comes closer into view. It then becomes easier to conceptualize how the mess we have written about in the previous section and the potential unruliness of things that is the concern of STS scholars (see Michael, this volume) is constituted through the relationality of things.

There is an operational distinction between ‘object’ and ‘thing’ that responds to a broad discussion regarding the life and agency of things. Ingold refers to this distinction to explain what happens in the interaction between humans and things in the flow of life. Ingold (2008) critically proposes that according to Actor-Network Theory, objects lack life when they are cut off from the network of distributed agency. He argues that ‘things’ are alive when they are immersed in the entanglement of forces. It is in the flow of life, as an ongoing process, that things and humans exist. In the terms of Appadurai (2013), objects are alive because they are interlinked with other objects and humans. It is through the process of design that mere things become life objects, under the scrutiny of human activity. Then, for both scholars, things and objects are distinguished by life but in a quite different way, the important point being that by things and objects, we mean divisible non-human unities, which are made alive through different relational circumstances with humans and with other things. The implications of this for our discussion of digital materiality is that materiality does not end in things and objects; materiality is – as Ingold and Appadurai suggest – a process, a flow and connections. The digital materiality happens in an ongoing and openness process that escapes delimitations in discrete units with attributes as tangible, physical or in opposition to other kind of attributes such virtual, binary and, primarily, digital.

Throughout this book we find our contributors confronted with mess and with things that are unpredictable, lines of contingencies, stories that unfold in ways that were not necessarily expected. They approach this mess variously and according to disciplinary preferences in the ways that they give theoretical order to it. However there is a collective consensus that what we are dealing with is something complex, messy and uncertain (see Pink and Akama 2015). For our contributors, this has become embodied in discussions of contingency, conflict, unevenness, idiocy, confusions, technologies not doing what people think they are meant to, people not doing what they are meant to with technologies, and more. There is nothing surprising about the fact that these chapters tell us that digital materiality is just as messy as everything else we are likely to encounter in an ongoing world. Yet, as they also show, this raises the question of why there simultaneously seem to be cultural narratives at play that stand for a utopian hope or expectation that digital material futures (or presents) will not be so messy. We expect that they will – mess and unruly things are here to stay; the challenge for us in research, design and intervention is to learn how to work with them. As we propose in the next section, this means getting into the middle of it with them and recognizing that the methods and technologies we use to research will likewise be unpredictable.

## Getting into the mess: Engaged practice from within

All of the contributions to this volume suggest the need for researchers to have deep engagements with digital material environments, processes, things and experiences. They do so across a range of contexts and sites that on the surface appear quite different.

For instance, building on her already significant experience of empirical and theoretical research in this field, Strengers carefully reviews existing debates, research and interventions in the field of the smart home. On the basis of what she finds – which reveals a context where there is a big gap between what smart home designers are working towards and the ways people actually live – she calls for more detailed research into ‘the entanglements between and beyond’ the digital, material and human. Other chapters that do not report on conventional empirical research nevertheless do involve the authors’ long-term engagement with and experience of the things being discussed. In some cases, they also take as their examples design interventions and the ways these have been made or activated. For instance, Dourish draws on his personal experiences of using and programming for early computers when discussing how they might be emulated. By bringing us up close to software in this way, he enables an understanding of what people (think they) are doing with it, and of what it is to be in such a world of digital–material things, where the things discussed might not be quite as they would seem from the outside. Likewise David Carlin’s work with Circus ${ \mathsf { O } } z .$ , with whom he and his colleagues have developed a digital archive, was informed by thirty years of being associated and working with this organization, at one point as a show director. His chapter charts and reflects on this process, from the perspective of someone who was part of it as it happened and who has participated through what he calls ‘an ethics of care’ – creating an interesting intersection between his own memories and the ambitions of the archive to house digitalized memories. Carlin’s chapter is one where he is right ‘in the middle of it’ in a different way to the conventional ethnographer, narrating through his own personal trajectory of working with a circus to make digital materiality alive as an evolving interface with human memories through which to remember, re-imagine, or imagine possible futures. Other chapters involve varying degrees and different periods of ethnography and describe correspondingly different forms of immersion in their sites of research and intervention. However, in common, they show that to research digital materiality we need to encounter it as it emerges and to follow it, and to recognize that it is an ongoing process and never a finished object.

In Chapter 5 Pink et al. discuss video ethnographies over four years with twenty households, which occurred over several visits to each household involving not only doing research with them in their homes but also showing them video research materials and pre-publication versions of articles, video and still images. This project developed a form of intensive immersion different from that of conventional long-term fieldwork in one site. As discussed elsewhere, the capacity of video to draw viewers along with it, forward into new ways of knowing and experiencing also formed part of the way in which the research team members participated in the project through its digital materiality (see Pink and Leder Mackley 2012). In Chapter 7 Ferrer et al. describe a process of ethnographic immersion of more than five years following the project of an interactive slide across sites of research, design and intervention transformations, but which was also part of this process (as was the work described by Pink et al. in Chapter 5).

As we noted above, the existing discussions of mess in the social sciences have tended to be about the world we research as being messy. Less has been said about the mess involved in making design interventions. Yet as we have outlined above, and as Dourish and Bell note, ‘the practice of any technology in the world is never quite as simple, straightforward, or idealized as it is imagined to be’ (Dourish and Bell 2011: 4) and, at least for the case of ubicomp (ubiquitous computing), there will always be variations in the ways technologies are used and experienced (Dourish and Bell 2011: 5). As the contributions to this book also show, technologies are always ‘used’ by people whom we refer to as everyday designers rather than simply ‘users’ in ways that are relational and contingent. We might think of these activities as everyday interventions that are part of the process of ongoing making and improvisation in the world that Ingold writes of (2013) and that has also influenced the work of design anthropologists (e.g. see Gunn and Donovan 2012). Mess, thus conceptualized, is therefore also a way of thinking about not only the context in which designers make interventions, but also the context of ongoing everyday intervention such as that discussed by Strengers in Chapter 4, Pink et al. in Chapter 5 and McShane et al. in Chapter 11.

In using the term intervention in this way, we concur with the reclaiming of the concept as Green and Pink have expressed it, where the idea of an intervention is intended to ‘bring to the fore the idea of intervening as a way of being active in the world; as a scholar, creative practitioner, activist, or as a person living their everyday life in ways that seek to generate forms of change’. This means appropriating the concept of intervention – ‘which has in some contexts been maligned as an act of power’ – through an emphasis which among other things ‘promotes the importance of research and practice that actively and creatively seeks to make change happen within and through creative research processes, and in ways that involve collaboration with participants in research and in change processes’ (Green and Pink 2014: 73). It is in this spirit that we also engage with the idea of intervention, to reclaim it from critical discourses about unwanted and politically problematic forms of change-making and to instead locate it with the concept of design co-interventions towards the participatory ways of understanding, engaging with and ‘intervening in’ the world that the contributors to this volume discuss.

Therefore, following the above argument, interventions are inevitably emergent from and made in messy worlds, with unruly things and in relation to a series of unknown future contingencies. Pink and Akama, with their co-contributors, begin to unravel some of these issues in their Un/Certainty iBook (2015), which reports on and discusses a two-day event where a group of about twenty ethnographers, designers and creative practitioners were brought together to explore uncertainty in practice. Indeed, Pink and Akama argue for a greater recognition of uncertainty as being fundamental to intervention practices. Whereas conventionally designers have often sought to find ways in which to construct future scenarios to design into, the contributors to this book similarly acknowledge, and indeed show through their examples, that we cannot know what is going to happen next. Indeed, as we outline in the next section, some have used methods that are deliberately experimental in order to seek new ways of finding out things that they might otherwise not have been able to awake. This might be – as in the case of those projects that discuss how design interventions themselves are implicated in processes – a matter of intervening in the world at the moment or place where digital materiality is particularly actively or obviously intertwined. These ways of engaging experimentally and collaboratively with the sites of and participants in research might not be unusual for designers, and they are also increasingly common in the social sciences. Yet they still go beyond the boundaries of those anthropologists who continue to defend an observational non-intrusive approach: for instance, in the case of Ferrer, Ardèvol and Parés, when the observer ethnographer was involved in the making of an experience of an interactive slide; or in the case of Michael in the placing of networked objects in people’s homes; or in the case of Pink et al. of asking participants to collaborate in showing their everyday activities (often with technologies) while being digital-video recorded. These digital–material research and design interventions then become part of worlds in progress, are appropriated in unexpected ways by the people who encounter and engage with them, and perhaps come to be different types of ‘thing’ to what was expected. In these works, then, the ethnographic process becomes one of understanding what design research can do – that is, what it can tell us about what can happen in the world, opening up the realm of the possible by letting it play out, and enabling us to begin to consider on that basis other possibilities, potentialities and affordances.

While the work of the designer is to intervene in other people’s worlds, that of the anthropologist has conventionally been to inhabit other people’s worlds and create accounts and understandings of these worlds without changing them. Neither of these, we suggest, remain viable propositions as single activities. As we have noted in the first paragraph of this chapter, the current impulse towards research that has impact, as well as the rise of applied and public scholarship, not only in anthropology but across the social science and humanities disciplines discussed in this book, has shifted this emphasis. It also raises the question of the rights and/or responsibilities that social scientists might now have to intervene in the world and the question of how this might best be done. This question goes beyond the controversies attached to and debated around institutionalized impact agendas. Instead it focuses our attention towards how and where those scholars, researchers and designers who are actively seeking to understand and/or design for and intervene in and through the digital materiality of the world might undertake such work. This leads us on to the next section, in which we reflect on the final theme of the methodologies that are being developed for such tasks.

## Methodologies for researching and intervening

There is no single methodology or approach for working across the social sciences, humanities and design through a concept of digital materiality. This point is demonstrated through the variety of disciplinary and technological approaches that have been engaged by the contributing researchers and designers. While we do not see this as a methodology volume, we – like most of our contributors – have also felt compelled to reveal and comment on the processes through which the ways of knowing that are required for and involved in research and intervention through digital materiality are being created.

At the core of ethical and participatory ethnographic and design practice is a reflexive stance – both to the ways in which researchers, designers and participants are positioned within projects and to the outcomes of those projects and the possible meanings they can have in the world. Such an approach is also integral to this book, although it is manifested in different ways in different chapters. For example, we have already noted how in Chapters 2 and 10 respectively Dourish and Carlin both show how they have been, both biographically and through their writing, ‘in the middle’ of the things and processes they discuss. Here personal biographical experience is self-consciously used through the texts to demonstrate the worlds that are described. These two chapters are not ethnographic in the conventional sense, even if they might be said to develop types of auto-ethnographical thinking, yet they carry through forms of reflexivity that also emerge in the chapters that develop a more (although still not conventional) anthropological type of ethnography, such as Ferrer et al. in Chapter 7 and Pink et al. in Chapter 5. Likewise, Michael uses a revelatory moment in his own experience of using digital media in his home as the opening scene in Chapter 6.

Reflexivity is a core methodological principle in the work discussed in this book; it is also a wave that has rolled across disciplines and forms of creative practice in the social sciences, humanities and design for the last thirty or so years. It is always inflected by the disciplines to which its practitioners belong, and the same can be said for most aspects of research practice. This is demonstrated well in this volume when we compare how, for instance, different sociological and anthropological methodologies are played out, including the variations in the ways that sociologists work. For instance, Strengers in Chapter 4 takes one sociological approach to the everyday – social practice theory – which, at the risk of oversimplification, uses practices as its object of enquiry and key unit of research design, analysis and findings. In contrast, in Chapter 6 Michael, also a sociologist, works with what he calls an idiotic methodology to develop a speculative approach. Anthropology likewise is a diverse discipline; in our own cases, all trained in visual anthropological methodologies, we have not taken distinctively different approaches, but have used different methods. Pink et al.’s sensory video ethnographies of the home are rooted in visual, sensory and digital ethnography methodologies (see Pink 2013, 2015; Pink et al. 2015) and Ferrer et al. have used longer-term ethnography and visual methods to follow the making of the slide over time and to analyse how different users play with the slide. Horst draws on longer term fieldwork to discuss examples from a field site that she has been engaged with through successive visits over the last fifteen years.