# Working with digital materiality

Putting digital materiality at the centre of our project is only one way in which to view the future of the relationship between the social sciences and humanities and design. There will be others, and it is not our purpose here to propose that this above all others is the only way to go. However there are several very good reasons why, alongside other methods of making interventions towards a more just, equal, environmentally sustainable and healthy world, working through a digital materiality approach to design/anthropology offers ways to rethink the world as a site for research, design and intervention. In part this is because this approach highlights the interactive dimensions between things, humans and environments that in other design fields are less evident.

Most of the chapters in this book discuss projects that, through research and design, seek to ‘better’ the world in some way – that is, increase forms of well-being and health, work towards environmental sustainability, create equality of access to resources, and similar. These are all reasonably wellestablished, if unequally distributed, shared global aims stated across the domains of many different governmental, corporate and NGO stakeholders, and also lived out in many cases through everyday life forms of activism and change-making. A digital materiality approach, when applied to question such perennial problems that seem to never get fixed, despite the fact that there is often much ink spilt over them, seems to offer ways of thinking productively about where and how a digital–material design anthropology could usefully research, design and intervene. We cannot cover all possibilities here, therefore in this section we comment on two, as examples.

First, there remains an aspect of the open space between design anthropology and digital anthropology which has been under-acknowledged, and that we wish to flag as part of a next stage of work in this field. Such steps could inform how the capacities of design and anthropology come together in the future and which likewise puts the emergence digital materiality at the centre of its work. Although there are some exceptions, design anthropology remains focused on the ‘developed’ world where designers design, whereas in the parts of the world that interventions tend to be towards ‘development’ design is often absent. Important exceptions in the design anthropology literature include the groundbreaking work of Dori Tunstall with indigenous design (Tunstall 2013) and Ian Ewart’s discussion of building in Borneo (Ewart 2013).

It has been inevitable that Digital Materialities has to some extent reproduced something of this divide. In Part One the critiques that contributors advance of the imaginaries of digital futures are all focused on developed nations and their concerns. But this is in part because although in developing countries digital materiality is equally ‘felt’, these are not the places where those who present us with digital future imaginaries tend to imagine as the first sites where such digital futures would be played out. Appadurai also highlights this point, suggesting that we have to change our understanding of design as ‘only partly a specialist activity’ and move to a broader view of design as a ‘fundamental human capacity and a primary source of social order’ (2013: 254). This movement will allow us to focus attention on other than Western societies seeking how people are designing our future digital imaginaries in their ordinary life.

More work needs to be done on indigenous and local imaginaries of digital futures across the world – not only in those modern societies where utopian visions of smart cities and smart homes give us something to critique, but also in emerging economies. Horst’s chapter goes some way towards this, with the proposal that we need to attend to such everyday design. But there is a bigger issue here that also encompasses what are called the emerging economies as well as developing countries – including the fieldwork sites of ‘traditional’ anthropologists or development anthropologists, such as Indonesia or India, where there are vast markets for digital media as well as locally designed uses for them. Asia is also a key site for the manufacture of digital technologies. In the future this might be a key intersection for digita and design anthropology – and raises the question of how the interventional stances of design and development anthropologies will also intersect or critically encounter each other in such a field of scholarship and practice.

Second, one of the areas of digital materiality that has been little acknowledged is the darker side of digital technologies that Maxwell and Miller discuss in their book Greening the Media (2012). In light of discussions over the substrate of the materials that compose the digital infrastructures, e-waste and the kind of materiality that is produced in the aforementioned cycles that have been taking place recently in the fields of media studies and human geography (Gabrys 2011; Parikka 2012), Maxwell and Miller examine contemporary demand for ongoing obsolete digital technologies, and the material and e-waste that is generated through the media manufacturing industries, along with the global inequalities related to the global distribution of the resource mining, manufacturing production, distribution and consumption of digital technologies.

Here the materiality of digital media becomes implicated beyond the making of digital material environments that we inhabit as we go about our everyday lives, and calls our attention to the ways in which digital materiality is also implicated in processes of climate change and the ‘natural’ and human disasters that are part of this. Elsewhere Hjorth, Pink, Sharpe and Williams (2016) have argued that creative digital arts practice interventions could play a role in working through these issues towards a more sustainable future. Here we suggest that digital design anthropology is likewise ideally positioned to be able to produce understandings and interventions towards designing for the recycling of digital technological and e-waste. Design anthropologists have already shown how the subdiscipline can create ethnographies of future ‘possible’ recycling systems (Halse 2013). We would also argue for an anthropological approach to designing for sustainable use, reuse and ways of living in everyday environments, with things and through processes that we can think of through the concept of digital materiality.

Our call is for an extended dialogue between design, anthropology, HCI and media studies. By putting digital materiality at the centre of our concerns, we argue for a deeper interrogation of where digital and design anthropologies intersect, and the extent to which they can be separated out in future discussions of how futures are imagined, how interventions can be made in the world, and the roles of people as everyday designers.

## A brief introduction to the structure of Digital Materialities

This book is divided into three parts titled respectively: Expectations, Co-interventions, and Insider Design. Here we introduce the parts, the chapters they comprise, and the work they do towards mapping out a field of research, design and intervention through digital materiality. In doing so, we chart a trajectory through the book; however this is not a closed route that we wish to guide readers to take, but instead would encourage unexpected routes, thoughts and practices of engagement with the text.

The three chapters in Part One – Expectations – focus on the ways in which different digital materialities are imagined and come to being, moving through from software and emulation (Dourish) to urban sensors (Lanzeni) and smart homes (Strengers). Although each of these chapters focuses on different subject matter, they all approach the question of digital materiality through critical interrogations of the ways in which it has been imagined and constituted through design. Each chapter in different ways also shows us how the pursuit of utopian or perfect digital designs is itself a flawed goal, because in fact a study of the ways in which digital materiality plays out and is experienced by people is always unfinished, ‘messy’ in the sense that we have outlined above, inhabited by unruly things, and contingencies.

For example, in Chapter 2 Dourish discusses a series of intriguing examples of how the digital–material is implicated in the emulation of older computer programs within newer technologies. One of these examples discusses the case of how a researcher found some bugs in the program he was developing an emulation of. Dourish tells us how ‘he fixed them for the clone machine so that it would behave correctly’, but, he goes on, ‘when the machine was nearing completion and people began bringing up software that had been developed for original PDP-10s, they found that some of it failed mysteriously. Investigation revealed that some software was failing because it depended on the very bugs that … [the researcher] had corrected’ (this volume page 38). If we unpack the trajectory through which this scenario (and others in the chapter) developed as described in full by Dourish, then we can see clearly how the contingencies through which digital materiality emerges need to be at the centre of our understanding of how future design should proceed.

The notions of smart cities, citizens and homes imply digital–material and human relations of particular kinds. Débora Lanzeni and Yolande Strengers both offer critical discussions of how smart futures have been envisaged through the assumptions attached to these imaginaries. In Chapter 3 Lanzeni points to how the smart concept has been mobilized for imagining ‘future technologically enhanced and potentially automated cities, homes and lives’ and argues that, instead, in order to understand digital materiality we need to attend to the meaning of smart for smart technology developers themselves, and to their design processes. Lanzeni calls on us to examine how visions of technological futures are in fact situated in the local and everyday experience of the designers. This, she proposes, invites us to rethink our understanding of the roles people play as citizens, and the implications this has for digital design.

In Chapter 4, Strengers interrogates and problematizes the notion of the smart home – as she puts it, ‘the future smart home is an imagined one, and it is constantly being reimagined’. She demonstrates how existing research on how both the history of the idea of the automated home and on how so-called smart technologies are used (or disregarded) by people in everyday life, reveals the flaws in the utopian vision of the smart home and the types of persona who would inhabit it. Instead, as Strengers shows, a rather different digital materiality is likely to play out, and it is to this that we need to look in order to design for the future sustainable home. She argues that ‘We cannot only be interested in how people “use” smart technologies, but must also focus on how they are reconfiguring both human and technology, and in doing so how they reconstitute the very fabric of everyday life’ (page 00). Thus Strengers ends her chapter with a call for further research into the ways that homes are lived, with which we concur, and which implies a double agenda that we seek to play out in this book. This means developing a critique of existing conceptualizations of the digital material that are already playing out in planning, design and policy, as well as undertaking an in-depth analysis of the ways that lived and experienced digital materialities are emergent from everyday life circumstances and how designers might become engaged with these processes and the persons who are active in them as participants. It is to this question that our attention turns in Part Two.

The common thread that links the four chapters in Part Two – Co-interventions – is the question of how to understand existing and ongoing emerging forms of digital materiality, and the processes and activities through which humans engage, improvise and live with them. Significantly all these chapters also engage with this question though possible relationships between researching and understanding, and designing and intervening which involve professional designers and/or design researchers. They therefore also consider how the social science and design disciplines might work together through the digital material.

In Chapter 5, Sarah Pink, Kerstin Leder Mackley, Val Mitchell, Garrath T. Wilson and Tracy Bhamra discuss how ethnography and design teams from anthropology, media studies, design and human–computer interaction (HCI) research worked together in a larger interdisciplinary project, which sought to make digital design interventions for energy demand reduction. They show how, in the course of the four-year project, their work tacked between ethnography and design research, theoretical development, and bringing the ethnographic-theoretical dialogue of anthropology to the design–ethnography collaboration. This collaboration focused precisely on some fields of activity that the chapters in Part One of this book reveal as being important – including the ways in which people were engaged as the makers of the digital materiality of their own homes. However, it also further advances our discussion of digital materiality, anthropology and design, by showing how, through a focus on the digital materiality of home encompassing methodologies of ethnographic research, design intervention and project dissemination, we can make the relationality of the digital–material operate across different levels and modes of working in interdisciplinary teams.

In Chapter 6 Mike Michael takes up a similar theme, in that he also reflects in part on a project that crossed the social sciences and design (in this case an STS inflected sociological approach) and that was concerned with energy and digital media. Michael’s work, however, engages with speculative designers and in doing so develops a speculative sociological methodology. He asks ‘is it possible to imagine a way of designing digital materialities that enact such research events and provoke the possible?’ by looking at how research methods can be open and unfolding. He playfully suggests an intermingling between design and social science research practices by bringing speculative design a step further through what he calls the figure of the ‘idiotic object’. This means developing imaginative ways of designing digital materialities that enact research events and provoke the possible to appear by somehow disrupting what would otherwise be everyday situations. This ‘method assemblage’ has several implications for how research is conceived and carried out as people engage actively in the research process in affective, aesthetic, ethical and political ways.

Next, in Chapter 7, shifting our focus away from energy, which runs through Chapters 4 to 6, Jaume Ferrer, Elisenda Ardèvol and Narcís Parés discuss the relationship between designers and users in the process of making an interactive slide. They centre their analysis in the different understandings of co-design related to how users’ interventions are acknowledged to contribute to the interactive design in multiple ways. The chapter problematizes the concept of user as a non-expert person whose participation in the design project serves only for designing user needs. The authors argue that the common justification in participatory or co-design practice for including users because they are experts on their own experiences, simply reinforces an existing tendency to exclude the human person in HCI design. Through an analysis of the multiple ways of experiencing/knowing the interactive slide – of the designers, the children, the ethnographer and the anthropologist – the authors propose a more open and generative understanding of (co)design. In doing so they interrogate the nature of intervention in design – What is the slide? Is the slide the intervention? Is it the (co)design? Is it ethnography? This leads to further questions about different gazes over the making of the slide, the kind of ‘thing’ that is being created, the intervention of materials, bodies, rules of play, interactions and experiences, and therefore engages the authors in a conversation about the nature of design.

In Chapter 8, the last in this section, Floyd Mueller brings the human into digital design in a different way, through a focus on the human body as part of the digital material design configuration. Mueller’s chapter comes from the perspective of a designer, contrasting well with the social science perspectives represented more strongly in earlier chapters, and shows how such processes are played out in particular within the context of exertion games design. This chapter offering us a series of examples of phenomenologically informed design research where ethnography formed part of, but did not lead the design research process, thus providing what Mueller calls ‘a futureoriented perspective on the active human body as digital materiality’. These projects form part of an ongoing process of exploration into design for the active human body in a context where the digital and material are not understood as separate from each other, but each continually involved in the user’s experience of the world.

The chapters in Part Three – Insider Design – all focus in different ways on how the digital material is made through the everyday design or the informed involvement of people who do not actually work as professional designers. In doing so, it also begins to address the problem of how we understand digital materiality and design in the global South, as well as different conceptualizations of the South, through a focus on a regional city in Australia (McShane et al.), an urban Australian circus (Carlin) and everyday materialities and consumption in the Caribbean (Horst).

The section begins with Heather Horst’s fascinating account of the ways in which the Jamaican and Dominican-Haitian participants in her research planned and designed their mobile phones and the material cultures in which they were entangled. She takes a different angle on the point made by the chapters in Part Two of this book, concerning how people who are not professional designers are also engaged in the design of their everyday artefacts and processes. In Chapter 10, David Carlin takes us on a journey through his own trajectory as well as that of the Melbourne-based Circus Oz to explain how the digital materiality of an online archive emerges and evolves. This chapter also makes connections with the work of the authors in Part Two of this book, since Carlin and the designers involved in the project worked together to create the Circus Oz archive; Carlin also worked from within his long association with the circus, and with the circus members who were also part of the archive-making process. Indeed, while the design ethnography projects discussed in Part Two involved making things that would be interventions in the lives of participants in research projects, Carlin’s project involved making something more directly with the circus community who might use that archive, which he refers to as a living archive – that is, an ongoing emergent form of digital materiality, in other ways. For Carlin, the design of the digital archive means working with a meshwork of materials, digital and otherwise, that opens new understandings about what an archive can do, but also new contingencies, such as the circus members’ annotations in the process of digitalizing the old video recordings.

Chapter 11, the final chapter of this book, tells the story of the emergence of new digital materialities in the regional Australian city of Goulburn, which had been missed off the map of public broadband. Ian McShane, Chris K. Wilson and Denise Meredyth show us how the digital materiality of urban wireless and the services and experiences that are related to it emerge at a messy interface of interests, infrastructures and aspirations. Their account is of an experience of how digital materiality emerges in worlds that are already messy, uneven, conflicted, contingent and ongoingly changing. Indeed, if we want to gain a fuller understanding of how digital materiality is being made, it is precisely these otherwise unmapped realities that we need to delve into. Comparing the example revealed in this final chapter with the models critiqued in Part One of this book takes us full circle. As Strengers and Lanzeni respectively critique the neat utopias and expectations embedded in future visions of smart homes and smart cities like Barcelona, we see how an urban digital materiality unfettered by smart models and expectations could emerge through a ‘messy’ process in a city that was off the map for mainstream public wi-fi. Here, in order to achieve their goals, design had to become the preoccupation of non-designers, again through a process that shows up a series of twists, turns and contingencies.

PART ONE

Expectations