2

# Rematerializing the platform: Emulation and the digital–material

Paul Dourish

## Introduction

We live – if any number of breathless accounts are to be believed – in the age of the virtual. The movement of digital technology into many realms of life, at least in the developed world and increasingly beyond, means that our experience is populated by ‘virtual’ objects of all sorts: virtual books, virtual organizations, virtual realities, virtual memory and more. Even where the moniker of ‘virtual’ is not attached, there is a sense that virtualization attends other aspects of life, such as communication with friends and loved ones mediated by digital technology, such that even mourning and grieving for loved ones becomes an online pursuit (Brubaker et al. 2013). In this world, online shopping replaces the mall; books, CDs and DVDs are replaced with digital downloads; MOOCs replace traditional classroom teaching; paper bills disappear in favour of online transactions. As a site of design, the virtual is compelling precisely for the ways in which it both reproduces and offers the opportunity to reconfigure aspects of the world that might otherwise be beyond our reach as designers (cf. Smith 1986).

Increasingly, however, scholars have argued that this position neglects the significant and persistent materiality of digital technologies. Arguments for the importance of materiality in the age of the virtual have come from different disciplines. Some, for example, have argued that the infrastructures by which digital systems are maintained are themselves thoroughly material, and so we should understand that the digital economy is still based on such material groundings as real estate (for servers and network connections), power and energy (for digital equipment and server farms), and extractive industries (for the materials from which digital systems are constructed, such as the rare earth metals that play important roles in digital equipment fabrication) – material groundings that also embed the ‘new’ economy in older systems of political economy.

Others (e.g. Orlikowski 2007; Orlikowski and Scott 2008; Leonardi and Barley 2008) have argued from the perspective of organizational theory that we need to attend to the material aspects of organizational processes and the way that new technologies produce not just ‘virtual’ sites of work and organizing, but also significant challenges, limits and infrastructures that configure how organizational work proceeds. Arguing for a ‘socio-material’ approach to thinking about technology in organizations, they use the investigation of material forms to counter both the boundless optimism of progressivist technological determinism and the open-endedness of traditional social constructivist approaches.

Designers of various stripes have participated in these discussions too, although their point of engagement is somewhat different. For designers, the struggle with form – what Schön (1984) calls the ‘reflexive conversation with materials’ – has always been central. From a design perspective, then, the challenge of digital materialities is the challenge associated with the incorporation of the digital into otherwise inert materials. Here, the challenge is to blend digitality with material forms in a way that is respectful of the uniqueness of each. This is not a counter to arguments of virtuality, then, but rather an approach to virtuality that sees it as always somehow in conversation with physical materials.

Just what does it mean for something to be ‘virtual’? The traditional rhetoric suggests a dissolution of the physical and its replacement with an ineffable digital abstraction. The alternative approaches argue that the digital needs to be seen alongside the material. However, these alternatives typically leave the duality between materiality and virtuality intact. That is, while one approach or another argues for the need to think about materiality as well as digitality, or materiality in relation to digitality, they largely presume that there is, on the one hand, digitality, and, on the other, materiality.

These critiques, while varying in their specific approaches, have in common the intent to remind us of the significance of the material contexts in which the virtual arises. Nonetheless, they focus their attention less on the digital or the virtual itself. Focusing on the infrastructures, the processes and the objects that surround the digital still leaves the digital itself underexamined; and most problematically of all, they fail to recognize that the digital is itself material (Dourish and Mazmanian 2012; Blanchette 2011).

How should we think about virtuality, virtualism and virtualization in light of a thoroughgoing materialist stance on the digital? What might be opened up for us by a recognition of the digital as material itself?

In this chapter, I want to explore these questions by focusing in particular on one site at which we see these questions played out – that of computer emulation. By examining a number of questions that arise at this particular site, I hope to be able to cast some light on the broader question of the relationship between the virtual and the material and to reconfigure the notion of the virtual as a site of design practice and analysis. My starting point, though, will be on the materialities of digital representations as a foundation for our later discussions.

## The digital–material

The essence of the digital is that it is a representational system. It encodes or denotes something else. What does it mean, then, to argue for this representational system as itself having material properties?

A familiar analogy lies in our use of number systems. The Indo-Arabic number system with which we are familiar uses the position of each numeral to indicate an aspect of its magnitude – so, when we write 123, we know that the ‘1’ means ‘100’, and so is larger magnitude than the ‘3’. We rely upon this positional system when we do simple arithmetic, such as multidigit multiplication and division. Compare this to Roman numerals, where the number 123 would be represented as CXXIII. How would we go about multiplying CXXIII by, say, XLV (45)? Unlike the same calculation performed using Arabic numerals, there is no way to break this down into a series of smaller steps based on number positions. So, the representation of the numbers has important consequences for the way that they can be manipulated and used. The two representational systems might denote the same numbers, but different representations can be put to work in different ways.

‘Number’ seems like an entirely virtual concept, and yet numbers themselves betray the virtuality of the concept by taking on material forms that shape their use. So too do the representational forms that make up the world of the digital. Digitality is an abstract property, but digital things themselves – and even digits – are not.

Much the same argument can be applied to the notational system of programming languages and other digital forms. Consider the very simple program in Figure 2.1. Written in the Python programming language, it is a program that reads a file from the internet and counts word frequencies. Computer programs are often thought of as painfully detailed sets of instructions for carrying out a procedure, so simple and detailed that a computer

```python
import urllib2
from collections import defaultdict
from sys import argv
d = defaultdict(int)
data = urllib2.urlopen(argv[1]).read()
data = data.split()
for word in data:
d[word] += 1
for word in d:
print d[word], word;
```

## FIGURE 2.1 A simple Python program

can implement them. And so it is with this program – every addition, every movement from one step to another, every check for errors, and so on, is specified. The sequence of operations – now do this, now do that – is reduced in the programming system to the absolutely simplest set of operations that the computer can perform. Without a program, as we know, the computer can do nothing at all; everything it does, then, must be given to it in the form of a program.

The program, then, dictates everything that the computer will do. But it does not notate everything that the computer will do. This seems a little odd at first. A programming language is a notation, after all, a way of writing; the program is a notation for a set of operations that the computer is to carry out, and, as we’ve said, the computer only does what the program says. And yet, while the computer does ‘only’ what the program says, there is more to what the computer does than what the program directly describes. There are ways of going about carrying out the tasks specified in the program that are not part of the program’s text, and there are properties of the computational platform that impact the program’s execution but which are also not described here.

It’s useful to examine what is not notated in the program text. The type and characteristics of the network to which the computer is linked are not notated, although perhaps that is more than we would expect, even if they have an important impact on the operation of the program. But other more detailed questions remain. The speed with which the computer proceeds from one instruction to the next is not notated, for example. Nor are the different speeds at which different instructions might be executed, depending on the particular features of the computer and processor on which the program is running. The size of the computer’s memory conditions circumstances under which the program will eventually fail, but this is not notated; similarly, the size of the maximum representable number in the computer is not notated but can also cause the program to fail at some indefinite moment. The size of the program itself is not notated, nor the memory capacity needed to run it, nor the performance characteristics of its interpreter.

The materialities of digital systems lie not least, then, in this gap between what is denoted and what is expressed, or between the specification and the execution. A computer program may be a precise series of instructions, and yet the experience that is the result of the program’s execution is radically underspecified by that program.

It is in this radical underspecification, and the slippage between notation and enaction, that we find the lie of virtuality. The denial of materiality that is at the centre of the rhetoric of virtuality could be maintained only if the specification were complete: if a program really were an adequate account of what will happen in execution, if an MP3 file really were a complete explanation of how music will be produced, or if a digital 3D model really specified what you’ll see through a display. However, none of these is in fact the case. The mechanics of, if you will, de-virtualization – of the production of actual effects on the basis of digital specifications, be that the running of a program or the rendering of an image file – inherently exceeds the reach of the specification itself.

Elsewhere, I have argued that these properties are inherent in the digital, and examined such cases as database representations (Dourish, 2014) and network protocols (Dourish, 2015). The particular lens through which I want to examine the topic of virtuality and materiality in this paper is that of emulation – the production of a virtual computer, in software, in another computer. From the perspective of the dominant rhetoric, this is a case that is twice virtual; however, in practice, it is a site where the problems of virtuality become particularly visible.

## Emulation

In 2003, a collaboration between artist Cory Arcangel, Pittsburgh’s Andy Warhol Museum and computer scientists at Carnegie Mellon University made available a series of original artworks by Warhol that had been essentially lost for many years (Heddaya, 2014). These were digital artworks, originally produced by Warhol on early versions of Commodore’s Amiga personal computer system. Manufactured between 1985 and 1997, the Amiga was marketed on the basis of its advanced graphics and multimedia functions, and for the product launch, Commodore developed relationships with a number of artists, including Warhol, to produce art that would show off the Amiga’s capabilities in these areas. The pieces that Warhol produced were archived on floppy disks held in the collection of the Warhol Museum, but they had not been seen or examined since accession; indeed, it would seem that nobody knew what the disks contained until the 2003 examination. However, by 2003, original Amiga computers were hard to come by, particularly the early variants that Warhol had used; and so, in fact, although the artworks had been produced using a piece of software designed specifically for the Amiga computer, no Amiga computer was involved in the retrieval of the images. Instead, the images were retrieved and reconstituted using an Amiga emulator – software running on a modern PC that reproduces the experience of using an Amiga computer so accurately that the Amiga software can be executed without modification.

The notion of emulation runs right to the heart and the origins of computer science as a discipline. One of the foundational papers that made computer science possible is Alan Turing’s (1936) paper, ‘On Computable Numbers with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem.’ In this paper, Turing made significant contributions to an open mathematical question first posed by David Hilbert in 1928, which essentially asked whether a mathematical language could be defined in which a definitive answer could be given to the question of whether any statement in that language was valid. Turing’s approach was to imagine two types of machine. These machines are not so much mechanical contrivances, more mathematical formalisms, albeit with distinctly machinelike properties. The first type of machine is one whose configuration is equivalent to a mathematical function, so that when the machine operates, its actions produce mathematical results according to that function – perhaps the digits of pi, or the shortest path through a network, or the fixpoints of a graphical function. The second type of machine that Turing imagined is one that can behave like any of the first class of machines according to a configuration that it processes in the form of a set of rules. This is what Turing called a ‘universal machine’, now conventionally known as a ‘Turing machine’, and the mathematical analysis of this sort of machine that Turing provides in his paper laid the foundation for contemporary computing. The set of rules for Turing’s universal machine is like the software for a modern computer; it encodes a series of instructions that allow a general-purpose device (a computer) to act like a wide range of more specific devices (a word processor, a game, a music player, and so on). Turing’s analysis highlights an oft-overlooked aspect of what it means to ‘run software’; it means, in the terms of his paper, to configure one machine to act like another.

In this sense, all software is some form of emulator, but the term ‘emulation’ has a narrower use in conventional technical discourse. An emulator is a piece of software that specifically uses one computer (often called the ‘host’) to mimic the operation of another computer (the ‘guest’). There are a number of reasons why one might want to do such a thing, but three are the most common, and are distinguished, interestingly, by their different temporal relations. The first is a projection into the past: one might want, as in the Warhol example, to emulate a computer which is no longer available, so as to be able to gain access to functions, information and software that has been lost. The second is marked by a condition of contemporaneous reference: one might want to emulate a different type of computer that one might have but doesn’t, perhaps to run some software that is only available for that computer (for example, to emulate a smartphone on a desktop computer in order to test software written for the phone). The third is marked by conditions of anticipation: one might emulate a computer system that does not yet exist. This is most commonly done during the development of new computer systems; emulating a new computer’s hardware allows software to be developed before the hardware is entirely debugged and available. While this third mode of emulation is fairly specialized and not particularly widespread, examples of the other two are quite broad. For instance, in 2006, when Apple began a design transition from computers based on the PowerPC processor to the x86 Intel architecture, they also modified their operating system to include a facility called Rosetta, an emulator for the PowerPC processor, so that users with new computers that used Intel processors could nonetheless still run software that they owned which had been designed and compiled for the PowerPC. Or again, emulators are a common way for enthusiasts to carry on playing computer games or running other pieces of software originally created for consoles or hardware platforms that are no longer available. On my Mac laptop, I can run cbm, an emulator of the Commodore PET 2001, the first computer I ever used; , an emulator of the first computer I eve owned; or simh, an emulator of the computer I supported for a research group as my first job. I can run salto, an emulator of the Alto (Thacker et al. 1979), Xerox’s pioneering workstation, the first device with a modern graphical user interface, a computer I have never used or even seen operating.<sup>1</sup> If I want to reproduce the experience of running an early Macintosh, I can visit a web page with a Mac emulator running in Javascript.<sup>2</sup> The technical enthusiast website Ars Technica recently carried a review of a computer game, Karateka, which had been released before the reviewer was born, recreated for a new generation through emulation (Johnston 2013); and as I was completing this chapter, a posting was distributed online describing the procedure by which an enthusiast had booted Windows 3.1 on a virtual MS-DOS PC emulated in Javascript within a web brower.<sup>3</sup>

Emulation speaks to a broad cultural logic, the logic of the virtual. Invocation of the virtual is the central discursive move of digitality. To the extent that digital phenomena are rhetorically opposed to non-digital equivalents, and that they further are connected through a notion of displacement, virtual objects – virtual books, virtual worlds, virtual organizations, virtual spaces, virtual meetings, virtual communities, and so on – are the stock-in-trade of the digerati. The notion of virtuality marks an absence; the designation of ‘virtual’ marks something that seems to be there but isn’t. A virtual book allows us to read without a real book being present; a virtual musical instrument allows us to produce music in the absence of the instrument itself.

One would imagine that the case of emulation is the perfect demonstration of the power of virtuality. If software is already thoroughly virtual, then what could be more appropriate that to ‘run’ that computer on ‘hardware’ that it itself constructed from the virtual medium of software – that is, an emulator?<sup>4</sup> This rhetoric of absence, though, draws our attention away from the very specific presence of technologies that manifest the emulator and the emulated device. The emulator, after all, does not simply conjure up a virtual computer – a virtual Commodore Amiga or whatever. Rather, it makes that virtual computer manifest within a host platform – a PC running the UAE emulator, a Mac running the Bochs PC emulator, a Raspberry Pi running MAME, and so on. I want here to use the case of emulators to examine virtualization as rematerialization – not as a move away from the material to create a domain of the virtual, but rather a new material foundation for digital experience.

In the next section, I will examine a series of problems that occur in the production of an effective emulation. By doing so, I hope to show how virtuality in practice is perhaps better seen as rematerialization. With that in hand, we can take a step back to consider the notion of the virtual as an aspect of the digital landscape.

## Problems of materiality in virtual computers

In what ways do the material manifestations of digital objects challenge the idea of a ‘virtual’ computer in the world of emulation? I will discuss three considerations here: instructions, timing, and input/output.

## Instructions and representations

The essence of emulation is the creation of an environment that can run specific pieces of software. Essentially, it does just what a computer should – it reads a program and then it executes it. To understand the difficulty, we need to think for a moment about what a program actually is.

A computer program, as stored on a disk or downloaded from the internet, is a series of instructions. These instructions are simply themselves numbers; each number corresponds to a function that the computer’s processor can perform, or a data item to which that function should be applied, or a memory address where data to be processed can be found or where execution should shift. Why then is there any need for emulation in order to make some software run? It is needed because different processors and different processor architectures (such as the x86 processors in many desktop computers and the ARM processors in many mobile phones) execute different instructions. It is not simply that they encode the same instructions with different numerical codes (although that is sometimes true); it is rather that they use different so-called ‘instruction sets’ – sets of functions that make up the processor’s catalogue of operations. These differ because processors might provide different kinds of functions in hardware (e.g. one processor might have an instruction for multiplying two numbers directly, while another might support only addition and require that multiplication be performed through repeated addition or through bit-shifting).

The instructions that make up a program are not simply mathematical functions or descriptions. They can be thought of that way, but they can also be thought of as objects that manipulate how a computational mechanism works. Just as a key, inserted into a lock, will reconfigure the tumblers in the lock (hopefully so as to open the door), so an instruction being executed by a processor activates different parts of the processor in order to produce its effect; the key doesn’t simply represent the configuration of tumblers, and similarly the instruction doesn’t simply represent the sequence of action to be taken. The instruction, then, is something that has meaning only relative to the processor in question. There are two important considerations here for the problem of emulation. The first is that, since kinds of processors have different kinds of capacities, as described above, so an instruction that makes sense on one processor may not make any sense on another. You can’t simply follow an instruction to add together the values of two registers if your processor doesn’t have two registers. In this way, the problem of emulation is more than simply ‘finding the equivalent instruction’; there is no logic of equivalences, and local facilities cannot simply ‘stand in for’ the facilities being emulated. The emulator makes up for these deficiencies; it explicitly stands between the original software and the new processor, reading each instruction and directing the processor to act in a manner that is somehow equivalent.

A second way that instructions are tied to particular manifestations – and arguably the more complicated one – lies in the fact that processors may have bugs, errors, or limits to their use which are part of their implementation but not part of the mathematical formulation; so, in order to produce an accurate emulation, an emulator needs to pay attention not just to what the instruction ought to do, but to what it actually does in the computer being emulated. A sterling example is the case documented in Michael Hiltzig’s (1999) account of the history of Xerox PARC, concerning the development of a ‘clone’ (not quite an emulation) of the DEC PDP-10 mainframe computer. The PARC researchers wanted to purchase a DEC PDP-10 computer, but were forbidden to do so by their management, on the basis that the PDP-10 was a competitor to Xerox’s own recent entry into the minicomputer market. In response, the researchers decided to build their own clone of the PDP-10, one that would be sufficiently compatible with the original that they could run software developed for the PDP-10 at other research sites. The tasks of reproducing various elements of the PDP-10 system was divided up among lab members, and researcher Ed Fiala was assigned to building support for floating point mathematical functions. In the course of his work, he discovered some small bugs in the PDP-10 implementation, and so he fixed them for the clone machine so that it would behave correctly. However, when the machine was nearing completion and people began bringing up software that had been developed for original PDP-10s, they found that some of it failed mysteriously. Investigation revealed that some software was failing because it depended on the very bugs that Fiala had corrected. With software compatibility as a key requirement for the new computer, only one solution was possible; Fiala was asked to program the bugs back into his implementation, so that it would be wrong, but in the same way as the PDP-10.

The object of attention in an emulation, then, is not simply the sequence of instructions, which needs therefore to be transformed into some different sequence that suits the host processor; rather, what needs to be reproduced and reenacted is the entire mechanism into which those instructions fit when they are taken not as representations of computational action but as components of the mechanism.

## Timing

As we discussed earlier, the conventional wisdom about computer programming is that computers must be given complete and detailed descriptions of what to do, and that these descriptions are what constitute a computer program, with no detail left unspecified. This is quite true as far as it goes, but computer instructions nonetheless leave much unsaid, and it is what is unsaid that nonetheless must be recaptured in emulation. The time taken by computer operations is an important case in point. On a MOS 6502 processor – the type of processor that powered the original Apple II computer, among others – the machine instruction sequence A1 44 00<sup>5</sup> means ‘fetch the contents of memory address \$4400, add to it the value of the X register to produce a new memory address, and load the value stored at that computer address into the accumulator’. However, it doesn’t specify, for example, how long that operation will take. Producing an accurate emulation means not just performing the same or equivalent instructions but doing it so as to produce the same effect. Why does the timing matter? Well, it might matter if the computer program relies on the delay produced by issuing a series of instructions to make sure that on-screen activities happen with appropriate synchronization, or that a value will be read from a disk at the right moment, or that an interrupt will be handled before an operation times out.

There are two problems here. One is a problem of scale, and the other a problem of imbalance.

The problem of scale is most visible when there are drastic mismatches between the host system and the guest system. One of the major uses of emulation is in the retrospective mode highlighted earlier – reproducing the experience of using older, perhaps unavailable computer hardware in software on modern hardware. In any emulation, performing the same operations in software as one might in hardware is a good deal slower, and so when one performs an emulation of contemporary hardware in software, there is a significant performance reduction. Modern hardware is, of course, generally much faster than older computer hardware, which means that the situation is different when emulating older hardware. It is quite possible that a contemporary software emulation will execute more quickly, perhaps much more quickly, than the older hardware that is being emulated. There are times when this is an advantage. For instance, in my first research position, I wrote software on Sun workstations that ran an emulator for the custom ‘Wildflower’ architecture of prototype research computers developed at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center in the 1970s; the modern emulation was much faster than the original hardware had ever been, representing a significant performance enhancement. In other cases, though, the mismatch might be significantly problematic. If an emulated game runs one hundred times faster in a modern emulation than on the original hardware, it may be too fast to play.

The difference between the performance of contemporary computer systems and that of what is sometimes called ‘legacy hardware’ may be large, but the issue for emulators is not simply the scale of the difference, but also the fact that different aspects of computer systems develop at different rates. Processors, for instance, have generally over time become faster at a rate higher than that of storage systems – so while contemporary storage systems are generally faster than older storage systems, they are not faster by the same factor that characterizes changes in processor performance. In order to account for this, computer system designers have, over the years, developed new computer architectures, or arrangements of system elements, to compensate for the difference.

Modern computer processors, then, are not simply faster than old ones – they are also more heavily pipelined,<sup>6</sup> and might have multiple cores operating simultaneously, as ways of making more efficient use of their ‘excess’ capacity relative to the data storage system. Similarly, modern graphics processors do more advanced processing on their own, without involving the central processor of the computer, introducing another source of parallelism and hence another architectural difference with implications for performance.

To further complicate the problems of timing in emulation, we should remember one other important thing: computers consist of more than processors. Those other things – peripheral devices, subsidiary electronics and non-digital components – all have their own timing considerations that software might need to account for.

As an example, remember that, before the days of LCD screens, most computer displays were cathode-ray tubes (CRTs). A CRT operates by sweeping an electron beam rapidly over a phosphor-lined screen, from side to side and top to bottom, switching rapidly on and off, causing spots of phosphor to either glow or not. These spots of glowing phosphor become the pixels that make up the display, and since they rapidly decay in brightness, they must be ‘repainted’ again and again by the scanning electron beam. This constant need to repaint the screen, and to do it within the timeframe demanded by the electron beam and the phosphor, and to supply the data to drive the display, became a significant demand on the design of early computers – Xerox’s original Alto computer spent fully 66 per cent of its time managing the display. (Butler Lampson, one of the designers of the Xerox Alto, recounted in a 2001 talk at the Computer History Museum that one of his most important contributions to the project was to reduce the time taken by the code supplying the display driver with data from seven microinstruction cycles to six, so that it occupied only 66 per cent of the computer’s time and not 80 per cent.)<sup>7</sup>

One especially important aspect of this arrangement for many microcomputers and game systems was the existence of what was called the ‘vertical blanking interval’, which is the period when the CRT’s electron beam would be turned off and would reposition itself from the bottom right to the top left of the screen, to begin a new painting cycle. Many pieces of software – especially programs like graphical games – would pay a lot of attention to the vertical blanking interval, for two reasons. The first is that a period of time when the screen was not being repainted might suddenly be a period when more processing time is available – a good time to do more complicated calculations. The second is that a period of time when the screen is not being repainted is a good time to make updates to on-screen objects so that there wouldn’t be any of the flickering that might result if the objects were updated at the same time as being painted onto the screen. As Montford and Bogost (2009) document in their book Racing the Beam, programmers on the early Atari VCS game system needed essentially to organize their entire programs around the timing of instructions relative to the horizontal and vertical sweeps of the electron beam.

The timing that needs to be reproduced in an emulator, then, is not simply the timing of the processor, but the timing of analog elements such as the CRT beam, not to mention such features as the characteristic operating speed of disks or the temporal performance of memory. In other words, the production of the virtual ‘guest’ computer means the reproduction not only of the digital elements of the original machine, but also thoroughly non-digital components – a further intrusion of the obstreperously non-virtual.

## Input and output

Perhaps one of the most complicated areas of challenge that emulation throws up is the problem of input and output – recreating and emulating aspects of how graphics and perhaps especially sound work. The problems here reflect and intensify some that we have already discussed. Part of the difficulty is that input and output operations are ones that go beyond the traditional mathematical descriptions that are the foundation of how we reason about computers.

As I have outlined, the mathematical theory upon which computer science is founded – the Church-Turing Theorem – describes a class of computable functions (basically, a class of solvable mathematical problems) and a computational mechanism that can solve them. So-called ‘Turing-equivalent machines’ are machines or mechanisms that can calculate any of that class of functions.

However, in practice, it turns out that actual computers – the ones we all use – are both more than and less than Turing-equivalent machines. They are less than Turing-equivalent in that the abstract description of the Turing machine postulates infinite storage. In comparison to the extremely simple operation of a Turing machine, a modern computer might have so much storage that it is essentially infinite – but it is (obviously) not in fact infinite. In other words, there can be functions that are solvable by a Turing machine but not necessarily solvable by specific actual computers that we might use, not because the problems make unresolvable computational demands but because they make unresolvable storage demands. So in this way, contemporary computers are less than formal mathematical Turing machines. At the same time, though, they are also more than formal mathematical Turing machines in that they have capacities that Turing machines don’t have, especially in their connection to the world. For instance, we expect that any computer we buy today will be capable of playing music; and yet, the functions needed to play music – that is, to be able to control the voltage on a connection to speakers or headphones so that music can be heard – are unavailable to the formal mathematical Turing machine. The theory of Turing equivalence is the theory of what can be calculated, but it stops where calculation ends. So we might be able to show how a Turing-equivalent machine can decode a description of music that has been encoded in the MP3 format, but there is no way to describe the actual playing of the music.

The case of input/output – of playing music, for instance – highlights the way that computer systems, as physical objects and as cultural objects, escape the mathematical accounts of computation. A real ‘Turing machine’ wouldn’t sell very well in the marketplace, because those functions that we demands of our computers – the ability to print documents, to communicate on networks, or to video-conference with friends – are entirely outside of its capacities. This means, then, that while we might imagine that Turing’s theorem – which, after all, describes a machine that can emulate another machine – should be a guarantee that emulation is straightforward, the truth is rather more complicated. To make things even more difficult for someone writing an emulator, these functions, like network communication and processing audio and video, are generally not performed by the central processing unit of the computer, but rather delegated to dedicated signal processing hardware that can be controlled by the processor. Input/output operations, indeed, are often handled in parallel with the operation of the processor, especially in the case of modern machines whose separate graphical processor units – themselves highly parallel – are often more capable computational devices (within a limited sphere) than the central processor itself.

As in other cases we have seen, then, there is no simple one-to-one equivalence between one context and another. Emulation is not simply a question of looking at each instruction and issuing the local equivalent; rather, the behaviour of the original system must be reproduced, in all its material specificity.

## Virtualization and rematerialization

I have focused here on the example of emulation because it provides us with a particularly fruitful perspective on the questions of virtuality. Software is already a thoroughly virtual good, in the terms of the traditional rhetoric; born digital, it lives entirely in digital media, operates entirely within the computer, is transmitted wholesale from place to place, can be duplicated digitally, protected cryptographically, and processed algorithmically. Emulation, then, is doubly virtual; by using one piece of software to produce the actions of another, it seems to constitute an even more radical separation of software from hardware, creating a thoroughly virtual environment for the operation of an already virtual object.

In practice, though, this realm of pure virtuality is hard to find. Emulation seems to be not so much an exercise in virtuality as one in brutal materiality – an engagement with all the specific material constraints of both platforms, those elements that lie outside what is notated by software systems but that are critical to the manifested expression of running software.

Rather than being doubly virtual, then, the case of emulation is instead doubly material. First, the software being executed as the guest system cannot be regarded purely as a virtual expression of desired behaviour, but as a tool for configuring a material arrangement of the delicately entwined digital and analog components that made up the original computer system – complete with flaws, mistakes, problems, undocumented features and unexpected idiosyncracies. Second, the challenge is not to dissolve away these material considerations, but rather to re-enact them in the context of a new materiality – the materiality of the host system. Not only, then, does someone developing emulation software need to pay attention to, for example, the timing arrangements between processor, memory and tertiary storage on the original computer, but these need to be configured so as to operate effectively in light of the timing arrangements among processor, memory and tertiary storage on the current one. It is perhaps, then, less a case of producing a ‘virtual’ computer to run the original software, but rather of ‘rematerializing’ that computer in the context of a new one.

This conceptual shift from virtualizing to rematerializing may be an instructive one beyond the domain of emulation. It brings into focus the inevitable processes of rematerialization inherent in any enaction or expression of the virtual. It places the distinction between notation and expression at the heart of any analysis, and illustrates the way that ‘virtual’ objects of all sorts – representations and encodings – inherently under-specify the phenomena that they putatively represent. The gaps between specifications and rematerialized phenomena should not be read here as failures in a process of virtualization, but rather as signals of the unavoidable materiality that underwrites any practice of the virtual. Those objects that traditional technical accounts hold up as virtual are themselves thoroughly material, and indeed to describe them as virtual at all – at least in the transcendent sense of the traditional rhetoric – requires a certain wilful and selective blindness.

Discussions of the materialities of information and their consequences for encounters between social science and design have focused largely on the materialities of information infrastructures and the materialites of digital artefacts: how the sizes, shapes and physical impositions of iPhones, transoceanic cables and high-rise server farms condition and constrain our encounters with the digital world. The case of emulation helps us to examine the materialities of digital information itself, and the materialities of representation and representational practices that underwrite our understandings of the digital. This is not to undermine the digital, of course, but rather to sustain it by reconnecting it with the world of mechanical effects, economic conditions, scientific practice, cultural appropriation, political debate and social innovation within which it comes into being.

## Acknowledgements

Work on this chapter, and the broader project of which it is a part, has benefitted immeasurably from the contributions of many colleagues including Melissa Mazmanian, Geof Bowker, Tom Boellstorff, Sarah Pink, Yoko Akama, Heather Horst and Danny Miller, as well as support from the Intel Science and Technology Center for Social Computing.