# Imagining smartness

The concept of smart has been part of the way in which future technologically enhanced and potentially automated cities, homes and lives have been imagined. However, to gain an understanding of this concept and how it is mobilized in relation to constituting digital–material worlds, we need to unpack what ‘smart’ means for people who are involved in the development of smart technologies.

In the ‘smart paradigm’ (or the ‘smart city agenda’) there are two shared understandings about where the ‘smartness’ is coming from. One is that intelligence arises from the information-processing capacity of digital technologies which is done at different levels: embedded (smart devices), fog (in the concentrator devices), or cloud (in a server); the second is that society has to enhance people’s skills regarding the understanding and practical uses of these technologies. To advance this agenda, Nam and Pardo, working on smart policies and open government, have developed a strategic principle which would align what they consider to be the three main dimensions (technology, people and institutions) of the smart city paradigm: integration of infrastructures and technology-mediated services; social learning for strengthening human infrastructure; and governance for institutional improvement and citizen engagement (Nam and Pardo 2011). The essence of their idea revolves around the perceived need to coordinate and integrate technologies and people in information processes. The aim is to improve the current social life: cities, homes, cars, factories, schools, clothes, and so on. Indeed, the smart city needs the smart citizen to exist. In addition, other stakeholders in this agenda advocate for ‘smartness’ to come from the production of digital technology and data by the citizens themselves. According to this proposal, some other developers claim that the citizen must share with others the knowhow and expertise by opening the making of digital technologies. This belief is manifested in the ways in which the two projects – Air Quality Egg and Smart Citizen Kit – operate.

Smart Citizen’s designers and backers are concerned with air quality. They are also concerned with the absence of governmental voice in the discussions that matter for people. On the night that the project was launched beyond the small circle that gave life to it, the developers gathered everyone who collaborated in Kickstarter in the Fab Lab in Barcelona. The venue was one of the spots where SCK mainly circulated and the building where the Fab Lab and a prestigious architecture institute were located. We were occupying the central salon, a microphone was on the podium and a mountain of sensor kits was spread over a table (I noted that all the kits were wireless). Tomás – who is seen as the face of Smart Citizen by most of the backers because he is always the speaker at the events – opened the night by thanking everyone who had trusted them. The atmosphere was quiet and everyone was attentive to what was happening above the podium. Alex, another member of the SCK core, spoke after Tomás, explaining the next phase of SCK, which was the deployment of the kits by everyone in the room. ‘Now’, Alex said, ‘is the time when we have to trust you.’ At the same time Tomás and Guillem (one of the workers at the Fab Lab) were delivering the kits to the backers by calling them by name to come up to the podium. Alex continued: ‘You now have the beginning of Smart Citizen in your hands, and it will depend on what you do with the kits. We’ll provide you with all the information and support needed to deploy the SCK, but the project is now in your hands.’

Alex insisted on the point that, while they would be engaged with the deployment, the main task would depend on the people who would set up the kits. Tomás and Alex used the word trust to express the expectations that they had for the deployment of the sensors. Indeed, the success of SCK would require people’s engagement with the deployment: the setting up of the sensors; the maintenance of the hardware; the production, sharing and visualization of data; and the feedback to the community designers about the performance of the sensors. Therefore, the designers trusted people to materialize the projects while the people trusted the designers to bring the kits into existence. Thus smartness became a matter of trust and engagement. This set of relations is far from the notion of the smart as intelligent infrastructure to be deployed in the city, or as technological planning policies coming down from local government. The initiative to separate technology and knowledge on the one hand from urban infrastructure and government initiatives on the other is the starting point, for designers and backers, to understand smartness as being located and actualized in the cycle of actions which are followed in order to materialize sensor kits. The imaginary of the smart is placed in different parts of the development of the projects according to the participants and the stages of the process design. The smart is performed by the relationship between the kits, the designers and backers.

The Smart Citizen Kit was launched as a democratizing device for people to use to monitor their own air environment. The developers and stakeholders understood this as a way of empowering people. Moreover, the people who enthusiastically invested in it believed in that idea. One of the premises that underpinned the SCK and AQE projects was the idea that the production of technological knowledge about our intimate environments will no longer remain solely the domain of governments, scientific companies and academic researchers. This was a dream – as highlighted in Nature – that was shared by the developers of the kit, the people that funded it and its potential users.

These different stakeholders shared an underlying idea in their agenda for the smart citizens – that the individual’s air quality needs could be determined via measurement information generated by a crowd of concerned citizens and monitored through participatory actions, instead of by a centralized and expert system controlled only by the government. It did not matter if there were some practical problems to solve – one of which is the difficulty in getting a sufficiently high standard of air quality measurements for this to be really useful and comparable to the commercial standards – because they had proven that it was possible and affordable.

To sum up, in the case of the smart city paradigm, the global imaginaries<sup>5</sup> of citizenship are put into play through visions of future for a better life. These visions are materialized in the development of the software and hardware of the device (the AQE or the SCK), the webpage that collects the data, etc. Therefore, the visions of future that the SCK or the AQE perform articulate the imaginary of a smart citizen with a practical goal to materialize the citizen sensors projects. In the next section I unpack the visions of future that participate in the making of the digital materialities associated with sensor technologies. Then in the section that follows I turn to my ethnographic materials to show how these were played out.

## Visions of (and in) a global future

The anthropologist Henrietta Moore suggests that utopian visions are engaged with the present and the future simultaneously. It is when a society is facing a crucial experience of social and economic change that the utopian visions of a future life emerge. Utopian visions ‘depend for their efficacy on the fact that they are written in the present whenever that present might be’ (Moore 1990: 16). But these visions are about possible forms of social organization placed in a reachable future. This reachable future is not any specific one and the possible worlds are not infinite; both are linked to the conditions of the present. Hence the visions of future have to be attuned with the present society and with what is possible in order to exert any anticipatory influence on the present society (Elias 1998). Significantly, according to this argument, visions of future articulate present and future through the possible, and its enactment eagerness to social change. The same can be said regarding technological visions of future. These visions of future should not be confused with future imaginaries, although they are related.

Visions imply a ‘willed social change’ while imaginaries are experienced as an inspiration for creativity. Both are related allies, for example in science fiction narratives, and have a central role in design (Dourish and Bell 2011; Galloway 2013). ‘Visions of future’ lie in the core of design processes in technologies (Suchman 2012; Anderson 2010; Kinsley 2010; Galloway 2013) as design has a robust future orientation (Gunn, Otto and Smith 2013) and a welldeveloped set of practices and strategies to go there. One of these sets of practices and strategies – perhaps the most used in technology development – is that of the anticipatory practices (Anderson 2007; Kinsley 2012; Galloway 2013). These are what designers do in the present to anticipate or rehearse possible futures. These practices suggest that there is a state of things that can be advanced through concrete actions which provide and demonstrate whether that possible future is viable and whether it is the best to choose. This notion of anticipation relies on an image of what Dourish and Bell call the ‘near future’, a very close time at which we could arrive any time soon but that is ‘reachable’ in the present through anticipatory practices (2011). For example, smart city design relies on an expanding set of interdisciplinary knowledge (geography, economy, biology, chemistry, computing science, social science, etc.). At its core lies a process of foresight around what people could/should do with the data gathered from the sensors. Therefore, here ‘visions of future’ operate in the design process that brings together the technologies of sensors with the imaginary of a smart city, in a pragmatic manner, connecting global imaginaries and local expectations. This interplay between visions and imaginaries of future might be understood through the distinction made by Appadurai between design (locally) and planning (globally): ‘where design can be caught up in an immediate need, trend, or material opportunity, planning aspires to be design with a social conscience and to connect the world of goods to the world of politics, justice and long-term resource constraints’ (2013: 266).

The significance of Future in the design of low-cost sensors is twofold: on the one hand is the proposition of possible worlds; on the other hand, these possible worlds guide individual and collective future orientations (Nielsen 2011). The sensors are thus designed to produce social change; to quote Charles Lemert, ‘social things’ as technological solutions are imagined, designed and created to solve social problems (2006). In this respect, the design of ‘sensors for the people’ does not only want to solve the problem of air pollution. Rather they are designed to push people to take the initiative to intervene in their world by participating in the production and distribution of local knowledge, thus creating their future. ‘Sensors for the people’ are the point of intersection between visions and imaginaries of future, and between global plans and local designs. In other words, the design of the citizen sensors happens at the crossroad of local and global, imagination and vision.