# Envisioning the smart home: Reimagining a smart energy future<sup>1</sup>

Yolande Strengers

material and human. Entangled as they are, these ingredients of the smart home are being ‘lashed together’ (Dourish and Bell 2011) to create new visions and realities for our future. While there is no universal definition, the smart home can be defined as ‘a residence equipped with computing and information technology which anticipates and responds to the needs of the occupants’ (Aldrich 2003: 17). One key ambition for the smart home, advocated by governments and energy utilities, is to solve national energy demand problems by decarbonizing and ‘de-peaking’ energy systems by reconfiguring and intervening in the home. With such high stakes being placed on smart homes and their associated technologies, there is a clear need to interrogate the promises they hold, as well as analyse the type of realities that are unfolding now, as people begin to integrate these technologies into their everyday lives. This chapter is dedicated to this task, aiming to demystify, probe and reimagine the visions and alternate realities that the smart home is realizing, and potentially can realize, to achieve a lower energy demand future.

The smart home global appliance market, defined as products with built-in connectivity, is predicted to reach nearly US\$25 billion by 2018 (ABIresearch 2013: 1894). A key feature of this luxury market espoused on smart home companies’ websites is a commitment to achieving heightened levels of household comfort, cleanliness, convenience, security, entertainment, communication and energy efficiency. This last ambition links to government and energy industry aspirations for a 15 per cent global reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 (Climate Group 2008) and a peak electricity demand reduction of between 13 and 24 per cent (IEA 2011: 5) through smart technology. In particular, ‘building increased smartness into homes’ (DECC 2009: 20), via two-way programmable thermostats and smart appliances, is anticipated to ‘unlock the vast potential of the smart grid’ (CEA 2011: i), where these technologies will ‘empower consumers to monitor, manage and adjust their electricity consumption’ (AEMC 2012: 29).

As such, advocates of smart home technologies aim to achieve a somewhat paradoxical interventionist agenda, whereby it is possible to maintain or increase standards of electrically enabled living while simultaneously reducing electricity consumption and/or shifting it outside peak times.<sup>2</sup> Despite enormous political and marketing investments in these technologies worldwide, there has been very little critical investigation of the effects smart home technologies are likely to have in our everyday lives. Questions remain regarding whether smart homes are able to achieve their intended energy management ambitions in real-life situations. How will they be taken up, contested, rejected and/or modified by householders who incorporate these technologies into their everyday lives? And what does this mean for energy consumption in homes?

More broadly, critics have been quick to point out the unrealistic utopian aspirations of smart technologies (Morozov 2013; Strengers 2013). In his aptly named exposé of all things digital (To Save Everything Click Here), Morozov (2013) warns of the dangers of technological ‘solutionism’ pervading all facets of society, including the smart home, where it manifests as a utopian vision for harmonious, convenient and efficient living. Another obvious reference point (and clear warning sign) comes from the past. Nyborg and Røpke (2011) remind us that the ingredients of the smart home have a long history, with new elements and trends added along the way. Analyses of the ‘homes of tomorrow’ from the early twentieth century (Horrigan 1986), the ‘electronic cottage’ from the 1980s (Toffler 1980) and the more recent ‘smart house’ (Berg 1994) reveal that utopian visions for our future have unfolded very differently from the ways they were imagined.

Current smart homes are similarly characterized by utopian aspirations alongside a disturbing absence of social research conducted with people who actually live in them. Wilson et al.’s (2014: n.p.) review of smart home literature found that only 20 per cent of publications were based in the social sciences (economics, psychology and energy). Over half (61 per cent) came from computer science, engineering and mathematics, and the remainder (19 per cent) sat in medicine, health, nursing and biology. The majority of publications only made cursory mention of ‘users’. Of those studies that do include people, most have focused on ‘user experiences’ with discrete technologies, rather than the broader implications of these technologies for how we live. Studies have focused on ‘user acceptance’ of smart technologies (Zpryme 2011) or how smart homes can best respond to ‘user needs’ (Gann et al. 1999). Less attention has been paid to ways in which the human, digital and material come together to constitute new ways of being in the world.

Recognizing these limitations, my starting point here is not what people think about energy or how they ‘use’ smart home technologies, but how they negotiate everyday living – doing the laundry, cooking dinner, running the air-conditioner – and how these dynamics are disrupted or transformed through smart home technologies. Following scholars of consumption and social practice (Shove 2010; Warde 2005), I am interested in moving beyond human-centred analyses or ‘user studies’ where there is often a stark demarcation between humans and nonhumans. Recent iterations of social practice theory draw on concepts of materiality and agency from science and technology studies to understand technologies and infrastructures as elements in, or active ingredients of, social practices (Reckwitz 2002; Shove et al. 2012). Reckwitz, for example, argues that the material world ‘necessarily participate[s] in social practices just as human beings do’ (Reckwitz 2002: 208). This blurs the boundaries between the digital, material and human, and encourages us to understand how they come together to enact new forms of everyday practice.

In the discussion that follows I draw loosely on these theoretical ideas to briefly interrogate three intersecting elements of the vision for smart homes emerging from utility providers, governments and their regulators, and smart home manufacturers, designers and advocates. Notably, these do not represent discrete or separate pathways, but often compete with, overlap and complement each other. I continue by outlining three alternate realities for smart homes. Here I demonstrate how digital technologies, material environments and humans are reconstituting everyday practice in new and unpredictable ways. The analysis focuses specifically on home automation devices and appliances, such as smart washing machines or thermostats, rather than looking more broadly at the suite of technologies proposed for the smart home, such as micro-generation or electric vehicles. As such, this is by no means a complete catalogue of the smart home vision or its manifestations in everyday life, but rather a launching pad from which to engage in discussion regarding the smart home as site of and for intervention aimed at achieving lower and less peaky energy futures. I conclude by considering some alternative possibilities for reimagining and redesigning smart home technologies in ways that support everyday life and the energy demand reductions intended for them.

## Envisioning the smart home

## The quantified home

Smart home advocates frequently espouse the virtues of capturing and counting numbers to quantify and change consumption and behaviour. This approach mirrors the Quantified Self movement, which involves self-tracking and monitoring of any physical, behavioural or environmental information in order to monitor or instigate change. The movement is gaining advocates and critics in the era of Big Data. Morozov (2013: 260–1), for example, describes the field as ‘madly devoted to articulating facts’ through numbers, which generates narratives or ‘numeric imaginations’ that ‘seek out quantitative and linear casual explanations that have little respect for the complexity of the actual human world’. This resembles Hacking’s (1982: 28) critique of the ‘fetishistic collection of overt statistical data’ and the ‘avalanche of printed numbers’ which has played a much broader role in the governance of populations.

The smart home can similarly be viewed as a numerical imagination with its own avalanche of data. From the morning cup of tea to overnight water heating, the assumption is that everything can be better managed (or governed) through counting. The dominant numerical logic found in government and industry reports is as follows: data and information made available via smart energy technologies will ‘empower consumers’ (OSTP 2012) to ‘take control’ (CEA 2011) of their consumption and make ‘informed choices’ (AEMC 2011) about how they use energy, thereby unlocking the ‘vast potential’ (CEA 2011) of these smart technologies. The ideal energy consumer is thus also imagined to have a numeric imagination, whereby data about energy inform rational and linear decisions to curb or shift energy consumption in the home.

Of course, how householders respond to and integrate energy feedback into their household practices is considerably more complicated than this. As others have warned, quantified energy consumption, displayed through feedback devices such as smartphone apps and in-home displays, can serve to justify or mask existing everyday practices which use energy in the home rather than reconfigure or transform them (Hargreaves et al. 2010, 2013; Marres 2012; Pierce et al. 2010; Strengers 2013). Similarly, increasing information from thermostats can be confusing, misunderstood or ignored, resulting in other potential realities and possibilities as discussed later in this chapter (Meier et al. 2010).

Interestingly, the quantified home does not only require humans to develop numerical imaginations; material appliances, too, are expected to respond to and act on this digital information. In many smart home visions, appliances communicate with dynamic pricing tariffs, enabling what is referred to as ‘prices-to-devices’, whereby appliances ‘“listen” to the price of electricity and operate accordingly’ (Hledik 2009: 31) to reduce electricity during periods of peak demand or in response to other market signals. Similarly, some automated devices operate by quantifying and then replicating numerically measurable forms of ‘user behaviour’. For example, the Nest thermostat develops a ‘schedule’ of thermostat settings based on occupant usage and input, in addition to providing a graphical interface featuring energy data and information (Yang et al. 2014). This device collects and analyses data to imagine what householders want and provides accordingly. Such manifestations blur the line between who, or what, is in control, and disrupt traditional human–material boundaries through the emergence of new digital relationships. This entanglement is continued in realizing a second element of the smart home vision as a site of automation.

## The automated home

While there is nothing inherently new in the idea of replacing human labour with technology, the notion of automating appliances, and by extension everyday practices, changes and reverses some of the human–material roles expected to be performed in the smart home. For example, former SmartGridNews editor Jesse Berst (2012) argues that ‘we’re wasting our time trying to make people smart about energy. We should be making our devices smart about energy.’ According to Berst, consumers prefer ‘cruise control’ when it comes to their energy demand. They should not have to monitor their own energy performance through energy feedback as advocated in the vision for the quantified home; rather, ‘they should tell the system (once) how they want it to respond and then let the system do the watching’ (Berst 2012). The key idea here is that appliances such as washing machines, dishwashers and air conditioners should do the ‘energy work’ (and other domestic labour) otherwise assigned to humans. This might mean anticipating washing, dishwashing and comfort ‘needs’ or habits, or only turning appliances on when energy prices are low.

Smart thermostats readily embody this vision of automated control; they generally involve the automation of cooling and heating appliances, particularly air conditioning. Smart thermostats, also known as two-way thermostats, can communicate with and be controlled by utility providers or demand response systems. They are an extension of programmable thermostats, which have been around for over sixty years, the critical difference being that smart thermostats can be controlled remotely (Hamilton et al. 2012). Smart thermostats can also notify customers (and their air conditioners) of price events and emergencies, and can be programmed by householders (and electricity providers) to automatically lower or raise the temperature during price events (Meier et al. 2010) – a strategy referred to as ‘set-and-forget’ (Harper-Slaboszewicz et al. 2012).

Oksanen-Sarela and Pantzar (2001: 212) describe these ideas as a form of ‘cultural determinism’, whereby it is ‘natural’ to view technologies as replacing people in everyday life contexts. Digital ethnographers have also critiqued the assumptions embedded in this vision of automation, arguing that it requires an ‘a priori specificity and rigidity that conflict[s] with a large body of ethnographic research on the organic, opportunistic, and improvisational ways that families construct, maintain, and modify their routines and plans’ (Davidoff et al. 2006: 19). Other researchers studying the use of digital technology in the home note that the functional and goal-centred ideals of some technologies such as home automation reflect a masculine image of domestic life (Livingstone 1992: 119) and exclude women, who are more interested in the significance of domestic technology in their lives for minimizing domestic chaos (Livingstone 1992; Logan et al. 1995; Rode et al. 2004).

These studies also remind us of the silencing of domestic labour in this vision of automated practice. Two forms of silencing can be identified here. First, automation is premised on an extremely functional and utilitarian understanding of everyday life where we can identify and separate discrete activities. Wyche et al.’s (2007) study of ‘pottering’ reminds us that ‘pleasure is taken in mundane, seemingly unessential activities’ which often have no identifiable boundaries or clear intentions: ‘pottering-time is dead, unplanned, unstructured, or […] insignificant’ (Wych et al. 2007: 1896). In other words, much of the activity performed in the home cannot be reduced to a singular identifiable practice (e.g. doing the laundry) but rather represents an unplanned or continuous fluidity best represented by concepts such as ‘flow’ (Pink and Leder Mackley 2014). In family life, for example, laundry is more likely to be done in opportunistic ‘time gaps’ rather than when energy is cheaper (Nicholls and Strengers 2015).

A second form of silencing takes place because, unlike other home appliances, automated technologies aim to operate in the background of everyday life. They are not always discrete technologies in their own right, but attach to existing household technologies, such as washing machines, lights, televisions, windows or air conditioners. Indeed, part of the appeal of the smart home is this seamless integration, or what Berry et al. (2007: 240) describe as ‘controlled ambience […] in which technologies recede, blending seamlessly with walls, ceilings and doors, furniture, decorative features and outdoor spaces’. Berry et al. (2007) refer to the first issue of Australian Smart Home Ideas (published 2005), which celebrates this fact. The magazine carried advertisements for a sound system which has been made invisible, and presented readers with the challenge of finding its elements: ‘There are 42 speakers in this room. Can you find them?’ (Australian Smart Home Ideas, cited in Berry et al. 2007: 240). In another magazine feature article on smart homes cited by Berry et al. (2007: 240), readers are invited ‘to imagine a future freed of the “barrage of switches on every wall”’. Here the digital enables the receding of the material, while seeking to free occupants from the encumbrances of either. Through this promise of freedom from material and digital concerns, such language also points to a third element of the smart home vision – one which seeks to enhance and improve everyday lifestyles.

## The enhanced home

The Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers (AHAM) adopts a deceptively neutral definition of a smart appliance, describing it as ‘a modernisation of the electricity usage system of a home appliance so that it monitors, protects, and automatically adjusts its operation to the needs of its owner’ (in Hamilton et al. 2012: 409–10, emphasis added). The central idea embodied in this statement is that automated appliances support, enable and provide predetermined occupant ‘needs’. In the last part of the definition, the AHAM avoids any recognition of, or responsibility for, the role that appliance manufacturers may play in establishing what these needs are. This sits at odds with history, which demonstrates how energy utilities and appliance manufacturers have consistently and successfully played a central role in establishing and transforming new ‘needs’ for comfort, convenience and cleanliness (Forty 1986; Shove 2003).

More explicitly, the vision depicted here reinvents an old idea, where electricity provided ‘the modern housewife with a perfect servant – clean, silent and economical’ (Forty 1986: 207). Smart technology is again being positioned as a modern servant, meeting and taking care of the needs of home occupants. Close to a century after this vision was first promoted to households, home automation company Control4 (2013) rekindles these ideas and adds new ones by inviting its customers to ‘imagine a house that remembers to lock itself at 10pm. Shades that close as the sun hits. A home theatre that takes care of lights, sound and picture in one touch.’ The company’s tagline – ‘life is just better with a little more control’ – references the desire to assign housework to someone or something else, featuring automation as the way to be ‘in control’ of domestic activity (Control4 2013). These ideals are further expanded to encompass not only the control of household labour, but of home security, comfort and entertainment. The outcome or ‘selling point’ for householders is ‘unprecedented levels of convenience’, with energy bill savings and increased home security listed as important side benefits (Harper-Slaboszewicz et al. 2012: 393).

Implicit in these sentiments is an underlying commitment to continual lifestyle improvement, where more (convenience, comfort, entertainment, security) is better than less, and in which these expectations depend and thrive on new devices and technologies that use energy. In this way, the smart home also promises to enhance everyday practice by promoting utopian ideals of seamlessly integrated, harmonious and labour-free home life, which is efficiently run, silently managed, and enables new forms of (electrically enabled) pleasure and luxury (Berg 1994; Dourish and Bell 2011).

Taken together, these three elements of the smart home vision – the quantified, automated and enhanced home – remind us that the agenda intended for this digital technology is far from neutral. The smart home seeks to intervene in everyday life to manage energy in very specific and numerical ways, and intends to carry out the labour and enhance the leisure performed and experienced in the home. While by no means a definite list, these elements exist simultaneously to constitute the smart home vision. They embody both an active and passive role for humans, who are expected to take control of their energy consumption through monitoring and management, while concurrently assigning some of this control to digital devices. Putting this vision to one side, I now turn to examples where smart home technologies have entered everyday life, to consider what realities are beginning to unfold as a result.

## Alternate realities for the smart home

## Coordinating practices

One of the ways in which automation technologies, particularly smart appliances, are entering the home is as a form of coordination, mediation, disruption or intersection across a variety of everyday routines. Davidoff et al. (2006: 19) argue that coordinating technologies are becoming a necessity in a world increasingly characterized by the feeling of being ‘out of control due to the complex and rapidly changing logistics that result from integrating and prioritizing work, school, family, and enrichment activities’.

In contrast to the vision of automating what are seen to be largely fixed and immovable practices, Davidoff et al. (2006) refer to smart technology’s role in creating increasing degrees of flexibility around different sites of activity. These researchers conclude that ‘to give families a sense of control over their lives, a smart home system will have to both support the concept of routine, but not bind families to that notion. Such a system will need to allow plans and routines to evolve organically’ (Davidoff et al. 2006: 28). This system, they argue, will need to allow for ‘battles’ over the thermostat, substantial innovation, ‘constantly shifting targets’, failed routines, and many timeintensive tasks that are nonetheless ‘vital to our identities as Mums, Dads and Families’ (Davidoff et al. 2006: 29–31). Automation and control are positioned here as something that is fluid and dynamic, embedded in daily routine, and not explicitly focused on the consumption of energy in and around the home.

Similarly, Leshed and Sengers’ (2011: 912) research reveals the cultural complexities associated with being ‘busy’, which they describe as a social norm that cuts across many lines of domestic activity. They argue that productivity tools have a broader role than the generation of goal-oriented ‘to-do’ lists. Rather, they are also used by householders to ‘renegotiate their goals and priorities, feel socially committed, manage ever-changing real-life interactions, feel in control, and organize not only what they do, but also who they are’ (Leshed and Sengers 2011: 912). Similarly, automation technologies might be thought to generate ‘downtime’, ‘slowness’ or ‘cold spots’ of activity (Southerton 2003), not necessarily of the luxurious kind espoused by home automation companies, but more practically experienced as a moment to ‘charge the batteries’ (Leshed and Sengers 2011: 912). In this example, control does not feature as the technological management or surveillance of the home, but as the ability to dynamically schedule time when no management is required, and where everyday life can be freed from the demands of people and technology. This opens the possibility for smart home technologies to disrupt and reschedule time in ways that might facilitate different peaks in energy.

However, this coordinating role of home automation technologies, while enabling practices to shift to off-peak times of the day, can also increase energy demand overall. For example, Røpke and Christensen (2012: 359) point out that ‘ICT contributes to both the increasing complexity of everyday life and to the handling of this complexity – making possible the management of more practices’. Home automation technologies can be thought of in this way, where they feature as devices intended to manage – and do more – increasingly complex tasks. A busy parent can be making plans to pick up a child by SMS while cooking dinner. At the same time, automation may be enabling another domestic activity, such as laundering, to be performed in the background. Røpke and Christensen (2012) note that this ability to perform multiple practices at the same time presents new opportunities for energy to be consumed. The concept of multi-tasking and making use of ‘dead time’ leads these researchers to suggest that ‘more energy can be spent per unit of time’ (Røpke and Christensen 2012: 359), presenting opportunities for smart technologies to both increase and decrease household energy consumption.

## Delegating practices

A more complicated suite of realities for home automation technologies can be found in fully automated smart homes. One area of past empirical investigation is with communities of Orthodox Jews, who have been using home automation technology for decades to coordinate the religious practice of resting on the Sabbath, and to maintain the modern interpretation, which is that it is forbidden to turn electrical devices on or off on this day (Woodruff et al. 2007). In their qualitative study of home automation technologies in Orthodox Jewish families, Woodruff et al (2007: 529) explain how the Sabbath is experienced ‘as a time of peace, relaxation, and reflection’, which resonates with the increasing desire to generate downtime or cold spots of activity discussed above.

The concealment of everyday activities is one of the attractions of automation for this community: ‘more technology provide[s] the illusion of less technology’ (Woodruff et al. 2007: 531). However, this technology also reveals and enhances subtle sensory experiences, adding ambience and atmosphere on the Sabbath through the automation of lighting, water fountains and the scheduled production of meals, thereby reinforcing and establishing new meanings (of aesthetics) and routines (of meal time). Appliances and lighting that might have otherwise remained on (or off) for the entirety of the Sabbath are pre-scheduled to operate in specific rooms at specific times, both saving and using electricity associated with the Sabbath’s activities of ‘going to synagogue, spending time with family and friends, studying religious materials, reflecting, taking naps, and going for walks’ (Woodruff et al. 2007: 529). As well as enabling or enhancing many practices, this has the unanticipated effect of making new demands on practice. This reminds us that home automation technologies are not passive slaves: they act back, taking on human-like characteristics and embodying agency by guiding, facilitating and even recommending action.

For example, in Woodruff et al.’s (2007) study, an automated light turning off in a recreation room sent a ‘message’ to the children within it to go to bed, thereby performing the role of the parent or carer. Similarly, lights turning off or dimming after the Sabbath meal were an indication that it was time for guests to leave, performing the role of a polite host. These human-like roles enabled by the digital intervention were not viewed negatively or in reference to a judgemental ‘Big Brother’. Rather, householders associated automation with ‘caretaking, anticipation, and guidance – roles such as servant (sometimes quite a wise servant), mother, and wife’ and ‘occasional allusions to more godlike or omniscient characteristics’ (Woodruff et al. 2007: 533). Such findings raise interesting questions about the human-like characteristics conveyed through different digital–material configurations in the home.

Similarly, Mozer (2005) describes his experience of living in a self-learning smart home as being like living with a housemate. The environment Mozer refers to is one where the smart home learns and predicts its occupants’ behaviours, operating seamlessly and invisibly in the background. However, it is precisely its invisible workings that make the automated home so visible to Mozer. He describes how he ‘found it disconcerting when ACHE [Adaptive Control of Home Environments] would incorrectly predict my passage into another room and lights would turn on or off in an unoccupied area of the house’, and notes that ‘when ACHE is disabled, the home seems cold and uninviting’ (Mozer 2005: 291). In contrast to the idea that this automated system can and should learn to fit in with and support his routines, Mozer (2005: 292) describes how he found himself trying to fit in with the routines ‘learnt’ by the system: ‘For instance, if I were at work at 8 p.m., I would realize that under ordinary circumstances, I might have left several hours earlier; consequently, ACHE would be expecting me, and I felt compelled to return home. I regularized my schedule in order to accommodate ACHE and its actions.’ Koskela et al. (2004: 239) report similar findings in their study of home automation technologies, where the invisibility of automation simultaneous gives the house a ‘life of its own’.

These examples remind us that automated technologies do not operate on the basis of some pre-designed or in-built ‘scripts’ (Akrich, 1992) or morality (Jelsma 2006), nor are they merely appropriated or domesticated into the home (Silverstone et al. 1992). Automation technology’s role in practice is more subtle and dynamic than that. In the examples discussed above, they make demands on everyday practice that potentially reconfigure its existing constellation. This is not a unidirectional imposition or reassignment of control; it is a cyclic process in which agency is circulated and redistributed between humans, the digital and the material, through practice.

## Absence and DIY

There are two other notable realities for home automation technologies as they encounter everyday life, where they appear as complicated, unworkable, uncontrollable, irrelevant and/or fallible. The first occurs when these technologies are experienced as overly complex, or when they break down or do things that annoy and frustrate householders. In these situations technologies are switched off and regulated to the back of the cupboard; in short, they do not perform anything at all. In some instances smart technologies never even make it out of the box – doomed to be irrelevant from their very entrance into the home (Pierce et al. 2010). In other instances, automation technologies come to constitute a do-it-yourself (DIY) practice of repair and innovation.

In the first of these scenarios householders may lack the skills to use and fix automated functions when they break down or ‘play up’, or they may not be clear on why they would want to use them in the first place. For example, Meier et al. (2010: 9) find that ‘occupants find thermostats cryptic and baffling to operate because manufacturers often rely on obscure, and sometimes even contradictory, terms, symbols, procedures, and icons’. In their review of programmable thermostat usability studies, these researchers cite an impressive list of thermostat (and energy) misconceptions and complaints that illustrate how householders are not always (or often) expert operators of systems, and often use complex thermostats as an on/off switch. In this situation, a smart thermostat is no different from a ‘dumb’ thermostat, being so complicated that its features are considered unusable.

A second scenario is that the complicated and/or failure-prone system of automation can constitute its own DIY practice, requiring constant interference and attention and rendering the system highly visible and demanding. Rather than rejecting or ignoring this technology, this may lead some householders to participate in practices of maintenance and repair located specifically around this suite of technologies. For example, Woodruff et al.’s (2007: 530) participants note that the automation system X10 is ‘notoriously unreliable’ and depends on the competence of ‘techsavvy “do-it-yourself-ers”’ who have impressive stories of both success and failure.

Like other DIY home improvement practices, the ‘project’ of home automation involves ‘sweat, sawdust, frustrations and satisfactions generated through the active combination of bodies, tools, materials and existing structures, all of which are implicated in repairing, maintaining or improving the home’ (Shove et al. 2007: 49). Such projects are emergent in the sense that they never go exactly to plan, and because they always involve complexity, exploration and uncertainty. Importantly, DIY automation necessarily intersects with a range of other practices that it seeks to automate. This arrangement is inherently unstable, perhaps more than practices usually are, because DIY automation is deliberately ‘experimental’ and does not always ‘work’, or at least not always as planned. In the case of a DIY automated washing machine, the implication is that the washing might not always ‘work’ either, or at least not in the ways intended. These realities generate a fluid field of possibilities for automation’s role in everyday practice, ranging from having no role whatsoever, through to radical improvisation and intervention.

## Digital intervention possibilities

Home automation’s stealthy and silent approach positions it as an ‘immaterial material’ (Pierce and Paulos 2010) in the practices it seeks to automate, making its role as a digital intervention sometimes difficult to pin down. By attaching itself to or merging itself with existing material appliances in the home in order to schedule, anticipate, automate or otherwise enable practice, automation aims, sometimes unsuccessfully, to maintain a passive role in everyday life. In other instances automation can manifest itself in a highly active role, or make very active demands on householders, by requiring constant attention and responses to numerical information, subtly proposing or attempting to enhance existing lifestyles, or by needing constant attention and maintenance.

This analysis thus demonstrates the sometimes surprising and contradictory ways in which the smart home is being imagined and enacted in everyday life, where smart technologies can engender multiple realities and intervention possibilities, often simultaneously. A smart thermostat can embody ideals of rational and efficient control of energy demand as well as a more comfortable life. It is also means for householders to take control of managing and controlling home comfort by responding to constant data. Alternatively, or additionally, householders can delegate control of doing this thermal work to the thermostat. The thermostat can also take control, by recommending when it should be used, on what settings, and for how long, thereby bringing new meanings and expectations to the practices of heating and cooling. The smart thermostat can also be completely ignored – its automation functions deemed uncontrollable or irrelevant. Finally, a smart thermostat’s complicated and seemingly erratic workings may constitute it as a DIY project – an activity to be continually ‘worked on’ (or only used by a tech-savvy person). Most importantly, automation can mean all or some of these things at once.

For those seeking to understand the smart home as a potential mode of intervention into everyday life, this analysis presents both significant challenges and opportunities. On the one hand, it is difficult to think beyond visions for passive and utilitarian control, when these understandings continue to pervade industry, policy and design circles, and attract significant funding and investment. On the other, studies of home automation in everyday life, alongside other ethnographic and social research on the home, provide alternative conceptualizations for redesigning the smart home to support energy demand reductions or other ambitions.

On this more positive note, one possibility might include taking seriously Dourish and Bell’s (2011) invitation to engage productively with the concept of ‘mess’ in everyday life, including ideas of ‘pottering’ (Wyche et al. 2007) and unplanned ‘flow’ (Pink and Leder Mackley 2014). Rather than seeking to remove mess, designers could engage with messiness as ‘inspiring, productive, generative, and engaging’. Mess is not something to be fixed, tamed or removed; indeed this is an impossible goal. Rather, messiness is ‘dynamic, adaptive, fluid, and open’ (Dourish and Bell 2011: 93); it is the stuff upon which innovation, improvisation and adaptation is founded. In this way, ‘mess’ and everyday environments have their own intelligence or smartness which is ‘organic, opportunistic and improvisational’ (Davidoff et al. 2006: 19). Taking this idea seriously would involve conceptualizing and theorizing mess as something other than mess – a term which tends to provoke negative and chaotic connotations. Mess could be reconceptualized as fine-grained networks of routines, or the outcome of different householders’ intersecting practices. It is has dynamics, rhythms and patterns. It is observable and knowable. It could be supported by and through design that seeks to shift domestic activity in new directions (Strengers 2014).

Another suggestion is to broaden our understanding of for whom, or what, we are designing smart homes. This might mean doing away with the gender-less and utilitarian concept of the ‘user’, by engaging with the eclectic composition of households and their human and nonhuman occupants. Pets and pests, for example, while not often captured in the generalist notion of a ‘user’, can play a significant role in how practices are performed in the home (Strengers et al. 2014). Similarly, babies and young children often do not directly ‘use’ technologies, but may be significant for how and why they are used the way they are.

There is also an opportunity here to think about how we might design for different types of time. If part of the aim of the smart home agenda is to shift energy demand to different times of the day, then this translates to a need to shift routines and practices outside their normal peaks. Thinking about how technologies could generate new ‘hot spots’ or ‘cold spots’ of activity (Southerton 2003), or designing for different understandings of productivity and busyness (Leshed and Sengers 2011) could be possibilities.

These ideas point towards an imperative for smart home designers and advocates to ‘assume new assumptions’, and to reimagine the sort of low-energy life we want or could have (Strengers 2014). Following design fiction practitioners and scholars, and research informed by theories of social practice, there is a clear need to speculate on what life might look like with a lower energy footprint and less peaky electricity demand. As Wilson et al. (2014: n.p.) argue, this means seeing smart ‘as emerging within users’ everyday lives and in the ways technologies are used in the home, not as something that resides in technologies themselves’. There is scope not only to imagine future possibilities, but to draw insights from the past, and from the billions of people who currently have no or extremely limited access to electricity, and who are remarkably and disturbingly absent from smart home visions.

Importantly, this reimagination may not involve anything digital. Instead, questions we might ask include: How could we cool and heat our homes (or bodies) without any or very minimal electricity? How might our practices change around increasing incidences of extreme hot and cold weather? What might bathing look like without the energy- and water-intensive shower that has dominated personal grooming in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries? Indeed, such questions are already the concern of design scholars working with notions of practice and everyday life (Clear et al. 2014; Kuijer et al. 2013). With new imaginaries in mind, there is scope for designing for different possible lower energy and less peaky futures both with, and without, smart technologies.

## Reimagining the smart home

Berry et al.’s (2007: 242) observation that the smart home is a ‘fluid and unstable field of possibilities’ reminds us that the energy demand outcomes for the smart home are far from a confirmed reality. Despite this, policy and energy industry predictions for the smart home assume that the development and proliferation of smart home technologies ‘will empower consumers to take control over their energy consumption’ (CEA 2011: i) in a way that will enable the ‘efficient use of electricity and water without compromising modern lifestyle’ (Ausgrid 2012: 1). What follows is a series of predictions and percentages, such as those referenced in the introduction to this chapter, which present the smart home vision as a fait accompli. In adopting this position, smart home policies and research effectively avoid engaging with the possibility that these technologies might enable new ways of living which increase energy demand. Instead, they position smart home technologies as ‘neutral slaves’, which perform tasks on behalf of their occupants or users, without interfering in how those occupants live (Hamilton et al. 2012).

As I have demonstrated in this chapter, this is an extremely dangerous and misleading position to take. Flanked by a long history of failed utopian promises, the continued critical interrogation of the smart home is necessary if we are to realize the vision’s energy reduction and demand shifting ambitions. In continuing this task, I have argued for the removal of common demarcations between the digital, material and human, suggesting instead that we carry out research that explores the entanglements between and beyond them. We cannot only be interested in how people ‘use’ smart technologies, but must also focus on how they are reconfiguring both human and technology, and in doing so how they reconstitute the very fabric of everyday life. Further, I have suggested that we need to refocus our attention on what (and who) we are designing for: the messy and often improvised flow of everyday activity, rather than discrete utilitarian tasks. This involves viewing the home as a collection of human and nonhuman interactions and relationships, rather than discrete uses between human and machine.

Finally, it is important to remember that the future smart home is an imagined one, and it is constantly being reimagined. By shining a critical light on the smart home vision, other emerging realities, and possible alternatives, we open up new ways of understanding and imagining the smart home that bring us closer to achieving its ambitious agenda of a lower energy demand future.

PART TWO

## Co-interventions