# Refiguring digital interventions for energy demand reduction: Designing for life in the digital–material home

Sarah Pink, Kerstin Leder Mackley, Val Mitchell, Garrath T. Wilson and Tracy Bhamra

## Introduction

In this chapter, we argue for an approach to design and intervention that builds on the ability of anthropological ethnography to open up new ways of knowing the world, and that attends to digital media as part of this world. Our ethnographic and design research is therefore undertaken in what we understand as a digital–material and sensory environment, and our approach to intervention and change-making is informed by this conceptualization. In what follows, we draw on our experiences of working in an interdisciplinary team – which draws from anthropology, media studies, design and human–computer interaction (HCI) research – with the aim of making digital design interventions in everyday home life that will help people reduce their energy demand. We show how the possibility for such an approach has emerged through interdisciplinary working that brings together the dialogue

between ethnographic practice and theory with design practice, in ways that both challenge our existing assumptions and that are generative of new possibilities.

Our work is set in an academic, activist and policy context where, for decades now, global climate change and local resource scarcity have led to calls for more sustainable energy futures, with digital technologies increasingly expected to provide some, if not the, key solutions for transforming consumption. Within this fast-growing field, the digital is often appropriated in one of two ways. One scenario sees sensor technologies within ever more interconnected information and communication networks as enabling automated energy-reduction systems that operate ‘in the woodwork’ (Weiser 1996); the smarter their processing power, the less responsibility lies with the humans who co-inhabit their environments. A second scenario puts agency (and responsibility) back with individuals by finding innovative ways of engaging them through digital services and devices; the aim is to persuade and enable people to actively monitor, control and reduce their energy consumption, in more or less playful or formulaic ways. The first approach renders digital technologies almost invisible, while the second foregrounds, at least in parts, the importance of people’s interactions with new material products and digital interfaces.

Social scientists in particular have been critical of both the utopian notion of digital technologies as providing all answers to energy demand reduction questions (cf. Strengers 2013), and of the simplicity of the above human/ technological agency dichotomy. While underpinning much engineering and design work in this area, a focus on the latter arguably fails to account for complexities and interrelations, as well as for important sociocultural, ethical and political implications. As such, scholars have sought alternative ways in which to conceptualize what people do with both energy and digital media. Débora Lanzeni, Yolande Strengers and Mike Michael (see Chapters 3, 4 and 6, this volume) engage with this context through (differently) critical discussions of the notions of smart cities, smart homes and digital energy feedback technologies and speculative design. By taking specific disciplinary approaches and perspectives to this field, these authors highlight the limitations of approaches that depend on either technological or human agency for the success of design initiatives or on interventions that seek to change human behaviour. For instance, Strengers is interested in a sociologically oriented social practice theory approach, which puts the practices of everyday life at the centre of the analysis. Like other social practice theory-oriented approaches (e.g. Shove 2010), this reveals the problems associated with the ways in which neo-liberal regimes place responsibility on individuals to change their (energy consumption) behaviour once sensitized to it through behaviour change campaigns. An emphasis on changing individuals’ behaviour, practice theorists argue, clouds the relevance of, and in the process reinforces, other sociotechnical forces and structures. Michael, in contrast, seeks to undermine the idea of the research question that might be successfully answered through conventional sociological processes. His work on energy demand leans towards a more speculative methodology – which is in many ways more akin to the experimental elements of a sensory ethnography approach to doing ethnography and creating research encounters with participants (see Pink 2015). As these discussions show, there are a number of tensions in terms of how to understand energy consumption and create sociotechnological ‘solutions’ towards demand reduction. Ultimately, new approaches both to researching with participants and to making everyday life interventions are needed. This, for us, has meant developing ethnographically and theoretically informed ways of engaging with digital media as part of new approaches to design and intervention.

In this chapter, we suggest a reconfiguration of the relationship between theory, research and design intervention that draws on phenomenological anthropology and design research approaches. We explore what happens when the apparent dichotomy of digital presence and affordances and human action and improvisation is both disrupted through ethnographic research and utilized by designers. To do this, we reflect on how concepts for digital interventions for energy demand reduction have emerged, between designers and social science researchers, on an interdisciplinary study of domestic energy consumption and digital media use. In doing so, we draw on our research and practice developed on a project that aimed to use digital innovation in energy demand reduction. The LEEDR (Low Effort Energy Demand Reduction (2010– 14)) project brought together engineers, designers, social anthropologists and computer scientists to explore energy use and digital media engagements in twenty UK family homes. It combined longitudinal energy monitoring with in-depth ethnographic fieldwork and family-oriented design research and practice. For further context, we invite readers to our website Energy and Digital Living where we present and explain our ethnographic findings and design concepts through video clips and writing for a wider audience (www.energyanddigitalliving.com).

We do not present our project as the perfect ‘solution’ to the problem of energy demand reduction, or indeed to the question of how to engage with the digital materiality of the home. Because the problem itself is wider and implicates not only the everyday energy consumption activities of individuals in their homes but also a series of other infrastructural and governance issues, it could not be ‘solved’ through a project such as ours alone. Moreover, the role and significance of digital technologies in this process is yet to be determined (see Strengers, Chapter 4, this volume). Rather our work is part of a journey towards developing new ways of working between ethnographers and designers, within and in relation to a digital–material environment and, in the case of this particular project, towards energy demand reduction. It is in that sense a speculative process, in that we did not know what would emerge from our research relationship when we began. In the spirit of the speculative design processes that are described by Mike Michael and Bill Gaver (see Michael, Chapter 6, this volume), as our project came to a conclusion we found ourselves in a position to show what we have learned from this process and to reflect on how it would enable us to craft future design ethnography relationships in new and generative relationships. Understanding the nature and significance of digital–material dimensions can be considered both a research and a design challenge. It is also this inspiration that we invite readers to take with them as the field of intervention in a digital–material world evolves further and through new projects.

## Researching through digital materiality: Project and methods

To be able to understand how and where to make digital design interventions towards everyday sustainability, our project aimed to reframe the approaches to energy demand reduction that are driven by the technological, engineering, behavioural and social practice theory agendas we have highlighted above. Instead we sought to refigure what people do with digital media in their everyday lives in their homes, how digital technologies already form part of everyday life, in both their tangible and intangible forms, and how people improvise with digital technologies in everyday life. In doing so, we appreciate the potential of ordinary people as everyday designers who have a certain form of agency, which emerges through their relationships with digital technologies.

We also create something of a false separation between the environment of and activity in the home, in order to distinguish these for the purposes of understanding the ways that both are implicated in design processes. At the end of the section we bring these together to suggest that their mutuality needs to inform the way we understand the home and the ways that interventions might be produced in it. First, we briefly explain the research methods we used, and the research design that informed the ways in which we developed our ethnographic encounters.

Our research design set out to understand how the home was made, experienced and maintained (and the role of digital media in this), and how a set of specific everyday activities, which had been identified as potentially high energy consuming, including laundry, media use, showering/bathing and use of heating, were actually accomplished. We were also concerned with the contingencies and human improvisations that these activities and environments are shaped by. Our ethnography thus had an emphasis on the experience of home, and how the unspoken, mundane, often invisible and otherwise unknown-about elements of everyday routines and lives underpinned the ways in which energy is consumed. To achieve this, our ethnographic research followed a three-stage process. The video tour was designed to understand the ‘sensory aesthetic’ of home, how it was made, maintained and experienced (Pink and Leder Mackley 2012). The tours pulled in the things, feelings (sensory and affective) and activities through which the home was constituted as our participants led us on a route through it. They enabled us to learn about how the home was known and sensed, where and how activities were distributed throughout it temporally and spatially. As part of the video tour encounter we also invited our participants to demonstrate to us, through reenactments, how they went about their everyday routines of getting up and going out in the morning and going to bed at night. The reenactment studies enabled us to gain an understanding of the ways in which everyday routines were accomplished, the idiosyncrasies and improvisation that they entailed, and the sensory tacit ways of knowing and moving through the home that were part of the often-never-spoken-about ways in which people consume energy as they make their homes and selves ‘feel right’ at these pivotal moments of the day (Pink and Leder Mackley 2014). We gave copies of all our video materials to participants and invited them to comment on and ask for edits in them, as part of both our research and ethics process. As the next stage of our research, we also worked with a smaller sample of eleven households, with whom we focused on exploring how they performed a series of everyday activities. These studies of everyday activities enabled us to understand better how the tasks of doing the laundry, showering, using media and other activities are interwoven with each other and with the materiality, sensoriality, affect and atmospheres of home. Our research taught us that these cannot easily be separated out as distinct practices that might be redesigned but, rather – and as we show below – we might need to think of other categories that might be identified through ethnography in order to find ways through which to design for energy demand reduction. This, then, became a matter of reframing what it is that we think we are designing for.