# The digital–material environment of home: Presence, co-presence and atmosphere

Our approach to analysing our ethnographic findings was developed through a series of theoretical-ethnographic dialogues which are discussed in more depth elsewhere in the articles we refer to below (see also Leder Mackley and Pink, 2013), and which have contributed to debates in media studies, sociology and human geography. Here we summarize these contributions to outline how we developed a focus on the concepts of presence, co-presence and atmosphere, which eventually played a role in the production of the insights the ethnography team offered to the design team. The purpose of the discussion here is also to present this as a framework for considering how we might understand the environments, actions and atmospheres of homes as sites of possibility for digital design interventions.

Our sensory video ethnographies of home set out to develop a new understanding of energy demand in the home. Our study focused on how and why energy was consumed in the homes of our participants, along with a special or dual focus on the place of media in this process. We were not only interested in how digital media consumed energy, but also in the ways in which they were integral to the mundane lives of our participants, given that our objective was to also produce insights into how and where digital design interventions for energy demand reduction might be introduced. Our approach to the home was informed and underpinned by existing research into the sensory, material and mediated qualities and affordances of home. These three themes offered us a rich ethnographic and theoretical background to build on, and we used existing theoretical ideas in dialogue with our own ethnographic findings. Our ethnographic research drew on the existing tradition of material culture studies of home, as developed by Danny Miller (e.g. 1988, 2001), the notion of the sensory home developed by Sarah Pink (2004) and the tradition of non-mediacentric media studies specifically relating to home, as developed by David Morley (e.g. 2000) and followed through in the more phenomenological work of Shaun Moores (e.g. 2012) and Nick Couldry and Tim Markham (e.g. 2008). These existing works offered us a way of understanding the home that was 1) constituted by its materiality in relation to human actors, 2) a sensory and affective domain filled with things and activities that were not necessarily tangible or ever spoken about but sensed and tacitly known, and 3) a mediated site, where media was part of both of the materiality of home and embedded and often appropriated into the routines of human activity and feeling that were co-constitutive of home.

Our work built on this existing understanding of home in two ways that we recount here briefly and to which here we also add an additional layer of analysis by accounting more explicitly for the proposal that digital media are part of the atmosphere of home. As such, we define the digital materiality of home in terms of its qualities not only as a material and sensory/affective environment, but as being constituted as an atmosphere (Pink and Leder Mackley forthcoming). This, we argue, offers a way of bringing together and reframing the materiality, sensoriality and mediatedness of home. It means that we are designing therefore not simply into a material, technological or sensory home but into an atmosphere generated through people’s embodied relations with a digital–material–sensory environment. This atmosphere will influence how any interventions are experienced and engaged with, and will itself be impacted by interventions. It is therefore also the atmospheres of home that we suggest need to be accounted for when designing for/with homes. Our existing publications have brought to the fore three key points that have formed the basis for this thinking.

First, through an analysis of how participants in our research understood their digital media technologies in relation to the ambiguous states and statuses of on, off and standby modes, we developed the notion of media as ‘presence’ (Pink and Leder Mackley 2013). In the non-mediacentric media studies work we have cited above, media still tend to be understood specifically in relation to their uses for content and for communications. Our ethnography showed us how digital media were used in the home in a series of ways beyond their value for content or communication. We learned how people put media on at bedtime to help them go to sleep, unbothered by the programme that was on. We also learned how people’s perceptions of the different states of on/off-ness of media was part of the way they sensed their homes, knowing that the home ‘felt right’ if and when media were switched to the ‘right’ status. This was often achieved through bedtime routines where, depending on the contingencies of the material and social arrangements of home, media would be put on, off or on a timer to go onto standby mode (Pink and Leder Mackley 2013). The other type of media ‘on-ness’ can be described through the notion of digital co-presence, whereby through mobile and locative media people are often continually online with the potential to access and ‘be with’, or with an affective sense of the presence of others who are in different and possibly distant physical locations (see Pink et al. 2015 for a discussion of digital relationships). In terms of energy demand, standby mode can be a relatively high consumer of electricity, and therefore something that would have potential for reduction. Yet it is also a mode of being, of material, sensory and social presence in the home for which we need to account through design.

Second, there has recently been a (re)turn of interest to the concept of atmosphere (e.g. Böhme 1993; 2013), particularly in the work of scholars in human geography (Anderson 2009; Bissell 2011; Edensor 2012, 2014), as well as in anthropology (e.g. Bille et al. 2015). In this literature atmosphere is not seen as something separate from people or environments, but as embodied and affective, emerging from bodies rather than enveloping them from elsewhere. Drawing on the work of Ingold, we have gone on to further theorize atmosphere as something that is also emergent from what Ingold calls ‘making’ – that is, from the everyday forms of improvisory activity that people engage in during their everyday lives. Therefore we have argued that ‘we can understand the atmospheres as emergent from processes of making – that is, from the encounters between people, materials and other elements of the environments of which they are part (e.g. air, light, warmth, scents). Atmospheres are not as such products but they are produced or emergent ongoingly as people improvise their ways through the world’ (Pink and Leder Mackley forthcoming). We found, when we looked at the ethnographic detail, that our participants could be understood as everyday makers of atmospheres in their home in precisely this way – for instance, as they walked through their homes at bedtime, switching the lights on and off, closing curtains, plugging in things to charge and setting up technologies to ‘work’ while they were asleep – as such making the material configuration and atmosphere of the bedtime home as they moved through (Pink and Leder Mackley forthcoming).

Bringing this argument together with that outlined above – where we have argued that media presence is also part of the home – invites us to take this further. This has meant generating a definition of the digital materiality of home, which takes the atmosphere of home to be something that goes beyond the relationship between materiality and the embodied/affective (as advanced in the human geography literature cited above), and which instead also encompasses the affordances and qualities of digital technologies – that is, the digital presence and co-presence that is generated by media in ways that go beyond (but of course also include) their functions for content and communication. The implication of this is that to design for change in the home we need to account for these ways in which media feel and participate in the generation of atmospheres of home, both through their technological presence and through the sociality of digital co-presence of being online with others.

The third element of this relates to the ways in which improvisory human activity is part of this process, as outlined in the next section.