# Speculative design and digital materialities: Idiocy, threat and com-promise

Mike Michael

## Introduction

Not so long ago, there was a little incident with my iPhone, my MacBook and my Damson Cisor BT5 Resonating Bluetooth Speaker. I was trying to play music from a playlist on my MacBook’s iTunes through a Bluetooth connection to the Damson speaker, but the music coming out of it was wrong. It sounded vaguely familiar, and was certainly very pleasant, but it was not the music that iTunes was saying it was playing. At first I thought I must be picking up music from someone else’s system in my apartment building. Quickly I realized this was highly unlikely given what I knew about Bluetooth and its relatively short range. So it must be something else. It was then that I noticed the corner of my iPhone poking out from beneath some papers. Once I had got into the iPhone it became apparent that on switching the Damson speaker on, it had connected ‘preferentially’ with my iPhone (which, after all, had had a longer ‘history’ of connectivity with the speaker). I felt slightly idiotic for imagining that my speaker had been hijacked by someone else’s music system, but also a little resentful at the apparent autonomy of ‘my’ devices that had determined their own relations, that had together conspired against my wishes, that had collaboratively misbehaved.

In many ways this is an everyday, more or less trivial, event – barely worth reporting on. And yet something interesting seemed to be going on. That something interesting was not the resort to the anthropomorphic terms in which this episode is couched. Such anthropomorphism is not uncommon and, given the sociotechnical constitution of these technologies, not altogether unjustified (Latour 1992). More immediately relevant is what this apparent ‘sociotechnical misbehaviour’ signifies. On one level, the software (for playing music, for seeking out Bluetooth devices, for establishing connections, for registering the ‘history’ of connectivity) and materiality (the physical proximity of the devices, the hiddenness of the phone, the juxtaposition of computer and speaker) together suggested an articulation that, in the setting of my trying to listen to music, made ‘no sense’. By ‘no sense’, I mean I couldn’t immediately understand what was going on – I was confused, and my initial attempt at an explanation (my speaker had been hijacked by someone else in the apartment block) was not a little nonsensical. On another level, it is of course possible to make sense of these reactions. The sense of betrayal by the sociotechncial coterie of computer, phone and speaker reflects a feeling that the relation between these devices is structured by a system from which I can be largely excluded, and into which, given my relatively low levels of technical skill, I have only partial and pre-delineated entrée. Here, there might be a critique to be developed around the issue of ‘configuring the user’ (Woolgar 1991) or the sensitization of users to the digital invasion of their privacy or dilution of their agency (Lupton, 2015).

However – and this is the perspective I want to develop in this chapter – one can also provide a more ‘speculative’ account of this episode. So the event that includes the ‘collaborative misbehaviour’ of the devices, and my reaction which sought to lay the blame on others in my apartment block, however, also suggests a more speculative reading. Thus the music I heard was very pleasant, and it might have come from others in my apartment, others who seem to have good taste (according to my preferences, of course). Say, fancifully, I went knocking on the doors of my neighbours, asked them to check their Bluetooth connections, while also commenting on the excellence of the music, is it possible – and I stress ‘possible’ (see below) – that a new set of conversations begins? Instead of the anonymity that typifies my apartment block, perhaps there will emerge the prospect of a different set of relations? Can we imagine this taking the form of not only a new sociality, but indeed, of a new ‘technosociality’? That is to say, do the semi-autonomous communications of digital objects enable the emergence of new social bonds? Here, ‘technosociality’ can be understood as a movement toward a novel nexus of interrelations and communications among humans, between humans and digital artefacts, and, crucially, amid digital artefacts.

Needless to say, the anecdote presented above is not innocent; it is performative (Michael 2012a) insofar as it entails both the peculiar selection and the ordering of its ‘data’. On this score, it is no different from any other means of generating and analysing data (e.g. Law 2004). Arguably, there is an increasing awareness of social scientific method as performative, and, with this, a sense that the epistemological and ontological terrain of social science might be shifting (e.g. Lury and Wakeford 2012). In particular, following such scholars as Isabelle Stengers – as we shall detail below – research events can begin to be treated as open, unfolding, oriented toward the not-as-yet. Is it possible to seek out ‘events’ that can be narrated with a sort of speculative intent, as in the anecdote above? More provocatively, is it possible to imagine a way of designing digital materialities that enact such research events and provoke the possible?

In response to this last question, this chapter describes a particular tradition in interaction design – let us call it ‘speculative design’ – that produces devices that can serve within the frame of the speculative social scientific methodology hinted at above. This tradition has long been interested in the design, production and implementation of artefacts, often with digital capacities, that are ambiguous and ludic. As such, these interaction designs playfully interject in, and potentially destabilize, routine social processes and practices, thereby opening up them up to speculative analysis.

In what follows, the chapter begins with an overview of the performativity of method and its implications for doing speculative social scientific research. Drawing on the process philosophical work of Whitehead and Stengers, the chapter suggests that the ‘philosophical figure’ of the idiot can do useful work in coming to grips with the ways in which we can explore the potential of everyday sociomaterial events, and to ask ‘more interesting’ questions of them. More specifically, it is proposed that the digital materialities of ‘speculative design’ are particularly suited for taking on the role of ‘proactive idiot’ (Michael 2012b). As such, the chapter describes a number of idiotic digital–material designs. However, the chapter also goes on to examine what needs to be in place in order for digital–material ‘idiot’ to provoke a rethinking of what is stake in the relevant sociomaterial events. The chapter thus ends with a reflection on the affective, aesthetic and ethical qualities of the digital– material idiot, and the ‘com-promises’ that these might entail.

## Research, process, event

In John Law’s (2004) After Method, a powerful argument is developed and elaborated around the performativity of social scientific method. For Law, methods which aspire to pin down reality and to exercise some form of validity tend to neglect the complexity that, according to Law following Deleuze, characterizes ‘reality’. As such, ‘reality’ is multiple, relational, shifting, emergent. To engage with such complexity is necessarily a process fraught with problems: how does one access that which is shifting, in flux, multiplicitous? In this light, method for Law is better understood as a ‘method assemblage’, that is to say, an active, halting and uncertain process of engagement that is unavoidably constitutive of the ‘reality’ it relates to. Key here is the idea that a method assemblage enters into relations with this reality marked by flux and multiplicity. Crucially, these relations are not confined to, or exclusively mediated by, the parameters of the social scientific method (e.g. the questionnaire, the focus group, participant observation). Rather, these relations themselves entail flux and multiplicity; for instance, they are sensorially highly complex (e.g. Pink 2012). Even so, the engagements entailed in a method assemblage are always limited; in the end, they comprise the ‘crafting of a bundle of ramifying relations that generates presence, manifest absence, and Otherness’ (Law 2004: 45). In spite of this chronic boundary work, the advantage of thinking method through the idea of a method assemblage is that we are invited to ‘imagine more flexible boundaries, and different forms of presence and absence’ (ibid.: 85).

This path-breaking rearticulation of social scientific method nevertheless raises issues. Crucially, in Law’s formulation a particular sort of boundary between researcher and researched seems to be enacted: the researcher ‘crafts’ but does not seem to be ‘crafted’; the method assemblage seems by and large unaffected by the assemblages of the world with which it becomes embroiled. Stated so boldly, this does a disservice to Law; I think these issues are implicit in the notion of method assemblage. The rest of the chapter is concerned with following up some of the implications of this dimension of method assemblage, not least by thinking ‘method assemblage’ in terms of ‘research event’.

I take my lead on the notion of the event from the process philosophies of Whitehead, Deleuze and Stengers. In particular, I see events as ‘actual occasions’ in which a multiplicity of divergent elements – what Whitehead calls prehensions – that span the social/material, the micro/macro, the human/ nonhuman, the cognitive/affective come together and merge, or ‘concresce’ in Whitehead’s (1929) terms. However, these ‘concrescences’ of ‘prehensions’ can take two broad forms. Thus, the constitutive elements can inter-act and retain their identity or distinctiveness, and cohabit within the event, as it were. Alternatively, they can intra-act (Barad 2007) and mutually change one another, co-becoming in the process of the event’s concrescence. For Mariam Fraser (2010), this processual formulation of the event involves a ‘becoming with’ among its various elements.

As Connolly (2010) remarks, it is not an easy matter to warrant this alternative view of the event with its evocation of ‘a world of becoming’. Nevertheless, along with John Law, I follow this view because it opens up new prospects for doing social science research. In the present context, it also allows us to ask whether a method assemblage in the ‘research event’ of crafting relations with the assemblages with which it engages is itself crafted. Put simply, do the research encounters we enter into simply constitute research events, or can they become something altogether different? Is the researcher who enters an empirical setting mutually changing with the ‘objects’ of her study, which also becomes something other than a ‘study’?

This version of the research event echoes Stengers’ (2005) conception of cosmopolitics. In a cosmopolitical event the various actors involved in a political encounter mutually change. In the process, what started out as the issue at stake might itself be transformed. As such, instead of seeking a solution to the original problem which precipitated the cosmopolitical event, the very premises underlying what counts as a problem might shift. Thus, there opens up the possibility of asking better questions; of, as Fraser (2010) phrases it, ‘inventive problem-making’. In the case of the research encounter, this translates as follows: rather than look for answers to some pre-existing research question, the researcher is open to the changes wrought by their empirical encounters, changes that enable them to reformulate what the ‘research event’ is about, and to articulate more inventive problems. In seeking to do this, the researcher is acknowledging the fact that they are embroiled in, and emergent from, the flux and openness of the research event. This implies that the doing of research can no longer be about representing, however modestly, the ‘object of research’ when it, along with the researcher, are mutually changing, co-becoming. This opens up a more speculative approach which attempts to grapple with the ways in which the ‘research event’ (though, of course, ‘research event’ hardly does justice to what might be happening) unfolds, becomes, emerges. Given this openness etc. of the research event, it befits us to resist the temptation to fall back on our usual frames of reference when coming to grips with what is emerging – to rethink what is at stake in the research event. On this score we might follow Stengers (2010: 57), and adopt a strategy that ‘affirms the possible […] actively resists the plausible and the probable targeted by approaches that claim to be neutral’.

## Idiocy and methodology

How do we access the prospective, the virtual in the research event? At base this is a matter of being open to the emergent. For Connolly (2010), this entails developing what he calls an ‘exquisite sensitivity to the world’ (a world that is in process, of course). To put it in the terms of Latour (2004), there needs to be cultivated a ‘learning to be affected’. However, Connolly is particularly anxious that such sensitivity does not necessarily allow insight into what is potential in the world; there can be a temptation simply to revert to usual framings through which to come to terms with what seems unclear, not-as-yet. Stengers (2005) also attends to this issue, but she does it via the ‘conceptual character’ of the idiot. In her hands, the idiot ‘resists the consensual way in which the situation is presented and in which emergencies mobilize thought or action’ (Stengers 2005: 994). By virtue of making little sense within the consensual or standard framing of the event, the idiot ‘demands that we slow down, that we don’t consider ourselves authorized to believe we possess the meaning of what we know’ (ibid.: 995). Our responsibility as, in the present case, social researchers is to ‘bestow efficacy upon the murmurings of the idiot, the “there is something more important” that is so easy to forget because it “cannot be taken into account”, because the idiot neither objects nor proposes anything that “counts”’ (ibid.: 1001). By engaging seriously with the apparent nonsensicalness of the idiot, we become open to a dramatic redefinition of the meaning of the event.

Let us return to the opening example of the ‘collective conspiracy’ and ‘collaborative misbehaviour’ of my iPhone, MacBook and Damson Cisor BT5 Resonating Bluetooth Speaker. Here is an idiotic episode; it didn’t make much sense in relation to my understanding of the event and my expectations about that event – expectations that ranged from what music I was hoping to hear, to the ways in which such technologies interact and work together. To be sure, I could ‘dismiss’ this as a simple accident, or more self-deprecatingly as a matter of my own incompetence. However, I could also pay attention to the sense of betrayal and exclusion: these objects had colluded to confuse me. Here, one can recast this in terms of a critical account about the ways in which a user such as myself is heterogeneously constituted, pre- and pro-scribed in particular ways (Latour 1992; Akrich 1992).

But note, this account assumes that there is a preeminent ‘I’ here under some sort of sociomaterial siege. I do not emerge from this event – as a speculative version of the event would imply – so much as am assailed by it. Of course, this sort of critical analysis is hugely useful and the purpose is not to dismiss critique per se. Rather, the aim here is to add to our analytic arsenal in ways that can further illuminate the immanence of sociomaterial events (for one account of the relation between critique and immanence, see Guess, 1981). It might be suggested that a combination of critique and speculation finds its greatest expression in the work of Donna Haraway (1991, 1997; see also Prins 1995). So, taking a speculative tack, I will focus on my own initial reaction to the playing of unexpected music, namely, that the Bluetooth speaker had been hijacked by someone else’s music system somewhere in the apartment building. I suspect that this interpretation draws on the fact that I occasionally notice the presence of other devices under the ‘Shared’ heading on the sidebar of my Finder file management system. Sometimes I do not recognize these named computers detected by my own. Presumably, I too am a semi-anonymous presence on someone else’s computer. And perhaps sometimes (though this is highly unlikely given the limitations of Bluetooth), my music is accidentally played on someone else’s music system. Here, there emerges the outline of a different way of engaging with the event of ‘the wrong music playing’: rather than seeking a practical solution (e.g. clearing up my desk), or political solution (e.g. opening up design to more user input), one aspires to more ‘interesting’ problems. As such, in this case, one might ask: What is the ‘I’ that is emergent here? Is it some hybrid combination of computer, music, taste, Bluetooth? Is this hybrid being digitally circulated? Is it potentially encountering others? Does this hint at a sort of ‘digital technosociality’? How are we to understand and unpack such a term?

This speculative accounting of the event of ‘the wrong music playing’ is no doubt stilted, not a little forced, and somewhat simple-minded. The point, however, is not to specify ‘a virtuality’ or ‘the possible’ for this particular event, but more modestly to illustrate what ‘learning to be affected’ (I hesitate to say practising an ‘exquisite sensitivity to the world’) might look like in doing speculative research and seeking to pose more ‘interesting problems’.

Now, being responsive to the idiotic in such events is just one methodological option available. It is also possible to deploy proactively the idiotic as a way of probing the virtual. By introducing something that is idiotic into particular social settings or situations, it is possible that those who must interact with this ‘idiotic something’ will respond in ways that pose questions about the ways in which that setting or situation is normally understood, enacted and warranted.

More specifically, can we imagine an ‘idiotic’ digital–material device (or system) that lures the user into expanding their sensibilities – enhancing their sensorium – so that they ‘learn to be affected’ in new and unexpected ways which in turn enable access to the possibilities and virtualities of the event of which that device and user are a part? This, of course, raises all sorts of further questions: What becomes the ‘user’ under these sorts of novel configurations of the digital, material, corporeal and ideational? What is the relation of these configurations to matters of affect, aesthetics and ethics, when that which is to be sensed or valued, and which, indeed, does the sensing and the valuing, is redistributed and recirculated? We shall explore some of these questions in the sections that follow. But first, we turn to a discussion of so-called ‘speculative design’. It is here, in some versions of ‘speculative design’, that we can find examples of idiotic digital–material devices. By following the procedures by which these devices are developed, crafted, deployed and engaged, we will begin to see how ‘speculative design’ might resource a speculative methodology in social science, while also raising ‘interesting questions’ about the parameters of such a methodology.

## ‘Speculative design’

In the preceding comments on ‘speculative design’, there has been some circumspection (signalled by the scare quotes) in putting a name to the set of design practices that most resonate with the issues addressed and the arguments developed in this chapter. In part this is because within academic design there seems to be considerable formal and informal debate as to what is to count as ‘speculative design’, and indeed whether this is an appropriate term in the first place. For the social scientist this complexity is redoubled when one takes into account the collaborative connections between design and social science that are beginning to take shape (e.g. Stormi 2012; Hawkins 2013; Latour 2008).

‘Speculative design’ can be understood to fall within a lineage that draws in ‘participatory design’ (where the design process is affected by a direct engagement, indeed collaboration, with potential users – see Ehn 2003) and ‘critical design’ (where credible technological futures are projected then critiqued through design artefacts that undermine them in some way or other – see Dunne 2005; Dunne and Raby 2001). Latterly, a fascinating combination of these approaches has found expression in ‘adversarial design’ (DiSalvo 2012). Needless to say, these genres of design blur at certain points – for instance, Dunne and Raby (2013) have, in their recent book Speculative Everything, emphasized the speculative dimension of their own and others’ design work. Even so, the ‘speculative design’ practised by Gaver and his colleagues (e.g. Boehner, Gaver and Boucher 2012; Michael and Gaver 2009; Gaver et al. 2008) that I shall be discussing below sits at a tangent to these enterprises in a number of ways, while also displaying a more general family resemblance.

So, the ‘speculative design’ I am interested in does engage with users, but in a distinctive way. In contrast to participatory design, users are invited through various means such as cultural probes and ethnographic visits to generate material (say, views on the aesthetics of a dwelling’s energy use, or idle doodles while talking on the phone, or photographs of a home’s spiritual centre) which are combined with other materials (design history, recent media reports, online discussions, and so on). The users are not directly involved in the specification of the design so much as providing materials that inspire the process by which designs are developed. This sort of speculative design thus retains a certain ‘mystique’ in its design practice. As we shall see, this is because the artefacts that are produced and deployed must be a-functional (in the sense of serving a practical purpose that is unclear), ambiguous, and playful in ways that surprise the user, test their expectations, and enable unforeseen ways of thinking about the issues at stake.

This also differs from critical design where, generally speaking, user engagement plays little or no part. The final product will be a prototype such as the ‘Local Barometer’ (which displays local advertisements whose geographical source is directed by wind speed and direction) or the ‘energy babble’ (which ‘broadcasts’ more or less garbled verbal announcements about energy consumption). These designs are given to users to live with for a relatively extended period of time (as long as a few years). So, while this version of speculative design, like critical design (Dunne and Raby 2013; see also Tonkinwise 2014), contributes its artefacts to design exhibitions in museum and galleries, this is not the primary way in which the public is addressed. Rather the main point of ‘contact’ between the artefact and the ‘public’ is through deployment – the installation of the prototype in a setting in which it will be, hopefully, routinely encountered, used, addressed, reflected upon. As such, a crucial part of these designers’ practice is regular ethnographic visits, conducted in order to enquire about users’ experiences with the prototype, about the sorts of practices that have evolved around the artefact. Whereas critical design is content to generate artefacts that question people’s beliefs about the technological future and resource visions of alternatives without necessarily following these up, speculative design is concerned with exploring people’s actual practical encounters with these objects. As such, speculative design can be understood as focused on the ways in which people’s practical engagements with artefacts that operate in odd, a-functional ways yield unexpected insights and enable the emergence of reformulations of the ‘issues at stake’. These empirically derived novel apprehensions of ‘what’s going on’ are themselves reflected upon as part of the design process.

Here, we also see differences across these design genres in the character of the designed object itself. By and large, participatory design’s object embodies a utility or functionality that better reflects the requirements of its users (requirements that are not simply practical, but may be social and political). By comparison, critical design’s object works in a way that ideally triggers critical reflection of contemporary credible technological futures. In contrast to both, speculative design’s object is one that entails a sociomaterial encounter in which users are faced with ambiguity, uncertainty, playfulness that allows for the emergence – through practical engagement – with novel, unexpected insights into the matters that are, or become, relevant to that engagement. Indeed, we might say, critical design tends to operate on a register of ‘apprehension’, in which understandings, ideation, affect combine to generate a sort of unease that facilitates the emergence critique of current technological and alternative futures. The object of critique and critical object retain their character – this is an event of partial co-becoming. Drawing on the vocabulary of Whitehead, speculative design functions on the register of ‘prehension’, where practical engagement allows for a co-emergence of object and user, as their interaction encompasses not only ideation and affect but also the physical, the social, and the corporeal (on the differences between apprehension and prehension, and also comprehension, see Michael, 2002). Finally, framing this in terms of the ‘idiot’, critical design’s objects seem to me to be partially idiotic – their idiocy is mediated, and possibly muted, by the context of display (the exhibition). The gallery is a space of critical and speculative reflection, exploration and meditation in which extended practical engagement is lacking, or at best truncated. The idiocy of speculative design’s object, and the sorts of responses that idiocy provokes, is interwoven with its deployment and the extent to which its functions and uses are specified. However, as we shall see, the idiocy of objects doesn’t always work in this way. We shall examine the notion of the idiot and the role of idiotic in digital– material methodologies in more detail. But before that, I present two cases of speculative design, one in which it was successful, one in which it failed.

## Un-successful-ish design

The ‘Local Barometer’ strikes me as a particularly successful example of speculative design. It was part of a larger design research project that sought to develop a range of ‘threshold devices’ (Gaver et al. 2008). These were designed to collect information in novel ways from various digital sources related to the home and display this information through ways which were not directly functional, but which nevertheless facilitated new ways of thinking about, for example, the situation of the household – not least its relation to ‘larger spatialities’, such as the trajectories of an airplane along its flightpath, or socioeconomic distribution and character of neighbourhoods.

In the case of the Local Barometer, this comprised six small devices, each coloured brightly and incorporating a small screen which displayed the images and text of classified advertisements. The Local Barometers themselves were shaped so that they could sit easily within the domestic setting of the household – for instance, attached snugly to a bookshelf. The texts and images themselves were derived from the online site Loot.com which specialized in classified advertisements. The other part of the Local Barometer was a commercially sourced anemometer attached to the roof of the dwelling. This measures wind speed and direction. It was on the basis of these measurements that the advertisements were selected for display. Thus, the stronger the wind was blowing, the further the site of the advertised object was located. Similarly, wind direction determined the direction from which the advertisement was digitally ‘blown in’. The idea underpinning the design of the Local Barometer addressed how people understood their neighbourhoods; it was thus design to enable people to engage in novel ways with how neighbourhoods were envisioned, say, in terms of their economic, social and cultural characteristics.

The volunteer, R, lived with the Local Barometer for around a month, and during that time members of the design team visited him several times, each visit lasting about half a day, for a total of thirty hours. Field notes (observations, informal interviews) and photographs were collected. From these materials, the following account took shape. R was initially aggravated by the adverts which he saw as yet another commercial intrusion into his home. He started off being resistant to using the barometer, not wanting to be distracted by still more advertising. However, this changed somewhat when he began noticing adverts that were more meaningful to him, for instance those selling vintage guitars. This immediate affective relation also took other forms, for instance negative reactions to sports car advertisements. Through this engagement with the device, he also began to notice that his sense of the neighbourhood, and those surrounding it, was being challenged. While certain objects reinforced his ideas about the area in which they were located, other objects did not seem to ‘fit’ culturally, socially or economically with their locations. In addition to this – and unexpectedly for the designers – R began to use the location of the advertisements as a way of interpreting the weather (most obviously, one can imagine R might interpret distant advertisements as indicative of windy conditions).

Insofar as the Local Barometer can be said to operate as an idiot (what is the point of sending advertisements into a home on the basis of wind speed and direction?), it becomes apparent that R has co-become with the barometer. Indeed, so too has ‘neighbourhood’. R, who was once resistant to the Local Barometer, finds that he is affected by it. The barometer is no longer a conduit of unwanted commercialism, but a digital lens on the surprising character of the surrounding neighbourhoods. And when R begins to read the weather through the advertisements, he is practically posing interesting questions about the idea of neighbourhood: the inventive problem of the neighbourhood now concerns how we conceptualize a neighbourhood. If initially it was comprehended in terms of particular economic, social and cultural features, it came to be apprehended as altogether more surprising in terms of those particular features, and eventually it came to be prehended as something composed of the cultural, the social and the economic but also of the meteorological, the electromagnetic and the digital.

By comparison, the Home Health Monitor (Gaver et al. 2009) was a failure in that it failed to enable any of such speculative prehensions in its users, even though it was meant to ‘provide an intriguing reflection on the household’s “mood”’ (n.p.). The Health Home Monitor was a simplified version of the Home Heath Horoscope (Gaver et al. 2007). The latter entailed a series of sensors around a very large and occasionally hectic household that detected certain physical conditions, frequencies and periods (e.g. whether the door to a particular room was opened or shut for a certain period of time, a sofa was sat on or not, a cleaning cupboard was being used or not). These stood as proxies for particular events such as privacy, social intimacy, cleaning, each of which in turn was indicative (albeit in sometimes ambiguous ways) of well-being, social cohesion, busyness or intimacy. These links between sensors and what was being physically sensed (e.g. door closedness), the activities associated with the physical changes being sensed (e.g. sequestration, privacy), and the meaning of these activities for the household (e.g. intimacy, aggravatingly busy household) were derived from various visits to the household. The data collected through the sensors were sent remotely to a processor that used the frequency and duration of changes, compared these to running totals, and derived the relevant metrics. The two metrics that had changed the most were then used as the basis for drawing on a large collection of statements taken from online horoscopes to generate the final printed output. The system was discussed many times with members of the household, who were less concerned with the accuracy of such statements as ‘the household is busy today’ as such interpretation of these statements as ‘you should slow down’.

As noted above, Home Health Monitor was a simplified version of the Horoscope. This simplification took place for numerous reasons, including the fact that household members focused on the designers’ research agenda rather than engaging with the playfulness and ambiguity of output itself. In the transition to the Monitor, the following changes were made: a simpler household was chosen in order to mitigate the Horoscope’s overinterpretation of a complex household; as the horoscope genre was not always appropriate, aphorisms were used instead, and later photographs and pie charts of the daily metrics; where the Horoscope sensors were housed in opaque casings which led to some suspicion, the Monitor sensors were rendered more legible by ensuring that their functions were more obvious; whereas the design team were deliberately reticent about their intentions for the Horoscope, for the Monitor they clarified their interest in how to access ‘home health’.

Despite all these changes, the Monitor seemed to be an even greater ‘failure’ than the Horoscope. For instance, the two household members developed a rather critical relation to the Monitor, assessing its outputs in terms of accuracy rather than engaging with their ambiguity as a matter of curiosity and an opportunity for further reflection. At base, they could not see the point of the system; the ‘thinness’ of the output against the sophistication of the system, the opaqueness of the output statements, the lack of apparent utility for a healthy couple – all of these judgements arose quickly and did not shift over the course of the deployment. This reflected, according to Gaver et al. (2009), a series of disjunctions: the users tolerated rather than engaged with the system, they didn’t situate it in relation to other technologies, they didn’t domesticate it into household routines, and they didn’t greet subsequent changes in and to the system with any interest. Gaver et al. attribute this failure to a number of factors: the system’s outputs were too varied and uncontextualized to allow for ready interpretation by the users; the range of inputs was not reflected in the simplicity of the outputs; the Home Health Monitor project was so theoretically oriented that it excluded appropriate considerations of whether the system offered meaningful experiences within a domestic setting.

Let us reconsider the two examples of the Local Barometer and the Home Health Monitor through the conceptual apparatus of the ‘idiot’. In the former case, the idiocy of the barometer could be couched in terms of the initial strangeness of having seemingly arbitrary adverts entering into, and being displayed at six different sites around the home. The initial response was one of hostility at what was regarded as commercial invasiveness. However, engagement continued, facilitated by occasional adverts that were seen to be interesting – the idiot was becoming ‘useful’, and then surprising as advertised objects challenged the user’s sense of the socioeconomic character of neighbourhoods, and then productive of a different practical relationship in which the barometer and user co-became something unexpected. By comparison, for the Home Health Monitor, the idiocy of system was never ‘penetrated’ – the idiot Monitor was rendered, and continued to be rendered, as either incomprehensible or uninteresting.

## Toward a conclusion: Idiocy, threat and com-promise

For Stengers, the idiot is a figure that requires a response: we are responsible for paying it heed, for bestowing efficacy upon its murmurings. Yet an idiot that ‘murmurs’ is a relatively benign or sedate idiot. Idiots also shout, scream and attack. In other words, not making sense takes many forms, including forms that are threatening. Within the relative safety of a philosopher’s study, even the more violent expressions of idiocy are food for thought. Yet when the idiot is operationalized as a speculative digital–material device, it can be too ‘threatening’, leading to incomprehension, disgust, active neglect and a recourse to more conventional ways of thinking (as we glimpsed in the example of the Home Health Monitor).

Now, ‘threat’ can be taken as a term that in the present case straddles many dimensions: the epistemic, the ethical, the aesthetic, the affective, the social, the political, the economic, and so on (though disambiguating in this way is itself problematic). As noted, the responses to threat take many forms: passivity, avoidance, displaced antagonism, directed aggression, and so on. In addition, threat is relational insofar as what is threatening to one actor is wholly unthreatening to another.

On one level, speculative devices are ‘pre-loaded’ with a degree of threat in that through their a-functionality and ambiguity they are designed to ‘not make sense’. However, the threat of this ‘not making sense’ can be reinforced in unintended ways: for example, economically (the expense of the design object or project as a whole compared against the apparent triviality of its output); politically or ethically (the issue of home health is pointless for healthy people as opposed to those at risk); the output can be sensorially or aesthetically grating (the invasive noise of Home Health Monitor’s printer); epistemically in that the output might not seem to have any value as ‘knowledge’ (as opposed to inviting reflection on the contingency of knowledge).

According to my online thesaurus at least, the antonym of threat is promise. The sorts of digital–material devices described above can certainly be said to embody promise. Often the speculative devices are highly finished and beautiful (there is a promise of aesthetic pleasure), ambiguous and playful outputs (there is a promise of ludic pleasure), strangely or oddly a-functional (promise of new affects, of self and collective discovery). Further, through initial visit and deployment phases, social relations develop between designers and users (there is a promise of ‘sociality’), and in the discussions between users and designers, the design might be framed in terms of wider issues (the promise of a future innovative digital materialities).

In the same way that threat is relational, so too, in the present context, is promise (despite its particular locutionary character – see Austin 1962). As we saw in the case of the Local Barometer, its promise began to overcome its threat: R first became engrossed in some of its content, then practically engaged with aspects of its potentiality. By contrast, its users seemed resolutely to find no promise in the Home Health Monitor. Put simply, whereas R opened himself up to the openness of the Local Barometer, the Monitor’s users did not. But then, as Connolly (2011) writes, such openness is perhaps less open to people ‘who accede too much to conventional wisdom or power’ (2011: 159).

Etymologically, ‘promise’ can be understood as a ‘putting forward’. We might say that the speculative device is designed to ‘put itself forward’ in a particular way that makes its idiotic ‘threat’ more approachable, accessible. However, at the same time, the potential users are being read and enacted by the designers as themselves having promise. Users must not ‘threaten’ the project, they also need to ‘put themselves forward’ in relation to the idiotic device’s ‘putting itself forward’. There is, in other words, a putting forward together – a ‘com-promise’ (where ‘com’ etymologically signals ‘together’). On top of this, as hinted in the foregoing, there is the com-promise that encompasses the designers’ engagements with prospective users and their household: a relationship is co-crafted in which there is a tacit exchange of promises about the general nature of the design system, the users’ commitments to the project, and so on. We have seen how these com-promises don’t always hold fast.

The point of this concluding discussion has been to try and illuminate some of the implicit threats and promises, and their mutual management, in the form of what has here been called ‘com-promise’. These com-promises, it has been suggested, undergird speculative research and the digital–material forms it takes. In orienting social scientific research toward the prospective and the virtual of events, com-promises have to be made which favour some prospects over others. These com-promises operate in complex, perhaps even topological, ways across numerous actors, events and relations; we have mentioned only a few here. In the end, the notion of a com-promise is simply a heuristic means of thinking about the virtualities that need to be put in place in order to enable the virtualities of the research event itself.