# Designing for the performance of memory

David Carlin

## Introduction: A Living Archive for a circus

I write here neither as an anthropologist nor as a designer, but as a writer and practitioner in the arts. In my practice, which has threaded its own eclectic path between creative writing, the performing arts and media, a recurring preoccupation is with the vicissitudes and materialities of memory, and the different ways that memory circulates in how we perceive and fabricate the world through practices of making such as storytelling. Being human, as digital anthropologists Horst and Miller remind us, ‘is a cultural and normative concept’ (2012) – as for that matter is being nonhuman. I am interested in exploring micro-sites in which these everyday processes of normative acculturation, as well as counterflows of resistance, can be observed and documented, approaching this making-work of storytelling as an attempt in itself at resistance. Such micro-sites need to be assemblages of material circumstances (including history) in which, to appropriate Barthes’s (1981) notion of the punctum, something punctures or wounds me. Other metaphors for this puncturing action that come to mind include haunting, infecting and seducing: each in its own way denotes an affective charge that draws in and implicates the observer so that he/she/I cannot maintain a fantasy of detachment. Instead, he/she/I participates in what we could think of as an ethics of care. Family is obvious as such a site (Carlin 2010). Another, as in this case, is a circus.

I have had some association with this circus, the leading Australian contemporary company, Circus Oz, for over thirty years, first as a teenage fan, then as a member of their complex and messy extended family (see

Carlin 2011 for gory details), later as a show director, writer and videographer. Circus Oz emerged from the vibrant Australian theatrical scene of the 1970s. It began as a radical collective in 1978, aiming to both subvert and celebrate the popular traditions of circus. It has grown and matured into a ‘national treasure’ (Syke 2014), but has managed to maintain its inclusive, collectivist, politically attuned and conceptually sophisticated aesthetic into the new century. Since 2008 I have led the Circus Oz Living Archive project team, a multidisciplinary effort to develop a platform for a digital archive for Circus Oz. The project can be conceived of as a digital intervention. It is attempting to intervene in cultural practice, and specifically the practices of an internationally significant performing arts company, investigating the costs and benefits for such a company of designing a system to make legible the knowledge and experience embodied in its cultural memory. At the same time, the project has another agenda: to intervene critically in the concept of the ‘archive’ itself by asking what kind of archive does a circus want and need – be it ‘radical’ (Geismar 2012), ‘participatory’ (Huvila 2008), or ‘animated’ (Burdick et al. 2012) – and what is involved in designing such a thing?

My aim in this essay is to revisit the trajectory of the development of this digital archive platform and to trace a number of key moments – meshes between the digital and the material – within that trajectory, which help to reflect not only on how and for what purpose community (digital) archives might be made, but also upon the ways in which the approach to making such an archive has influenced what can and will be made. The proposition I want to suggest is that digital archives afford opportunities for communities and organizations to develop what I am calling new platforms for the performance of memory. Platforms for the performance of memory, in the way I will use the expression, are what Assmann (2008: 98) would characterize as ‘institutions of active memory [that] preserve the past as present’. But, more than this, they are provisional dynamic sites which stage the complex and multithreaded interplay between past and present, memory and experience, and do so in a way that helps us both to orient ourselves in relation to the past and to open up ‘lines of flight’ (Deleuze and Guattari 2004) into the future.

The project, broadly speaking, aimed to build something practical in the ‘lifeworld’ (to borrow anthropologist Tim Ingold’s word (2011: 2)); namely, an interactive digital archive built upon the 2,000-plus-hour performance video collection accumulated over the thirty-seven-year history of the internationally acclaimed Australian contemporary circus, Circus Oz. As a research rather than commercial undertaking, the project sought to investigate the technical, cultural, design and organizational issues around the making of such an archive, with the agreed premise that success was to be measured by the extent to which the archive could contribute to the ongoing life and culture of the circus now and into the future. It was assumed that the knowledge generated would be applicable more widely in the performing arts sector and beyond to other organizations holding potentially valuable archival collections.

The project team was large and multidisciplinary: a diverse, productive mix of artists, designers, media and performance scholars and computer scientists (see archive.circusoz.com/credits), including staff, current and former artists of the circus itself. The project began in 2008 with a proposition: the ‘Living Archive’. Drawing enthusiastically from the then-current rhetoric of Web 2.0 (O’Reilly 2005), online ‘collective intelligence’ (Levy 2007) and ‘knowledge communities’ (Jenkins 2008), we situated the project as:

interrogat[ing] the intersection between the raucous circus space that welcomes audience interaction in the ring and the online ‘living archive’ that welcomes interactive participation – creating a socially mediated online space where Circus Oz information/creation can be augmented, annotated, explained, mashed-up and (re)created, engendering new material for the live show, which will find its way into the online circus space. (Carlin and Mullett 2010)

From 2010–14 the videos were digitized and the Living Archive itself was built in a series of prototypes collaboratively designed in a process led by PhD candidates Reuben Stanton and Lukman Iwan. It was ‘soft launched’ online in 2013 (see archive.circusoz.com) and handed over by the research team to the circus, where, as of 2014, it was operational and in use both for repertoire development and marketing purposes.

Elsewhere, myself and project colleagues have discussed and theorized the Circus Oz Living Archive project through a variety of lenses, most notably in the book Performing Digital: Multiple Perspectives on a Living Archive (Carlin and Vaughan 2015), as well as in articles focusing on design methods (Vaughan et al. 2013) and the tensions between notions of archive and repertoire (Carlin 2014). Here I want to consider the notion of the ‘platform’ that implicitly underpins this digital archive project, thinking about it in the context of the opposition Ingold draws between classification and storytelling. How can the platform for a digital archive engender storytelling, not simply classification?

## A knot of stories

A platform, according to the Oxford English Dictionary, is ‘a surface, or area, on which something may stand’. Platforms are typically flat, so that things upon them can stand and not slide or topple off; they are typically elevated, so that what is stood upon them is more visible or more distinguishable from its surroundings. Platforms can also be grounds or foundations for ideas, the basis for actions.

For anyone with a theatrical background, the notion of the platform brings that of the stage irresistibly to mind. The stage – or in a circus tent or arena, the ring – is the platform for performance: at once a surface for things (actors, animals, stage scenery and apparati), ideas and actions. But on a stage or in a circus ring these things do not so much stand as move; they flow through the medium of time.

Performances occupy their chosen platform (stage, ring) for a certain length of time, flowing onto it at the beginning and off again at the end. By being placed on or occupying a platform they are designed to attract attention as focused instances of what Ingold calls ‘a knot of stories’ (Ingold 2011: 154). Ingold lays out a persuasive theoretical framework for thinking about how humans apprehend and help to shape the world, starting with the premise that, as inhabitants of the lifeworld, our knowledge flows from enmeshment in that world, across time, as ‘wayfarers’ (2011: 155). It is by wayfaring through the lifeworld that we pick up knowledge. Ingold argues that the classificatory splitting of the world into a panoply of discrete subjects and objects, bounded and fixed, material in their thing-ness, is a misapprehension:

For inhabitants, things do not so much exist as occur. Lying at the confluence of actions and responses they are identified not by their intrinsic attributes but by the memories they call up. These things are not classified like facts, or tabulated like data, but narrated like stories. And every place, as a gathering of things, is a knot of stories. (2011: 154)

Natural language, for instance, is not a set system passed on by parents and teachers to children, to be built up chunk by chunk into an edifice, an armature of knowledge, but rather an ever-changing stream of sounds, words, grammatical conventions, sentences, intonations, puns, jokes, etc. into which each of us, as infants, floats and gradually learns to navigate (Ingold 2011). We might forgive Ingold if he resorts to a somewhat clunky neologism to express how inhabitants integrate knowledge neither vertically, as in systems of classification that link discrete objects through classes of similarity and difference, nor laterally, as in networks connecting points on a grid, but ‘alongly’ – along the way of the inhabitant’s movement through the world, weaving together its elements, each of which is in constant flow as well. He calls this ‘the alongly integrated knowledge of the wayfarer’ (2011: 155). In opposition to classification, Ingold positions the activity of storytelling. Classification works by separating out the characteristics of things independent of context, but ‘stories always and inevitably draw together what classifications split apart’ (2011: 160). It is through story that we constitute the world and the world constitutes itself for us as inhabitants: ‘the things of this world are their stories, identified not by fixed attributes but by their paths of movement in an unfolding field of relations’ (2011: 160, italics in original). Stories are organic mechanisms for the retracing and sharing of paths of movement through the world, techniques dexterous enough to convey – to choose an arbitrary example – the fluttering death-throes of a moth on Virginia Woolf’s desk along with the pulsing empathy of the author herself as she observes the little creature along with the clouds scudding above the fields beyond her window and the panorama of animals, plants and birds framed therein (see Woolf, The Moth).

Archives, historically, have been understood as sites of storage and preservation, within which archival units known as records are classified and catalogued. However, as Mike Featherstone and many others have argued, the move from physical to digital archives changes fundamentally what the archive can do and how we understand it. In a digital archive, as Featherstone puts it: ‘the notion of immediate access and feedback replaces the former data separation (the file in the box on the shelf) which created the differences out of which archive order was constructed and reconstructed’ (2006: 596). The new digital archive, instead of being fixed and closed to all but the initiated, is, in Featherstone’s words, ‘fluid, processual, dynamic’ (ibid.).

In this move, the place of the archive in meaning production and in storytelling has changed. The classical post-Enlightenment archive was the place where the past lived in silence. As Caroline Steedman vividly describes it, ‘nothing happens to this stuff, in the Archive […] It just sits there until it is read, and used, and narrativised’ (1998: 67). It was by agency of the historian that the archive was ‘made to speak’ (1998: 69); the historian who uncovered and pieced together stories from its traces. By contrast, the digital archive holds the promise that now the archive itself can become a knot of stories, a live site of meaning-formation. This is what I am edging towards with the concept of a platform for the performance of memories, which can help to weave what Ingold calls ‘the meshwork of storied knowledge’ (2011: 168).

## The performance event and its recording

A platform for the performance of memory, I would like to propose, is made through the mediation and remediation of a minimum of three types of event. These we can call the performance event, the memory event, and the performance of memory event. (In saying this I run the risk, I realize, of introducing a reductive classificatory schema; bearing this risk in mind, I offer the schema as a designer would a sketch, as a shorthand for thinking through the connections amid a meshwork of materials, digital and otherwise.)

In this instance, where the platform is for a circus, the performance event is usually quite literally a circus performance, although it might also be a rehearsal or a backstage/offstage activity such as the performers putting on make-up in their dressing room, the audience assembling outside the venue, or the company embarking on a regional tour. Circus performances, like their performing arts cousins in theatre, dance or live music, rely on a highly charged mesh of relations between performers, stage technicians and audience members. Each performance arises out of a long continuum of what Roland Barthes (2011) would call ‘preparations’, which might include, for the performance makers, years of training, rehearsal, travelling, construction, scriptwriting and choreography, and for the audience members, acculturation through reading and other informal research, conversation and participation in previous performance events.

The next ingredient is that the performance event must be recorded in one medium or another. Until the advent of photography and, later, phonographic sound recording, performances were recorded, if at all, through first-hand written accounts, drawings and paintings. The advent of widely affordable video recording technologies in the 1970s made it possible for the first time to regularly record full-length live performances (previous celluloid film technologies were expensive and restricted to ten-minute film reels). Circus Oz, which began performing in 1978, was one of many performing arts companies that quickly took advantage of the new video technologies, using (typically) a single camera from a fixed position among or behind the audience. These recordings, made on a variety of videotape formats, including U-Matic, VHS and later, Mini-DV, were stored by the circus in its optimistically named ‘archive room’. They were accessed and viewed within the company from time to time using VCRs and televisions, most commonly by performers and directors wanting to review performances for show development purposes.

These recordings were made notwithstanding the widely held view of practitioners and performance scholars (see Phelan 2004; Auslander 2008) that the essential force of live performance derives from its very liveness and ephemerality, the precious sense that it can only be experienced ‘in the moment’ at the time of the event and that it therefore always disappears, resisting any attempt to ‘capture’ or ‘store’ it. A live performance occurs and remains in the realm of what Taylor calls ‘the repertoire’ of a culture: ‘embodied memory: performances, gestures, orality, movement, dance, singing – in short, all those acts usually thought of as ephemeral, non-reproducible knowledge’ (Taylor 2003: LOC 607).

Bearing these ideas in mind, it follows that video recordings of a live performance such as those of Circus Oz should not be seen as re-presentations of the performance, or, in other words, attempts at a mediated restaging, for as such they will always fall short. However, such recordings do have forensic value as documentary evidence, and can be particularly useful in this regard not only for circus practitioners but for scholars and students interested in studying performance and cultural history, as Varney and Fensham (2000) have noted. This scholarly and, so to speak, dispassionate use for performance video recordings should be remembered in the design of digital archives collecting and presenting those recordings, and it formed one scenario of use that the Circus Oz Living Archive prototypes were designed to enable.

But insofar as our interest here lies in the development of a platform for the performance of memory, the video recordings perform a function as mnemonic prompts. Their power lies in their indexical ambiguity as traces of the performance event. The materiality of the video recording format – its pixellations, glitches, colour approximations and tints – as well as that of the conditions and operations of filming – the placement of the camera and the attention or lack thereof of its operator to matters such as framing, focus and the following of action – serve to distance the recording from correlation with the embodied memory of the event retained by a person who was there (this applies even to the memory of the camera operator herself, as anyone who has been in that position would attest). At the same time, their photographic effects of verisimilitude – the capacity of video to render details of colour, movement, gesture, voice, atmosphere and many other elements of the performance – draws in the viewer to examining their surfaces. It is the tension between the distancing effect – this is not the same as the live performance I experienced – and the drawing-in effect of recognition, for the viewer of the video who has previously experienced the live event recorded or one similar, that infuses these audiovisual archival documents with their potential to contribute to memory-work. The viewer is confronted by an uncanny rerunning in the present of an event that is recognizable as having been experienced in the past but at the same time that is critically divergent from the viewer’s at-that-time-existing embodied memory of that event. (In saying this, of course, we have to be careful to remember that embodied memory is itself constantly in a dynamic process of becoming: forgetting and revision.)

Ingold defines storytelling thus: ‘to tell a story is to relate, in narrative, the occurrences of the past, bringing them to life in the vivid present of listeners as if they were going on here and now’ (2011: 161). In this sense, video recordings of performances are nonhuman storytellers, bringing the past to life as if it were going on here and now – and yet clearly inflected with an idiosyncratic and nonhuman (in this instance, machinic) bias in the telling: telling a story that points towards but is distinctly different from the past as it was lived.