# Virtualization and rematerialization

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\auto\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;.md

## Virtualization and rematerialization

I have focused here on the example of emulation because it provides us with a particularly fruitful perspective on the questions of virtuality. Software is already a thoroughly virtual good, in the terms of the traditional rhetoric; born digital, it lives entirely in digital media, operates entirely within the computer, is transmitted wholesale from place to place, can be duplicated digitally, protected cryptographically, and processed algorithmically. Emulation, then, is doubly virtual; by using one piece of software to produce the actions of another, it seems to constitute an even more radical separation of software from hardware, creating a thoroughly virtual environment for the operation of an already virtual object.

In practice, though, this realm of pure virtuality is hard to find. Emulation seems to be not so much an exercise in virtuality as one in brutal materiality – an engagement with all the specific material constraints of both platforms, those elements that lie outside what is notated by software systems but that are critical to the manifested expression of running software.

Rather than being doubly virtual, then, the case of emulation is instead doubly material. First, the software being executed as the guest system cannot be regarded purely as a virtual expression of desired behaviour, but as a tool for configuring a material arrangement of the delicately entwined digital and analog components that made up the original computer system – complete with flaws, mistakes, problems, undocumented features and unexpected idiosyncracies. Second, the challenge is not to dissolve away these material considerations, but rather to re-enact them in the context of a new materiality – the materiality of the host system. Not only, then, does someone developing emulation software need to pay attention to, for example, the timing arrangements between processor, memory and tertiary storage on the original computer, but these need to be configured so as to operate effectively in light of the timing arrangements among processor, memory and tertiary storage on the current one. It is perhaps, then, less a case of producing a ‘virtual’ computer to run the original software, but rather of ‘rematerializing’ that computer in the context of a new one.

This conceptual shift from virtualizing to rematerializing may be an instructive one beyond the domain of emulation. It brings into focus the inevitable processes of rematerialization inherent in any enaction or expression of the virtual. It places the distinction between notation and expression at the heart of any analysis, and illustrates the way that ‘virtual’ objects of all sorts – representations and encodings – inherently under-specify the phenomena that they putatively represent. The gaps between specifications and rematerialized phenomena should not be read here as failures in a process of virtualization, but rather as signals of the unavoidable materiality that underwrites any practice of the virtual. Those objects that traditional technical accounts hold up as virtual are themselves thoroughly material, and indeed to describe them as virtual at all – at least in the transcendent sense of the traditional rhetoric – requires a certain wilful and selective blindness.

Discussions of the materialities of information and their consequences for encounters between social science and design have focused largely on the materialities of information infrastructures and the materialites of digital artefacts: how the sizes, shapes and physical impositions of iPhones, transoceanic cables and high-rise server farms condition and constrain our encounters with the digital world. The case of emulation helps us to examine the materialities of digital information itself, and the materialities of representation and representational practices that underwrite our understandings of the digital. This is not to undermine the digital, of course, but rather to sustain it by reconnecting it with the world of mechanical effects, economic conditions, scientific practice, cultural appropriation, political debate and social innovation within which it comes into being.

