# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\auto\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;.md

## Introduction

Recently, there has been a trend in using technology to support the active human body. This contrasts with the prevalent focus of technology supporting desk-based work that has characterized the history of the field. For example, where most prior work on the design of interactive systems focused on developing software for desk-based computer systems, with advances in miniaturization and sensor advances came a new breed of interactive technologies that support interactive experiences beyond the desktop. Such interactive experiences are often not only encompassing other locations than a desk environment, they are also offering completely new interaction experiences and techniques. Typical game systems within this genre are the Xbox Kinect and Nintendo Wii that enabled new forms of digital play. Such ‘exertion games’ systems (Mueller, Agamanolis and Picard 2003) are offering exemplary interactive experiences that collectively have been assembled under the notion of the so-called third wave of human–computer interaction (Harrison, Tatar and Sengers 2007), which argues that our interactions with computers moved from mainframes where multiple people needed to share one computer, to individual desktops, to now many devices equipped with many sensors that support a more embodied-centric digital experience focus. Such a more embodied-centric digital experience focus originated from a view that the ‘body’ of the computer matters more than originally assumed; for

example, the shape and form of a laptop does not only allow computers to be moved from place to place, but also affords new opportunities for interaction (Dourish 2001). Typical examples arose through the field of tangible interfaces (Hornecker and Buur 2006); these are new interfaces that highlight the physical form of the device people use to interact with when engaging with digital content. Extending this, new research has emerged that not only considers the body of the computer, but also the body of the user; for example, jogging apps on mobile phones support people being physically active as part of the digital interaction experience.

With these new opportunities to support the active human body comes an increased desire to understand how to design these new technologies to support interactions in which the human body actively engages with a world full of physical and digital materialities. Considering physical materialities is important, as the human body never acts in isolation or independent from its environment and social others, and digital materialities are important to consider as this chapter is concerned with the information processing of digital data as a result of sensor systems. However, it should be noted that there is no dichotomy between physical and digital materialities, but rather a constant quick back-and-forth of users engaging with physical and digital materialities as part of the bodily experience, which should become clear throughout this chapter.

Based on hands-on experiences of engaging ethnographic-informed design research on the topic of creating playful experiences for the active human body, we have derived a set of reflections on how to design interactive technology for an active human body. We use specific examples from our own research in the Exertion Games Lab (http://exertiongameslab.org) to illustrate this thinking.

This work on the design around the active human body is the result of having engaged with this topic for over a decade and having developed a portfolio of projects that demarcate the field. The projects make a contribution through their associated research-through-design (Zimmerman, Forlizzi and Evenson 2007) processes we engaged with, but they are also complemented by an ethnographic investigation that contributes towards further understandings in design knowledge by investigating possible future interactions with the technology. As such, these ethnographic investigations differ from other approaches such as those described by Pink et al. (Chapter 5, this volume), whereby ethnography is used to understand people’s current practice when engaging with digital materialities in order to provide guidance for designers. In our work, we use ethnography to provoke future interactions to not only understand what is, but what ‘should be’, in line with a futureoriented approach to research, a strength associated with design research (Zimmerman et al. 2007). Therefore the projects presented combined with the research-through-design processes provide a perspective on the design of materialities for the active human body. Our investigation started with our early work on exertion games – digital games that require physical effort from players (Mueller et al. 2003; Mueller et al. 2011; Mueller, Gibbs and Vetere 2008). These exertion games are a key departure point for us to engage the active human body.

