# The memory event (1): Digitizing, Kim and her notes

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\auto\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;.md

# The memory event (1): Digitizing, Kim and her notes

The second event that a platform for the performance of memory needs to facilitate is this moment of confrontation and subsequent interweaving between the materiality of the machine memory (the disembodied recording, in this case on video) and that of the embodied memories of the humans implicated in some way in the original event. This can be called the memory event.

In the design and development of a digital archive, the first opportunity for the memory event occurs with the digitization process. Current techniques for the digitization of video recordings requires that they take place in ‘real time’ – the originating analogue video must be spooled through a machine displaying its electromagnetic contents in audiovisual form so that these can be digitally analysed, encoded and stored as digital data by a software program. Facilitation of this process requires attention to such details as tape cleaning and configuration of video file formats: the purview of a technician. This is a long, expensive and tedious procedure.

However the Circus Oz Living Archive project demonstrated the benefits of treating digitization as more than a technical chore. Participation in the AusStage consortium, a group of Australian universities and performing arts companies working together to develop the AusStage online database for performance research, gave us access to a mobile laboratory. This was a bespoke set-up incorporating state-of-the-art SAMMA video digitization machines and designed to be packed up into roadcases so that it could be physically shared by companies and universities facing the common finite problem of digitizing a performance video collection. As first users, we set up the AusStage mobile lab in situ at Circus Oz for six months in 2011. Moreover, we made the crucial decision to employ Dr Kim Baston to run the digitizing process – not a technician but rather a circus scholar, circus musician and longtime Circus Oz fan, and hence coming to view the videos across, as it were, several storeys of interest.

Baston and her equipment were situated in a small room next to the music rehearsal room, with a door onto the courtyard where company members leave their bicycles. While to begin with she was left alone for the most part by Circus Oz staff and performers, as the months went on she found that people would drop by to check out what she was up to, watch and comment upon the videos. Circus Oz is a performing arts organization with a very idiosyncratic culture and history. Many individuals have long and complex histories with the company. Baston found that Circus Oz staff and performers began to engage with the videos on the laboratory screens in a variety of ways: discovering footage or acts they hadn’t previously known about, remembering their own performances, contributing impromptu anecdotes in response to the scenes they were viewing. This informal interaction between Circus Oz members, Baston and the digitization laboratory helped the researcher, in some instances, to clarify the details of the dataset (correcting dates, identifying performers or venues in particular videos). More fundamentally for the future prospects of the project, it began to embed the reality of the nascent ‘living archive’ process within, or at least contiguous to, the daily practice of the company. This memory event of digitization was itself recorded by Baston herself in the form of an idiosyncratic but highly valuable set of notes, documenting the process. These notes not only record technical information such as glitches and sound problems but also Baston’s detailed personal commentary on the videos as she is watching them. For example:

Wayne electrocuted. Musical number .---- 2 Poles erected. Swirly electronic music, audience clapping along. 10 performers up poles. ----------Missed a bit due to phone call and now I’m completely mystified. Torch song parody. (Baston, 2011, ‘1985 – Albury, Australia, Big Top, Howell Tree Reserve – 12 Dec’)

Baston’s digitizing commentary, known as ‘Kim’s Notes’, has been incorporated into the online Living Archive.

