# Introduction: A Living Archive for a circus

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\auto\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;.md

## Introduction: A Living Archive for a circus

I write here neither as an anthropologist nor as a designer, but as a writer and practitioner in the arts. In my practice, which has threaded its own eclectic path between creative writing, the performing arts and media, a recurring preoccupation is with the vicissitudes and materialities of memory, and the different ways that memory circulates in how we perceive and fabricate the world through practices of making such as storytelling. Being human, as digital anthropologists Horst and Miller remind us, ‘is a cultural and normative concept’ (2012) – as for that matter is being nonhuman. I am interested in exploring micro-sites in which these everyday processes of normative acculturation, as well as counterflows of resistance, can be observed and documented, approaching this making-work of storytelling as an attempt in itself at resistance. Such micro-sites need to be assemblages of material circumstances (including history) in which, to appropriate Barthes’s (1981) notion of the punctum, something punctures or wounds me. Other metaphors for this puncturing action that come to mind include haunting, infecting and seducing: each in its own way denotes an affective charge that draws in and implicates the observer so that he/she/I cannot maintain a fantasy of detachment. Instead, he/she/I participates in what we could think of as an ethics of care. Family is obvious as such a site (Carlin 2010). Another, as in this case, is a circus.

I have had some association with this circus, the leading Australian contemporary company, Circus Oz, for over thirty years, first as a teenage fan, then as a member of their complex and messy extended family (see

Carlin 2011 for gory details), later as a show director, writer and videographer. Circus Oz emerged from the vibrant Australian theatrical scene of the 1970s. It began as a radical collective in 1978, aiming to both subvert and celebrate the popular traditions of circus. It has grown and matured into a ‘national treasure’ (Syke 2014), but has managed to maintain its inclusive, collectivist, politically attuned and conceptually sophisticated aesthetic into the new century. Since 2008 I have led the Circus Oz Living Archive project team, a multidisciplinary effort to develop a platform for a digital archive for Circus Oz. The project can be conceived of as a digital intervention. It is attempting to intervene in cultural practice, and specifically the practices of an internationally significant performing arts company, investigating the costs and benefits for such a company of designing a system to make legible the knowledge and experience embodied in its cultural memory. At the same time, the project has another agenda: to intervene critically in the concept of the ‘archive’ itself by asking what kind of archive does a circus want and need – be it ‘radical’ (Geismar 2012), ‘participatory’ (Huvila 2008), or ‘animated’ (Burdick et al. 2012) – and what is involved in designing such a thing?

My aim in this essay is to revisit the trajectory of the development of this digital archive platform and to trace a number of key moments – meshes between the digital and the material – within that trajectory, which help to reflect not only on how and for what purpose community (digital) archives might be made, but also upon the ways in which the approach to making such an archive has influenced what can and will be made. The proposition I want to suggest is that digital archives afford opportunities for communities and organizations to develop what I am calling new platforms for the performance of memory. Platforms for the performance of memory, in the way I will use the expression, are what Assmann (2008: 98) would characterize as ‘institutions of active memory [that] preserve the past as present’. But, more than this, they are provisional dynamic sites which stage the complex and multithreaded interplay between past and present, memory and experience, and do so in a way that helps us both to orient ourselves in relation to the past and to open up ‘lines of flight’ (Deleuze and Guattari 2004) into the future.

The project, broadly speaking, aimed to build something practical in the ‘lifeworld’ (to borrow anthropologist Tim Ingold’s word (2011: 2)); namely, an interactive digital archive built upon the 2,000-plus-hour performance video collection accumulated over the thirty-seven-year history of the internationally acclaimed Australian contemporary circus, Circus Oz. As a research rather than commercial undertaking, the project sought to investigate the technical, cultural, design and organizational issues around the making of such an archive, with the agreed premise that success was to be measured by the extent to which the archive could contribute to the ongoing life and culture of the circus now and into the future. It was assumed that the knowledge generated would be applicable more widely in the performing arts sector and beyond to other organizations holding potentially valuable archival collections.

The project team was large and multidisciplinary: a diverse, productive mix of artists, designers, media and performance scholars and computer scientists (see archive.circusoz.com/credits), including staff, current and former artists of the circus itself. The project began in 2008 with a proposition: the ‘Living Archive’. Drawing enthusiastically from the then-current rhetoric of Web 2.0 (O’Reilly 2005), online ‘collective intelligence’ (Levy 2007) and ‘knowledge communities’ (Jenkins 2008), we situated the project as:

interrogat[ing] the intersection between the raucous circus space that welcomes audience interaction in the ring and the online ‘living archive’ that welcomes interactive participation – creating a socially mediated online space where Circus Oz information/creation can be augmented, annotated, explained, mashed-up and (re)created, engendering new material for the live show, which will find its way into the online circus space. (Carlin and Mullett 2010)

From 2010–14 the videos were digitized and the Living Archive itself was built in a series of prototypes collaboratively designed in a process led by PhD candidates Reuben Stanton and Lukman Iwan. It was ‘soft launched’ online in 2013 (see archive.circusoz.com) and handed over by the research team to the circus, where, as of 2014, it was operational and in use both for repertoire development and marketing purposes.

Elsewhere, myself and project colleagues have discussed and theorized the Circus Oz Living Archive project through a variety of lenses, most notably in the book Performing Digital: Multiple Perspectives on a Living Archive (Carlin and Vaughan 2015), as well as in articles focusing on design methods (Vaughan et al. 2013) and the tensions between notions of archive and repertoire (Carlin 2014). Here I want to consider the notion of the ‘platform’ that implicitly underpins this digital archive project, thinking about it in the context of the opposition Ingold draws between classification and storytelling. How can the platform for a digital archive engender storytelling, not simply classification?

