# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\auto\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;.md

## Introduction

Not so long ago, there was a little incident with my iPhone, my MacBook and my Damson Cisor BT5 Resonating Bluetooth Speaker. I was trying to play music from a playlist on my MacBook’s iTunes through a Bluetooth connection to the Damson speaker, but the music coming out of it was wrong. It sounded vaguely familiar, and was certainly very pleasant, but it was not the music that iTunes was saying it was playing. At first I thought I must be picking up music from someone else’s system in my apartment building. Quickly I realized this was highly unlikely given what I knew about Bluetooth and its relatively short range. So it must be something else. It was then that I noticed the corner of my iPhone poking out from beneath some papers. Once I had got into the iPhone it became apparent that on switching the Damson speaker on, it had connected ‘preferentially’ with my iPhone (which, after all, had had a longer ‘history’ of connectivity with the speaker). I felt slightly idiotic for imagining that my speaker had been hijacked by someone else’s music system, but also a little resentful at the apparent autonomy of ‘my’ devices that had determined their own relations, that had together conspired against my wishes, that had collaboratively misbehaved.

In many ways this is an everyday, more or less trivial, event – barely worth reporting on. And yet something interesting seemed to be going on. That something interesting was not the resort to the anthropomorphic terms in which this episode is couched. Such anthropomorphism is not uncommon and, given the sociotechnical constitution of these technologies, not altogether unjustified (Latour 1992). More immediately relevant is what this apparent ‘sociotechnical misbehaviour’ signifies. On one level, the software (for playing music, for seeking out Bluetooth devices, for establishing connections, for registering the ‘history’ of connectivity) and materiality (the physical proximity of the devices, the hiddenness of the phone, the juxtaposition of computer and speaker) together suggested an articulation that, in the setting of my trying to listen to music, made ‘no sense’. By ‘no sense’, I mean I couldn’t immediately understand what was going on – I was confused, and my initial attempt at an explanation (my speaker had been hijacked by someone else in the apartment block) was not a little nonsensical. On another level, it is of course possible to make sense of these reactions. The sense of betrayal by the sociotechncial coterie of computer, phone and speaker reflects a feeling that the relation between these devices is structured by a system from which I can be largely excluded, and into which, given my relatively low levels of technical skill, I have only partial and pre-delineated entrée. Here, there might be a critique to be developed around the issue of ‘configuring the user’ (Woolgar 1991) or the sensitization of users to the digital invasion of their privacy or dilution of their agency (Lupton, 2015).

However – and this is the perspective I want to develop in this chapter – one can also provide a more ‘speculative’ account of this episode. So the event that includes the ‘collaborative misbehaviour’ of the devices, and my reaction which sought to lay the blame on others in my apartment block, however, also suggests a more speculative reading. Thus the music I heard was very pleasant, and it might have come from others in my apartment, others who seem to have good taste (according to my preferences, of course). Say, fancifully, I went knocking on the doors of my neighbours, asked them to check their Bluetooth connections, while also commenting on the excellence of the music, is it possible – and I stress ‘possible’ (see below) – that a new set of conversations begins? Instead of the anonymity that typifies my apartment block, perhaps there will emerge the prospect of a different set of relations? Can we imagine this taking the form of not only a new sociality, but indeed, of a new ‘technosociality’? That is to say, do the semi-autonomous communications of digital objects enable the emergence of new social bonds? Here, ‘technosociality’ can be understood as a movement toward a novel nexus of interrelations and communications among humans, between humans and digital artefacts, and, crucially, amid digital artefacts.

Needless to say, the anecdote presented above is not innocent; it is performative (Michael 2012a) insofar as it entails both the peculiar selection and the ordering of its ‘data’. On this score, it is no different from any other means of generating and analysing data (e.g. Law 2004). Arguably, there is an increasing awareness of social scientific method as performative, and, with this, a sense that the epistemological and ontological terrain of social science might be shifting (e.g. Lury and Wakeford 2012). In particular, following such scholars as Isabelle Stengers – as we shall detail below – research events can begin to be treated as open, unfolding, oriented toward the not-as-yet. Is it possible to seek out ‘events’ that can be narrated with a sort of speculative intent, as in the anecdote above? More provocatively, is it possible to imagine a way of designing digital materialities that enact such research events and provoke the possible?

In response to this last question, this chapter describes a particular tradition in interaction design – let us call it ‘speculative design’ – that produces devices that can serve within the frame of the speculative social scientific methodology hinted at above. This tradition has long been interested in the design, production and implementation of artefacts, often with digital capacities, that are ambiguous and ludic. As such, these interaction designs playfully interject in, and potentially destabilize, routine social processes and practices, thereby opening up them up to speculative analysis.

In what follows, the chapter begins with an overview of the performativity of method and its implications for doing speculative social scientific research. Drawing on the process philosophical work of Whitehead and Stengers, the chapter suggests that the ‘philosophical figure’ of the idiot can do useful work in coming to grips with the ways in which we can explore the potential of everyday sociomaterial events, and to ask ‘more interesting’ questions of them. More specifically, it is proposed that the digital materialities of ‘speculative design’ are particularly suited for taking on the role of ‘proactive idiot’ (Michael 2012b). As such, the chapter describes a number of idiotic digital–material designs. However, the chapter also goes on to examine what needs to be in place in order for digital–material ‘idiot’ to provoke a rethinking of what is stake in the relevant sociomaterial events. The chapter thus ends with a reflection on the affective, aesthetic and ethical qualities of the digital– material idiot, and the ‘com-promises’ that these might entail.

