# PART ONE Expectations 27 / Contes / List of Figures / Acknowledgements / List of contributors / Digital materiality Sarah Pink, Elisenda Ardèvol and Débora Lanzeni / Opening out: Design anthropology, HCI and digital anthropology / Design anthropology and digital media in everyday life / Going beyond: Surpassing the digital/ material dichotomy / Mess and things: Situated ways to look for the unexpected / Getting into the mess: Engaged practice from within / Methodologies for researching and intervening / Working with digital materiality / A brief introduction to the structure of Digital Materialities / Rematerializing the platform: Emulation and the digital–material / Introduction / The digital–material / FIGURE 2.1 A simple Python program / Emulation / Problems of materiality in virtual computers / Instructions and representations / Timing / Input and output

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\auto\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;.md

## PART ONE Expectations 27

2 Rematerializing the platform: Emulation and the digital– material 29 Paul Dourish

3 Smart global futures: Designing afordable materialities for a better life 45 Débora Lanzeni

4 Envisioning the smart home: Reimagining a smart energy future 61 Yolande Strengers

PART TWO Co-interventions 77

5 Refiguring digital interventions for energy demand reduction: Designing for life in the digital–material home 79 Sarah Pink, Kerstin Leder Mackley, Val Mitchell, Garrath T. Wilson and Tracy Bhamra

6 Speculative design and digital materialities: Idiocy, threat and   
com-promise 99   
Mike Michael   
7 Ethnography and the quest to (co)design a mixed reality   
interactive slide 115   
Jaume Ferrer, Elisenda Ardèvol and Narcís Parés   
8 Designing for the active human body in a digital–material   
world 137   
Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller   
PART THREE Insider Design 157   
9 Mobile intimacies: Everyday design and the aesthetics of   
mobile phones 159   
Heather Horst   
10 Designing for the performance of memory 175   
David Carlin   
11 Digital interventions in declining regions 195   
Ian McShane, Chris K. Wilson and Denise Meredyth   
Notes 213   
Bibliography 217   
Index 241

## Contes

## List of Figures

Figure 2.1. A simple Python program 32   
Figure 3.1. Smart Citizen Kit 47   
Figure 3.2. Smart Citizen Kit 56   
Figure 5.1. Finite – the digital well 93   
Figure 5.2. Anima – home is where the heart is 94   
Figure 5.3. Kairos – creating the opportune moment 95   
Figure 7.1. Prototype mural screen for Robot Factory 118   
Figure 7.2. At the Lab, designers exchange views 123   
Figure 7.3. Robot Factory with a group of very young children using   
the ramp to climb 127   
Figure 7.4.1 and Figure 7.4.2. Robot Factory: Extreme examples   
where each group followed completely opposing strategies 129   
Figure 7.5. The installation of the mixed reality Interactive Slide 132   
Figure 8.1. Cart-Load-O-Fun on a train 144   
Figure 8.2. Some of the material artefacts that the 3D printer   
produced based on people’s heart rate data 146   
Figure 8.3. The SweatAtoms system in people’s homes 147   
Figure 8.4. Musical Embrace 149   
Figure 8.5. Four of the Exertion Cards 151   
Figure 8.6. The Movement-Based Game Guidelines website 153   
Figure 9.1. Veronica’s phone 165   
Figure 9.2. Bronte’s wallet 169   
Figure 9.3. Sandra discussing her portable kit 170   
Figure 10.1. The Barrel of Memories 184   
Figure 10.2. The community ‘memory event’ 185   
Figure 10.3. The Living Archive homepage: a ‘generous interface’ 188   
Figure 10.4. The Memory Booth, featuring Lu Guang Rong and   
Toni Smith 191   
Figure 11.1. The Big Merino 195   
Figure 11.2. Goulburn, Australia 196   
Figure 11.3. In 2014 Goulburn Mulwaree Council erected signs at the   
highway exits advertising the town’s Free WiFi service 210

## Acknowledgements

and committed contributors as well as fantastic support and enthusiasm from Bloomsbury’s anthropology editors. We would also like to acknowledge the funding sources for the meetings and discussions that made this book possible, working across long distances and with contributors from different continents. Some of the chapters of this book were first presented as part of the Digital Interventions seminar series (2013–14) that spanned Melbourne, Barcelona and Perth and was funded generously by the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation, the Design Research Institute, RMIT University, Australia and the IN3, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Spain. Part of our work on this book was also completed during an RMIT EU Centre Visiting Fellowship awarded to Sarah Pink and Elisenda Ardèvol in 2014.

# List of contributors

Elisenda Ardèvol is Associate Professor in Social Anthropology at the Department of Arts and Humanities at the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya and director of mediaccions Digital Culture Research Group at the Internet Interdisciplinary Institute in Barcelona. She participates in different Master and PhD programmes in media, digital and visual anthropology and has been Visiting Scholar at the Visual Anthropology Centre of the University of Southern California and EU Centre Visiting Fellow at the Digital Ethnography Centre at RMIT University, Melbourne. She is also an active member of international research networks such as the Media Anthropology Network and the Future Anthropology Network of the EASA (European Association of Social Anthropologists) and the Section of Digital Culture and Communication ECREA (European Communication Research and Education Association). Her main research lines are related to digital culture, visuality and media in everyday life. Currently, she is exploring design, creativity and collaborative practices in digital technologies. Her publications include ‘Digital Ethnography and Media Practices’ in Darling Wolf, Research Methods in Media Studies (2014); ‘Virtual/Visual Ethnography: Methodological Crossroads at the Intersection of Visual and Internet Research’ in Pink, Advances in Visual Methodology (2012); ‘Playful Practices: Theorising New Media Cultural Production’ in Brauchler and Postill, Theorising Media and Practice (2010); editor of Researching Media through Practices (2009) and the books (in Spanish) Key Debates (2014); A Gaze’s Quest (2006) and Representation and Audiovisual Culture in Contemporary Societies (2004).

Tracy Bhamra is Pro Vice Chancellor (Enterprise) and Professor of Sustainable Design at Loughborough University, until 2015 she was Dean of Loughborough Design School. In 2003 she established the Sustainable Design Research Group at Loughborough University that undertakes world-leading research in areas such as Design for Sustainable Behaviour, Methods and Tools for Sustainable Design and Sustainable Design Education. Tracy has over 150 publications associated with her research including the coauthored book Design for Sustainability: A Practical Approach (2007). She has been awarded over £2.5m of research funding from the UK government and research councils and a number of large industrial organizations. Her recent research is focused on approaches to enable designers to integrate sustain- ability into their work, how to move towards designing sustainable services rather than products, and also understanding how design can be used to create more sustainable user behaviour.

David Carlin is a writer, Associate Professor and Co-Director of the nonfictionLab Research Group in the School of Media and Communication at RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia. He led the interdisciplinary Circus $\bigcirc z$ Living Archive research project, and co-edited (with Laurene Vaughan) the book Performing Digital: Multiple Perspectives on a Living Archive (Ashgate, 2015). He conceived and curated (with Paper Giant) the mixed media exhibition, Vault: the Nonstop Performing History of Circus $O z ,$ commissioned by the 2014 Melbourne Festival. David’s narrative nonfiction investigates questions of cultural memory, identity, narration and uncertainty; his books include the memoir/biography The Abyssinian Contortionist (UWAP, 2015) and the memoir Our Father Who Wasn’t There (Scribe, 2010), and his creative essays and articles have appeared in Griffith Review, Overland, TEXT, Newswrite, Victorian Writer, Continuum and other journals. His research interests extend across memory studies and nonfiction creative practices from the essay and memoir genres to digital media and archives. He has directed Circus Oz on New York’s 42nd St, and has written and directed award-winning films, documentaries and plays. David is co-director of RMIT’s WrICE (Writers Immersion and Cultural Exchange) research program and a co-chair of the international NonfictioNOW Conference.

Paul Dourish is a Professor of Informatics in the Donald Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences at UC Irvine, California, with courtesy appointments in Computer Science and Anthropology, and co-directs the Intel Science and Technology Center for Social Computing. His research focuses primarily on understanding information technology as a site of social and cultural production; his work combines topics in human–computer interaction, ubiquitous computing, and science and technology studies. He has published over 100 scholarly articles, and was elected to the CHI Academy in 2008 in recognition of his contributions to human–computer interaction. He is the author of two books: Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction (MIT Press, 2001), which explores how phenomenological accounts of action can provide an alternative to traditional cognitive analysis for understanding the embodied experience of interactive and computational systems; and, with Genevieve Bell, Divining a Digital Future: Mess and Mythology in Ubiquitous Computing (MIT Press, 2011), which examines the social and cultural aspects of the ubiquitous computing research program. Before his arrival at UCI, he was a Senior Member of Research Staff in the

Computer Science Laboratory of Xerox PARC; he has also held research positions at Apple Computer and at Rank Xerox EuroPARC. He holds a PhD in Computer Science from University College, London, and a BSc (Hons) in Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science from the University of Edinburgh.

Jaume Ferrer is Lecturer at the School of Art and Design EDRA and also teaches Interaction Design and Mixed Reality at the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya. Graduated in Fine Arts at the University of Barcelona, he has recently finished his PhD in the International Interdisciplinary Program in Knowledge and Information Society at the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya. He has worked for several years as an illustrator and visual artist and explored net.art as co-founder with David Gomez of the Intangibles Workshop (TAG), carrying out several artistic interventions, workshops and creative projects focused on arts network. He has also collaborated with the Experimentation on Interactive Communication Research Group (CIS) of the Audiovisual Institute of Pompeu Fabra University. He is interested in ethnography as a tool to understand the social construction of technology and as a means of creating the technology itself. He considers himself a ‘maker’ and situates his current activity at the intersection of arts, interactive digital technology and the social sciences.

Heather Horst is Director, Research Partnerships in the College of Design and Social Context and a Founding Director of the Digital Ethnography Research Centre at RMIT University, Australia. Her research focuses upon understanding how digital media, technology and other forms of material culture mediate relationships, communication, learning, mobility and our sense of being human. Her books examining these themes include The Cell Phone: An Anthropology of Communication (Horst and Miller, Berg, 2006), Hanging Out, Messing Around and Geeking Out: Kids Living and Learning with Digital Media (Ito, et al. 2010, MIT Press), Digital Anthropology (Horst and Miller, Eds., 2012, Berg) and Digital Ethnography: Principles and Practice (Pink, Horst, et al. 2016, Sage). Heather’s current research, supported by the Australian Research Council and an EU Horizon 20/20 grant, explores transformations in the telecommunications industry and the emergence of new mobile media practices across the Asia-Pacific region.

Débora Lanzeni is a PhD candidate in the Knowledge and Information Society Programme at the IN3 (Internet Interdisciplinary Institute) at the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya. Her training has been in anthropology and filmmaking and incorporates visual and digital anthropology. Her research focuses upon understanding how digital technology and its processes of creation, imagination and production are being made in the context of Urban Labs. She is currently focusing on developments at interface of Smart City and Internet of Things, the study of materiality and moral order.

Kerstin Leder Mackley is a Research Associate at the Loughborough Design School, UK, where she currently explores futures of domestic hot water consumption on the interdisciplinary HotHouse project. HotHouse draws on ethnographic research developed during LEEDR (Low Effort Energy Demand Reduction, 2010–14). Kerstin has a background in qualitative audience research from a broad media and cultural studies perspective. Her research interests include domestic energy consumption, material culture, interdisciplinary methodologies, and the wider study of media and emerging technologies in everyday life. She has published in a variety of journals, including Media, Culture and Society, TOCHI, Participations, and Sociological Research Online.

Ian McShane is a Senior Research Fellow at RMIT University’s Centre for Urban Research. His research focuses on informal and formal education systems (especially museums, libraries and schools), local infrastructure and community services, and digital technologies. Current research projects are on shared use community infrastructure and service coordination, the development of publicly accessible wireless networks in Australia and internationally, and the representational politics of cultural diversity in Australian museums. Ian has had a long involvement with the Australian museum sector, working as a senior curator at the National Museum of Australia and consulting to other levels of government on museums and culture. In 2013 Ian was appointed to UNESCO’s Creative Cities Network external evaluation panel.

Denise Meredyth has worked for some time on projects that explore links between political aspiration and the difficulties of decision-making on civic infrastructure, choice and civic capacity. She has explored this theme in relation to public education, libraries and museums, communications, local planning and community policing. Her most recent work has focused on youth media and social enterprise, on community uses of the digital and physical resources of schools and on digital literacy and information poverty. She has recently moved from positions at RMIT and the Australian Research Council to the role of Pro Vice Chancellor, Division of Education, Arts and Social Sciences at the University of South Australia.

Mike Michael is a sociologist of science and technology, and Professor of Sociology and Social Policy at the University of Sydney, Australia. His research interests include the relation of everyday life to technoscience, biotechnological and biomedical innovation and culture, and process methodology. Current research projects include the interdisciplinary use of sociological and speculative design techniques to explore energy demand reduction. Among his most recent publications are (with Marsha Rosengarten) the co-authored volume Innovation and Biomedicine: Ethics, Evidence and Expectation in HIV (Palgrave, 2013), and (with Jennifer Gabrys and Gay Hawkins) the co-edited volume Accumulation: The Material Politics of Plastic (Routledge, 2013).

Val Mitchell is Lecturer in the Design School at Loughborough University, UK. Val has over fifteen years’ multidisciplinary research experience specializing in the development of User Centred Design (UCD) methodologies for eliciting user requirements for future technologies and services, in particular understanding user needs and requirements for mobile communication and other interactive products. She is particularly interested in the communication of user needs and requirements to designers using scenarios and personas and the design of creative Participatory Design and Co-design methods for eliciting needs from users. Current research interests focus on the use of ICT to promote sustainability within both the transport and domestic sectors. She was the lead human factors researcher in the Services Aggregation Trials for the DTI under The Application Homes Initiative (TAHI). She is currently a senior researcher on the EPSRC/E.On-funded CALEBRE project which is investigating user behaviours and comfort relating to the implementation of energy-saving technologies within the home. She is also a senior researcher on the EPSRC/DoT/TSB-funded User Innovation project which is investigating how user-driven innovation can be used to inform the design of sustainable transport and travel products and services. She is Co I on the EPSRC LEEDR project which is seeking to reduce energy demand in homes through the innovative application of ICT.

Dr Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller directs the Exertion Games Lab at RMIT, Melbourne, Australia. Floyd’s research has spanned four continents, including research posts at the University of Melbourne (Australia), MIT Media Lab (USA), Media Lab Europe (Ireland), Fuji-Xerox Palo Alto Laboratories (USA) and Xerox PARC (USA). Floyd was also leading a team of twelve researchers at the Commonwealth and Scientific Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) on the future of ‘Connecting People’. He has been a Fulbright Visiting Scholar at Stanford University (USA). Floyd has also been a Microsoft Research Asia Fellow and has worked at Microsoft Beijing (China) with the research teams developing Xbox’s Kinect. Floyd’s research work was presented at the top conferences in the field of interaction design and computer games, including several best paper nominations. Floyd’s Exertion Games work has been shortlisted for the European Innovation Games Award (next to Nintendo’s Wii Fit), received honorary mentions from the Nokia Ubimedia Award, was commissioned by Wired’s Nextfest, exhibited worldwide and attracted substantial international research funding, including numerous grants from the US, Australian, UK and German governments. His team’s Exertion Games were played by over 20,000 players across three continents and were featured on the BBC, ABC, Discovery Science Channel and Wired magazine.

Narcís Parés is Tenure Associate Professor of the ICT Department of Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona. He has a PhD in Audiovisual Communication, specializing in Virtual Reality (UPF), MSc in Image Processing and Artificial Intelligence (UAB) and BSc in Computer Engineering (UPC). He is co-creator and coordinator of the Master in Cognitive Systems and Interactive Media (UPF). He has an interest in the possibilities of full-body interaction based on current embodied cognition theories in areas such as learning, play and special needs. This research is undertaken from an interdisciplinary standpoint including interaction design and interactive communication, focusing attention mainly on interaction for children and using non-invasive technologies. He is member of the Steering Committee of the ACM SIGCHI and IFIP International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, member of the IFIP TC13 – Human–Computer Interaction, WG 13.9 – Interaction Design and Children, and member of the Editorial Board of the International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction, Elsevier.

Sarah Pink is Director of the Digital Ethnography Research Centre, and Professor of Design and Media Ethnography at RMIT University, Australia, Visiting Professor in Applied Social and Cultural Analysis at Halmstad University, Sweden, Visiting Professor in Social Sciences across the Design and Civil and Building Engineering Schools at Loughborough University, UK and Guest Professor at the Free University, Berlin. Her work is usually interdisciplinary and international and brings academic scholarship to applied research problems. Her projects connect anthropological ethnography to design, engineering, documentary and arts practice. Her current focus is on the relationship between design, ethnography and futures research, working through projects that challenge conventional ethnographic temporalities. Sarah’s recent books include the co-authored Digital Ethnography: Principles and Practice (2016) and her single-authored books Doing Sensory Ethnography (2nd edn, 2015), Doing Visual Ethnography (3rd edn, 2013) and Situating Everyday Life (2012).

Yolande Strengers is a Vice Chancellor’s Research Fellow in the Centre for Urban Research, School of Global Urban and Social Studies at RMIT

University, Melbourne, Australia, where she co-leads the Beyond Behaviour Change research program (http://www.rmit.edu.au/cfd/beyondbehaviour). Yolande’s research is currently clustered around a series of applied projects which draw on theories of social practice to understand the dynamics of social and environmental change, and possibilities for intervening in the trajectories of practices. Theories of materiality and technological change are a key feature of her research across a number of sustainability domains including energy demand, water consumption, waste management, air travel and telecommunications.

Chris K. Wilson is a Research Fellow at RMIT University’s Centre for Urban Research and an Associate Member of the RMIT Centre for Communication, Politics and Culture. His expertise is in examining the historical and contemporary nature of communication infrastructure provision, its underlying social, technological, economic and governmental determinants, and downstream impact on cultural production and innovation. In 2015 he completed the doctoral project Frequently Modulating: Australian radio’s relationship with youth. He is currently engaged in two substantial programs of research: Public Wi-Fi as Urban Infrastructure examines the development of publicly accessible wireless networks in Australia and internationally; Governing for Innovation examines the impact that the liberalisation of access to radio broadcast spectrum in Australia in the 1990s had on local cultural innovation within and beyond broadcasting.

Dr Garrath T. Wilson is a Lecturer in Industrial Design and is part of the Sustainable Design Research Group at Loughborough Design School, UK. His research interests include the psychology of energy consumption and behaviour change strategies; the ethics and design considerations of behavioural interventions; design for sustainable and resilient futures; and more recently, emotionally durable design and product-service systems. Drawing upon an industrial design consultancy background, design has always been central to Garrath’s research approach, generating design concepts and physical prototypes as speculative and disruptive probes or as behavioural change agents. Garrath has written and talked internationally on the topic of Design for Sustainable Behaviour and is enthusiastic about both industry and public engagement.

# Digital materiality Sarah Pink, Elisenda Ardèvol and Débora Lanzeni

D<sup>igital</sup> <sup>Materialities:</sup> <sup>design</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>anthropology</sup> <sup>is</sup> <sup>a</sup> <sup>book</sup> <sup>about</sup> <sup>research/</sup> knowing, making/doing and intervention/designing in a world where the digital and the material are not separate but entangled elements of the same processes, activities and intentionalities. This is also a world that is shared by researchers, makers and designers – that is, by those of us who seek to learn about other people’s experiences of the world and make new ways of knowing about them; by those of us who are everyday makers – all of us, that is, who make the world as we go along and as we inhabit it; and by those of us who intentionally intervene in the world to try to make change happen in particular ways, or, put differently, to make making go in a particular direction. Sometimes those three sets of activities are part of the life and work of just one person, sometimes they are more dispersed across groups of people. Whatever the case – and we will see different variations across the chapters that follow in this book – we are interested in unpacking how they are co-implicated in processes and activities which involve what we will here call digital materiality. Collectively the contributors to this volume explore how this is happening, through interrogations of digital materialities in progress, as they grow, are made, and are activated for specific purposes.

This book is for social, cultural and technological researchers, designers, and anyone who is interested in the implications of how digital–material configurations or entanglements are emerging as part of the world that we share. It refers to, draws on and advances discussions relevant to the ways that scholars and practitioners from anthropology, design, human geography, media studies, sociology and other cognate disciplines and interdisciplinary fields are seeking to engage with change and future-making processes in environments where the digital–material is part of everyday life. Digital Materialities is written in the context of and in a spirit of commentary on an environment for academic scholarship where the increasing need for researchers to do work that has impact in the world is coupled with a growing engagement of designers with the social sciences and humanities. It presents a series of examples of how these intersections have been navigated by the contributors to this book. However, it also engages with this context, and drives towards impact, applied, public and engaged scholarship and design, at a moment where it is becoming impossible to ignore the ways in which digital media, infrastructures, technologies and content are part of our working and living environments. This, together with the demand for us to engage with the digital – as part of the materiality of the world – creates a powerful need for new understandings of the implications and outcomes of our critical research, making and interventions.

In this first chapter we open up this field of research, making and intervention to scrutiny. We also outline how the contributors to this book advance the discussion and definition and point to where we think its future lies. This book was inspired by our shared interest in what we are calling the digital materiality of the worlds we inhabit. Through our respective research agendas that sought to understand different elements of digital ‘cultures’ such as the free culture movement, smart city visions and digital design interventions for homes, we each began to understand practical everyday processes as involving the entanglement of the digital and material. Each of our research agendas in common focused on people who were engaged in processes and activities that sought to make change in the world – whether as ways of living out and improvising in their everyday lives at home or at work, as activists, as makers, or as designers deliberately making interventions to disrupt what was already happening. Our work, we realized, involved witnessing digital materiality in the making.

Contributors to existing literatures and practice have begun to work through the digital–material in a range of different ways, and from different disciplinary and practical perspectives. We discuss the advances they have made below. Here we take up this discussion to bring together digital, design and anthropological scholarship and practice and to argue that it can offer a convincing agenda through which to research and intervene in a digital material world. It is this capacity that we believe is needed for an engaged, applied or design anthropology to be able to flourish in a world where digital–material configurations are an almost inevitable element of everyday life experiences, activities and environments. The contributors to this book are precisely working at this intersection and are therefore through their own theory and practice driving towards such an agenda. Here we initiate the task of mapping out this field of interdisciplinary theory and practice, which puts digital materiality at the centre. Yet, as a disclaimer, as for any field of study or emphasis, we do not mean digital materiality in isolation, or digital materiality as the only way to look at the world. But rather we examine and show the benefits of using it as a prism through which to engage (with) wider ecologies of ideas and practices in research, design and intervention.

In this chapter we first focus in on the foundations of this approach as they have developed in the subdisciplines of design anthropology and digital anthropology and through the relationship that both might have with the older tradition of the study of human–computer interaction (HCI). Critically evaluating the trajectories of these subdisciplines, where they have focused, where they have touched on each other, and, perhaps more significantly, where they have not, we propose a formulation of digital materiality that brings together some of their key interests in the digital and material on the one hand, and in ethnography and design on the other. We argue for an approach that evades existing tendencies to both separate the digital and material as things that can then be united and to debate the relationship between anthropology and design in terms of what each discipline can extract from the relationship. It should not be a matter of using design to do better anthropology or vice versa, or a matter of understanding the digital as material, or the material in relation to how it has become digital. Instead we argue for understandings of all these rather different levels of concept and process as relational elements of a possible digital material design anthropology. To do this we explore three key themes that have emerged from our own thinking and which unite the chapters in this book: mess, engaged practice, and methodologies for knowing and intervening.

We finally suggest how the chapters of this book, which we argue are part of an embryonic version of what could be a wider commitment to the digital– material as it emerges in digital design anthropology practice, demonstrate how such an agenda might play out. This book therefore does not claim to be a resolution of this field, but a starting point or an opening out – and it is to this we turn our attention in the next section.

## Opening out: Design anthropology, HCI and digital anthropology

One of the inspirations for this book was the perception that there is a gap created and left open by recent advances in the fields of digital and design anthropology. This is not a gap that can simply be filled by a new book. Rather it is a space that calls for further exploration, further opening and ways of engaging with the questions that it poses. Putting it another way, this book has two close relatives: Digital Anthropology (Horst and Miller 2012) and Design Anthropology (Gunn, Otto and Smith 2013).

These two books respectively begin to map out a field where anthropology intersects with the digital, and with design, yet in both volumes the digital and design largely (with some notable exceptions discussed below) remain separately theorized and part of two distinct worlds of scholarship or subdisciplines. This is ironic given how, in Design Anthropology, Ton Otto and Rachel Charlotte Smith (2012: 5–6) acknowledge the origins of design anthropology that lie in human–computer interaction (HCI) research, through approaches spearheaded by Lucy Suchman and others in the 1980s (2013: 5–6). We do not recount this history as it is more than adequately documented and discussed elsewhere – not least by Adam Drazin’s excellent account in his chapter in Digital Anthropology (Drazin 2012) and by Otto and Smith, who also note the critical perspectives that emerged from this field (2013: 7), in relation to the need for design and anthropology to work in such fields on an equal footing, and towards collaborative models.

Drazin (2012) charts a trajectory of entanglement between anthropology, digital media and design, beginning with the emergence of HCI research in the previous century. His account brings to the fore a history of applied design anthropology that has been little accounted for in the emergence of media anthropology (e.g. Ginsburg et al. 2002; Brauchler and Postill 2010), although it has had a higher profile in applied anthropology literatures (e.g. Pink 2005, 2007). Drazin emphasizes the multi-dimensionality of relationships between anthropological scholarship, applied and design research, collaborations with industry, and with research/design participants and digital media – as HCI research and design flourished over the last forty or so years. As he argues, it is important to understand this relationship as being beyond the idea that anthropology might inform design. Instead he maps out a set of future questions which would set out to ask not what anthropology could do for digital design, but ‘what can this engagement do for us as anthropologists in the work of producing socio-cultural interpretations, and how has design anthropology work operated within the political field of digital technologies?’ through a focus on ‘digital knowledge artefacts’ (2012: 260). Indeed, as we see in particular in Lanzeni’s chapter (this volume), digital working provides distinctive perspectives for design anthropology, one of which is the need to resituate the ‘user’ or the ‘consumer’ as a responsible citizen and craftsperson.

Drazin’s analysis represents one strand in the history of the relationship between the digital, anthropology and design, and points to a future where digital design anthropologists have a role to navigate that politicizes design and works through an anthropological agenda. He invites anthropologists to make gains from this context for the discipline. In the context of discipline building, which involves for anthropology what Strathern has called a ‘community of critics’ (2006: 204), this is a valid exercise and we would not disagree with Drazin’s call in the sense that all disciplines need to continue to work on themselves in this way. Yet in the context of working on the relationship between anthropology and design there are also other ways to bring together design and anthropology/ethnography, for instance through approaches to design that vary from those of traditional HCI, and also vary from (and are sometimes critical of) traditional anthropology (see Pink and Akama 2015). In this sense, it would be problematic to see the history of the relationship between HCI and design anthropology as the only possible way in which a relationship between digital anthropology and design might evolve and emerge. Indeed, one of the tasks of this book is to take up such possibilities by exploring this through examples of recent practice – such as in Chapters 5 to 7 of this volume by Pink et al., Michael, and Ferrer, Ardèvol and Parés respectively.

## Design anthropology and digital media in everyday life

The connections made between digital media and design anthropology in Gunn et al.’s (2013) Design Anthropology are also different to those guided by the trajectory of HCI discussed above. For example, Smith makes a move towards digital design anthropology in her chapter discussion of ‘Designing Heritage for a Digital Culture’ (2013: 117). There she points out that ‘If museums and cultural heritage institutions wish to engage audiences in new ways using the opportunities digital media and technologies afford, they need to look more carefully at how these media provide meaning to people through their everyday lives’ (2013: 132). Christina Wasson and Crysta Metcalfe likewise bring media in everyday life to the fore when they discuss a collaboration between the Motorola company and a design anthropology class in a university. Here the research focus was on everyday uses of media technologies in kitchens (Wasson and Metcalfe 2013). These two chapters discuss digital design anthropology projects to demonstrate very well how anthropological and design practice can be brought together to do design anthropology in ways that have significant implications for our understanding of digital technologies. In several ways they suggest that new relationships between design, digital media and anthropology are developing along lines that have some things in common with the third HCI paradigm (see also Pink et al. 2013) but that are not necessarily simply emergent from it.

However, simultaneously for us, as anthropologists whose work is engaged with questions about digital media in everyday life, there is also an opportunity to connect the work of scholars operating at the interface between anthropology, digital media and design, such as Smith (2013) and Wasson and Metcalfe (2013), to the large body of literature about digital media in everyday life. There has been a recent explosion of work which creates a convergence point between anthropology and media studies. In part this encompasses or includes digital anthropology (e.g. Horst and Miller 2012) as well as the wider field of media anthropology where media studies and anthropology converse (e.g. Braucher and Postill 2010; Moores 2012; Pink et al. 2016). One of the next steps then, we argue, is for a media anthropology of digital technologies in everyday life to be brought together more closely with design anthropology. In this volume, some chapters work specifically towards this by taking a more media/digital anthropology approach to everyday activity (Pink et al., Ferrer et al., Horst), while other chapters do something similar by engaging other approaches, such as sociology or science and technology studies (STS), for the study of the everyday with design (e.g. Michaels, Strengers). As we argue in this book, a bringing together of design and digital ethnographies of everyday life needs precisely to engage not only with meanings of digital media in the world, but with the digital materiality of both everyday life and design objects, activities and processes.

Indeed in many ways this attention to the detail of everyday life is distinctively anthropological – or at least ethnographic. For Miller and Horst (2012), the ethnographic examples offered by their contributors and collaborators are instances of what a focus on the everyday ways in which digital media are shaped as they become part of people’s lives can tell us. Through the examples of migrant domestic workers (Madianou and Miller 2013) and disability activists (Ginsburg 2012), they point out that the users of digital technologies are not necessarily always those for whom they were designed, showing how we need to attend to use as emergent (Miller and Horst 2012: 9–10). This point is equally relevant for a digital design anthropology, and is advanced throughout the chapters of this book, from Strenger’s critique of the ways in which the everyday of this kind is ignored in utopian smart home visions, through McShane et al.’s account of the development of a community wi-fi system, to Horst’s ethnographies of everyday uses of mobile phones.

## Going beyond: Surpassing the digital/ material dichotomy

As we have insisted above, the digital and material should not be thought of as two separate things that already independently existed in the world and have now become entangled. However there has been a tendency towards such thinking because in academic scholarship they have been developed as two different concepts that different researchers and disciplines have, since the digital has become thought of as ‘ubiquitous’, put together in a range of different ways. We now, in this and the following sections, interrogate some of the variations through which this relationship has been constructed conceptually, show how this book contributes to the debates they raise, and continue to argue for a relational concept of digital materiality.

The material has long since been a conceptual focus for scholars across the social sciences and humanities – including from its traditional place in archaeology, museum studies and anthropology of material culture across to cultural studies and now internet and HCI research. Material culture approaches have offered researchers an entry point into analysing social worlds through their materiality. Materials have been central to the work of design, and of course have their own discipline in engineering. Indeed the making of digital material futures is inevitably a task that involves multiple disciplines, and a focus on materials offers one way in which to consider how they might come together.

Scholars across a range of disciplines have also acknowledged that digital content and technologies need to be understood in relation to materiality, and in recent years the notion and the terminology of digital materiality has been discussed across architecture, design and media studies as well as in the social sciences. Yet, we propose that further interrogation of the problematic of the digital–material as inseparable is needed. In the literature of practicebased disciplines of architecture and design, for instance, we see examples of how the digital–material relationship is presented in terms of how it becomes part of a disciplinary practice. Yet the problematic of the physicality of matter versus the intangible digital is generally overlooked. For example, in architecture the concept of digital materiality has come to stand for a particular set of practices involving digital design (see Willman et al. 2013). For instance, writing about architecture, Gramazio and Kohler use the term digital materiality ‘to describe an emergent transformation in the expression of architecture’. This, they write is a process whereby ‘Materiality is increasingly being enriched with digital characteristics, which substantially affect architecture’s physis’ (2008: 7). Thus, for them, ‘Digital materiality evolves through the interplay between digital and material processes in design and construction. The synthesis of two seemingly distinct worlds – the digital and the material – generates new, self-evident realities. Data and material, programming and construction are interwoven’ (Gramazio and Kohler 2008: 7). For these architects this way of conceptualizing the process also has implications for practice in that it is a new way of dealing with materials which transforms the possibilities and the professional scope of the architect, since ‘Digital materiality leads to a new expression and – surprisingly enough, given the technical associations of the term “digital” – to a new sensuality in architecture’ (Gramazio and Kohler, 2008: 7). In this discussion, therefore, the work of blending the digital and material, which are objects with different properties, qualities and affordances, becomes the task of the architect – indeed an element of her/his professional skill.

Similarly in the context of digital design, Tone Bratteteig writes from the position of a designer for whom ‘Design is “thinking with materials”’ (2010: 148). While we note here that the idea that design is only about materials – of any kind – is contested in that it can also be to do with services and processes (see Akama and Prendiville 2013), Bratteteig shows how digital designers have sought to understand the relationship between the digital and material in digital design in a way that recognizes the multiple dimensions of this. Through a review of this field she proposes that ‘Seeing digital design as thinking with concrete abstractions of processes, at different levels of concretizations as well as across them, suggests that digital designers should understand their material in a way that enables them to move between levels of concretization and choose the right abstraction for the actual design process as it evolves in time’. Here again, digital materiality, as for architects, seems to be something that needs to become embedded in the practice of the designer, and becomes likewise part of professional skill, in that Bratteteig concludes that ‘The many levels of digital design open up for many different competencies being involved in imagining and building possible futures’ (2010: 166).

Likewise in media studies, the question of digital materiality has been acknowledged since the first years of the twenty-first century, but neither here has it been systematically interrogated. Indeed it has been approached from different directions, depending on the purpose of the study. For instance, Fuller (2005: 2) acknowledges that ‘objects have explicitly become informational as much as physical but without losing any of their fundamental materiality’. Here, the challenge is to unpack how this materiality can be sensed, how it can be made use of, and how in turn it makes other elements or compositions tangible. The focus in Fuller’s work on the informational qualities of objects implies taking their materiality as their original state, and asking how the digital has become part of this. In contrast, for other scholars, whose focus is on the informational or communications uses of media, the question of the materiality of digital elements situates the digital as the original state and asks how materiality has developed as part of it. For instance, José van Dijck writes: ‘In the case of lifelogs, the digital materiality of the internet engenders a new type of reflection and communication. This shows traces of the former analogue genre but functions substantially differently’ (2004). Here the digital is described as the tool or platform where digital materiality is experienced and expected to be found.

In the field of anthropology, the issue of digital materiality has also been broadly discussed in particular in the areas which have a history of research in both material culture studies and design. A key point in the trajectories of the discussions that we advance in this book is the appropriation of material culture as a way to approach the world anthropologically, as developed in the work of Danny Miller from the 1980s onwards. This field of material culture studies has also intersected with design anthropology, for instance through projects led by Alison Clarke (e.g. Clarke 2010). Given this history of a material culture anthropology, it would be easy to see the digital as a new facet of a material culture approach to the world. It is clear that digital anthropology has impacted on this field, and indeed Alison Clarke reflected in her edited volume on design anthropology that ‘Digital anthropology and interaction design are poised to move the theorizing and practice around twenty-first-century object culture far beyond the remit of those early corporate design anthropologists and their preoccupation with big, green photocopier buttons’ (Clarke 2010: 13). To be fair to the early corporate anthropologists, we would note that it was Lucy Suchman who advanced an anthropology of design that was also an anthropology for design by locating design in a broader perspective than design methods to illuminate design’s relevance in contemporary societies as a practice of change, and to interrogate what constitutes transformative change and how it happens (2011: 3). However, a notable difference between the approach of Suchman and that developed by Clarke is that in terms of her approach to object culture, Suchman has been more interested in objects-inaction than in defining their ‘materiality’ (2005: 381). Moreover, as we note below, there has been little conversation in the existing literatures between mainstream media anthropology and HCI-focused anthropology, thus leaving the intersection between digital anthropology and design – at least initially – primarily in the context of material culture studies.

Since the question of how to understand the nature of the digital has been a central debate in Media Anthropology as well as Digital Anthropology, Media Studies and the Social Studies of the Internet, to understand how the digital–material relationship is being constituted in the social sciences now we first take a step back, to consider how early studies emphasized the ontological status of the things that happened in the virtual worlds constituted through digital technologies and their users. As Ardèvol and Gómez Cruz (2014) argue, in Internet Studies these online contexts were thought as a new social space, the cyberspace, where virtual communities were evolving and where disembodied identities interacted, free from the social and cultural constraints of the real world or reproducing them in these virtual realms (Turkle 1995; Baym 2000; Hine 2000; Nakamura 2002). Later on, this distinction between the virtual and the real was challenged and the relationship between online and offline activity was theorized as a continuum (Miller and Slater 2000; Leander and McKim 2003; Hine 2007) with a focus on explaining precisely the worlding of the virtual world (such as in the virtual platform Second Life) as a world apart (Boellstorff 2008). In their prologue to Digital Anthropology, Miller and Horst accurately contested ‘approaches that imply that becoming digital has either rendered us less human, less authentic or more mediated’. Instead they argue that ‘Not only are we just as human within the digital world, the digital also provides many new opportunities for anthropology to help us understand what it means to be human’ (2012: 4). One of the key ways in which the online/offline dichotomy has been challenged is through a focus on the question of the relationship between the digital and material. As Miller and Horst assess it, ‘Materiality is thus bedrock for digital anthropology, and this is true in several distinct ways, of which three are of prime importance. First, there is the materiality of digital infrastructure and technology. Second, there is the materiality of digital content, and, third, there is the materiality of digital context’ (Miller and Horst 2012: 25). In these definitions, importance is given to how the digital is materially produced. This is an important consideration for determining what digital materiality can involve and which indeed figures in the following chapters in this book. Indeed, Miller and Horst insist on the relationship between the digital and the material and treat it as one of the core principles of their approach to digital anthropology, which acknowledges ‘the materiality of digital worlds, which are neither more nor less material than the worlds that preceded them’ (Miller and Horst, 2012: 4). Their argument is that ‘the digital, as all material culture, is more than a substrate; it is becoming a constitutive part of what makes us human’ (2012: xx).

We would not disagree with Miller and Horst’s proposal. Here, however, we have a different purpose in that our own agenda is to develop the notion of digital materiality as a way to connect digital and design anthropologies. In stating a concept of digital materiality, we are not seeking to produce a new hybrid ontology by referring to an ‘empirical object’ that exists ‘out there’, configured by physical and digital properties. Rather than starting with an a priori definition about what is digital and what is material, we prefer to understand digital materiality as a process, and as emergent, not as an end product or finished object. In doing so we break down the boundaries that are assumed when questions are asked about what is digital and what is not. It is moreover not a question of whether the digital is material or not. This is because in the worlds that the contributors to this volume discuss, the digital, the material and design are not specific and separate things, but are rather more porous elements of processes of research, design and intervention. People design children’s experiences, make code, build living archives, develop interactive systems, search for more sustainable homes, rig up public wi-fi networks, create sensors for controlling air pollution, desire healthy environments, want to empower citizens, imagine possible futures. Thus, digital materiality does not define ‘something’ done, but a process of becoming. Digital materiality refers to the making and to what emerges of these entanglements, not to a state or a quality of matter.

It is because we focus on what is happening that we need a processual concept of digital materiality. Current debates about materiality have called for more materialist modes of analysis and attention to matter and processes of materialization (deLanda 2004; Bennett 2009; Ingold 2011; Hodder 2012). In particular, the New Materialism turn and the vitalism led by Jane Bennett argue for an understanding of matter as alive and as an active force in the making of the world, in sum a ‘materiality that is itself vibrant or active’ (Bennett 2010: 49). These lines of inquiry propose an ontological reorientation that takes into account post-humanist ideas (Haraway, 1991, 1999; Latour, 2005) and the notion of living matter, thus avoiding conceptualizations of humans as being apart from matter and rejecting the idea of ‘matter as an inert substance subject to predictable causal force’. This allows other ways to describe the design process by understanding it as a process of materialization ‘complex, pluralistic and relatively open’ (Coole and Frost 2010: 7) where matter is a vital force.

Media archaeologists also call for a processual understanding of matter. For instance, Parikka suggests speaking of ‘not only of objects, but also as much about non-solids and the processual materiality’. For example, this refers to dirty matter at the level of components, voltages and materials in technological media, but ‘is not just machines nor is it just solids, and things, or even objects. Materiality leaks in many directions also concretely (i.e. e-waste)’ (Parikka 2011: 98). This position resonates with Ingold’s point that ‘things are alive because they leak’ (Ingold 2008: 10), and that things, like people, are processes: ‘it is in the opposite of capture and containment, namely discharge and leakage, that we discover the life of things’ (2008: 13). Even Parikka suggests that a big challenge for new materialism is ‘to develop a media theory of things – and yet not only thing-powers, but process-power’ (Parikka 2011: 98). Beyond these claims, different scholars from philosophy, feminist studies, media and anthropology propose new ontologies that highlight processes of formation rather than discrete entities, delimited objects or final products – instead, to define matter for its living process in the world’s formation.

We maintain that digital materiality is part of this living process in the world of design. Our proposal is primarily methodological; in order to centre our attention in the process of making in the mess of everyday life, we need a processual approach to digital materiality. This creates a prism through which to examine the complex interfaces at which we engage with technologies, architectures and narratives that constitute the materiality of the everyday and how futures are imagined, forged and made.

# Mess and things: Situated ways to look for the unexpected

That the worlds we research are messy is well acknowledged in the existing literature, whether expressed precisely in that idiom (e.g. Law, 2004) or not. This point might not come as much of a surprise to anthropologists for whom their first fieldwork is likely to be a hands-on training in how to deal with research materials of different qualities and affordances. Anthropology is also a discipline for which a critical dialogue between ethnography is ongoing. This means that as anthropologists we would not expect the theoretical model which we had in mind when approaching our ethnographic site to necessarily frame what we eventually thought we found there. Rather we would expect to discover all kinds of things that would lead us to critique the theory for its universal presumptions. The notion of mess can, however, be useful for reinforcing the point that we don’t walk into neatly ordered worlds that can be readily converted into equally neat data. This point has been developed further in much excellent research that focuses on digital material worlds, notably by some of the leading scholars included in our book (e.g. Dourish and Bell 2011; Michael, this volume). However, one thing that concerns us about the contemporary enthusiasm for the idea that the world, and the research we do in it, is messy, is when researchers use their findings to demonstrate this point. Instead we would argue that the sooner researchers, designers and policy makers take up the idea that mess is what they are about to engage with at the beginning of research, design and intervention projects, rather than making mess part of their conclusions, the better. Without wanting to fall into the trap of claiming that anthropologists just knew it all along, we would point out that as part of our (always immersed in particular sites and inevitably very personal) training as anthropological ethnographers we have always been confronted with this complicated question of how to bring together series of things, processes and even other inexplicable phenomena of different kinds, types, qualities and affordances, to tell coherent and consistent stories about what is happening while also accounting for people’s self-descriptions. In particular the challenge is also to tell such stories in ways that acknowledge that what people do tends often to be inconsistent, because it is always contingent on changing sets of circumstances.

Indeed we can find similar unruliness wherever we look in research, and in particular with reference to another of the rather sticky concepts that we engage with here: ‘things’. Existing discussions in anthropology have long since shown us how things have biographies and that their meanings change as they are (re)appropriated in different contexts (Appadurai 1986; Koppitof 1986; Henare, Holbraad and Wastell 2006). Some ANT and STS scholars (Latour 2005; Pinch 2008) also attribute a certain amount of (albeit distributed or displaced) agency to things. Following this perspective, things can be thought of as ‘acting’ differently as they move through and participate in different environments.

As we have commented above, there has been a shift in the material culture studies inflected field of design anthropology (e.g. Clarke 2010) towards rethinking the object through the digital. Yet if we take this shift further to focus away from the concept of an object towards that of a ‘thing’, the relationality between the digital and material comes closer into view. It then becomes easier to conceptualize how the mess we have written about in the previous section and the potential unruliness of things that is the concern of STS scholars (see Michael, this volume) is constituted through the relationality of things.

There is an operational distinction between ‘object’ and ‘thing’ that responds to a broad discussion regarding the life and agency of things. Ingold refers to this distinction to explain what happens in the interaction between humans and things in the flow of life. Ingold (2008) critically proposes that according to Actor-Network Theory, objects lack life when they are cut off from the network of distributed agency. He argues that ‘things’ are alive when they are immersed in the entanglement of forces. It is in the flow of life, as an ongoing process, that things and humans exist. In the terms of Appadurai (2013), objects are alive because they are interlinked with other objects and humans. It is through the process of design that mere things become life objects, under the scrutiny of human activity. Then, for both scholars, things and objects are distinguished by life but in a quite different way, the important point being that by things and objects, we mean divisible non-human unities, which are made alive through different relational circumstances with humans and with other things. The implications of this for our discussion of digital materiality is that materiality does not end in things and objects; materiality is – as Ingold and Appadurai suggest – a process, a flow and connections. The digital materiality happens in an ongoing and openness process that escapes delimitations in discrete units with attributes as tangible, physical or in opposition to other kind of attributes such virtual, binary and, primarily, digital.

Throughout this book we find our contributors confronted with mess and with things that are unpredictable, lines of contingencies, stories that unfold in ways that were not necessarily expected. They approach this mess variously and according to disciplinary preferences in the ways that they give theoretical order to it. However there is a collective consensus that what we are dealing with is something complex, messy and uncertain (see Pink and Akama 2015). For our contributors, this has become embodied in discussions of contingency, conflict, unevenness, idiocy, confusions, technologies not doing what people think they are meant to, people not doing what they are meant to with technologies, and more. There is nothing surprising about the fact that these chapters tell us that digital materiality is just as messy as everything else we are likely to encounter in an ongoing world. Yet, as they also show, this raises the question of why there simultaneously seem to be cultural narratives at play that stand for a utopian hope or expectation that digital material futures (or presents) will not be so messy. We expect that they will – mess and unruly things are here to stay; the challenge for us in research, design and intervention is to learn how to work with them. As we propose in the next section, this means getting into the middle of it with them and recognizing that the methods and technologies we use to research will likewise be unpredictable.

## Getting into the mess: Engaged practice from within

All of the contributions to this volume suggest the need for researchers to have deep engagements with digital material environments, processes, things and experiences. They do so across a range of contexts and sites that on the surface appear quite different.

For instance, building on her already significant experience of empirical and theoretical research in this field, Strengers carefully reviews existing debates, research and interventions in the field of the smart home. On the basis of what she finds – which reveals a context where there is a big gap between what smart home designers are working towards and the ways people actually live – she calls for more detailed research into ‘the entanglements between and beyond’ the digital, material and human. Other chapters that do not report on conventional empirical research nevertheless do involve the authors’ long-term engagement with and experience of the things being discussed. In some cases, they also take as their examples design interventions and the ways these have been made or activated. For instance, Dourish draws on his personal experiences of using and programming for early computers when discussing how they might be emulated. By bringing us up close to software in this way, he enables an understanding of what people (think they) are doing with it, and of what it is to be in such a world of digital–material things, where the things discussed might not be quite as they would seem from the outside. Likewise David Carlin’s work with Circus ${ \mathsf { O } } z .$ , with whom he and his colleagues have developed a digital archive, was informed by thirty years of being associated and working with this organization, at one point as a show director. His chapter charts and reflects on this process, from the perspective of someone who was part of it as it happened and who has participated through what he calls ‘an ethics of care’ – creating an interesting intersection between his own memories and the ambitions of the archive to house digitalized memories. Carlin’s chapter is one where he is right ‘in the middle of it’ in a different way to the conventional ethnographer, narrating through his own personal trajectory of working with a circus to make digital materiality alive as an evolving interface with human memories through which to remember, re-imagine, or imagine possible futures. Other chapters involve varying degrees and different periods of ethnography and describe correspondingly different forms of immersion in their sites of research and intervention. However, in common, they show that to research digital materiality we need to encounter it as it emerges and to follow it, and to recognize that it is an ongoing process and never a finished object.

In Chapter 5 Pink et al. discuss video ethnographies over four years with twenty households, which occurred over several visits to each household involving not only doing research with them in their homes but also showing them video research materials and pre-publication versions of articles, video and still images. This project developed a form of intensive immersion different from that of conventional long-term fieldwork in one site. As discussed elsewhere, the capacity of video to draw viewers along with it, forward into new ways of knowing and experiencing also formed part of the way in which the research team members participated in the project through its digital materiality (see Pink and Leder Mackley 2012). In Chapter 7 Ferrer et al. describe a process of ethnographic immersion of more than five years following the project of an interactive slide across sites of research, design and intervention transformations, but which was also part of this process (as was the work described by Pink et al. in Chapter 5).

As we noted above, the existing discussions of mess in the social sciences have tended to be about the world we research as being messy. Less has been said about the mess involved in making design interventions. Yet as we have outlined above, and as Dourish and Bell note, ‘the practice of any technology in the world is never quite as simple, straightforward, or idealized as it is imagined to be’ (Dourish and Bell 2011: 4) and, at least for the case of ubicomp (ubiquitous computing), there will always be variations in the ways technologies are used and experienced (Dourish and Bell 2011: 5). As the contributions to this book also show, technologies are always ‘used’ by people whom we refer to as everyday designers rather than simply ‘users’ in ways that are relational and contingent. We might think of these activities as everyday interventions that are part of the process of ongoing making and improvisation in the world that Ingold writes of (2013) and that has also influenced the work of design anthropologists (e.g. see Gunn and Donovan 2012). Mess, thus conceptualized, is therefore also a way of thinking about not only the context in which designers make interventions, but also the context of ongoing everyday intervention such as that discussed by Strengers in Chapter 4, Pink et al. in Chapter 5 and McShane et al. in Chapter 11.

In using the term intervention in this way, we concur with the reclaiming of the concept as Green and Pink have expressed it, where the idea of an intervention is intended to ‘bring to the fore the idea of intervening as a way of being active in the world; as a scholar, creative practitioner, activist, or as a person living their everyday life in ways that seek to generate forms of change’. This means appropriating the concept of intervention – ‘which has in some contexts been maligned as an act of power’ – through an emphasis which among other things ‘promotes the importance of research and practice that actively and creatively seeks to make change happen within and through creative research processes, and in ways that involve collaboration with participants in research and in change processes’ (Green and Pink 2014: 73). It is in this spirit that we also engage with the idea of intervention, to reclaim it from critical discourses about unwanted and politically problematic forms of change-making and to instead locate it with the concept of design co-interventions towards the participatory ways of understanding, engaging with and ‘intervening in’ the world that the contributors to this volume discuss.

Therefore, following the above argument, interventions are inevitably emergent from and made in messy worlds, with unruly things and in relation to a series of unknown future contingencies. Pink and Akama, with their co-contributors, begin to unravel some of these issues in their Un/Certainty iBook (2015), which reports on and discusses a two-day event where a group of about twenty ethnographers, designers and creative practitioners were brought together to explore uncertainty in practice. Indeed, Pink and Akama argue for a greater recognition of uncertainty as being fundamental to intervention practices. Whereas conventionally designers have often sought to find ways in which to construct future scenarios to design into, the contributors to this book similarly acknowledge, and indeed show through their examples, that we cannot know what is going to happen next. Indeed, as we outline in the next section, some have used methods that are deliberately experimental in order to seek new ways of finding out things that they might otherwise not have been able to awake. This might be – as in the case of those projects that discuss how design interventions themselves are implicated in processes – a matter of intervening in the world at the moment or place where digital materiality is particularly actively or obviously intertwined. These ways of engaging experimentally and collaboratively with the sites of and participants in research might not be unusual for designers, and they are also increasingly common in the social sciences. Yet they still go beyond the boundaries of those anthropologists who continue to defend an observational non-intrusive approach: for instance, in the case of Ferrer, Ardèvol and Parés, when the observer ethnographer was involved in the making of an experience of an interactive slide; or in the case of Michael in the placing of networked objects in people’s homes; or in the case of Pink et al. of asking participants to collaborate in showing their everyday activities (often with technologies) while being digital-video recorded. These digital–material research and design interventions then become part of worlds in progress, are appropriated in unexpected ways by the people who encounter and engage with them, and perhaps come to be different types of ‘thing’ to what was expected. In these works, then, the ethnographic process becomes one of understanding what design research can do – that is, what it can tell us about what can happen in the world, opening up the realm of the possible by letting it play out, and enabling us to begin to consider on that basis other possibilities, potentialities and affordances.

While the work of the designer is to intervene in other people’s worlds, that of the anthropologist has conventionally been to inhabit other people’s worlds and create accounts and understandings of these worlds without changing them. Neither of these, we suggest, remain viable propositions as single activities. As we have noted in the first paragraph of this chapter, the current impulse towards research that has impact, as well as the rise of applied and public scholarship, not only in anthropology but across the social science and humanities disciplines discussed in this book, has shifted this emphasis. It also raises the question of the rights and/or responsibilities that social scientists might now have to intervene in the world and the question of how this might best be done. This question goes beyond the controversies attached to and debated around institutionalized impact agendas. Instead it focuses our attention towards how and where those scholars, researchers and designers who are actively seeking to understand and/or design for and intervene in and through the digital materiality of the world might undertake such work. This leads us on to the next section, in which we reflect on the final theme of the methodologies that are being developed for such tasks.

## Methodologies for researching and intervening

There is no single methodology or approach for working across the social sciences, humanities and design through a concept of digital materiality. This point is demonstrated through the variety of disciplinary and technological approaches that have been engaged by the contributing researchers and designers. While we do not see this as a methodology volume, we – like most of our contributors – have also felt compelled to reveal and comment on the processes through which the ways of knowing that are required for and involved in research and intervention through digital materiality are being created.

At the core of ethical and participatory ethnographic and design practice is a reflexive stance – both to the ways in which researchers, designers and participants are positioned within projects and to the outcomes of those projects and the possible meanings they can have in the world. Such an approach is also integral to this book, although it is manifested in different ways in different chapters. For example, we have already noted how in Chapters 2 and 10 respectively Dourish and Carlin both show how they have been, both biographically and through their writing, ‘in the middle’ of the things and processes they discuss. Here personal biographical experience is self-consciously used through the texts to demonstrate the worlds that are described. These two chapters are not ethnographic in the conventional sense, even if they might be said to develop types of auto-ethnographical thinking, yet they carry through forms of reflexivity that also emerge in the chapters that develop a more (although still not conventional) anthropological type of ethnography, such as Ferrer et al. in Chapter 7 and Pink et al. in Chapter 5. Likewise, Michael uses a revelatory moment in his own experience of using digital media in his home as the opening scene in Chapter 6.

Reflexivity is a core methodological principle in the work discussed in this book; it is also a wave that has rolled across disciplines and forms of creative practice in the social sciences, humanities and design for the last thirty or so years. It is always inflected by the disciplines to which its practitioners belong, and the same can be said for most aspects of research practice. This is demonstrated well in this volume when we compare how, for instance, different sociological and anthropological methodologies are played out, including the variations in the ways that sociologists work. For instance, Strengers in Chapter 4 takes one sociological approach to the everyday – social practice theory – which, at the risk of oversimplification, uses practices as its object of enquiry and key unit of research design, analysis and findings. In contrast, in Chapter 6 Michael, also a sociologist, works with what he calls an idiotic methodology to develop a speculative approach. Anthropology likewise is a diverse discipline; in our own cases, all trained in visual anthropological methodologies, we have not taken distinctively different approaches, but have used different methods. Pink et al.’s sensory video ethnographies of the home are rooted in visual, sensory and digital ethnography methodologies (see Pink 2013, 2015; Pink et al. 2015) and Ferrer et al. have used longer-term ethnography and visual methods to follow the making of the slide over time and to analyse how different users play with the slide. Horst draws on longer term fieldwork to discuss examples from a field site that she has been engaged with through successive visits over the last fifteen years.

# Working with digital materiality

Putting digital materiality at the centre of our project is only one way in which to view the future of the relationship between the social sciences and humanities and design. There will be others, and it is not our purpose here to propose that this above all others is the only way to go. However there are several very good reasons why, alongside other methods of making interventions towards a more just, equal, environmentally sustainable and healthy world, working through a digital materiality approach to design/anthropology offers ways to rethink the world as a site for research, design and intervention. In part this is because this approach highlights the interactive dimensions between things, humans and environments that in other design fields are less evident.

Most of the chapters in this book discuss projects that, through research and design, seek to ‘better’ the world in some way – that is, increase forms of well-being and health, work towards environmental sustainability, create equality of access to resources, and similar. These are all reasonably wellestablished, if unequally distributed, shared global aims stated across the domains of many different governmental, corporate and NGO stakeholders, and also lived out in many cases through everyday life forms of activism and change-making. A digital materiality approach, when applied to question such perennial problems that seem to never get fixed, despite the fact that there is often much ink spilt over them, seems to offer ways of thinking productively about where and how a digital–material design anthropology could usefully research, design and intervene. We cannot cover all possibilities here, therefore in this section we comment on two, as examples.

First, there remains an aspect of the open space between design anthropology and digital anthropology which has been under-acknowledged, and that we wish to flag as part of a next stage of work in this field. Such steps could inform how the capacities of design and anthropology come together in the future and which likewise puts the emergence digital materiality at the centre of its work. Although there are some exceptions, design anthropology remains focused on the ‘developed’ world where designers design, whereas in the parts of the world that interventions tend to be towards ‘development’ design is often absent. Important exceptions in the design anthropology literature include the groundbreaking work of Dori Tunstall with indigenous design (Tunstall 2013) and Ian Ewart’s discussion of building in Borneo (Ewart 2013).

It has been inevitable that Digital Materialities has to some extent reproduced something of this divide. In Part One the critiques that contributors advance of the imaginaries of digital futures are all focused on developed nations and their concerns. But this is in part because although in developing countries digital materiality is equally ‘felt’, these are not the places where those who present us with digital future imaginaries tend to imagine as the first sites where such digital futures would be played out. Appadurai also highlights this point, suggesting that we have to change our understanding of design as ‘only partly a specialist activity’ and move to a broader view of design as a ‘fundamental human capacity and a primary source of social order’ (2013: 254). This movement will allow us to focus attention on other than Western societies seeking how people are designing our future digital imaginaries in their ordinary life.

More work needs to be done on indigenous and local imaginaries of digital futures across the world – not only in those modern societies where utopian visions of smart cities and smart homes give us something to critique, but also in emerging economies. Horst’s chapter goes some way towards this, with the proposal that we need to attend to such everyday design. But there is a bigger issue here that also encompasses what are called the emerging economies as well as developing countries – including the fieldwork sites of ‘traditional’ anthropologists or development anthropologists, such as Indonesia or India, where there are vast markets for digital media as well as locally designed uses for them. Asia is also a key site for the manufacture of digital technologies. In the future this might be a key intersection for digita and design anthropology – and raises the question of how the interventional stances of design and development anthropologies will also intersect or critically encounter each other in such a field of scholarship and practice.

Second, one of the areas of digital materiality that has been little acknowledged is the darker side of digital technologies that Maxwell and Miller discuss in their book Greening the Media (2012). In light of discussions over the substrate of the materials that compose the digital infrastructures, e-waste and the kind of materiality that is produced in the aforementioned cycles that have been taking place recently in the fields of media studies and human geography (Gabrys 2011; Parikka 2012), Maxwell and Miller examine contemporary demand for ongoing obsolete digital technologies, and the material and e-waste that is generated through the media manufacturing industries, along with the global inequalities related to the global distribution of the resource mining, manufacturing production, distribution and consumption of digital technologies.

Here the materiality of digital media becomes implicated beyond the making of digital material environments that we inhabit as we go about our everyday lives, and calls our attention to the ways in which digital materiality is also implicated in processes of climate change and the ‘natural’ and human disasters that are part of this. Elsewhere Hjorth, Pink, Sharpe and Williams (2016) have argued that creative digital arts practice interventions could play a role in working through these issues towards a more sustainable future. Here we suggest that digital design anthropology is likewise ideally positioned to be able to produce understandings and interventions towards designing for the recycling of digital technological and e-waste. Design anthropologists have already shown how the subdiscipline can create ethnographies of future ‘possible’ recycling systems (Halse 2013). We would also argue for an anthropological approach to designing for sustainable use, reuse and ways of living in everyday environments, with things and through processes that we can think of through the concept of digital materiality.

Our call is for an extended dialogue between design, anthropology, HCI and media studies. By putting digital materiality at the centre of our concerns, we argue for a deeper interrogation of where digital and design anthropologies intersect, and the extent to which they can be separated out in future discussions of how futures are imagined, how interventions can be made in the world, and the roles of people as everyday designers.

## A brief introduction to the structure of Digital Materialities

This book is divided into three parts titled respectively: Expectations, Co-interventions, and Insider Design. Here we introduce the parts, the chapters they comprise, and the work they do towards mapping out a field of research, design and intervention through digital materiality. In doing so, we chart a trajectory through the book; however this is not a closed route that we wish to guide readers to take, but instead would encourage unexpected routes, thoughts and practices of engagement with the text.

The three chapters in Part One – Expectations – focus on the ways in which different digital materialities are imagined and come to being, moving through from software and emulation (Dourish) to urban sensors (Lanzeni) and smart homes (Strengers). Although each of these chapters focuses on different subject matter, they all approach the question of digital materiality through critical interrogations of the ways in which it has been imagined and constituted through design. Each chapter in different ways also shows us how the pursuit of utopian or perfect digital designs is itself a flawed goal, because in fact a study of the ways in which digital materiality plays out and is experienced by people is always unfinished, ‘messy’ in the sense that we have outlined above, inhabited by unruly things, and contingencies.

For example, in Chapter 2 Dourish discusses a series of intriguing examples of how the digital–material is implicated in the emulation of older computer programs within newer technologies. One of these examples discusses the case of how a researcher found some bugs in the program he was developing an emulation of. Dourish tells us how ‘he fixed them for the clone machine so that it would behave correctly’, but, he goes on, ‘when the machine was nearing completion and people began bringing up software that had been developed for original PDP-10s, they found that some of it failed mysteriously. Investigation revealed that some software was failing because it depended on the very bugs that … [the researcher] had corrected’ (this volume page 38). If we unpack the trajectory through which this scenario (and others in the chapter) developed as described in full by Dourish, then we can see clearly how the contingencies through which digital materiality emerges need to be at the centre of our understanding of how future design should proceed.

The notions of smart cities, citizens and homes imply digital–material and human relations of particular kinds. Débora Lanzeni and Yolande Strengers both offer critical discussions of how smart futures have been envisaged through the assumptions attached to these imaginaries. In Chapter 3 Lanzeni points to how the smart concept has been mobilized for imagining ‘future technologically enhanced and potentially automated cities, homes and lives’ and argues that, instead, in order to understand digital materiality we need to attend to the meaning of smart for smart technology developers themselves, and to their design processes. Lanzeni calls on us to examine how visions of technological futures are in fact situated in the local and everyday experience of the designers. This, she proposes, invites us to rethink our understanding of the roles people play as citizens, and the implications this has for digital design.

In Chapter 4, Strengers interrogates and problematizes the notion of the smart home – as she puts it, ‘the future smart home is an imagined one, and it is constantly being reimagined’. She demonstrates how existing research on how both the history of the idea of the automated home and on how so-called smart technologies are used (or disregarded) by people in everyday life, reveals the flaws in the utopian vision of the smart home and the types of persona who would inhabit it. Instead, as Strengers shows, a rather different digital materiality is likely to play out, and it is to this that we need to look in order to design for the future sustainable home. She argues that ‘We cannot only be interested in how people “use” smart technologies, but must also focus on how they are reconfiguring both human and technology, and in doing so how they reconstitute the very fabric of everyday life’ (page 00). Thus Strengers ends her chapter with a call for further research into the ways that homes are lived, with which we concur, and which implies a double agenda that we seek to play out in this book. This means developing a critique of existing conceptualizations of the digital material that are already playing out in planning, design and policy, as well as undertaking an in-depth analysis of the ways that lived and experienced digital materialities are emergent from everyday life circumstances and how designers might become engaged with these processes and the persons who are active in them as participants. It is to this question that our attention turns in Part Two.

The common thread that links the four chapters in Part Two – Co-interventions – is the question of how to understand existing and ongoing emerging forms of digital materiality, and the processes and activities through which humans engage, improvise and live with them. Significantly all these chapters also engage with this question though possible relationships between researching and understanding, and designing and intervening which involve professional designers and/or design researchers. They therefore also consider how the social science and design disciplines might work together through the digital material.

In Chapter 5, Sarah Pink, Kerstin Leder Mackley, Val Mitchell, Garrath T. Wilson and Tracy Bhamra discuss how ethnography and design teams from anthropology, media studies, design and human–computer interaction (HCI) research worked together in a larger interdisciplinary project, which sought to make digital design interventions for energy demand reduction. They show how, in the course of the four-year project, their work tacked between ethnography and design research, theoretical development, and bringing the ethnographic-theoretical dialogue of anthropology to the design–ethnography collaboration. This collaboration focused precisely on some fields of activity that the chapters in Part One of this book reveal as being important – including the ways in which people were engaged as the makers of the digital materiality of their own homes. However, it also further advances our discussion of digital materiality, anthropology and design, by showing how, through a focus on the digital materiality of home encompassing methodologies of ethnographic research, design intervention and project dissemination, we can make the relationality of the digital–material operate across different levels and modes of working in interdisciplinary teams.

In Chapter 6 Mike Michael takes up a similar theme, in that he also reflects in part on a project that crossed the social sciences and design (in this case an STS inflected sociological approach) and that was concerned with energy and digital media. Michael’s work, however, engages with speculative designers and in doing so develops a speculative sociological methodology. He asks ‘is it possible to imagine a way of designing digital materialities that enact such research events and provoke the possible?’ by looking at how research methods can be open and unfolding. He playfully suggests an intermingling between design and social science research practices by bringing speculative design a step further through what he calls the figure of the ‘idiotic object’. This means developing imaginative ways of designing digital materialities that enact research events and provoke the possible to appear by somehow disrupting what would otherwise be everyday situations. This ‘method assemblage’ has several implications for how research is conceived and carried out as people engage actively in the research process in affective, aesthetic, ethical and political ways.

Next, in Chapter 7, shifting our focus away from energy, which runs through Chapters 4 to 6, Jaume Ferrer, Elisenda Ardèvol and Narcís Parés discuss the relationship between designers and users in the process of making an interactive slide. They centre their analysis in the different understandings of co-design related to how users’ interventions are acknowledged to contribute to the interactive design in multiple ways. The chapter problematizes the concept of user as a non-expert person whose participation in the design project serves only for designing user needs. The authors argue that the common justification in participatory or co-design practice for including users because they are experts on their own experiences, simply reinforces an existing tendency to exclude the human person in HCI design. Through an analysis of the multiple ways of experiencing/knowing the interactive slide – of the designers, the children, the ethnographer and the anthropologist – the authors propose a more open and generative understanding of (co)design. In doing so they interrogate the nature of intervention in design – What is the slide? Is the slide the intervention? Is it the (co)design? Is it ethnography? This leads to further questions about different gazes over the making of the slide, the kind of ‘thing’ that is being created, the intervention of materials, bodies, rules of play, interactions and experiences, and therefore engages the authors in a conversation about the nature of design.

In Chapter 8, the last in this section, Floyd Mueller brings the human into digital design in a different way, through a focus on the human body as part of the digital material design configuration. Mueller’s chapter comes from the perspective of a designer, contrasting well with the social science perspectives represented more strongly in earlier chapters, and shows how such processes are played out in particular within the context of exertion games design. This chapter offering us a series of examples of phenomenologically informed design research where ethnography formed part of, but did not lead the design research process, thus providing what Mueller calls ‘a futureoriented perspective on the active human body as digital materiality’. These projects form part of an ongoing process of exploration into design for the active human body in a context where the digital and material are not understood as separate from each other, but each continually involved in the user’s experience of the world.

The chapters in Part Three – Insider Design – all focus in different ways on how the digital material is made through the everyday design or the informed involvement of people who do not actually work as professional designers. In doing so, it also begins to address the problem of how we understand digital materiality and design in the global South, as well as different conceptualizations of the South, through a focus on a regional city in Australia (McShane et al.), an urban Australian circus (Carlin) and everyday materialities and consumption in the Caribbean (Horst).

The section begins with Heather Horst’s fascinating account of the ways in which the Jamaican and Dominican-Haitian participants in her research planned and designed their mobile phones and the material cultures in which they were entangled. She takes a different angle on the point made by the chapters in Part Two of this book, concerning how people who are not professional designers are also engaged in the design of their everyday artefacts and processes. In Chapter 10, David Carlin takes us on a journey through his own trajectory as well as that of the Melbourne-based Circus Oz to explain how the digital materiality of an online archive emerges and evolves. This chapter also makes connections with the work of the authors in Part Two of this book, since Carlin and the designers involved in the project worked together to create the Circus Oz archive; Carlin also worked from within his long association with the circus, and with the circus members who were also part of the archive-making process. Indeed, while the design ethnography projects discussed in Part Two involved making things that would be interventions in the lives of participants in research projects, Carlin’s project involved making something more directly with the circus community who might use that archive, which he refers to as a living archive – that is, an ongoing emergent form of digital materiality, in other ways. For Carlin, the design of the digital archive means working with a meshwork of materials, digital and otherwise, that opens new understandings about what an archive can do, but also new contingencies, such as the circus members’ annotations in the process of digitalizing the old video recordings.

Chapter 11, the final chapter of this book, tells the story of the emergence of new digital materialities in the regional Australian city of Goulburn, which had been missed off the map of public broadband. Ian McShane, Chris K. Wilson and Denise Meredyth show us how the digital materiality of urban wireless and the services and experiences that are related to it emerge at a messy interface of interests, infrastructures and aspirations. Their account is of an experience of how digital materiality emerges in worlds that are already messy, uneven, conflicted, contingent and ongoingly changing. Indeed, if we want to gain a fuller understanding of how digital materiality is being made, it is precisely these otherwise unmapped realities that we need to delve into. Comparing the example revealed in this final chapter with the models critiqued in Part One of this book takes us full circle. As Strengers and Lanzeni respectively critique the neat utopias and expectations embedded in future visions of smart homes and smart cities like Barcelona, we see how an urban digital materiality unfettered by smart models and expectations could emerge through a ‘messy’ process in a city that was off the map for mainstream public wi-fi. Here, in order to achieve their goals, design had to become the preoccupation of non-designers, again through a process that shows up a series of twists, turns and contingencies.

PART ONE

Expectations

2

# Rematerializing the platform: Emulation and the digital–material

Paul Dourish

## Introduction

We live – if any number of breathless accounts are to be believed – in the age of the virtual. The movement of digital technology into many realms of life, at least in the developed world and increasingly beyond, means that our experience is populated by ‘virtual’ objects of all sorts: virtual books, virtual organizations, virtual realities, virtual memory and more. Even where the moniker of ‘virtual’ is not attached, there is a sense that virtualization attends other aspects of life, such as communication with friends and loved ones mediated by digital technology, such that even mourning and grieving for loved ones becomes an online pursuit (Brubaker et al. 2013). In this world, online shopping replaces the mall; books, CDs and DVDs are replaced with digital downloads; MOOCs replace traditional classroom teaching; paper bills disappear in favour of online transactions. As a site of design, the virtual is compelling precisely for the ways in which it both reproduces and offers the opportunity to reconfigure aspects of the world that might otherwise be beyond our reach as designers (cf. Smith 1986).

Increasingly, however, scholars have argued that this position neglects the significant and persistent materiality of digital technologies. Arguments for the importance of materiality in the age of the virtual have come from different disciplines. Some, for example, have argued that the infrastructures by which digital systems are maintained are themselves thoroughly material, and so we should understand that the digital economy is still based on such material groundings as real estate (for servers and network connections), power and energy (for digital equipment and server farms), and extractive industries (for the materials from which digital systems are constructed, such as the rare earth metals that play important roles in digital equipment fabrication) – material groundings that also embed the ‘new’ economy in older systems of political economy.

Others (e.g. Orlikowski 2007; Orlikowski and Scott 2008; Leonardi and Barley 2008) have argued from the perspective of organizational theory that we need to attend to the material aspects of organizational processes and the way that new technologies produce not just ‘virtual’ sites of work and organizing, but also significant challenges, limits and infrastructures that configure how organizational work proceeds. Arguing for a ‘socio-material’ approach to thinking about technology in organizations, they use the investigation of material forms to counter both the boundless optimism of progressivist technological determinism and the open-endedness of traditional social constructivist approaches.

Designers of various stripes have participated in these discussions too, although their point of engagement is somewhat different. For designers, the struggle with form – what Schön (1984) calls the ‘reflexive conversation with materials’ – has always been central. From a design perspective, then, the challenge of digital materialities is the challenge associated with the incorporation of the digital into otherwise inert materials. Here, the challenge is to blend digitality with material forms in a way that is respectful of the uniqueness of each. This is not a counter to arguments of virtuality, then, but rather an approach to virtuality that sees it as always somehow in conversation with physical materials.

Just what does it mean for something to be ‘virtual’? The traditional rhetoric suggests a dissolution of the physical and its replacement with an ineffable digital abstraction. The alternative approaches argue that the digital needs to be seen alongside the material. However, these alternatives typically leave the duality between materiality and virtuality intact. That is, while one approach or another argues for the need to think about materiality as well as digitality, or materiality in relation to digitality, they largely presume that there is, on the one hand, digitality, and, on the other, materiality.

These critiques, while varying in their specific approaches, have in common the intent to remind us of the significance of the material contexts in which the virtual arises. Nonetheless, they focus their attention less on the digital or the virtual itself. Focusing on the infrastructures, the processes and the objects that surround the digital still leaves the digital itself underexamined; and most problematically of all, they fail to recognize that the digital is itself material (Dourish and Mazmanian 2012; Blanchette 2011).

How should we think about virtuality, virtualism and virtualization in light of a thoroughgoing materialist stance on the digital? What might be opened up for us by a recognition of the digital as material itself?

In this chapter, I want to explore these questions by focusing in particular on one site at which we see these questions played out – that of computer emulation. By examining a number of questions that arise at this particular site, I hope to be able to cast some light on the broader question of the relationship between the virtual and the material and to reconfigure the notion of the virtual as a site of design practice and analysis. My starting point, though, will be on the materialities of digital representations as a foundation for our later discussions.

## The digital–material

The essence of the digital is that it is a representational system. It encodes or denotes something else. What does it mean, then, to argue for this representational system as itself having material properties?

A familiar analogy lies in our use of number systems. The Indo-Arabic number system with which we are familiar uses the position of each numeral to indicate an aspect of its magnitude – so, when we write 123, we know that the ‘1’ means ‘100’, and so is larger magnitude than the ‘3’. We rely upon this positional system when we do simple arithmetic, such as multidigit multiplication and division. Compare this to Roman numerals, where the number 123 would be represented as CXXIII. How would we go about multiplying CXXIII by, say, XLV (45)? Unlike the same calculation performed using Arabic numerals, there is no way to break this down into a series of smaller steps based on number positions. So, the representation of the numbers has important consequences for the way that they can be manipulated and used. The two representational systems might denote the same numbers, but different representations can be put to work in different ways.

‘Number’ seems like an entirely virtual concept, and yet numbers themselves betray the virtuality of the concept by taking on material forms that shape their use. So too do the representational forms that make up the world of the digital. Digitality is an abstract property, but digital things themselves – and even digits – are not.

Much the same argument can be applied to the notational system of programming languages and other digital forms. Consider the very simple program in Figure 2.1. Written in the Python programming language, it is a program that reads a file from the internet and counts word frequencies. Computer programs are often thought of as painfully detailed sets of instructions for carrying out a procedure, so simple and detailed that a computer

```python
import urllib2
from collections import defaultdict
from sys import argv
d = defaultdict(int)
data = urllib2.urlopen(argv[1]).read()
data = data.split()
for word in data:
d[word] += 1
for word in d:
print d[word], word;
```

## FIGURE 2.1 A simple Python program

can implement them. And so it is with this program – every addition, every movement from one step to another, every check for errors, and so on, is specified. The sequence of operations – now do this, now do that – is reduced in the programming system to the absolutely simplest set of operations that the computer can perform. Without a program, as we know, the computer can do nothing at all; everything it does, then, must be given to it in the form of a program.

The program, then, dictates everything that the computer will do. But it does not notate everything that the computer will do. This seems a little odd at first. A programming language is a notation, after all, a way of writing; the program is a notation for a set of operations that the computer is to carry out, and, as we’ve said, the computer only does what the program says. And yet, while the computer does ‘only’ what the program says, there is more to what the computer does than what the program directly describes. There are ways of going about carrying out the tasks specified in the program that are not part of the program’s text, and there are properties of the computational platform that impact the program’s execution but which are also not described here.

It’s useful to examine what is not notated in the program text. The type and characteristics of the network to which the computer is linked are not notated, although perhaps that is more than we would expect, even if they have an important impact on the operation of the program. But other more detailed questions remain. The speed with which the computer proceeds from one instruction to the next is not notated, for example. Nor are the different speeds at which different instructions might be executed, depending on the particular features of the computer and processor on which the program is running. The size of the computer’s memory conditions circumstances under which the program will eventually fail, but this is not notated; similarly, the size of the maximum representable number in the computer is not notated but can also cause the program to fail at some indefinite moment. The size of the program itself is not notated, nor the memory capacity needed to run it, nor the performance characteristics of its interpreter.

The materialities of digital systems lie not least, then, in this gap between what is denoted and what is expressed, or between the specification and the execution. A computer program may be a precise series of instructions, and yet the experience that is the result of the program’s execution is radically underspecified by that program.

It is in this radical underspecification, and the slippage between notation and enaction, that we find the lie of virtuality. The denial of materiality that is at the centre of the rhetoric of virtuality could be maintained only if the specification were complete: if a program really were an adequate account of what will happen in execution, if an MP3 file really were a complete explanation of how music will be produced, or if a digital 3D model really specified what you’ll see through a display. However, none of these is in fact the case. The mechanics of, if you will, de-virtualization – of the production of actual effects on the basis of digital specifications, be that the running of a program or the rendering of an image file – inherently exceeds the reach of the specification itself.

Elsewhere, I have argued that these properties are inherent in the digital, and examined such cases as database representations (Dourish, 2014) and network protocols (Dourish, 2015). The particular lens through which I want to examine the topic of virtuality and materiality in this paper is that of emulation – the production of a virtual computer, in software, in another computer. From the perspective of the dominant rhetoric, this is a case that is twice virtual; however, in practice, it is a site where the problems of virtuality become particularly visible.

## Emulation

In 2003, a collaboration between artist Cory Arcangel, Pittsburgh’s Andy Warhol Museum and computer scientists at Carnegie Mellon University made available a series of original artworks by Warhol that had been essentially lost for many years (Heddaya, 2014). These were digital artworks, originally produced by Warhol on early versions of Commodore’s Amiga personal computer system. Manufactured between 1985 and 1997, the Amiga was marketed on the basis of its advanced graphics and multimedia functions, and for the product launch, Commodore developed relationships with a number of artists, including Warhol, to produce art that would show off the Amiga’s capabilities in these areas. The pieces that Warhol produced were archived on floppy disks held in the collection of the Warhol Museum, but they had not been seen or examined since accession; indeed, it would seem that nobody knew what the disks contained until the 2003 examination. However, by 2003, original Amiga computers were hard to come by, particularly the early variants that Warhol had used; and so, in fact, although the artworks had been produced using a piece of software designed specifically for the Amiga computer, no Amiga computer was involved in the retrieval of the images. Instead, the images were retrieved and reconstituted using an Amiga emulator – software running on a modern PC that reproduces the experience of using an Amiga computer so accurately that the Amiga software can be executed without modification.

The notion of emulation runs right to the heart and the origins of computer science as a discipline. One of the foundational papers that made computer science possible is Alan Turing’s (1936) paper, ‘On Computable Numbers with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem.’ In this paper, Turing made significant contributions to an open mathematical question first posed by David Hilbert in 1928, which essentially asked whether a mathematical language could be defined in which a definitive answer could be given to the question of whether any statement in that language was valid. Turing’s approach was to imagine two types of machine. These machines are not so much mechanical contrivances, more mathematical formalisms, albeit with distinctly machinelike properties. The first type of machine is one whose configuration is equivalent to a mathematical function, so that when the machine operates, its actions produce mathematical results according to that function – perhaps the digits of pi, or the shortest path through a network, or the fixpoints of a graphical function. The second type of machine that Turing imagined is one that can behave like any of the first class of machines according to a configuration that it processes in the form of a set of rules. This is what Turing called a ‘universal machine’, now conventionally known as a ‘Turing machine’, and the mathematical analysis of this sort of machine that Turing provides in his paper laid the foundation for contemporary computing. The set of rules for Turing’s universal machine is like the software for a modern computer; it encodes a series of instructions that allow a general-purpose device (a computer) to act like a wide range of more specific devices (a word processor, a game, a music player, and so on). Turing’s analysis highlights an oft-overlooked aspect of what it means to ‘run software’; it means, in the terms of his paper, to configure one machine to act like another.

In this sense, all software is some form of emulator, but the term ‘emulation’ has a narrower use in conventional technical discourse. An emulator is a piece of software that specifically uses one computer (often called the ‘host’) to mimic the operation of another computer (the ‘guest’). There are a number of reasons why one might want to do such a thing, but three are the most common, and are distinguished, interestingly, by their different temporal relations. The first is a projection into the past: one might want, as in the Warhol example, to emulate a computer which is no longer available, so as to be able to gain access to functions, information and software that has been lost. The second is marked by a condition of contemporaneous reference: one might want to emulate a different type of computer that one might have but doesn’t, perhaps to run some software that is only available for that computer (for example, to emulate a smartphone on a desktop computer in order to test software written for the phone). The third is marked by conditions of anticipation: one might emulate a computer system that does not yet exist. This is most commonly done during the development of new computer systems; emulating a new computer’s hardware allows software to be developed before the hardware is entirely debugged and available. While this third mode of emulation is fairly specialized and not particularly widespread, examples of the other two are quite broad. For instance, in 2006, when Apple began a design transition from computers based on the PowerPC processor to the x86 Intel architecture, they also modified their operating system to include a facility called Rosetta, an emulator for the PowerPC processor, so that users with new computers that used Intel processors could nonetheless still run software that they owned which had been designed and compiled for the PowerPC. Or again, emulators are a common way for enthusiasts to carry on playing computer games or running other pieces of software originally created for consoles or hardware platforms that are no longer available. On my Mac laptop, I can run cbm, an emulator of the Commodore PET 2001, the first computer I ever used; , an emulator of the first computer I eve owned; or simh, an emulator of the computer I supported for a research group as my first job. I can run salto, an emulator of the Alto (Thacker et al. 1979), Xerox’s pioneering workstation, the first device with a modern graphical user interface, a computer I have never used or even seen operating.<sup>1</sup> If I want to reproduce the experience of running an early Macintosh, I can visit a web page with a Mac emulator running in Javascript.<sup>2</sup> The technical enthusiast website Ars Technica recently carried a review of a computer game, Karateka, which had been released before the reviewer was born, recreated for a new generation through emulation (Johnston 2013); and as I was completing this chapter, a posting was distributed online describing the procedure by which an enthusiast had booted Windows 3.1 on a virtual MS-DOS PC emulated in Javascript within a web brower.<sup>3</sup>

Emulation speaks to a broad cultural logic, the logic of the virtual. Invocation of the virtual is the central discursive move of digitality. To the extent that digital phenomena are rhetorically opposed to non-digital equivalents, and that they further are connected through a notion of displacement, virtual objects – virtual books, virtual worlds, virtual organizations, virtual spaces, virtual meetings, virtual communities, and so on – are the stock-in-trade of the digerati. The notion of virtuality marks an absence; the designation of ‘virtual’ marks something that seems to be there but isn’t. A virtual book allows us to read without a real book being present; a virtual musical instrument allows us to produce music in the absence of the instrument itself.

One would imagine that the case of emulation is the perfect demonstration of the power of virtuality. If software is already thoroughly virtual, then what could be more appropriate that to ‘run’ that computer on ‘hardware’ that it itself constructed from the virtual medium of software – that is, an emulator?<sup>4</sup> This rhetoric of absence, though, draws our attention away from the very specific presence of technologies that manifest the emulator and the emulated device. The emulator, after all, does not simply conjure up a virtual computer – a virtual Commodore Amiga or whatever. Rather, it makes that virtual computer manifest within a host platform – a PC running the UAE emulator, a Mac running the Bochs PC emulator, a Raspberry Pi running MAME, and so on. I want here to use the case of emulators to examine virtualization as rematerialization – not as a move away from the material to create a domain of the virtual, but rather a new material foundation for digital experience.

In the next section, I will examine a series of problems that occur in the production of an effective emulation. By doing so, I hope to show how virtuality in practice is perhaps better seen as rematerialization. With that in hand, we can take a step back to consider the notion of the virtual as an aspect of the digital landscape.

## Problems of materiality in virtual computers

In what ways do the material manifestations of digital objects challenge the idea of a ‘virtual’ computer in the world of emulation? I will discuss three considerations here: instructions, timing, and input/output.

## Instructions and representations

The essence of emulation is the creation of an environment that can run specific pieces of software. Essentially, it does just what a computer should – it reads a program and then it executes it. To understand the difficulty, we need to think for a moment about what a program actually is.

A computer program, as stored on a disk or downloaded from the internet, is a series of instructions. These instructions are simply themselves numbers; each number corresponds to a function that the computer’s processor can perform, or a data item to which that function should be applied, or a memory address where data to be processed can be found or where execution should shift. Why then is there any need for emulation in order to make some software run? It is needed because different processors and different processor architectures (such as the x86 processors in many desktop computers and the ARM processors in many mobile phones) execute different instructions. It is not simply that they encode the same instructions with different numerical codes (although that is sometimes true); it is rather that they use different so-called ‘instruction sets’ – sets of functions that make up the processor’s catalogue of operations. These differ because processors might provide different kinds of functions in hardware (e.g. one processor might have an instruction for multiplying two numbers directly, while another might support only addition and require that multiplication be performed through repeated addition or through bit-shifting).

The instructions that make up a program are not simply mathematical functions or descriptions. They can be thought of that way, but they can also be thought of as objects that manipulate how a computational mechanism works. Just as a key, inserted into a lock, will reconfigure the tumblers in the lock (hopefully so as to open the door), so an instruction being executed by a processor activates different parts of the processor in order to produce its effect; the key doesn’t simply represent the configuration of tumblers, and similarly the instruction doesn’t simply represent the sequence of action to be taken. The instruction, then, is something that has meaning only relative to the processor in question. There are two important considerations here for the problem of emulation. The first is that, since kinds of processors have different kinds of capacities, as described above, so an instruction that makes sense on one processor may not make any sense on another. You can’t simply follow an instruction to add together the values of two registers if your processor doesn’t have two registers. In this way, the problem of emulation is more than simply ‘finding the equivalent instruction’; there is no logic of equivalences, and local facilities cannot simply ‘stand in for’ the facilities being emulated. The emulator makes up for these deficiencies; it explicitly stands between the original software and the new processor, reading each instruction and directing the processor to act in a manner that is somehow equivalent.

A second way that instructions are tied to particular manifestations – and arguably the more complicated one – lies in the fact that processors may have bugs, errors, or limits to their use which are part of their implementation but not part of the mathematical formulation; so, in order to produce an accurate emulation, an emulator needs to pay attention not just to what the instruction ought to do, but to what it actually does in the computer being emulated. A sterling example is the case documented in Michael Hiltzig’s (1999) account of the history of Xerox PARC, concerning the development of a ‘clone’ (not quite an emulation) of the DEC PDP-10 mainframe computer. The PARC researchers wanted to purchase a DEC PDP-10 computer, but were forbidden to do so by their management, on the basis that the PDP-10 was a competitor to Xerox’s own recent entry into the minicomputer market. In response, the researchers decided to build their own clone of the PDP-10, one that would be sufficiently compatible with the original that they could run software developed for the PDP-10 at other research sites. The tasks of reproducing various elements of the PDP-10 system was divided up among lab members, and researcher Ed Fiala was assigned to building support for floating point mathematical functions. In the course of his work, he discovered some small bugs in the PDP-10 implementation, and so he fixed them for the clone machine so that it would behave correctly. However, when the machine was nearing completion and people began bringing up software that had been developed for original PDP-10s, they found that some of it failed mysteriously. Investigation revealed that some software was failing because it depended on the very bugs that Fiala had corrected. With software compatibility as a key requirement for the new computer, only one solution was possible; Fiala was asked to program the bugs back into his implementation, so that it would be wrong, but in the same way as the PDP-10.

The object of attention in an emulation, then, is not simply the sequence of instructions, which needs therefore to be transformed into some different sequence that suits the host processor; rather, what needs to be reproduced and reenacted is the entire mechanism into which those instructions fit when they are taken not as representations of computational action but as components of the mechanism.

## Timing

As we discussed earlier, the conventional wisdom about computer programming is that computers must be given complete and detailed descriptions of what to do, and that these descriptions are what constitute a computer program, with no detail left unspecified. This is quite true as far as it goes, but computer instructions nonetheless leave much unsaid, and it is what is unsaid that nonetheless must be recaptured in emulation. The time taken by computer operations is an important case in point. On a MOS 6502 processor – the type of processor that powered the original Apple II computer, among others – the machine instruction sequence A1 44 00<sup>5</sup> means ‘fetch the contents of memory address \$4400, add to it the value of the X register to produce a new memory address, and load the value stored at that computer address into the accumulator’. However, it doesn’t specify, for example, how long that operation will take. Producing an accurate emulation means not just performing the same or equivalent instructions but doing it so as to produce the same effect. Why does the timing matter? Well, it might matter if the computer program relies on the delay produced by issuing a series of instructions to make sure that on-screen activities happen with appropriate synchronization, or that a value will be read from a disk at the right moment, or that an interrupt will be handled before an operation times out.

There are two problems here. One is a problem of scale, and the other a problem of imbalance.

The problem of scale is most visible when there are drastic mismatches between the host system and the guest system. One of the major uses of emulation is in the retrospective mode highlighted earlier – reproducing the experience of using older, perhaps unavailable computer hardware in software on modern hardware. In any emulation, performing the same operations in software as one might in hardware is a good deal slower, and so when one performs an emulation of contemporary hardware in software, there is a significant performance reduction. Modern hardware is, of course, generally much faster than older computer hardware, which means that the situation is different when emulating older hardware. It is quite possible that a contemporary software emulation will execute more quickly, perhaps much more quickly, than the older hardware that is being emulated. There are times when this is an advantage. For instance, in my first research position, I wrote software on Sun workstations that ran an emulator for the custom ‘Wildflower’ architecture of prototype research computers developed at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center in the 1970s; the modern emulation was much faster than the original hardware had ever been, representing a significant performance enhancement. In other cases, though, the mismatch might be significantly problematic. If an emulated game runs one hundred times faster in a modern emulation than on the original hardware, it may be too fast to play.

The difference between the performance of contemporary computer systems and that of what is sometimes called ‘legacy hardware’ may be large, but the issue for emulators is not simply the scale of the difference, but also the fact that different aspects of computer systems develop at different rates. Processors, for instance, have generally over time become faster at a rate higher than that of storage systems – so while contemporary storage systems are generally faster than older storage systems, they are not faster by the same factor that characterizes changes in processor performance. In order to account for this, computer system designers have, over the years, developed new computer architectures, or arrangements of system elements, to compensate for the difference.

Modern computer processors, then, are not simply faster than old ones – they are also more heavily pipelined,<sup>6</sup> and might have multiple cores operating simultaneously, as ways of making more efficient use of their ‘excess’ capacity relative to the data storage system. Similarly, modern graphics processors do more advanced processing on their own, without involving the central processor of the computer, introducing another source of parallelism and hence another architectural difference with implications for performance.

To further complicate the problems of timing in emulation, we should remember one other important thing: computers consist of more than processors. Those other things – peripheral devices, subsidiary electronics and non-digital components – all have their own timing considerations that software might need to account for.

As an example, remember that, before the days of LCD screens, most computer displays were cathode-ray tubes (CRTs). A CRT operates by sweeping an electron beam rapidly over a phosphor-lined screen, from side to side and top to bottom, switching rapidly on and off, causing spots of phosphor to either glow or not. These spots of glowing phosphor become the pixels that make up the display, and since they rapidly decay in brightness, they must be ‘repainted’ again and again by the scanning electron beam. This constant need to repaint the screen, and to do it within the timeframe demanded by the electron beam and the phosphor, and to supply the data to drive the display, became a significant demand on the design of early computers – Xerox’s original Alto computer spent fully 66 per cent of its time managing the display. (Butler Lampson, one of the designers of the Xerox Alto, recounted in a 2001 talk at the Computer History Museum that one of his most important contributions to the project was to reduce the time taken by the code supplying the display driver with data from seven microinstruction cycles to six, so that it occupied only 66 per cent of the computer’s time and not 80 per cent.)<sup>7</sup>

One especially important aspect of this arrangement for many microcomputers and game systems was the existence of what was called the ‘vertical blanking interval’, which is the period when the CRT’s electron beam would be turned off and would reposition itself from the bottom right to the top left of the screen, to begin a new painting cycle. Many pieces of software – especially programs like graphical games – would pay a lot of attention to the vertical blanking interval, for two reasons. The first is that a period of time when the screen was not being repainted might suddenly be a period when more processing time is available – a good time to do more complicated calculations. The second is that a period of time when the screen is not being repainted is a good time to make updates to on-screen objects so that there wouldn’t be any of the flickering that might result if the objects were updated at the same time as being painted onto the screen. As Montford and Bogost (2009) document in their book Racing the Beam, programmers on the early Atari VCS game system needed essentially to organize their entire programs around the timing of instructions relative to the horizontal and vertical sweeps of the electron beam.

The timing that needs to be reproduced in an emulator, then, is not simply the timing of the processor, but the timing of analog elements such as the CRT beam, not to mention such features as the characteristic operating speed of disks or the temporal performance of memory. In other words, the production of the virtual ‘guest’ computer means the reproduction not only of the digital elements of the original machine, but also thoroughly non-digital components – a further intrusion of the obstreperously non-virtual.

## Input and output

Perhaps one of the most complicated areas of challenge that emulation throws up is the problem of input and output – recreating and emulating aspects of how graphics and perhaps especially sound work. The problems here reflect and intensify some that we have already discussed. Part of the difficulty is that input and output operations are ones that go beyond the traditional mathematical descriptions that are the foundation of how we reason about computers.

As I have outlined, the mathematical theory upon which computer science is founded – the Church-Turing Theorem – describes a class of computable functions (basically, a class of solvable mathematical problems) and a computational mechanism that can solve them. So-called ‘Turing-equivalent machines’ are machines or mechanisms that can calculate any of that class of functions.

However, in practice, it turns out that actual computers – the ones we all use – are both more than and less than Turing-equivalent machines. They are less than Turing-equivalent in that the abstract description of the Turing machine postulates infinite storage. In comparison to the extremely simple operation of a Turing machine, a modern computer might have so much storage that it is essentially infinite – but it is (obviously) not in fact infinite. In other words, there can be functions that are solvable by a Turing machine but not necessarily solvable by specific actual computers that we might use, not because the problems make unresolvable computational demands but because they make unresolvable storage demands. So in this way, contemporary computers are less than formal mathematical Turing machines. At the same time, though, they are also more than formal mathematical Turing machines in that they have capacities that Turing machines don’t have, especially in their connection to the world. For instance, we expect that any computer we buy today will be capable of playing music; and yet, the functions needed to play music – that is, to be able to control the voltage on a connection to speakers or headphones so that music can be heard – are unavailable to the formal mathematical Turing machine. The theory of Turing equivalence is the theory of what can be calculated, but it stops where calculation ends. So we might be able to show how a Turing-equivalent machine can decode a description of music that has been encoded in the MP3 format, but there is no way to describe the actual playing of the music.

The case of input/output – of playing music, for instance – highlights the way that computer systems, as physical objects and as cultural objects, escape the mathematical accounts of computation. A real ‘Turing machine’ wouldn’t sell very well in the marketplace, because those functions that we demands of our computers – the ability to print documents, to communicate on networks, or to video-conference with friends – are entirely outside of its capacities. This means, then, that while we might imagine that Turing’s theorem – which, after all, describes a machine that can emulate another machine – should be a guarantee that emulation is straightforward, the truth is rather more complicated. To make things even more difficult for someone writing an emulator, these functions, like network communication and processing audio and video, are generally not performed by the central processing unit of the computer, but rather delegated to dedicated signal processing hardware that can be controlled by the processor. Input/output operations, indeed, are often handled in parallel with the operation of the processor, especially in the case of modern machines whose separate graphical processor units – themselves highly parallel – are often more capable computational devices (within a limited sphere) than the central processor itself.

As in other cases we have seen, then, there is no simple one-to-one equivalence between one context and another. Emulation is not simply a question of looking at each instruction and issuing the local equivalent; rather, the behaviour of the original system must be reproduced, in all its material specificity.

