# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;\auto\Digital Materialities ： Design and Anthropology -- Sarah Pink; Elisenda Ardèvol;.md

## Introduction

In this chapter I argue for closer attention to the ways in which smart futures are constituted through the relationships between different local and global scales of future visions. To achieve this I propose an understanding of the design of the digital–material environment which builds on two bodies of literature: first, on discussions of ‘visions of future’ in design and technology research (Dodge and Kitchen 2011; Anderson 2007; Kinsley 2013; Thrift 2005); and second, on the recent call from Design Anthropology to take seriously ethnographic research on imagination (Sneath, Holbraad and Pedersen 2009; Ingold 2013; Halse 2013; Pink 2014; Appadurai 2013). My discussion has an analysis of the future orientations of digital design knowledge and practice at its centre. It examines how the two scales of local and global action and connection are involved in the design of smart technologies, and interrogates the role played by future visions and technological imaginaries within these design processes.

In the following three sections, I develop my analysis through a discussion of the example of low-cost sensor kits. These are seen as affordable technologies made by citizens for citizens. I first unpack the key concepts that inform both how technologies, such as sensors, are thought to be active in the world, and how they are developed: DIY citizenship and its global imaginary, the concept of smart, and the notion of a global future. I then shift the focus to ask how practical knowledge and tangible futures are actually located in the processes through which sensors are designed and developed. To do this I draw on my ethnographic research undertaken with Internet of Things (IoT) designers in urban and companies’ labs to provide an in-depth understanding of the processes in which the design of these projects of citizen sensor kits is entangled. I argue for a more specific analysis of how imaginaries and visions of future are implicated in the design processes and in meaning making of smart technologies. Ultimately, I suggest the imaginaries are connected with a broader global future and have less significance in the design, whereas the visions of future are informed by the local (quotidian) experience of the designers and have a crucial role in the materialization of design projects.

In developing this discussion I call for attention to the role of knowledge production as material work. In existing and ongoing debates in the literature about digital materiality (Leonardi 2010) emphasis has usually been put on the double nature of the ‘thing’: the physicality of the hardware and the intangibility of the software. To understand the implications of such digital–material forms more fully, I call for further attention to another aspect of the ‘intangible’ – that is, to focus on the forms of knowledge that the design process materializes.

