## Acknowledgments In completing the sixth edition of Meggs' History of Graphic Design, numerous specialists, collectors, associates, graphic designer colleagues, and students provided fresh suggestions and valuable expertise, and it is impossible to adequately express my gratitude to all of them. I am especially indebted to Libby and Elizabeth Meggs for their support and confidence throughout the production of the last three editions. I would like to extend my appreciation to June and the late Robert Leibowits for their kindness and backing of this and all my writing endeavors. Wilma Schuhmacher continued to generously share her unique knowledge of Dutch graphic design history. Michael Hearne's expertise regarding Russian graphic design was always informative and immediately available. In addition, grateful acknowledgement is made to the following people whose contributions have greatly enriched this publication: Anthon Beeke, James Lapides, Steven Heller, John Kristensen, Ernst H. von Metzsch, Stephen Pekich, Erik Voorrips, and James M. Storey. I am indebted to Roger Remington for sharing his knowledge and making available important new images for both this edition and the previous one. Also, I have been fortunate in having the learned advice of Earle Havens, curator of rare books and manuscripts, Department of Special Collections, The Sheridan Libraries, at Johns Hopkins University. The late Jan van Loenen Martinet, after only a brief acquaintance, generously made available his extensive archives on the Dutch printer and designer H. N. Werkman. For both the fifth and the sixth editions, Emilio Gill was supportive in procuring images and material on contemporary Spanish graphic design, and the assistance and knowledge of Sónia Teixeira made possible the inclusion of Portuguese graphic design. Having Majid Abbasi share his knowledge regarding the richness of Iranian graphic design contributed an important feature to chapter 23. Martijn Le Coultre, with whom I have collaborated on numerous publications, provided incisive advice and many fresh images for this and the previous edition. Many members of the staff at the Yale Beinecke Library were helpful, and Ulla Kasten of the Yale Babylonian Collection opened worlds of information and generously provided unique cuneiform images from their collection. The administration at Boston University has been constantly supportive, especially in assigning graduate students as research assistants. Jeannette Guillemin, director ad interim of visual arts, has always given me encouragement whenever needed. Others who were helpful include Lynne Allen, dean ad interim; former dean Walt Meissner; Logen Zimmerman, fiscal coordinator of visual arts; former dean Benjamin Juarez; and John Amend, assistant dean. My colleagues Yael Ort-Dinoor, Bryce Ambo, Kristen Coogen, Laura Giannitrapani, Laura Grey, and Nick Rock were consistently available for discussions regarding contemporary design topics. To the staff at the Gotlieb Archival Research Center at Boston University I offer my gratitude; these include Vita aladino, director; Sean Noel, associate director; Katherine Kominis, assistant director, rare books; and Perry Barton, exhibition and publication coordinator. Stephen Goldstein's writing in the section on contemporary Chinese graphic design was both illuminating and invaluable, and he was also instrumental in securing many new and exciting images from China. Special thanks are due to Wang Yun of the China Design Museum at China Academy of Art (CAA) in Hangzhou, for her tireless research on Chinese designers a d her translation support when communicating with the designers. I am grateful to Robert Burns for sharing intimate knowledge of his close friend and mentor Paul Rand. Kristen Coogen made contributions on Spanish Civil War posters, Corita Kent, and Raymond Loewy. The late Alvin Eisenman, John T. Hill, and Bonnie Scranton kindly provided extensive material pertaining to the rich history of the graphic design program at Yale University. Both my undergraduate and graduate assistants at Boston University approached their tasks with unwavering diligence, and their loyal, professional, and tireless support was essential. Their patience and perseverance in finding sizes for the images in this edition was often a tedious and difficult task. Most especially, Katie Leeche's untiring efforts in procuring images and editing and revising texts were not only helpful but vital in bringing this edition to a conclusion. Elizabeth Ryan's diligent reviews of all final texts and art logs were crucial in avoiding errors that might have otherwise passed unnoticed. In addition to Katie and Elizabeth, the following students, both past and current, were especially helpful: Alyssa Hoersten, Elise Jones, Brandy Gibbs-Riley, Amy Ahrens, Amanda Creighton, Melissa Marshall, Ashley Costanzo, Jennifer Wilkens, Shahrzad Amri, Jennifer Gover, Keith Kitz, Abigail Beauregard-Lewis, Regina Milan, Nicholas Pioggia, Ekaterina Nick, Marc Ghayad, Joseph Haddad, Sónia Teixeira, and Erin Sanders. Qusai Akoud and Ford Curran kindly provided assistance in scanning and photographing images. Margaret Cummins, executive editor at John Wiley & Sons, and my former editor Lauren Poplawski were reservoirs of support. The professionalism of Amanda Shettleton, my current editor, was essential in keeping this edition on course. I extend special thanks to David Sassian, senior production editor at John Wiley & Sons, for his diligent management and devotion to this and previous editions. Melissa McDaniel, the copyeditor, and Lisa Story, the proofreader, both deserve particular mention for their painstaking and often unseen efforts. I am happy that Cees W. de Jong in the Netherlands is again the designer of Meggs' History of Graphic Design. And, lastly, I want to especially thank my wife, Susan, and son, Philip, for their patience during the long periods when I was sequestered working on this project.