## Epilogue We are now in the midst of a period of such profound technological change that it can only be compared to the Industrial Revolution that initiated the machine age. In the 1980s access to high-end computers and early desktop microprocessors enabled designers to begin exploring new digital realms that continue to transform the communications industry today. Though the tools of graphic design are evolving with the relentless advance of technology, the essential imperative of graphic design remains unchanged: to give order to information and form to ideas and expression. The new generation of graphic designers must be encouraged to define the new aesthetics of electronic media rather than allowing technology to define them. In doing so, they will lead the way to new and more effective approaches to their profession. As the graphic design field moves forward at an increasingly rapid pace, the process of redefining the very nature of communications, authorship, and display media is proceeding with ever-expanding technical and creative possibilities. The need for clear and imaginative visual communications to relate people to their cultural, economic, and social existences has never been greater. As creators of messages and images, graphic designers have the responsibility to contribute meaningfully to a public understanding of environmental and social issues. Although printed media will continue in the age of electronic technology, contemporary graphic designers must adapt the new technology to express the zeitgeist by inventing new forms and ways to convey ideas.