Bibliography ## General Surveys Ades, Dawn. The 20th Century Poster: Design of the Avant-Garde. New York: Abbeville, 1984. Altman, Rochelle. Absent Voices: The Story of Writing Systems in the West. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2004. Ambrose, Gavin, and Paul Harris. The Visual Dictionary of Graphic Design. New York: AVA Publishing, 2006. Anderson, Donald M. The Art of Written Forms: The Theory and Practice of Calligraphy. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1969. Appel, Alfred, Jr. Jazz Modernism: From Ellington and Armstrong to Matisse and Joyce. New York: Knopf, 2002. Arnason, H. H., and Marla F. Prather. History of Modern Art. New York: Abrams, 1998. Arvin, Leila. Scribes, Scripts, and Books: The Book Arts from Antiquity to the Renaissance. Chicago: American Library Association, 1991. Baines, Phil, and Andrew Haslam. Type & Typography. New York: Watson-Guptill, 2002. Barker, Nicolas, and the Curatorial Staff of the British Library. Treasures of the British Library. London: British Library, 2005. Barnicoat, John. A Concise History of the Poster. London: Thames & Hudson, 1972. Barthes, Roland. Image, Music, Text. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977. Bartram, Alan. Five Hundred Years of Book Design. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2001. ———. Typeforms: A History. London: British Library, 2007. Bayley, Stephen, and Terence Conran. Design Intelligence Made Visible. New York: Firefly Books, 2007. Bennett, Audrey. Design Studies: Theory and Research in Graphic Design. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2006. Bernstein, William J. Masters of the Word: How Media Shaped History from the Alphabet to the Internet. New York: Grove, 2013. Bettley, James, ed. The Art of the Book: From Medieval Manuscript to Graphic Novel. London: V&A, 2001. Bierut, Michael, William Drenttel, and Steven Heller. Looking Closer 4: Critical Writings on Graphic Design. New York: Allworth, 2002. Birkerts, Sven. The Gutenberg Elegies: The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age. New York: Faber and Faber, 2006. Blumenthal, Joseph. The Printed Book in America. Boston: Trustees of Dartmouth College, 1977. ———. Typographic Years: A Printer’s Journey through a Half Century, 1925– 1975. New York: Frederic C. Beil, 1982. Bondt, Sara De, and Catherine de Smet, eds. Graphic Design: History in the Writing (1983–2011). London: Occasional Papers, 2012. Bouwman, André, Berry Dongelmans, Paul Hoftijzer, Ed Van Der Vlist, and Christaan Vogelaar. Stad Van Boeken: Handschrift en Druk in Leiden, 1260– 2000. Leiden, Neth.: Primavera Pers, 2008. Breathnach, Teresa, and Brenda Dermody. New Retro: Classic Graphics, Today’s Designs. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2009. Briggs, Asa, and Peter Burke. A Social History of the Media: From Gutenberg to the Internet. 3rd ed. Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2009. Burke, Peter. A Social History of Knowledge: From Gutenberg to Diderot, Based on the First Series of Vonhof Lectures Given at the University of Groningen (Netherlands). Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2000. Byers, Mel. The Design Encyclopedia. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2004. Capelleveen, Paul van, and Clemens de Wolf. The Ideal Book: Private Presses in the Netherlands, 1910–2010. The Hague: Koninklijke Bibliotheek, 2010. Carter, Rob, Libby Meggs, and Sandra Wheeler, eds. Meggs: Making Graphic Design History. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2008. Carter, Rob, Philip B. Meggs, Ben Day, Sandra Maxa, and Mark Sanders. Typographic Design: Form and Communication. 6th ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2015. Claeys, Gregory, Lyman Tower Sargent, and Roland Schaer. Utopia. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 2000. Clifford, John. Graphic Icons: Visionaries Who Shaped Modern Graphic Design. San Francisco: Peachpit, 2014. Cohen, Elaine Lustig, and Ellen Lupton. Letters from the Avant Garde: Modern Graphic Design. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996. Craig, Miller. U.S. Design, 1975–2000. New York: Prestel, 2002. Cramsie, Patrick. The Story of Graphic Design. London: British Library, 2010. Crisp, Denise Gonzales, and William F. Temple. Typography. London: Thames & Hudson, 2012. Danchev, Alex. 100 Artist’s Manifestos: From the Futurists to the Stuckists. New York: Penguin, 2011. Davis, Meredith. Graphic Design Theory. London: Thames & Hudson, 2012. Denman, Frank. The Shaping of Our Alphabet: A Study of Changing Type Styles. New York: Knopf, 1955. Dewey, John. Art as Experience. New York: Berkley, 2005. Dodd, Robin. From Gutenberg to Opentype. Vancouver: Hartley & Marks, 2006. Drew, Ned, and Paul Sternberger. By Its Cover: Modern American Book Cover Design. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2005. Drucker, Johanna, and Emily McVarish. Graphic Design History. 2nd Ed. New York: Pearson, 2013. Eskilson, Stephen J. Graphic Design: A New History. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2007. Fawcett-Tang, Roger. New Typographic Design. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2007. Febvre, Lucien, and Henri-Jean Martin. The Coming of the Book. New York: Verso, 1997. Fischer, Steven Roger. A History of Writing. London: Reaktion, 2005. Flood, Catherine. British Posters: Advertising, Art and Activism. London: V&A, 2012. Gallo, Max. The Poster in History. New York: Norton, 2001. Garfield, Simon. Just My Type: A Book about Fonts. New York: Gotham, 2012. Garrigan, John, Margaret Cogswell, Milton Glaser, Dore Ashton, and Alan Gowans. Images of an Era: The American Poster, 1945–75. Washington, DC: National Collection of Fine Art, 1975. Gay, Peter. Modernism: The Lure of Heresy, from Baudelaire to Beckett and Beyond. New York: Norton, 2008. Gnanadesikan, Amalia E. The Writing Revolution: Cuneiform to the Internet. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009. Gomez-Palacio, Bryony, and Armin Vit. Graphic Design, Referenced: A Visual Guide to the Language, Applications, and History of Graphic Design. Beverly, MA: Rockport, 2009. Gottschall, Edward M. Typographic Communications Today. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989. Gress, Edmund G. The Art and Practice of Typography. New York: Oswald, 1917. Günther, Jörn, and Robert O’Neill. The Art of the Book from the Early Middle Ages to the Renaissance: A Journey Through a Thousand Years. Hamburg: Dr. Jörn Günther Antiquariat, 2000. Haley, Allan. Typographic Milestones. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1992. Hamilton, Frederick W. A Brief History of Printing in England: A Short History of Printing in England from Caxton to the Present Time. Chicago: United Typothetae of America, 1918. Heller, Steven. Design Literacy (Continued): Understanding Graphic Design. New York: Allworth, 1999. ———. The Education of a Typographer. New York: Allworth, 2004. Heller, Steven, and Seymour Chwast. Graphic Style. New York: Abrams, 1988. Heller, Steven, and Louise Fili. Style Pedia: A Guide to Graphic Design Mannerisms, Quirks, and Conceits. San Francisco: Chronicle, 2006. Heller, Steven, and Mirko Ilic. The Anatomy of Design: Uncovering the Influences and Inspirations in Modern Graphic Design. Beverly, MA: Rockport, 2007. ———. Genius Moves: 100 Icons of Graphic Design. Cincinnati: North Light, 2001. Heller, Steven, and Elinor Pettit. Graphic Design Time Line: A Century of Design Milestones. New York: Allworth, 2000. Heller, Steven, and Lita Talarico. Graphic: Inside the Sketchbooks of the World’s Great Graphic Designers. New York: Monacelli, 2010. Heskett, John. Design: A Very Short Introduction. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 2002. Howard, Nicole. The Book: The Life Story of a Technology. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2005. Hughes, Robert. Things I Didn’t Know: A Memoir. New York: Knopf, 2006. Janssen, Frans A. Technique and Design in the History of Printing. Leiden: Bill Hes & De Graff, 2004. Jubert, Roxane. Typography and Graphic Design: From Antiquity to the Present. Paris: Flammarion, 2006. Kinross, Robin. Modern Typography: An Essay in Critical History. London: Hyphen Press, 2004. Knight, Stan. Historical Types: From Gutenberg to Ashendene. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2012. Knuttel, Gerhardus Wzn. De Letter Als Kunstwerk. Amsterdam: N.V Lettergieterij, 1951. Kovarik, Bill. Revolutions in Communication: Media History from Gutenberg to the Digital Age. New York: Continuum, 2011. Kramer, Hilton. The Triumph of Modernism: The Art World, 1985–2005. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 2006. Lawson, Alexander S. Anatomy of a Typeface. Boston: Godine, 1990. ———. Printing Types: An Introduction. Boston: Beacon Press, 1971. Levarie, Norma. The Art and History of Books. London: British Library, 1995. Lewis, John. The 20th Century Book: Its Illustration and Design. 2nd ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1984. ———. Typography: Design and Practice. New York: Taplinger, 1978. Livingston, Alan, and Isabella Livingston. The Thames & Hudson Dictionary of Graphic Design and Designers. London: Thames & Hudson, 2003. Lommen, Mathieu. The Book of Books: 500 Years of Graphic Design. London: Thames & Hudson, 2012. Louth, Andrew. Greek East and Latin West: The Church, AD 681. Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press, 2007. Loxley, Simon. Type: The Secret History of Letters. New York: I. B. Tauris, 2005. Lucie-Smith, Edward. Lives of the Great 20th-Century Artists. London: Thames & Hudson, 1999. Lyons, Martyn. Books: A Living History. London: Thames & Hudson, 2011. Macaria, Joyce Walsh. Graphic Design Essentials: Skills, Software, and Creative Solutions. London: Laurence King, 2009. Macmillan, Neil. An A–Z of Type Designers. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2006. Margolin, Victor. The Politics of the Artificial. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 2002. Margolin, Victor, Ira Brichta, and Vivian Brichta. The Promise and the Product: 200 Years of American Advertising Posters. New York: Macmillan, 1979. McLean, Ruari. How Typography Happens. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2000. McMurtrie, Douglas C. The Book: The Story of Printing & Bookmaking. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1943. Middendorp, Jan. Dutch Type. Rotterdam, Neth.: 0l0 Publishers, 2004. Miller, R. Craig. Introduction to U.S. Design, 1975–2000. New York: Prestel-Verlag, 2001. Moran, James, ed. Printing in the 20th Century. New York: Hastings House, 1974. Morison, Stanley. On Type Faces. London: Medici Society, 1923. Morison, Stanley, and Brooke Crutchley, eds. A Tally of Types with Additions by Several Hands. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1973. Muller, Sheila D. Dutch Art: An Encyclopedia. New York: Garland, 1997. Müller-Brockman, Josef, and Shizuko Müller-Brockman. History of the Poster. London: Phaidon, 2004. Nakanishi, Akira. Writing Systems of the World: Alphabets, Syllabaries, Pictograms. Rutland, VT, and Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle, 1991. Neue Grafik (New Graphic Design). Edited by Richard P. Louse, Josef Müller-Brockmann, Hans Neuberg, and Carlo L. Vivarelli. Nos. 1–16. Zurich: 1959– 1963. Neurath, Otto. From Hieroglyphics to Isotype: A Visual Autobiography. London: Hyphen Press, 2010. Noordzij, Gerrit. De Handen Van De Zeven Zusters. Amsterdam: Van Oorschot, 2000. Olmert, Michael. The Smithsonian Book of Books. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Books, 1999. Pearson, David. Books as History: The Importance of Books beyond Their Texts. London: British Library, 2008. Petrucci, Armando. Public Lettering: Script, Power, and Culture. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1993. Pevsner, Nikolaus. Pioneers of Modern Design. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2005. Pflughaupt, Laurent. Letter by Letter: An Alphabetical Miscellany. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2007. Poe, Marshall T. A History of Communications: Media and Society from the Evolution of Speech to the Internet. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2011. Pollard, Alfred W. Last Words on the History of the Title-Page with Notes on Some Colophons and Twenty-seven Fac-similes of Title-Pages. New York: Burt Franklin, 1971. Powers, Alan. Front Cover: Great Book Jackets and Cover Design. London: Mitchell Beazley, 2006. Poynor, Rick. Typographica. London: Laurence King, 2001. Purvis, Alston W., and Martijn F. Le Coultre. Graphic Design 20th Century. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2003. Ray, Gordon N. The Illustrator and the Book in England from 1790 to 1914. New York: Pierpont Morgan Library, 1976. Resnick, Mark. The American Image: U.S. Posters from the 19th to the 21st Century. Rochester, NY: RIT Cary Graphic Arts Press, 2006. Ronell, Avital. The Telephone Book: Technology, Schizophrenia, Electric Speech. Lincoln: Univ. of Nebraska Press, 1991. Sacks, David. Language Visible: Unraveling the Mystery of the Alphabet from A to Z. New York: Broadway, 2003. Sanders, Ewond. Boekengeluk (Book Happiness). Amsterdam: De Buitenkant, 2008. Shillingsburg, Peter L. From Gutenberg to Google. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2006. Simon, Oliver, ed. Signature: A Quadrimenstrial of Typography and Graphic Arts. London: Baynard Press, 1938. Smithuijzen Abifares, Huda. Arabic Typography: A Comprehensive Sourcebook. London: Saqi Books, 2001. Southall, Richard. Printer’s Type in the Twentieth Century: Manufacturing and Design Methods. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2005. Spencer, Herbert. The Liberated Page: A Typographica Anthology. San Francisco: Bedford, 1987. ———. Pioneers of Modern Typography. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989. ———. Typographica 9. London: Lund Humphries, 1964. Steinberg, S. H. Five Hundred Years of Printing. London: British Library, 1996. Suarez, Michael F., and H. R. Woudhuysen, eds. The Book: A Global History. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 2013. Taflinger, Richard F. From Gutenberg to Berners-Lee: How the Invention of the Media Changed the World. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt, 2011. Tanselle, G. Thomas. Book-Jackets: Their History, Forms, and Use. Charlottesville: Bibliographical Society of the University of Virginia, 2011. Tigerman, Stanley. The Archeworks Papers: Volume 1, Number One. Chicago: Archeworks, 2004. Timmers, Margaret. The Power of the Poster. London, V&A, 1998. Tracy, Walter. Letters of Credit: A View of Type Design. Boston: Godine,1986. ———. The Typographic Scene. London: Gordon Fraser, 1988. Tufte, Edward R. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press, 1983. Twyman, Michael. The British Library Guide to Printing: History and Techniques. London: British Library, 1998. Weidemann, Kurt. Book Jackets and Record Covers: An International Survey. New York: Praeger, 1969. Weill, Alain. Graphic Design: A History. New York: Abrams, 2004. Woodham, Jonathan M. Twentieth-Century Design. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1997. , ed. Oxford Dictionary of Modern Design. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 2006. Wrede, Stuart. The Modern Poster. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1988. Yelavich, Susan, ed. Profile Pentagram Design. London: Phaidon, 2004. Zukowsky, John, ed. Chicago Architecture and Design, 1923–1993. New York: Prestel, 2000. ## Chapter 1 Allen, Thomas George. The Book of the Dead or Going Forth by Day. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1974. Altman, Rochelle. Absent Voices: The Story of Writing Systems in the West. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2004. Andrews, Carol. The British Museum Book of the Rosetta Stone. New York: Dorset Press, 1991. Arduini, Franca, and Guglielmo Cavallo. The Shape of the Book, from Roll to Codex (3rd Century BC–19th Century AD). Florence: Mandragora, 2008. Breasted, James. Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt. Gloucester, MA: Scribner’s, 1959. Budge, E. A. Wallis. The Book of the Dead. London: British Museum, 1909. ———. The Dwellers on the Nile. New York: Benjamin Blom, 1972. ———. The Rosetta Stone in the British Museum. New York: AMS Press, 1976. Castor, Alexis Q. Between the Rivers: The History of Mesopotamia, Parts 1–3. Chantilly, VA: Teaching Company, 2006. Charpin, Dominique. Reading and Writing in Babylon. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 2010. Collon, Dominique. First Impressions. London: British Museum, 1987. Daniels, Peter T., and William Bright, eds. The World’s Writing Systems. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1996. Dowson, Thomas A. Rock Engravings of Southern Africa. Johannesburg: Witwatersrand Univ. Press, 1992. Gelb, I. J. A Study of Writing. Rev. ed. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago, 1952. Giedion, S. The Eternal Present. Vol. 1, The Beginning of Art. New York: Pantheon, 1962. Grayson, A. Kirk, and Donald B. Redford. Papyrus and Tablet. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1973. Graziosi, Paolo. Paleolithic Art. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960. Green, M. W. “The Construction and Implementation of the Cuneiform Writing System.” Visible Language 15, no. 4 (1981): 345–372. Hooker, J. T. Reading the Past: Ancient Writing from Cuneiform to the Alphabet. New York: Barnes and Noble, 1998. Huyghe, René, ed. Larousse Encyclopedia of Prehistoric and Ancient Art. New York: Prometheus Press, 1962. Jackson, Donald. The Story of Writing. New York: Taplinger, 1981. James, Jean M. “Signs in Ancient Egypt: Another Look at the Relation of Figure to Hieroglyph.” Visible Language 14, no. 1 (1980): 52–61. Kramer, Samuel Noah. The Sumerians: Their History, Culture, and Character. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1963. Leakey, Richard E., and Roger Lewin. Origins. New York: Dutton, 1977. Lewis-Williams, J. D., and T. A. Dowson. Discovering Southern African Rock Art. Cape Town: David Philip Publishers, 1990. ———. Images of Power: Understanding Bushman Rock Art. Johannesburg: Southern Book Publishers, 1989. Mertz, Barbara. Temples, Tombs, and Hieroglyphs: A Popular History of Ancient Egypt. 1964. 2nd ed. New York: William Morrow, 2007. Michalowski, Kazimierz. Art of Ancient Egypt. New York: Abrams, 1978. Nakanishi, Akira. Writing Systems of the World. North Clarendon, VT: Tuttle Publishing, 1980. Parrot, Andre. The Arts of Assyria. New York: Golden Press, 1961. Petrie, W. M. Flinders. Buttons and Design Scarabs. Warminster, UK: Aris & Phillips, 1974. Porada, Edith. Ancient Art in Seals. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1980. Powell, Marvin A. “Three Problems in the History of Cuneiform Writing: Origins, Direction of Script, Literacy.” Visible Language 15, no. 4 (1981): 419– 440. Ray, John. The Rosetta Stone and the Rebirth of Egypt. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 2007. Robinson, Andrew. Cracking the Egyptian Code: The Revolutionary Life of Jean-Francois Champollion. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 2012. ———. The Story of Writing: Alphabets, Hieroglyphs, and Pictograms. London: Thames & Hudson, 1995. Rossiter, Evelyn. The Book of the Dead. Fribourg-Geneva: Productions Liber SA, 1979. Saggs, H. W. F. The Babylonians: A Survey of the Ancient Civilization of the Tigris–Euphrates Valley. London: Folio Society, 2007. Schneider, Thomas. Ancient Egypt in 101 Questions and Answers. Edited by J. J. Shirley. Translated by David Lorton. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univ. Press, 2013. Solé, Robert, Dominique Vabelle, and W. V. Davies. The Rosetta Stone: The Decipherment of the Hieroglyphs. Preface by Neil MacGregor. London: Folio Society, 2006. Strommenger, Eva. 5000 Years of the Art of Mesopotamia. New York: Abrams, 1964. Teissier, Beatrice. Ancient Near Eastern Cylinder Seals. Los Angeles: Univ. of California Press, 1984. Trustees of the British Museum. Introductory Guide to the Egyptian Collection. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1971. Vinnicombe, Patricia. People of the Eland. Pietermaritzburg, South Africa: Univ. of Natal Press, 1976. Walker, C. B. F. Reading the Past: Cuneiform. London: British Museum, 1987. Wilkinson, Richard H. The Complete Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Egypt. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2003. Zender, Marc. Writing and Civilization: From Ancient Worlds to Modernity. Chantilly, VA: Teaching Company, 2013. ## Chapter 2 Anderson, Donald M. The Art of Written Forms. New York: Holt, Reinhart and Winston, 1969. Catich, Edward M. The Trajan Inscription. Boston: Society of Printers, 1973. Cook, B. F. Reading the Past: Greek Inscriptions. London: British Museum,1987. Daniels, Peter T., and William Bright. The World’s Writing Systems. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1996. Denman, Frank. The Shaping of Our Alphabet. New York: Knopf, 1955. Diringer, David. The Alphabet: A Key to the History of Mankind. 3rd ed. New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1968. ———. The Book before Printing: Ancient, Medieval, and Oriental. New York: Dover, 1982. ———. Writing. New York: Praeger, 1962. Doblerhoffer, Ernest. Voices in Stone. New York: Viking, 1961. Drucker, Johanna. The Alphabetic Labyrinth: The Letters in History and Imagination. New York: Thames & Hudson, 1995. Fairbank, Alfred. A Book of Scripts. London: Faber, 1977. Harn, Ko Van, and Wigger Bierma. Romeinse Cijfers: Geschiedenis, Vorm En Toepassing. Amsterdam: De Buitenkant, 2005. Healey, John F. Reading the Past: The Early Alphabet. London: British Museum, 1990. Hutchinson, James. Letters. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983. Jean, Georges. Writing: The Story of Alphabets and Scripts. New York: Abrams, 1992. Kraus, Theodor. Pompeii and Herculaneum: The Living Cities of the Dead. New York: Abrams, 1975. Logan, Robert K. The Alphabet Ef ect: The Impact of the Phonetic Alphabet on the Development of Western Civilization. New York: Morrow, 1986. Nesbitt, Alexander. The History and Technique of Lettering. New York: Dover, 1950. Ouaknin, Marc-Alain. Mysteries of the Alphabet. New York: Abbeville, 1999. Roberts, Colin H., and T. C. Skeat. The Birth of the Codex. London: Oxford Univ. Press, 1983. Sacks, David. Language Visible: Unraveling the Mystery of the Alphabet from A to Z. New York: Broadway Books, 2003. Sutton, James, and Alan Bartram. An Atlas of Typeforms. New York: Hastings House, 1968. Trudgill, Anne. Traditional Penmanship. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1989. Turner, E. G. Greek Manuscripts of the Ancient World. London: Institute of Classical Studies, 1986. Ullman, B. L. Ancient Writing and Its Influence. New York: Longmans, Green, 1932. ## Chapter 3 Aria, Barbara. The Nature of the Chinese Character. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1991. Carter, Thomas F., and L. Carrington Goodrich. The Invention of Printing in China and Its Spread Westward. New York: Ronald Press, 1955. Chang, Leon Long-Yien. Four Thousand Years of Chinese Calligraphy. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1990. Cooper, Arthur. The Creation of the Chinese Script. London: China Society, 1978. DeVinne, Theodore L. The Invention of Printing. New York: Francis Hart, 1876. Gernet, Jacques. A History of Chinese Civilisation. Vols 1–2. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1972. Jiantang, Han. Chinese Characters. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2012. Kapleau, Philip. The Three Pillars of Zen. New York: Beacon, 1967. Lee, Sherman, E. Chinese Landscape Painting. London: Harper & Row, 1977. Swann, Peter C. Art of China, Korea, and Japan. New York: Praeger, 1963. Takagi, Mariko. Hanzi Graphy: A Typographic Translation between Latin Letters and Chinese Characters. Hong Kong: MCCM Creations, 2014. Tsien, Tsuen-Hsuin. Written on Bamboo and Silk. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1962. Twitchett, Denis. Printing and Publishing in Medieval China. New York: Beil, 1983. Wieger, L. Chinese Characters: Their Origin, Etymology, History, Classification and Signification. New York: Dover, 1965. Williams, C. A. S. Outlines of Chinese Symbolism and Art Motives. New York: Dover, 1976. Yao-t’ing, Wang. Looking at Chinese Painting. Japan: Nigensha Publishing, 1996. Yee, Chiang. Chinese Calligraphy: An Introduction to Its Aesthetic and Technique. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 1973. Zhang, Hongxing. Masterpieces of Chinese Painting, 700–1900. London: V&A, 2013. ## Chapter 4 Alexander, J. J. G. The Decorated Letter. New York: Braziller, 1978. ———. Italian Renaissance Illuminations. London: Chatto & Windus, 1977. Atiyeh, George N., ed. The Book in the Islamic World: The Written Word and Communication in the Middle East. Albany: State Univ. of New York Press, 1995. Backhouse, Janet. The Illuminated Page: Ten Centuries of Manuscript Painting. London: British Library, 1997. ———. The Lindisfarne Gospels. London: Phaidon, 1981. Banks, Doris H. Medieval Manuscript Bookmaking. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1989. Beach, Milo Cleveland. The Grand Mogul: Imperial Painting in India, 1600– 1660. Williamstown, MA: Clark Art Institute, 1978. ———. The Imperial Image Paintings for the Mughal Court. Washington, DC: Freer Gallery of Art, Smithsonian Institution, 1981. Bland, David. A History of Book Illustration: The Illuminated Manuscript and the Printed Book. London: Faber and Faber, 1958. Brown, Michelle P. A Guide to Western Historical Scripts from Antiquity to 1600. London: British Museum, 2011. ———. The Lindisfarne Gospels and the Early Medieval World. Toronto: British Library, 2007. ——. Understanding Illuminated Manuscripts: A Guide to Technical Terms. Malibu, CA: Getty Publications, 1994. Brown, Peter. The Book of Kells. London: Thames & Hudson, 1980. Chaitanya, Krishna. A History of Indian Painting. New Delhi: Abhinav Publications, 1976. D’Ancona, P., and E. Aeschlimann. The Art of Illumination. London: Phaidon, 1969. Diringer, David. The Book before Printing: Ancient, Medieval, and Oriental. New York: Dover, 1982. Drogin, Marc. Medieval Calligraphy: Its History and Technique. Montclair, NJ: Allenheld & Schram, 1980. Fairbank, Alfred. The Story of Handwriting. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1970. Fremantle, Ann. Age of Faith. New York: Time-Life, 1965. Gutmann, Joseph. Hebrew Manuscript Painting. New York: Braziller, 1978. Hamel, Christopher De. A History of Illuminated Manuscripts. 2nd ed. London: Phaidon, 1986. Hassall, A. G., and W. O. Hassall. The Douce Apocalypse. New York: Thomas Yoseloff, 1961. Hattinger, Franz. The Duc De Berry’s Book of Hours. Berne: Hallwag, 1962. Henderson, George. From Durrow to Kells: The Insular Gospel-Books, 650– 800. London: Thames & Hudson, 1987. Henry, Francoise. The Book of Kells. New York: Knopf, 1974. Karp, Abraham J. From the Ends of the Earth: Judaic Treasures of the Library of Congress. New York: Rizzoli, 1991. Ker, N. R. Medieval Scribes, Manuscripts, and Libraries. London: Scholar Press, 1978. Meehan, Bernard. The Book of Kells: An Illustrated Introduction to the Manuscript in Trinity College Dublin. London: Thames & Hudson, 1994. Meiss, Millard, and Elizabeth H. Beatson. De Belles Heures van Jean, duc de Berry. Utrecht, Neth.: Uitgeverij Het Spectrum, 1974. Morgan, Margaret. The Bible of Illuminated Letters: A Treasury of Decorative Calligraphy. London: Quarto, 2006. Morison, Stanley. Selected Essays on the History of Letterforms in Manuscript and Print. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1983. Mutherich, Florentine, and Joachim E. Gaehde. Carolingian Painting. New York: Braziller, 1976. Narkiss, Bezalel, and Cecil Roth. Hebrew Illuminated Manuscripts. Jerusalem: Keter Publishing, 1969. Netzer, Nancy, ed. Secular Sacred: 11th–16th Century Works from the Boston Public Library and the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Chestnut Hill, MA: McMullen Museum of Art, Boston College, 2006. Nordenfalk, Carl. Celtic and Anglo-Saxon Painting. New York: Braziller, 1977. O’Neill, Timothy. The Irish Hand: Scribes and Their Manuscripts from the Earliest Times to the 17th Century, with an Exemplar of Irish Scripts. Portalaoise, Ire.: Dolmen Press, 1984. Petrosyan, Yuri A. Pages of Perfection. Lugano, It.: ARCH Foundation, 1995. Pognon, Edmond. Les Trés Riches Heures du Duc de Berry: 15th Century Manuscript. Fribourg-Geneva: Productions Liber, 1979. Robb, David M. The Art of the Illuminated Manuscript. London: Yoseloff, 1973. Robinson, B. W., et al. Islamic Painting and the Arts of the Book. London: Faber and Faber, 1976. Rogers, J. M. Islamic Art & Design, 1500–1700. London: British Museum, 1983. Schapiro, Meyer. The Language of Forms: Lectures on Insular Manuscript Art. New York: Pierpont Morgan Library, 2005. Schmitz, Barbara, et al. Islamic Manuscripts in the New York Public Library. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1992. Sullivan, Sir Edward. The Book of Kells. London: Studio Limited, 1952. Swietochowski, Marie Lukens, et al. Illustrated Poetry and Epic Images: Persian Painting of the 1330s and 1340s. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1994. Sypeck, Jeff. Becoming Charlemagne: Europe, Baghdad, and the Empires of A.D. 800. New York: Ecco, 2006. Titley, Norah M. Persian Miniature Painting. London: British Library, 1983. Weitzmann, Kurt. Late Antique and Early Christian Book Illumination. New York: Braziller, 1977. Welch, Stuart Cary. Persian Painting: Five Royal Safavid Manuscripts of the Sixteenth Century. New York: Braziller, 1976. Williams, John. Early Spanish Manuscript Illumination. New York: Braziller, 1977. ———. The Illustrated Beatus: A Corpus of the Illustrations of the Commentary on the Apocalypse. London: Harvey Miller, 1994. Wilson, Derek. Charlemagne. New York: Vintage, 2005. ## Chapter 5 Abel, Richard. The Gutenberg Revolution: A History of Print Culture. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 2011. Anman, Jost, and Hans Sachs. The Book of Trades. New York: Dover, 1973. Beatty, Nancy Lee. The Craft of Dying: A Study in the Literary Tradition of the Ars Moriendi in England. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1970. Blades, William. The Life and Typography of William Caxton. London: Joseph Lilly, 1861. Breitkopf, Johann G. I. Versuch den Ursprung der Spielkarten, Die Einfuhrung des Leinenpapieres, und den Anfang der Holzschneidekunst in Europa. Leipzig, 1784. Butler, Pierce. The Origin of Printing in Europe. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1968. Carter, John, and Percy H. Muir. Printing and the Mind of Man. London: Cassell, 1967. Chatto, William Andrew. A Treatise on Wood Engraving. London: Chatto and Windus, 1861. Colin, Clair. A Chronology of Printing. New York: Cassell, 1969. Dowding, Geoffrey. An Introduction to the History of Printing Types. Clerkenwell, UK: Wace, 1961. Eisenstein, Elizabeth L. The Printing Press as an Agent of Change: Communications and Cultural Transformations in Early Modern Europe. 2 vols. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008. Fletcher, H. George. Gutenberg and the Genesis of Printing. New York: Pierpont Morgan Library, 1994. Freeman, Janet Ing. Johann Gutenberg and His Bible: A Historical Study. New York: Typophiles, 1988. Füssel, Stephan. Johannes Gutenberg. Reinbek Bei Hamburg: Rowohlt Taschenbuch-Verl., 1999. Gekler, Mary E. Gutenberg: The Master Printer. Oak Park, IL: MG Publications, 1991. Gress, Edmund. The Art and Practice of Typography. New York: Oswald, 1917. Haebler, Konrad. Incunabula: Original Leaves Traced by Konrad Haeber. Munich: Werss and Company, 1927. Hansard, Thomas. Typographia: An Historical Sketch of the Origin and Progress of the Art of Printing. London: Baldwin, Cradock & Joy, 1825. Hellinga, Lotte. Caxton in Focus: The Beginning of Printing in England. London: British Library, 1982. Ing, Janet Thompson. Johann Gutenberg and His Bible: A Historical Study. New York: Typophiles, 1988. Kapr, Albert. Johann Gutenberg: The Man and His Invention. Translated by Martin Douglas. Brookfield, VT: Scolar Press, 1996. Lavarie, Norma. The Art and History of Books. New York: Heineman, 1968. Lehmann-Haupt, Hellmut. Gutenberg and the Master of the Playing Cards. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1966. Lockombe, Philip. The History and Art of Printing. 1771. McLuhan, Marshall. The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man. Toronto: Univ. of Toronto, 1962. McMurtrie, Douglas C. The Book: The Story of Printing and Bookmaking. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1943. Morison, Stanley. German Incunabula in the British Museum. New York: Hacker, 1975. Morison, Stanley, and Kenneth Day. The Typographic Book. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago, 1963. Norton, F. J. Printing in Spain, 1501–1520. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1966. Pollard, Michael. Johann Gutenberg: Master of Modern Printing. Woodbridge, CT: Blackbirch, 2001. Poortenaar, Jan. Coster—niet Gutenberg. Naarden: Uitgeverij In Den Toren, 1947. Steinberg, S. H. Revised by John Trevitt. Five Hundred Years of Printing. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 1996. ## Chapter 6 Anzewlewsky, Fedja. Dürer: His Art and Life. New York: Alpine, 1980. Bailey, Martin. Dürer. London: Phaidon, 1995. Bliss, Douglas Percy. A History of Wood-Engraving. London: J. M. Dent, 1928. Dodgson, Cambell. Catalog of Early German and Flemish Woodcuts. Vols. 1–2. London: British Museum, 1903. Dürer, Albrecht. Of the Just Shaping of Letters. Translated by R. T. Nichol. New York: Dover, 1965. Gilver, William. Masterworks in Wood: The Woodcut Print. Portland, OR: Portland Art Museum, 1976. Goff, Frederick R. Fifteenth Century Books in the Library of Congress. Washington, DC: United States Government Printing Office, 1950. Hamilton, Frederick W. A Brief History of Printing in England: A Short History of Printing in England From Caxton to the Present Time. Chicago: United Typothetae of America, 1918. Hind, Arthur M. An Introduction to a History of Woodcut. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1935. Hoetink, Hans. Dürer’s Universe. Woodbury, NY: Barron’s, 1971. Hollstein, F. W. H. German Engravings, Etchings, and Woodcuts ca. 1400– 1700. Amsterdam: Menno Hertzberger, 1962. Johnson, A. P. Selected Essays on Books and Printing. New York: Van Gendt, 1970. Kurth, Dr. Willi. The Complete Woodcuts of Albrecht Dürer. New York: Crown, 1946. Moran, James. Wynkyn de Worde: Father of Fleet Street. London: British Library, 2003. Muther, Richard. German Book Illustration of the Gothic Period and the Early Renaissance (1460–1530). Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1972. Panofsky, Erwin. The Life and Art of Albrecht Dürer. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1955. Rossiter, Henry Preston. Albrecht Dürer: Master Printmaker. Boston: Museum of Fine Arts, 1971. Strauss, Walter L. The German Single-Leaf Woodcut, 1550–1600. New York: Abrams, 1975. Talbot, Charles W., ed. Dürer in America: His Graphic Work. New York: Macmillan, 1971. Weil, Ernst. Die Deutschen Druckerzeichen des XV. Jahrhunderts. Munich: Verlag der Münchener Drucke, 1924. Wilson, Adrian, and Joyce Lancaster Wilson. The Making of the Nuremberg Chronicle. Amsterdam: A. Asher, 1978. Winship, George Parker. Gutenberg to Plantin: An Outline of the Early History of Printing. New York: Burt Franklin, 1968. ## Chapter 7 Amert, Kay. The Scythe and the Rabbit: Simon De Colines and the Culture of the Book in Renaissance Paris. Edited by Robert Bringhurst. Rochester, NY: Cary Graphic Arts, 2012. Amory, Hugh. Steven Day’s First Type. Lunenburg, VT: Meriden-Stinehour, 1989. Armstrong, Elizabeth. Robert Estienne, Royal Printer: An Historical Study of the Elder Stephanus. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1954. Arrighi, Ludovico. The First Writing Book: An English Translation and Facsimile Text of Arrighi’s Operina, the First Manual of The Chancery Hand. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1954. Atkins, Kathryn A. Masters of the Italic Letter: Twenty-Two Exemplars from the Sixteenth Century. London: Penguin, 1988. Barker, Nicolas. Aldus Manutius and the Development of Greek Script & Type in the Fifteenth Century. 2nd ed. New York: Fordham Univ. Press, 1992. Barolini, Helen. Aldus and His Dream Book. New York: Italica Press, 1992. Benson, John Howard. The First Writing Book. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1955. Bernard, Auguste. Geofroy Tory. Translated by George B. Ives. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1909. Bühler, Curt F. The Fifteenth-Century Book: The Scribes, the Printers, the Decorators. Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania Press, 1960. Calzolari, Francesco. Printing a Book at Verona in 1622: The Account Book of Francesco Calzolari. Edited by Conor Fahy. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 1993. Carter, Harry. A View of Early Typography up to about 1600. London: Hyphen Press, 2002. Clement, Richard W. “Italian Sixteenth-Century Italian Writing Books and the Scribal Reality in Verona.” Visible Language 20, no. 4 (1986): 393–412. Clemons, G. Scott, and George Fletcher. Aldus Manutius: A Legacy More Lasting than Bronze. New York: Grolier Club, 2015. Colonna, Francesco. Hypnerotomachia Poliphili: The Strife of Love in a Dream. Translated by Joscelyn Godwin. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2005. DeVinne, Theodore L. A Treatise on Title-Pages. 1901. Reprint, New York: Haskell House, 1972. Fletcher, H. George. New Aldine Studies: Documentary Essays on the Life and Work of Aldus Manutius. San Francisco: B. M. Rosenthal, 1988. Greenblatt, Stephen. The Swerve: How the World Became Modern. New York: Norton, 2011. Hughes, Robert. Things I Didn’t Know: A Memoir. New York: Knopf, 2006. Johnson, A. P. Selected Essays on Books and Printing. New York: Van Gendt, 1970. Johnson, Fridolf. A Treasury of Bookplates from the Renaissance to the Present. New York: Dover, 1977.Kallendorf, Craig, and Lisa Pon. The Books of Venice. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 1986. Lacey, Barbara E. From Sacred to Secular: Visual Images in Early American Publications. Newark, DE: Univ. of Delaware Press, 2007. Langereis, Sandra. De Woordenaar: Christof el Plantin: ‘s werelds grootste drukker en uitgever, 1520–1589. Amsterdam: Uitgeverij Balans, 2014. le Bé, Pierre. Modèles de lettres de Pierre le Bé. Paris, 1601. Lowry, Martin. The World of Aldus Manutius. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univ. Press, 1979. McCrillis, John O. C. Printer’s Abecedarium. Boston: Godine, 1974. McKitterick, David, ed. Stanley Morison and D. B. Updike: Selected Correspondence. London: Scholar Press, 1972. Meynell, Sir Francis, and Simon, Herbert, eds. Fleuron Anthology. Boston: Godine, 1979. Morison, Stanley. First Principles of Typography. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1936. Mortimer, Ruth. Catalogue of Books and Manuscripts. Part 1, French 16th Century Books. Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 1964. Orcutt, William Dana. The Book in Italy during the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries. London: George G. Harrap, 1928. Pettegree, Andrew. The Book in the Renaissance. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2010. Schreiber, Fred. The Estiennes: An Annotated Catalog. New York: E. K. Schreiber, 1982. Slater, John Rothwell. Printing and the Renaissance: A Paper Read before the Fortnightly Club of Rochester, New York. New York: Battery Park Book Company, 1978. Soepnel, Ine. Festina Lente: Aldus Manutius, drukker/uitgevers. Zutphen, Neth.: De Walburg Pers, 1986. Standard, Paul. Arrighi’s Running Hand. New York: Taplinger, 1979. Tannenbaum, Samuel A. The Handwriting of the Renaissance. New York: Ungar, 1930. Vervliet, Hendrik D. L. French Renaissance Printing Types: A Conspectus. London: Bibliographical Society, 2010. Williamson, Hugh. Methods of Book Design. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1983. Woodfield, Denis. Surreptitious Printing in England, 1550–1640. New York: Bibliographical Society of America, 1973. ## Chapter 8 Ball, Johnson. William Caslon: Master of Letters. Kineton, UK: Roundwood Press, 1973. Bartram, Alan. The English Lettering Tradition from 1700 to the Present Day. London: Lund Humphries, 1986. Benton, Josiah Henry. John Baskerville: Type-Founder and Printer, 1706– 1775. New York: Burt Franklin, 1968. Bodoni, Signora, and Luigi Orsi, eds. Manuale tipografico. Parma, It., 1818. Bultin, Martin. William Blake, 1757–1827. London: Tate Gallery, 1990. Carter, Henry, trans. Fournier on Typefounding. New York: Lenox Hill, 1972. Didot, Ambroise Firmin. Essai sur la typographie. Paris, 1851. Fournier, Pierre Simon. Manuel typographique. 2 vols. Paris, 1764–66. Franklin V, Benjamin. Boston Printers, Publishers, and Booksellers: 1640– 1800. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1980. Holloway, Owen E. French Rococo Book Illustration. New York: Transatlantic Arts, 1969. Holmes, Nigel. Designer’s Guide to Creating Charts and Diagrams. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1984. Hutt, Allen. Fournier: The Compleat Typographer. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1972. Lane, John A. Early Type Specimens in the Plantin-Moretus Museum. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2004. Lowance, Mason I., Jr., and Georgia B. Bumgardner, eds. Massachusetts Broadsides of the American Revolution. Amherst: Univ. of Massachusetts, 1976. Malcolmson, Anne. William Blake: An Introduction. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1967. Osborne, Carole Maroot. Pierre Didot the Elder and French Book Illustration. New York: Garland, 1985. Oswald, John Clyde. Printing in the Americas. New York, 1937. Pardoe, F. E. John Baskerville of Birmingham, Letter-Founder and Printer. London: Frederick Muller, 1975. Pignatti, Terisio. The Age of Rococo. New York: Paul Hamlyn, 1966. Playfair, William. The Commercial and Political Atlas. London: J. Debrett, Plomer, Henry R. English Printer’s Ornaments. New York: Burt Franklin, 1924. Sewter, A. C. Baroque and Rococo. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1972. Twyman, Michael. Printing 1770–1970. London: Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1970. ## Chapter 9 Abbot, Charles D. Howard Pyle: A Chronicle. New York: Harper’s, 1925. Alistair, Allen, and Hoverstadt, Joan. The History of Printed Scraps. London: New Cavendish, 1983. Annenberg, Maurice. Type Foundries of America and Their Catalogs. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 1994. Arnold, H. J. P. William Henry Fox Talbot: Pioneer of Photography and Man of Science. London: Hutchinson Benham, 1977. Baker, Elizabeth Faulkner. Printers and Technology. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1957. Ball, Edward. The Inventor and the Tycoon: The Murderer Eadweard Muybridge, the Entrepreneur Leland Stanford, and the Birth of Moving Pictures. New York: Anchor, 2013. Bidwell, John, ed. Specimens of Type. . . American Type Founders Co. New York: Garland, 1981. Billington, Elizabeth T. The Randolph Caldecott Treasury. New York: F. Warne, 1978. Black, Mary. American Advertising Posters of the Nineteenth Century. New York: Dover, 1976. Blackburn, Henry W. Randolph Caldecott: A Personal Memoir of His Early Art Career. London: S. Low, Marston, Searle, & Rivington, 1886. Brady, Mathew B. National Photographic Collection of War Views, and Portraits of Representative Men. New York: C. A. Alvord, 1869. Bruce, David, Jr., and James Eckman, eds. History of Type Founding in the United States. New York: Typophiles, 1981. Buckland, Gail. Fox Talbot and the Invention of Photography. Boston: Godine, 1980. Bullen, Henry Lewis. Catalogue of Type Specimen Books: United States and Foreign. San Diego, CA: Frontier Publishing, 1972. Clouse, Doug. MacKellar, Smiths and Jordan: Typographic Tastemakers of the Late Nineteenth Century. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2008. Crane, Walter. Walter Crane as a Book Illustrator. London: Academy, 1975. Day, Kenneth, ed. Book Typography, 1815–1965: In Europe and the United States of America. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1965. Dobson, Austin. Thomas Bewick and His Pupils. London: Chatto and Windus, Piccadilly, 1884. Durant, Stuart. Victorian Ornamental Design. New York: St. Martin’s, 1972. Eckman, James. The Heritage of the Printer. Philadelphia: North American Publishing, 1965. Engen, Rodney K. Kate Greenaway: A Biography. London: Macdonald, 1981. Freeman, Larry. Louis Prang: Color Lithographer. Watkins Glen, NY: Century House, 1971. Gowan, Al. T. J. Lyons: A Biography and Critical Essay. Boston: Society of Printers, 1987. Gray, Nicolete. Nineteenth Century Ornamented Typefaces. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1976. Greenaway, Kate. Kate Greenaway. New York: Rizzoli, 1977. Halloran, Fiona Deans. Thomas Nast: The Father of Modern Political Cartoons. Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 2012. Hammond, John H. The Camera Obscura: A Chronicle. Bristol, UK: Adam Hilger, 1981. Hillier, Bevis. 100 Years of Posters. New York: Harper & Row, 1972. Huss, Richard E. The Development of Printer’s Mechanical Typesetting Methods, 1822–1925. Charlottesville: Univ. of Virginia Press, 1973. Isaac, Peter. William Davison’s New Specimen of Cast-Metal Ornaments and Wood Types, 1780–1858. London: Printing Historical Society, 1990. Jammes, Andre. William H. F. Talbot: Inventor of the Positive-Negative Process. New York: Macmillan, 1973. Jarvis, Simon. High Victorian Design. Woodbridge, Suffolk, UK: Boydell, 1983. Johnston, Alastair. Alphabets to Order: The Literature of Nineteenth-Century Type-Founders’ Specimens. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2000. Jones, Owen. The Grammar of Ornament. Folio edition. London: B. Quaritch, 1910. Reprint, New York: Portland House, 1986. Kelly, Rob Roy. American Wood Type, 1828–1900: Notes on the Evolution of Decorative and Large Types. New York: De Capo, 1969. Konody, Paul George. The Art of Walter Crane. London: G. Bell, 1902. Lane, Anthony. “Names and Faces: The Portraits of Julia Margaret Cameron.” New Yorker, September 2, 2013, 69–73. Lassam, Robert. Fox Talbot: Photographer. Wiltshire, UK: Compton, 1979. Lehmann-Haupt, Hellmut. The Book in America. New York: Bowker, 1951. Lewis, John. Typography: Basic Principles. New York: Reinhold, 1966. McClinton, Katharine Morrison. The Chromolithographs of Louis Prang. New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1973. McLean, Ruari. Victorian Book Design and Colour Printing. 2nd ed. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1972. Maindron, Ernest. Les af iches illustrées. Paris: H. Launette, 1886. Marzio, Peter C. The Democratic Art. Boston: Godine, 1979. Matthews, Oliver. Early Photographs and Early Photographers: A Survey in Dictionary Form. New York: Pitman, 1973. Meredith, Roy. Mr. Lincoln’s Camera Man. New York: Scribner’s, 1946. Morse, Willard Samuel. Howard Pyle: A Record of His Illustrations and Writings. Wilmington, DE: Wilmington Society of the Fine Arts, 1921. Mosley, James. British Type Specimens before 1831: A Hand List. Oxford: Bodleian Library, 1984. Mott, Frank Luther. A History of American Magazines. Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 1957. Mourek, Anthony J. Famous, Infamous & Forgotten: Political Cartoons from the Collection of Anthony J. Mourek. New York: Grolier Club, 2013. Muir, Percy. Victorian Illustrated Books. New York: Praeger, 1971. Muybridge, Eadweard. Descriptive Zoopraxography; or, The Science of Animal Locomotion Made Popular. Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania, 1893. Newhall, Beaumont. The History of Photography. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1964. Paine, Albert Bigelow. Thomas Nast: His Period and His Pictures. Princeton, NJ: Payne Press, 1904. Pardoe, F. E. John Baskerville of Birmingham: Letter-Founder and Printer. London: Frederick Muller, 1975. Parton, James. Caricature and Other Comic Art. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1877. Pierce, Sally, and Catharina Slautterback. Boston Lithography, 1825–1880. Boston: Boston Athenaeum, 1991. Pitz, Henry C. Howard Pyle: Writer, Illustrator, Founder of the Brandywine Press. New York: C. N. Potter, 1975. Pollack, Peter. The Picture History of Photography. New York: Abrams, 1969. Potenniée, Georges. The Literature of Photography: The History of the Discovery of Photography. New York: Arno Press, 1973. Ray, Gordon N. The Illustrator and the Book in England from 1790 to 1914. New York: Dover, 1976. Reed, Talbot Baines. A History of the Old English Letter Foundries. Revised by A. F. Johnson. London: Faber and Faber, 1952. Rosenblum, Naomi, ed. A World History of Photography. New York: Abbeville, 1981. Shove, Raymond H. Cheap Book Production in the United States, 1870 to 1891. Urbana: Univ. of Illinois Library, 1937. Silver, Rollo G. Typefounding in America, 1787–1825. Charlottesville: Univ. of Virginia Press, 1965. Snyder, Joel. American Frontiers: Timothy O’Sullivan. Millerton, NY: Aperture, 1981. Southward, John. Practical Printing: A Handbook for the Art of Typography. London: Printer’s Register Office, 1882. Reprint, New York: Garland, 1980. Spencer, Isabel. Walter Crane. London: Studio Vista, 1975. Stern, Madeleine B. Publishers for Mass Entertainment in Nineteenth Century America. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1980. Stillman, Jacob Davis Babcock. The horse in motion as shown by instantaneous photography, with a study on animal mechanics founded on anatomy and the revelations of the camera, in which is demonstrated the theory of quadrupedal locomotion. Boston: J. R. Osgood and Company, 1882. Talbot, William Henry Fox. The Pencil of Nature. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans, 1844–46. Thompson, John Smith. History of Composing Machines. Chicago: Inland Printer, 1904. ———. The Mechanism of the Linotype. Chicago: Inland Printer, 1902. Tracy, Walter. Letters of Credit: A View of Type Design. London: Gordon Fraiser, 1986. Tuckerman, Henry T. Book of the Artists: American Artist Life. New York: G. P. Putnam and Sons, 1867. Twyman, Michael. History of Chromolithography: Printed Colour for All. London: British Library, 2013. Upton, Barbara London, and John Upton. Photography. 4th ed. New York: Harper Collins, 1989. Wade, John. A Short History of the Camera. Watford, England: Fountain Press, 1979. Watson, Roger, and Helen Rappaport. Capturing the Light: The Birth of Photography, a True Story of Genius and Rivalry. New York: St. Martin’s, 2013. Weinbergen, Norman S. The Art of the Photogram: Photography without a Camera. New York: Taplinger, 1981. Wolpe, Berthold, ed. Vincent Figgins Type Specimens, 1801–1815. London: Printing Historical Society, 1967. Wornum, Ralph N. Analysis of Ornament. London: Chapman and Hall, 1879. ## Chapter 10 Abbe, Dorothy, Louise Fili, and Steven Heller. Typographic Treasures: The Work of W. A. Dwiggins. Woburn, MA: International Typeface Corporation, 1986. Anscombe, Isabelle, and Charlotte Gere. Arts and Crafts in Britain and America. London: Academy Editions, 1978. Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society. Arts and Crafts Essays. London: Longmans Green, 1893. Ashbee, Charles R. Craftsmanship in Competitive Industry. Campden, England: Essex House, 1908. ———. An Endeavor Towards the Teaching of John Ruskin and William Morris. London: Edward Arnold, 1901. ———, ed. The Manual of the Guild and School of Handicraft. London: Cassell, 1892. Reprint, New York: Garland, 1977. Balston, Thomas. The Cambridge University Press Collection of Private Press Types: Kelmscott, Ashendene, Eragny, Cranach. Cambridge: B. Crutchley, 1951. Bell, Malcolm. Edward Burne-Jones. London: Bell, 1892. Bell, Quintin. Ruskin. New York: Braziller, 1963. Bennett, Paul A. Postscripts on Dwiggins. 2 vols. New York: Typophiles, 1960. Blumenthal, Joseph. Bruce Rogers: A Life in Letters, 1870–1957. Austin, TX: W. T. Taylor, 1989. Bruckner, D. J. R. Frederic Goudy. New York: Abrams, 1990. Carter, Sebastian. Twentieth Century Type Designers. London: Trefoil, 1987. Cave, Roderick. The Private Press. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1971. Cobden-Sanderson, Thomas James. Ecce Mundus and the Arts and Crafts Movement. Hammersmith, UK: Hammersmith Pub. Society, 1902–1905. Reprint, New York: Garland, 1977. Colebrook, Frank. William Morris: Master Printer. Council Bluffs, Iowa: Yellow Barn Press, 1989. Crane, Walter. Of the Decorative Illustration of Books Old and New. London: Bell, 1896. ———. William Morris to Whistler. London: Bell, 1911. Crawford, Alan. C. R. Ashbee: Architect, Designer, and Romantic Socialist. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1985. Dooijes, Dick. Over de drukletterontwerpen van Sjoerd H. de Roos. Zutphen, Neth.: Bührmann-Ubbens Papier, 1987. Fairclough, Oliver. Textiles by William Morris and Morris and Co., 1861–1940. New York: Thames & Hudson, 1981. Ferebee, Ann. A History of Design from the Victorian Era to the Present. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970. Franklin, Colin. The Ashendene Press. Dallas, TX: Birdwell, 1986. Franklin, Colin, and John R. Turner. The Private Presses. 2nd ed. Brookfield, VT: Gower, 1991. Gibbs-Smith, C. H. The Great Exhibition of 1851. London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1951. Gillow, Norah. William Morris: Designs and Patterns. London: Bracken, 1988. Goudy, Frederic W. The Alphabet and Elements of Lettering. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1942. ———. Goudy’s Type Designs. 2nd ed. New Rochelle, NY: Myriade Press, 1978. ———. Typologia. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1940. Harvey, Charles. Art, Enterprise, and Ethics: The Life and Works of William Morris. Portland, OR: Frank Cass, 1996. Haslam, Malcolm. Arts and Crafts Book Covers. Shepton Beauchamp, UK: Richard Dennis, 2012. Kelly, Jerry. The First Flowering: Bruce Rogers at the Riverside Press. Boston: Godine, 2008. Keynes, Geoffrey. William Pickering: Publisher. Rev. ed. London: Galahad Press, 1969. Koch, Rudolf. Das ABS Büchlein. Leipzig: Insel-Verlag, 1934. ———. The Book of Signs. Translated by Vyvyan Holland. New York: Dover, 1955. ———. The Little ABC Book of Rudolf Koch. Boston: Godine, 1976. Konody, Paul George. The Art of Walter Crane. London: Bell, 1902. Lommen, Mathieu. De grote vijf. Amsterdam: Bührmann-Ubbens Papier, 1991. Ludwig, Coy L. The Arts and Crafts Movement in New York State, 1890s– 1920s. Hamilton, NY: Gallery Association of New York State, 1983. Mackail, J. W. The Life of William Morris. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1950. McCrillis, John O. C. Recollections of Daniel Berkeley Updike. Newport, RI: Redwood Library, 1991. McLean, Ruari. Modern Book Design from William Morris to the Present Day. London: Faber and Faber, 1958. , ed. Typographers on Type: An Illustrated Anthology from William Morris to the Present Day. New York: Norton, 1995. ———. Victorian Book Design and Colour Printing. 2nd ed. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1972. Morris, William. Giftwraps by Artists. New York: Joost Elffers, 1985. Naylor, Gillian. The Arts and Crafts Movement. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971. Needham, Paul, ed. William Morris and the Art of the Book. New York: Pierpont Morgan Library, 1976. Parry, Linda, ed. William Morris. New York: Abrams, 1996. ———. William Morris Textiles. London: Weidenfeld and Nicol, 1983. Peterson, William S. The Kelmscott Press: A History of William Morris’s Typographical Adventure. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1989. Pissarro, Lucien. The Letters of Lucien to Camille Pissarro, 1883–1903. Edited by Anne Thorold. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993. Ransom, Will. Kelmscott, Doves and Ashendene: The Private Press Credos. New York: Typophiles, 1952. ———. Private Presses and Their Books. New York: Bowker, 1929. Rogers, Bruce. Paragraphs on Printing. New York: William E. Rudge’s Sons, 1943. Rosenberg, John D. The Darkening Glass: A Portrait of Ruskin’s Genius. New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1961. Skoblow, Jeffrey. Paradise Dislocated: Morris, Politics, Art. Charlottesville: Univ. of Virginia Press, 1993. Smart, William. John Ruskin: His Life and Work. New York: Heywood, 1973. Sparling, H. Halliday. The Kelmscott Press and William Morris, Master Craftsman. London: Macmillan, 1924. Stansky, Peter. Redesigning the World: William Morris, the 1880s, and the Arts and Crafts. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1985. Thompson, Susan Otis. American Book of Design and William Morris. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 1996. Thorold, Anne. A Catalogue of the Oil Paintings of Lucien Pissarro. London: Athelney, 1983. Thorold, Anne, and Kristen Erickson. Camille Pissarro and His Family. Oxford, UK: Ashmolean Museum, 1993. Tidcombe, Marianne. The Doves Bindery. London: British Library, 1991. Updike, Daniel Berkeley. The Well-Made Book: Essays and Lectures. Edited by William S. Peterson. West New York, NJ: Marc Batty, 2002. Updike, D. B., et al. The Work of Bruce Rogers: Jack of All Trades, Master of One. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1939. Urbanelli, Lora. The Wood Engravings of Lucien Pissarro and a Bibliographical List of Eragny Books. Oxford, UK: Ashmolean Museum, 1994. Vallance, Aymer. William Morris: His Art, His Writings, and His Public Life. London: George Bell and Sons, 1897. Volpe, Todd, and Beth Cathers. Treasures of the American Arts and Crafts Movement. New York: Abrams, 1988. Warde, Frederic. Bruce Rogers: Designer of Books. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 1925. ## Chapter 11 Abrams, Leslie E. The History and Practice of Japanese Printmaking: A Selectively Annotated Bibliography of English Language Materials. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1984. Alexandre, Arsene, et al. The Modern Poster. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1895. Amaya, Mario. Art Nouveau. New York: Schocken, 1985. Ando, Hiroshige. Hiroshige: Birds and Flowers. New York: Braziller, 1988. ———. One Hundred Famous Views of Edo. New York: Braziller, 1986. ———. Prints by Utagawa Hiroshige in the James A. Michener Collection. Honolulu, HI: Honolulu Academy of Arts, 1991. Appelbaum, Stanley. The Complete “Masters of the Poster”: All 256 Plates from “Les Maîtres de I’Af iche.” New York: Dover, 1990. Arwas, Victor. Belle Époque Posters and Graphics. New York: Rizzoli, 1978. ———. Berthon and Grasset. New York: Rizzoli, 1978. Aslin, Elizabeth. The Aesthetic Movement: Prelude to Art Nouveau. London: Elek Books, 1969. Bargiel, Réjane. Steinlen af ichiste: Catalogue raisonne. Lausanne, Fr.: Éditions du Grand-Pont, 1986. Bavilli, Renato. Art Nouveau. London: Cassell, 1987. ———. The Later Work of Aubrey Beardsley. London: Lane, 1901. Beeh, Wolfgang. Jugendstil: Kunst um 1900. Darmstadt, Ger.: Roether, 1982. Botwinick, Michael, et al. Belgian Art, 1880–1914. Brooklyn, NY: Brooklyn Museum, 1980. Braches, Ernst. Nieuwe Kunst en het boek Een studie in Art Nouveau, Amsterdam: De Buitenkant, 2003. Bradley, William H. Will Bradley: His Chap Book. New York: Typofiles, 1955. Brandt, Frederick R., Robert Koch, and Philip B. Meggs. Designed to Sell: Turnof-the-Century American Posters. Richmond, VA: Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, 1994. Brinckmann, Justus. Jugendstil. Dortmund, Ger.: Havenberg, 1983. Broido, Lucy. The Posters of Jules Cheret. New York: Dover, 1980. Canning, Susan Marie. Henry van de Velde (1863–1957): Paintings and Drawings. Antwerp, Neth.: Koninklijk Museum voor Schone Kunsten, 1987. Castleman, Riva, and Wolfgang Wittrock. Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1985. Cate, Philip Dennis, Nancy Finby, and David W. Kiehl. American Posters of the 1890s. New York: Abrams, 1987. Cate, Philip Dennis, and Sinclair Hamilton Hitchings. The Color Revolution: Color Lithography in France, 1890–1900. Santa Barbara, CA: Peregrine Smith, 1978. Chibbett, David. The History of Japanese Printing and Book Illustration. Tokyo: Kodansha, 1977. Cirker, Hayward, and Blanche Cirker. The Golden Age of the Poster. New York: Dover, 1971. Constantine, Mildred, and Alan M. Fern. Word and Image. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1968. Delevoy, Robert L., Maurice Culot, and Yvonne Brunhammer. Guimard, Horta, Van de Velde. Paris: Musée des Arts Decoratifs, 1971. Devynck, Danièle, and Catherine Tiné. Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec: Les af iches; Collection du Musée Toulouse-Lautrec. Graulhet, Fr.: Éd. Odyssée, 2001. Engen, Rodney. Laurence Housman. Stroud, UK: Catalpa Press, 1983. Eschmann, Karl. Jugendstil. Kastellann, Ger.: Aloys Henn Verlag, 1976. Fields, Armond. George Auriol. Salt Lake City, UT: Peregrine Smith, 1985. Forrer, Matthi. Hokusai. New York: Rizzoli, 1988. Frey, Julia Bloch. Toulouse-Lautrec: A Life. New York: Viking, 1994. Gerhardus, Maly, and Dietfried Gerhardus. Symbolism and Art Nouveau. Oxford, UK: Phaidon, 1979. Gibson, David. Designed to Persuade: The Graphic Art of Edward Penfield. Yonkers, NY: Hudson River Museum, 1984. Gillon, Edmund V., Jr. Art Nouveau: An Anthology of Design and Illustration from the Studio. New York: Dover, 1969. Götz, Adriani. Toulouse-Lautrec: The Complete Graphic Works. New York: Thames & Hudson, 1988. Grasset, Eugéne. Eugéne Grasset: Lausanne 1841–Sceaux 1917. Paris: Y. Plantin et F. Blondel, c. 1980. Green, William. Japanese Woodblock Prints: A Bibliography of Writings from 1822–1992, Entirely or Partly in English Text. Leiden, Neth.: Ukiyo-e Books, 1993. Greenhalgh, Paul. Art Nouveau, 1890–1914. New York: Abrams, 2000. Hermand, Jost. Jugendstil: Kunst um 1900. Stuttgart, Ger.: Metzlersche, 1965. Hiatt, Charles. Picture Posters. London: George Bell and Sons, 1995. Hiesinger, Kathryn B., ed. Art Nouveau in Munich: Masters of the Jugendstil. Munich: Prestel-Verlag, 1988. Hillier, Jack Ronald. The Art of Hokusai in Book Illustration. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1980. ———. The Japanese Print: A New Approach. Rutland, VT: C. E. Tuttle, 1975. ———. Suzuki Harunobu. Philadelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Art, 1970. ———. Utamaro: Colour Prints and Paintings. 2nd ed. Oxford: Phaidon, 1979. Hofstatter, Hans H. Art Nouveau: Prints, Illustrations, and Posters. New York: Greenwich House, 1968. Horning, Clarence P. Will Bradley: His Graphic Art. New York: Dover, 1974. Houfe, Simon, ed. The Birth of “The Studio,” 1893–1895. Woodbridge, UK: Antique Collectors’ Club, 1976. Huguette Beres (gallery). Utamaro: Estampes, Livres Illustres. Paris: Huguette Beres, 1977. Hutchison, Harold F. The Poster. New York: Viking, 1968. Izzard, Sebastian. Hiroshige: An Exhibition of Selected Prints and Illustrated Books. New York: Ukiyo-e Society of America, c. 1983. Jong, Cees W. de, Martijn F. Le Coultre, and Alston W. Purvis. Posters NL. Amsterdam: Muller Visual Communication, 2007. Julien, Édouard. The Posters of Toulouse-Lautrec. Monte Carlo: Andre Sauret, 1966. Keay, Carolyn. American Posters of the Turn of the Century. London: Academy Editions, 1975. Kempton, Richard. Art Nouveau: An Annotated Bibliography. Los Angeles: Hennessey & Ingalls, 1977. Kitagawa, Utamaro. Utamaro: A Chorus of Birds. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1981. Kobayashi, Tadashi. Utamaro. Translated by Mark A. Harbison. Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1982. —. Utamaro: Portaits from the Floating World. Translated by Mark A. Harbison. Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1993. Koch, Robert. Will H. Bradley: American Artist in Print: A Collector’s Guide. Manchester, VT: Hudson Hills, 2002. Lane, Richard. Hokusai, Life and Work. New York: Dutton, 1989. Lemonnier, Camille, and Maurice Pillard Verneuil. Eugène Grasset et son oeuvre. Paris: Éditions de “La Plume,” 1900. Levy, Merwyn. Liberty Style: The Classic Years, 1889–1910. New York: Rizzoli, 1986. Madsen, Stephan T. Sources of Art Nouveau. New York: Da Capo, 1975. Maindron, Ernest. Les af iches étrangères. Paris: 1897. ———. Les af iches illustrées. Paris: H. Launetter, 1886. Margolin, Victor. American Poster Renaissance. Secaucus, NJ: Castle Books, 1975. Meech, Julia, and Gabriel P Weisberg. Japonisme Comes to America. New York: Abrams, 1990. Minsky, Richard. The Art of American Book Covers, 1875–1930. New York: Braziller, 2010. Morse, Peter. Hokusai: One Hundred Poets. New York: Braziller, 1989. Mucha, Juri. Alphonse Mucha. New York: St. Martin’s, 1971. Murray-Robertson, Anne. Grasset: Pionnier de l’Art Nouveau. Lausanne, Switz.: Éditions 24 Heures, 1981. Nagata, Seiji. Hokusai: Genius of the Japanese Ukiyo-e. Translated by John Bester. Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1995. Nyns, Marcel. Georges Lemmen. Antwerp, Neth.: de Sikkel, 1954. Ockman, Karol, and Kenneth E. Silver. Sarah Bernhardt: The Art of High Drama. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2006. Oka, Isaburo. Hiroshige. Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1982. ———. Hiroshige: Japan’s Great Landscape Artist. Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1992. Osthaus, Karl Ernst. Van de Velde. Hagen, Ger.: Folkwang, 1920. Penfield, Edward. Posters in Miniature. New York: R. H. Russell and Son, 1896. Peterson, William S. The Beautiful Poster Lady: A Life of Ethel Reed. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2013. Plasschaert, A. Jan Toorop. Amsterdam: Vorst & Tas, 1929. Price, Charles Matlock. Poster Design: A Critical Study of the Development of the Poster in Continental Europe, England, and America. Rev. ed. New York: George W. Bricka, 1913. Purvis, Alston W. “Feast of Dutch Diversity: Nieuwe Kunst Book Design.” Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts 24 (2002): 118–139. Rappard-Boon, Charlotte van, et al. Hiroshige and the Utagawa School: Japanese Prints, c. 1810–1860. Amsterdam: Rijksprentenkabinet, Rijksmuseum, 1984. Read, Brian. Aubrey Beardsley. New York: Bonanza, 1968. Rennert, Jack. Posters of the Belle Époque. New York: Wine Spectator Press, 1990. Richards, Maurice. Posters at the Turn of the Century. New York: Walker, 1968. Ricketts, Charles. A Defence of the Revival of Printing. London: Ballantine, 1909. Sainton, Roger. Art Nouveau Posters and Graphics. New York: Rizzoli, 1977. Selz, Peter, and Mildred Constantine, eds. Art Nouveau. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1959. Sembach, Klaus-Jürgen. Henry van de Velde. Translated by Michael Robinson. New York: Rizzoli, 1989. Sembach, Klaus-Jürgen, et al. 1910: Halbzeit der Moderne, Van de Velde, Behrens, Hof mann und die Anderen. Stuttgart, Ger.: Hatje, 1992. Sharp, Dennis. Henri van de Velde: Theatres, 1904–1914. London: Architectural Association, 1974. Shibui, Kiyoshi. Utamaro. New York: Crown, 1962. Solo, Dan X. Art Nouveau Display Alphabets. New York: Dover, 1976. Sterner, Gabriele. Jugendstil Art Deco: Malerei and Grafik. Munich: Wilhelm Heyne Verlag, 1981. Strange, Edward Fairbrother. Hiroshige’s Woodblock Prints: A Guide. New York: Dover, 1983. ———. Hokusai: The Old Man Mad with Painting. Folcroft, PA: Folcroft Library, 1977. Sunshine, Linda. The Posters of Alphonse Mucha. New York: Harmony, 1975. Taylor, John Russell. The Art Nouveau Book in Britain. Edinburgh: Paul Harris, 1979. Terrence, Kathy. An Art Nouveau Album. New York: Dutton, 1981. Troy, Nancy J. Modernism and the Decorative Arts in France: Art Nouveau to Le Corbusier. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1991. Ulmer, Renate. Mucha. Cologne, Ger.: Taschen, 2003. Velde, Henri van de. Deblaiement d’art. Brussels: Monnom, 1894. ———. Henri van de Velde. Cologne, Ger.: Wienand, 1992. ———. Die Renaissance im Modernen Kunstgewerbe. Berlin: Cassirer, 1903. Vergez, Robert. Early Ukiyo-e Master: Okumura Masanobu. Tokyo: Kodanshu, 1983. Verneuil, M.M.P., G. Auriol, and A. Mucha. Combinaisons Ornementales. Paris: Librairie Centrale des Beaux-Arts, 1901. Weisser, Michael. Im Stil der “Jugend.” Frankfurt: Fricke, 1979. Wichmann, Siegfried. Japonisme: The Japanese Influence on Western Art in the 19th and 20th Century. New York: Harmony, 1981. ## Chapter 12 Ades, Dawn, et al. The 20th Century Poster: Design of the Avant Garde. New York: Abbeville, 1984. Adlmann, Jan Ernst. Vienna Moderne: 1898–1918. Houston: Univ. of Houston, 1979. Banham, Reyner. Theory and Design in the First Machine Age. New York: Praeger, 1967. Baroni, Daniele, and Antonio D’Auria. Kolo Moser: Graphic Artist and Designer. New York: Rizzoli, 1986. Behrens, Peter. Feste des Lebens und der Kunst, eine Betrachtung des Theaters als Höchsten Kultursymbols. Leipzig: Eugen Diederichs, 1900. Billcliffe, Roger. Charles Rennie Mackintosh: The Complete Furniture, Furniture Drawings, and Interior Designs. London: J. Murry, 1986. Bliss, Douglas Percy. Charles Rennie Mackintosh and Glasgow School of Art. Glasgow: Glasgow School of Art, 1979. Bruckhardt, Lucius. The Werkbund: History and Ideology, 1907–1933. New York: Barron’s, 1977. Buddenseig, Tilmann. Industrialkultur: Peter Behrens and the AEG. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984. Buddenseig, Tilmann, et al. Peter Behrens: Umbautes Licht: Das Verwaltungsgebaüde der Hoechst AG. Frankfurt: Prestel-Verlag, 1990. Campbell, Joan. The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1978. Cinamon, Gerald. “Talwin Morris, Blackie and the Glasgow Style.” Private Library 3rd series, 10, no.1 (1987). Clair, Jean, et al. Vienne 1880–1938: L’Apocalyspe Joyeuse. Paris: Éditions du Centre Pompidou, 1986. Crane, Walter. Line and Form. London: G. Bell & Sons, 1900. Crawford, Alan. Charles Rennie Mackintosh. New York: Thames & Hudson, 1995. Eadie, William. Movements of Modernity: The Case of Glasgow and Art Nouveau. London and New York: Routledge, 1990. Eisler, Max. Gustav Klimt. Vienna: Rikola, 1921. Fenz, Werner. Koloman Moser. Salzburg: Residenz Verlag, 1904. Fleischmann, Benno. Gustav Klimt. Vienna: Deuticke, 1946. Garvey, Eleanor M., Anne B. Smith, and Peter A. Wick. The Turn of a Century, 1885–1910: Art Nouveau–Jugendstil Books. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 1970. Green, Oliver. Art for the London Underground: London Transport Posters 1908 to the Present. New York: Rizzoli, 1990. Hanks, David A. The Decorative Designs of Frank Lloyd Wright. New York: Dutton, 1979. Haslam, Malcolm. In the Nouveau Style. Boston: Little, Brown, 1989. Helland, Janice. The Studios of Frances and Margaret Macdonald. Manchester, UK: Manchester Univ. Press, 1996. Hoeber, Fritz. Peter Behrens. Munich: Georg Muller and Eugen Rentsch, 1913. Hoepfner, Wolfram. Das Haus Wiegand von Peter Behrens in Berlin-Dahlem. Mainz: Von Zabern, 1979. Hoffman, Werner. Gustav Klimt. Translated by Inge Goodwin. Greenwich, CT: New York Graphic Society, 1974. Holliday, Peter. Edward Johnston: Master Calligrapher. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2007. Howarth, Thomas. Charles Rennie Mackintosh and the Modern Movement. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1952. Kadatz, Hans-Joachim. Peter Behrens. Leipzig: VEB E. A. Seemann Verlag, 1977. Kallir, Jane. Viennese Design and the Wiener Werkstätte. New York: Braziller, 1986. Koschatzky, Walter, and Horst-Herbert Kossatz. Ornamental Posters of the Vienna Secession. London: Academy Editions, 1974. Lane, Terence. Vienna 1913. Melbourne: National Gallery of Victoria, 1984. Langmead, Donald. Frank Lloyd Wright: A Bio-bibliography. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2003. Latham, Ian. Josef Maria Olbrich. London: Academy Editions, 1980. Loos, Adolf. Spoken into the Void: Collected Essays, 1897–1900. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982. Loubier, Hans. Die Neue Deutsche Buchkunst. Stuttgart, Ger.: Felix Krais Verlag, 1921. MacLeod, Robert. Charles Rennie Mackintosh: Architect and Artist. New York: Dutton, 1983. MacMillan, Andy, and Yukio Futagawa. Charles Rennie Mackintosh: The Glasgow School of Art. Tokyo: A.D.A. Edita, 1979. Meehan, Patrick J., ed. Truth against the World: Frank Lloyd Wright Speaks for an Organic Architecture. New York: Wiley, 1987. Messina, Maria Grazia. Hof mann: I “mobili semplici” Vienna 1900–1910. Florence: Galleria dell’Emporio, 1977. Meyer, Christian. Josef Hof mann: Architect and Designer, 1870–1956. Vienna: Galerie Metropol, 1981. Nebehay, Michael Christian. Ver Sacrum: 1898–1903. New York: Rizzoli, 1977. Neuwirth, Waltraud. Wiener Werkstätte: Avantgarde, Art Deco, Industrial Design. Vienna: Neuwirth, 1984. Noever, Peter, and Oswald Oberhuber. Josef Hof mann: Ornament Zwischen Hof nung und Verbrechen. Vienna: Österreichisches Museum für Angewandte Kunst, 1987. Oliver, Cordelia. Jessie M. King, 1875–1949. Edinburgh: Scottish Arts Council, 1971. Pevsner, Nikolaus. Charles R. Mackintosh. Milan: Il Balcone, 1950. ———. The Sources of Modern Architecture and Design. London: Thames & Hudson, 1968. Powell, Nicolas. The Sacred Spring: The Arts in Vienna, 1898–1918. Greenwich, CT: New York Graphic Society, 1974. Sarmany-Parsons, Ilona. Gustav Klimt. New York: Crown, 1987. Schuster, Peter-Klaus, ed. Peter Behrens und Nürnberg. Munich: Prestel-Verlag, 1980. Schweiger, Werner J. Wiener Werkstaette: Design in Vienna 1903–1932. New York: Abbeville, 1984. Schweiger, Werner J., et al. Koloman Moser, 1868–1918. Vienna: Hochschule für Angewandte Kunst in Wien, 1979. Tummers, Nic H.M.J. L. Mathieu Lauweriks, zijn werk en zijn invloed op architectuur en vormgeving rond 1910: De Hagener lmpuls. Hilversum, Neth.: Uitgeverij F. van Saane, 1968. Varnedoe, Kirk. Vienna 1900: Art, Architecture, and Design. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1986. Vergo, Peter. Art in Vienna 1898–1918. London: Phaidon, 1975. ——. Vienna 1900: Vienna, Scotland, and the European Avant-Garde. Edinburgh: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1975. Vienna Secession: Katalog der Kunst-Ausstellung der Vereinigung Bildenden Künstler Osterreichs, nos. 1–14. Vienna, 1898–1902. Weber, Wilhelm. Peter Behrens. Berlin: Pfalzgalerie Kaiserslautern, 1966. Werde, Stuart. The Modern Poster. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1988. White, Colin. The Enchanted World of Jessie M. King. Edinburgh: Canongate, 1989. Windsor, Alan. Peter Behrens: Architect and Designer. New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1981. ## Chapter 13 Ades, Dawn. The Dada Reader: A Critical Anthology. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 2006. ———. Photomontage. London: Thames & Hudson, 1976. Apollinaire, Guillaume. Calligrammes. Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1925. ———. The Cubist Painters: Aesthetic Meditiations, 1913. New York: Wittenborn, 1962. Apollonio, Umbro, ed. Futurist Manifestos. New York: Viking, 1973. Baldacci, Paolo, and Philippe Daverio. Futurism, 1911–1918. Milan: Galleria Daverio, 1988. Bartarm, Alan. Futurist Typography and the Liberated Text. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2005. Baxandall, Lee. Radical Perspectives in the Arts. Middlesex, UK: Penguin, 1972. Benson, Timothy O. Raoul Hausmann and Berlin Dada. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1987. Brown, Jonathan, ed. Picasso and the Spanish Tradition. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1996. Calvocoressi, Richard. Magritte. London: Phaidon, 1994. Cardinal, Roger, and Gwendolen Webster. Kurt Schwitters. Ostfildern, Ger.: Hatje Cantz, 2011. Cassou, Jean, and Jean Leymarie. Fernand Léger: Drawings and Gouaches. Greenwich, CT: New York Graphic Society, 1973. Cendrars, Blaise. La fin du monde. Paris: Pierre Seghers, 1949. Chambers, Emma, and Karin Orchard. Schwitters in Britain. London: Tate, 2013. Cohen, Arthur A. The Avant Garde in Print. Vols. 1–5. New York: Ex Libris, 1983. Cooper, Philip. Cubism. London: Phaidon, 1995. Crane, Arnold W. Man Ray Photo Graphics. Milwaukee, WI: Milwaukee Art Center, 1973. Crone, Rainer. Paul Klee: Legends of the Sign. New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1991. Crow, Kelly. “The Surreal Selling of Man Ray.” Wall Street Journal, May 11, 2012. Dachy, Marc. Dada: The Revolt of Art. New York: Abrams, 2006. Damase, Jacques. Révolution typographique. Geneva: Galerie Motte, 1966. De Rache, Andre, ed. Joan Miro. Brussels: Gemeentelijke Casino, 1971. D’Harnoncourt, Anne, et al. Paintings from Europe and the Americas in the Philadelphia Museum of Art: A Concise Catalogue. Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania Press, 1994. Dickerman, Leah. Inventing Abstraction, 1910–1925: How a Radical Idea Changed Modern Art. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2012. Drucker, Joanna. The Visible Word: Experimental Typography and Modern Art. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1994. Duchamp, Marcel. Duchamp. New York: Cameo, 1996. Dupin, Jacques. Miro. New York: Abrams, 1993. Elderfield, John. Kurt Schwitters. London: Thames & Hudson, 1985. Enyert, James. Bruguière: His Photographs and His Life. New York: Knopf, 1977. Ernst, Max. Une semaine de bonté. New York: Dover, 1976. Evans, David. John Heartfield: AIZ/VI 1930–38. New York: Kent, 1992. Fischer Hannelore. Käthe Kollwitz: Meisterwerke der Zeichnung. Cologne, Ger.: DuMont, 1995. Foresta, Merry, Francis Naumann, Stephen C. Foster, et al. Perpetual Motif: The Art of Man Ray. New York: Abbeville, 1988. Foster, Steven B., ed. Dada/Dimensions. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1984. Fraser, James, and Steven Heller. The Malik Verlag 1916–1947, Berlin, Prague, New York. New York: Goethe House, 1985. Freeman, Judi. The Dada and Surrealist Word-Image. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989. Fry, Edward F. Cubism. London: Thames & Hudson, 1966. Giroud, Vincent. Marinetti’s Metal Book: Parole in Libertà. Berkeley, CA: Codex Foundation, 2012. Gombrich, Lisbeth, trans. Käthe Kollwitz. Berlin: Henschelverlag Kunst und Gesellschaft, 1980. Gordon, Peter E., and John P. McCormick, eds. Weimar Thought: A Contested Legacy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 2013. Greenberg, Allen Carl. Artists and Revolution: Dada and the Bauhaus, 1917– 1925. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1979. Habasque, Guy. Cubism. Paris: Skira, 1959. Haenlein, Carl-Albrecht. Dada Photomontagen. Hanover, Ger.: Kestner-Gesellschaft Hannover, 1979. Hausmann, Raoul, and Kurt Schwitters. PIN. London: Gaberbocchus Press, 1962. Heartfield, John. Photomontages of the Nazi Period. New York: Universe, 1977. Hemus, Ruth. Dada’s Women. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2009. Hewitt, Andrew. Fascist Modernism: Aesthetics, Politics, and the Avant-Garde. Stanford, CA: Stanford Univ. Press, 1993. Hopkins, David. Dada and Surrealism: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 2004. Hubert, Renee Riese. Surrealism and the Book. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1988. Huelsenbeck, Richard, ed. The Dada Almanac. London: Atlas Press, 1993. ———. Memoirs of a Dada Drummer. New York: Viking, 1969. Hulten, Pontus, ed. Futurism and Futurisms. New York: Abbeville, 1986. Jones, Leslie. Drawing Surrealism. New York: Prestel, 2012. Kahn, Douglas. John Heartfield: Art and Mass Media. New York: Tanam, 1985. Kinross, Robin. Modern Typography: An Essay in Critical History. London: Hyphen Press, 1992. Klein, Mina C. Käthe Kollwitz: Life in Art. New York: Schocken, 1975. Kozloff, Max. Cubism/Futurism. New York: Charter House, 1973. Lippard, Lucy R., ed. Dadas on Art. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1971. Lista, Giovanni. Futurismo e fotografia. Milan: Multhipla Edizioni, 1979. Little, Roger. Guillaume Apollinaire. London: Athlone, 1976. Loria, Stefano. Pablo Picasso. New York: Peter Bedrick Books, 1995. Mansbach, S. A., and Wojciech Jan Siemaszkiewicz. Graphic Modernism: From the Baltic to the Balkans, 1910–1935. New York: New York Public Library, 2007. Marcus, George H., ed. Treasures of the Philadelphia Museum of Art and the John G. Johnson Collection. Philadelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Art, 1973. Marinetti, Filippo T. Marinetti: Selected Writings. Edited by R. W. Flint. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1971. Martin, Marianne W. Futurist Art and Theory, 1909–1915. Oxford: Clarendon, 1968. Meyer, Esther da Costa. The Work of Antonio Sant’Elia: Retreat into the Future. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1995. Michaud, Guy. Mallarmé. New York: New York Univ. Press, 1965. Milner, John. Symbolists and Decadents. New York: Dutton, 1971. Moure, Gloria. Marcel Duchamp. New York: Rizzoli, 1988. Nadeau, Maurice. The History of Surrealism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 1989. Nagel, Otto. Käthe Kollwitz. Greenwich, CT: New York Graphic Society, 1971. Nagel, Otto, et al. Käthe Kollwitz: Die Handzeichnungen. Stuttgart, Ger.: W. Kohlhammer, 1980. Newell, Kenneth B. Pattern Poetry: A Historical Critique from the Alexandrian Greeks to Dylan Thomas. Boston: Marlborough House, 1976. Noun, Louise R. Three Berlin Artists of the Weimar Era: Hannah Höch, Käthe Kollwitz, Jeanne Mammen. Des Moines, IA: Des Moines Art Center, 1994. Orchard, Karin, Isabel Schulz, Sjarel Ex, et al. Kurt Schwitters: En de avantgarde. Rotterdam, Neth.: Dumont. 2006. Passamani, Bruno. Fortunato Depero. Luglio, It.: Bassano del Grappa, 1970. Perloff, Marjorie. The Futurist Movement: Avant-Garde, Avant Guerre, and the Language of Rupture. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1986. Peters, Olaf, ed. Berlin Metropolis, 1918 -1913. Munich: Prestel, 2015. Poggi, Christine. Inventing Futurism: The Art and Politics of Artificial Optimism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 2009. Polizzotti, Mark. Revolution of the Mind: The Life of André Breton. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1995. Read, Herbert. A Concise History of Modern Painting. New York: Praeger, 1959. Richardson, Tony, and Nikos Stangos, eds. Concepts of Modern Art. New York: Harper & Row, 1974. Rosenbaum, Robert. Cubism and Twentieth-Century Art. New York: Abrams, 1966. Rothschild, Nannette F., et al. Encounters with Modern Art. Philadelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Art, 1996. Rye, Jane. Futurism. London: Studio Vista, 1972. Samaltanos, Katia. Apollinaire: Catalyst for Primitivism, Picabia, and Duchamp. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1984. Schmalenbach, Werner. Fernand Léger. New York: Abrams, 1976. Schulz, Isabel. Kurt Schwitters: Color and Collage. Houston, TX: Menil Foundation, 2010. Schwartz, Arturo. Man Ray: Rigour of Imagination. New York: Rizzoli, 1972. Scudiero, Maurizio. Futurismi postali. Rovereto, It.: Longo Editore, 1986. Scudiero, Maurizio, and David Leiber. Depero futurista & New York. Rovereto, It.: Longo Editore, 1986. Seigel, Jerrold E. The Private Worlds of Marcel Duchamp: Desire, Liberation, and the Self in Modern Culture. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1995. Siepmann, Eckhard. Montage: John Heartfield. Berlin: Elefanten Press Galerie, 1977. Steegmuller, Francis. Apollinaire: Poet among the Painters. Freeport, NY: Books for Libraries Press, 1971. Steinitz, Kate Trauman. Kurt Schwitters: A Portrait from Life. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1968. Sylvester, David. Magritte. New York: Praeger, 1969. Taylor, Frederick. The Downfall of Money: Germany’s Hyperinflation and the Destruction of the Middle Class. New York: Bloomsbury, 2013. Tisdall, Caroline, and Angelo Bozzola. Futurism. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1978. Trachtman, Paul. “Dada.” Smithsonian, May 2006. Webster, Michael. Reading Visual Poetry after Futurism: Marinetti, Apollinaire, Schwitters, Cummings. New York: Lang, 1995. Weiss, Jeffrey S. The Popular Culture of Modern Art: Picasso, Duchamp, and Avant-Gardism. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1994. White, Michael. Generation Dada: The Berlin Avant-Garde and the First World War. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2013. Willett, John. Heartfield versus Hitler. Paris: Éditions Hazan, 1997. ## Chapter 14 Aguirre y Gil de Biedma, Esperanza, et al. Cámara panorámica 120° Aniversario. Madrid: Cámara de Comercio, 2007. Aulich, James. War Posters: Weapons of Mass Communication. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2007. Binder, Carla, compiler. Joseph Binder. Vienna: Anton Schroll & Co., 1976. Brown, Robert K., and Susan Reinhold. The Poster Art of A. M. Cassandre. New York: Dutton, 1979. Cooper, Austin. Making a Poster. London: The Studio, 1938. Crouse, William W. The Art Deco Poster. London: Thames & Hudson, 2013. Darrocott, Joseph. The First World War in Posters. New York: Dover, 1974. Delhaye, Jean. Art Deco Posters and Graphics. New York: Rizzoli, 1978. Duncan, Alastair. The Encyclopedia of Art Deco. New York: Dutton, 1988. Edelstein, Teri J., Oliver Green, Neil Harris, et al. Art for All: British Posters for Transport. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2010. Encyclopédie des arts décoratifs et industriels modernes au XXème siècle. Vols. 1–7. Paris: Impr. Nationale, 1925. Estrada, Manuel. El diseÑo nos es una guinda. Madrid: Aldeasa, 2003. Games, Naomi, Catherine Moriarty, and June Rose. Abram Games: Graphic Designer. Aldershot, UK: Lund Humphries, 2003. Gil, Emilio. Pioneros del diseÑo gráfico en EspaÑa. Barcelona: Index Book, 2007. Gluck, Felix. World Graphic Design: Fifty Years of Advertising Art. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1969. Green, Oliver. Art for the London Underground. New York: Rizzoli, 1990. Haworth-Booth, Mark. E. McKnight Kauf er: A Designer and His Public. London: V&A, 2005. Heller, Steven. Iron Fists: Branding the 20th Century Totalitarian State. New York: Phaidon, 2008. Heller, Steven, and Louise Fili. Euro Deco: Graphic Design between the Wars. San Francisco: Chronicle, 2004. Hillier, Bevis. Art Deco of the 20s and 30s. New York: Dutton, 1968. ———. The World of Art Deco. New York: Dutton, 1971. Hitler, Adolf. Mein Kampf. Translated by E. T. S. Dugdale. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1933. Hohlwein, Ludwig. Hohlwein Posters. New York: Dover, 1976. ———. Ludwig Hohlwein, 1874–1949. Munich: Klinkhardt & Biermann, 1996. Jammes, Isabelle, and Paul Jammes. Collection de spécimens de caractères, 1517–2004. Paris: Librairie Paul Jammes, Éditions des Cendres, 2006. Kauffer, E. McKnight. The Art of the Poster. London: Cecil Palmer, 1924. Luckert, Steven, and Susan Bachrach. State of Deception: The Power of Nazi Propaganda. New York: Norton, 2009. Masutani, Yoko, ed. Every Face of the Great Master Cassandre. Tokyo: Suntory Museum, 1995. Menten, Theodore. Advertising Art in the Art Deco Style. New York: Dover, 1975. Metzl, Ervine. The Poster: Its History and Its Art. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1963. Mouron, Henri. A. M. Cassandre. New York: Rizzoli, 1985. Orwell, George. Homage to Catalonia. London: Martin Secker & Warburg, 2008. Paret, Peter, Beth Irwin Lewis, and Paul Paret. Persuasive Images: Posters of War and Revolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1992. Rawls, Walton H., Wake Up, America! New York: Abbeville, 1988. Ray, Timothy. Imponderable Joys: The Work of Austin Cooper. Brandon, Manitoba: Art Gallery of Southwestern Manitoba, 1993. Rennert, Jack, ed. 100 Posters of Paul Colin. New York: Images Graphiques, 1977. Satué, Enric. El diseÑo gráfico en EspaÑa: Historia de una forma comunicativa nueva. Madrid: Alianza Editorial, 1997. Schau, Michael. J. C. Leyendecker. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1974. Striner, Richard. Art Deco. New York: Abbeville, 1994. Thomson, Oliver. Mass Persuasion in History. Edinburgh: Paul Harris, 1977. Tisa, John. The Palette and the Flame: Posters of the Spanish Civil War. New York: International Publishers, 1979. Tolmer, A. Mies en Page. The Theory and Practice of Layout. London: The Vox, Maximillien. A. M. Cassandre Plakate. St. Gallen, Switz.: Verlag Zollikofer, 1948. Weill, Alain. Rétrospective Jean Carlu. Paris: Musée de l’Affiche, 1980. ## Chapter 15 Andel, Jaroslav. Avant Garde Page Design 1900–1950. New York: Delano Greenridge, 2002. Andersen, Troels. Malevich. Amsterdam: Stedelijk Museum, 1970. Andrews, Richard, and Milena Kalinovska. Art into Life: Russian Constructivism 1914–1932. New York: Rizzoli, 1990. Anikst, Mikhail. Soviet Commercial Design of the Twenties. New York: Abbeville, 1987. Anikst, Mikhail, and Elena Chernevich. Russian Graphic Design: 1880–1917. New York: Abbeville, 1990. Baburina, Nina. The Soviet Political Poster: 1917–1980. New York: Viking, 1988. Baljeu, Joost. Theo van Doesburg. New York: Macmillan, 1974. Bann, Stephen, ed. The Tradition of Constructivism. New York: Viking, 1974. Barooshian, Vahan D. Russian Cubo-Futurism, 1910–1930. The Hague: Mouton, 1974. Barron, Stephanie, and Maurice Tuchman, eds. The Avant-Garde in Russian, 1910–1930: New Perspectives. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1980. Beeren, Wim, et al. Kazimir Malevich, 1878–1935. Amsterdam: Stedelijk Museum, 1988. Blake, Patricia, ed. Vladimir Mayakovsky: The Bedbug and Selected Poetry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1975. Bojko, Szymon. New Graphic Design in Revolutionary Russia. London: Lund Humphries, 1972. Bowlt, John E., ed. and trans. Russian Art of the Avant-Garde: Theory and Criticism 1902–1934. New York: Viking, 1976. Broos, Kees, and Paul Hefting. Dutch Graphic Design: A Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993. Bury, Stephen. Breaking the Rules: The Printed Face of the European Avant Garde, 1900–1937. London: British Library, 2007. Charters, Ann, and Samuel Charters. I Love: The Story of Vladimir Mayakovsky and Lili Brik. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1979. Chernevich, Elena. Russian Graphic Design, 1880–1917. New York: Abbeville, 1990. Cohen, Arthur A., ed. ExLibris 6: Constructivism & Futurism: Russian and Other. New York: ExLibris, 1977. Compton, Susan P. Russian Avant-Garde Books, 1917–34. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993. —. The World Backwards: Russian Futurist Books, 1912–16. London: British Museum, 1978. Constantine, Mildred, and Alan Fern. Revolutionary Soviet Film Posters. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1974. Contensou, Bernadette, and Serge Lemoine. Domela: 65 ans d’abstraction. Paris: Musée d’Art Moderne, 1987. Deicher, Susanne. Mondriaan. Cologne, Ger.: Taschen, 2010. Dickerman, Leah, ed. Building the Collective: Soviet Graphic Design, 1917– 1937: Selections from the Merrill C. Berman Collection. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996. Dluhosch, Eric, and Rostislav Svácha, eds. Karel Teige, 1900–1951: L’Enfant Terrible of the Czech Modernist Avant-Garde. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999. Doig, Allan. Theo van Doesburg: Painting into Architecture, Theory into Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1986. Elliott, David. Rodchenko and the Arts of Revolutionary Russia. New York: Pantheon, 1979. Franciscono, Marcel. The Modern Dutch Poster: The First Fifty Years, 1890– 1940. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987. Friedman, Mildred, ed. De Stijl, 1917–1931: Visions of Utopia. New York: Abbeville, 1982. Grey, Camilla. The Great Experiment: Russian Art, 1863–1922. New York: Abrams, 1962. Hearn, Michael Patrick, and John Larson. Introduction: Russian Literature and Art. New York: Bloomsbury Auctions, 2008. ———. Reconsidering the Constructivists: The Ivan Collection, Russian Literature & Art. New York: Bloomsbury Auctions, 2008. Hellyer, Peter W. A Catalogue of Russian Avant-Garde Books, 1912–1934 and 1969–2003. London: British Library, 2006. Houston Museum of Fine Arts. Czech Modernism, 1900–1945. Boston: Bulfinch, 1990. Jaffe, Hans. De Stijl. New York: Abrams, 1971. ———. Mondrian und De Stijl. Cologne, Ger.: Galerie Gmurzynska, 1979. Janssen, Hans, and Michael White. The Story of De Stijl: Mondrian to Van Doesburg. New York: Abrams, 2011. Karginov, German. Rodchenko. London: Thames & Hudson, 1979. Khan-Magomedov, S. O. Rodchenko: The Complete Work. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987. King, David, and Cathy Porter. Images of Revolution: Graphic Art from 1905 Russia. New York: Pantheon, 1983. Lissitzky, El. About Two Squares. Translated by Christina Van Manen. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991. Lissitzky, El, and Ilya Ehrenburg, eds. Vesc’ Objet Gegenstand. Baden: Verlage Lars Müller, 1994. Lissitzky-Kuppers, Sophie, ed. Lissitzky: Life, Letters, Texts. London: Thames & Hudson, 1967. Lodder, Christina. Russian Constructivism. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1983. Margolin, Victor. The Struggle for Utopia: Rodchenko, Lissitzky, Moholy-Nagy, 1917–1946. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1997. Markov, Vladimir. Russian Futurism: A History. London: MacGibbon & Kee, 1969. Martinet, Jan. H. N. Werkman “Druksel” Prints and General Printed Matter. Amsterdam: Stedelijk Museum, 1977. ———. The Next Call. Utrecht, Neth.: Uitgeverij Reflex, 1978. Milner, John. Vladimir Tatlin and the Russian Avant-Garde. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1983. Moholy-Nagy, Laszlo, and L. Kassák. The Book of New Artists. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996. Mondrian, Piet. Plastic Art and Pure Plastic Art. New York: Wittenborn, 1951. Neumann, Eckhard. Functional Graphic Design in the 20s. New York: Reinhold, 1967. Nisbet, Peter. El Lissitzky: 1890–1941. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Art Museums, 1987. Overy, Paul. De Stijl. London: Studio Vista, 1969. Purvis, Alston. Dutch Graphic Design: 1918–1945. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1992. Railing, Patricia. More About Two Squares. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991. Rickey, George. Constructivism: Origins and Evolution. New York: Braziller, 1967. Rodchenko, Alexsandr M., and Varvara F. Stepanova. The Future Is Our Only Goal. Munich: Prestel-Verlag, 1991. Roman, Gail Harrison, and Virginia Hagelstein Marquardt, eds. The Avant-Garde Frontier: Russia Meets the West, 1910–1930. Gainesville: Univ. of Florida Press, 1992. Rubinger, Krystyna, Szymon Bojko, John E. Bowlt, et al. Women Artists of the Russian Avantgarde, 1910–1930. Cologne, Ger.: Galerie Gmurzysnka, 1980. Seuphor, Michel. Piet Mondrian. New York: Abrams, 1956. Spencer, Herbert. The Liberated Page. San Francisco: Bedford, 1987. ———, ed. Pioneers of Modern Typography. London: Lund Humphries, 1969. ———.Typographica 9. London: Lund Humphries, 1964. Stapanian, Juliette R. Mayakovsky’s Cubo-Futurist Vision. Houston: Rice Univ. Press, 1986. Tupitsyn, Margarita. El Lissitzky: Beyond the Abstract Cabinet. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1999. ———. Gustav Klusis and Valentina Kulagina: Photography and Montage after Constructivism. New York: International Center of Photography, 2004. Van Straaten, Evert. Theo Van Doesburg: Schilder en Architect. ‘S-Gravenhage, Neth.: SDU Uitgeverij, 1988. White, Stephen. The Bolshevik Poster. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1988. Woroszylski, Wiktor. The Life of Mayakovsky. New York: Orion, 1970. ## Chapter 16 Albers, Josef. Interaction of Color. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1975. ———. Search versus Research. Hartford, CT: Trinity College Press, 1969. Andel, Jaroslav. Avant-Garde Page Design, 1900–1950. New York: Delano Greenidge, 2002. Annink, Ed, and Max Bruinsma. Gerd Arntz: Graphic Designer. Rotterdam, Neth.: 0l0 Publishers, 2010. Aynsley, Jeremy. Graphic Design in Germany, 1890–1945. London: Thames & Hudson, 2000. Barker, Nicolas. Stanley Morison. London: Macmillan London, 1972. Bartram, Alan. Bauhaus, Modernism, and the Illustrated Book. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2004. Bayer, Herbert. Herbert Bayer: Painter, Designer, Architect. New York: Reinhold, 1967 Bayer, Herbert, Walter Gropius, and Ise Gropius, eds. Bauhaus, 1919–1928. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1938. Bergdoll, Barry, and Leah Dickerman. Bauhaus, 1919–1933: Workshops for Modernity. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2009. Blackwell, Lewis. Twentieth Century Type. New York: Rizzoli, 1992. Blaser, Werner. Mies van der Rohe: Less Is More. Zurich: Waser Verlag, 1986. Bookbinder, Paul. Weimar Germany: The Republic of the Reasonable. New York: Manchester Univ. Press, 1996. Borchardt-Hume, Achim, ed. Albers and Moholy-Nagy: From the Bauhaus to the New World. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2006. Brady, Elizabeth. Eric Gill: Twentieth Century Book Designer. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1974. Brewer, Roy. Eric Gill: The Man Who Loved Letters. London: Frederick Muller, 1973. Broos, Kees. Piet Zwart. The Hague: Gemeentemuseum, 1973. Burke, Christopher. Active Literature: Jan Tschichold and New Typography. London: Hyphen Press, 2007. Chanzit, Gwen F. The Herbert Bayer Collection and Archive at the Denver Art Museum. Denver, CO: Denver Art Museum, 1988. Cinamon, Gerald. Rudolf Koch: Letterer, Type Designer, Teacher. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2000. Dearstyne, Howard. Inside the Bauhaus. New York: Rizzoli, 1986. Droste, Magdalena. Bauhaus, 1919–1933. Cologne, Ger.: Taschen, 2006. Franciscono, Marcel. Walter Gropius and the Creation of the Bauhaus at Weimar: The Ideals and Artistic Theories of Its Founding Years. Urbana: Univ. of Illinois Press, 1971. Garlan, Ken. Mr. Beck’s Underground Map. London: Capital Transport, 1994. Gay, Peter. Weimar Culture: The Outsider as Insider. New York: Norton, 2001. Geelhaar, Christian. Paul Klee and the Bauhaus. Greenwich, CT: New York Graphic Society, 1973. Gill, Eric. An Essay on Typography. London: Sheed and Ward, 1931. ———. The Letter Forms and Type Designs of Eric Gill. Westerham, UK: Eva Svensson, 1976. Girard, Xavier. Bauhaus. New York: Assouline, 2003. Gropius, Walter. The New Architecture and the Bauhaus. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1965. ———, ed. The Theatre of the Bauhaus. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan Univ., 1961. Gropius, Walter, et al. Of set Buch und Werbekunst, Heft 7. Leipzig: Der Offset-Verlag GMBH, 1926. Gropius, Walter, and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, eds. Staatliches Bauhaus Weimar, 1919–1923. Munich: Kraus Reprint, 1980. Gualdoni, Flaminio. Bauhaus. Milan: Skira, 2009. Hahn, Peter. Bauhaus Berlin. Weingarten, Ger.: Kunstverlag Weingarten GmbH, 1985. Haus, Andreas. Moholy-Nagy: Photographs and Photograms. New York: Pantheon, 1980. Hight, Eleanor M. Moholy-Nagy: Photography and Film in Weimar Germany. Wellesley, MA: Wellesley College Museum, 1985. Itten, Johannes. Design and Form: The Basic Course at the Bauhaus and Later. New York: Reinhold, 1963. Jong, Cees W. de, Alston W. Purvis, Martijn F. Le Coultre, et al. Jan Tschichold, Master Typographer: His Life, Work, and Legacy. Laren, Neth.: VK Projects; London: Thames & Hudson, 2008. Kagan, Andrew. Paul Klee: Art & Music. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univ. Press, 1983. Kandinsky, Wassily. Complete Writings on Art. New York: Dover, 1977. ———. Concerning the Spiritual in Art. New York: Wittenborn, 1947. ———. Point and Line to Plane. New York: Dover, 1979. Klee, Paul. Pedagogical Sketchbook. New York: Praeger, 1953. Kostelanetz, Richard. Moholy-Nagy. London: Allen Lane, 1974. Kroll, Friedhelm. Bauhaus, 1919–1933. Dusseldorf, Ger.: Verlagsgruppe Bertelsmann GmbH, 1974. Le Coultre, Martjin F., and Alston W. Purvis. Jan Tschichold: Posters of the Avantgarde. Laren, Neth.: VK Projects, 2007. Lewis, Michael J. “The Bauhaus Restored.” New Criterion, December 2009. Lupton, Ellen, and J. Abbott Miller, eds. The ABC’s of the Bauhaus and Design Theory. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1995. Lupton, Ellen, and Elaine Lustig Cohen. Letters from the Avant Garde: Modern Graphic Design. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996. MacCarthy, Fiona. Eric Gill: A Lover’s Quest for Art and God. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1989. Marzona, E., and R. Fricke, eds. Bauhaus Photography. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969. McLean, Ruari. Jan Tschichold: Typographer. London: Lund Humphries, 1975. Mertens, Ferdinand. Otto Neurath en de maakbaarheid van de betere samenleving: Fragmenten uit de vorige eeuw. The Hague: Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau, 2007. Middendorp, Jan. Dutch Type. Rotterdam, Neth.: 010 Publishers, 2004. Modley, Rudolf. Handbook of Pictorial Symbols: 3,250 Examples from International Sources. New York: Dover, 1976. ———. How to Use Pictorial Statistics. 2nd ed. New York: Harper, 1937. Moholy-Nagy, Laszlo. The New Vision and Abstract of an Artist. New York: Wittenborn, 1947. ———. Vision in Motion. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1947. Moholy-Nagy, Sibyl. Experiment in Totality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969. Moran, James. Stanley Morison: His Typographic Achievement. London: Lund Humphries, 1971. Muller, Fridolin, ed. Piet Zwart. Teufen, Switz.: Verlag Arthur Niggli, 1966. Naylor, Gilliam. The Bauhaus Reassessed: Sources and Design Theory. London: Herbert Press, 1985. Neumann, Eckhard. Bauhaus and Bauhaus People. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970. Passuth, Krisztina, and Terence A. Senter. L. Moholy-Nagy. London: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1980. Peukert, Detlev J. K. The Weimar Republic. New York: Hill and Wang, 1993. Plant, Margaret. Paul Klee: Figures and Faces. London: Thames & Hudson, 1978. Poling, Clark V. Kandinsky’s Teaching at the Bauhaus: Color Theory and Analytical Drawing. New York: Rizzoli, 1986. Purvis, Alston W. H. N. Werkman. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2004. Roh, Franz, and Jan Tschichold, eds. Foto-auge. Stuttgart, Ger.: Akademischer Verlag Dr. Fritz Wedekind, 1929. Rose, Jonathan. The Holocaust and the Book. Amherst: Univ. of Massachusetts Press, 2001. Sandberg, Willem. Now: In the Middle of the XXth Century. Hilversum, Neth.: De Jong, 1959. Schlemmer, Oskar. Man: Teaching Notes from the Bauhaus. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971. Schmidt, Joost. Entwurf: Of set Buch und Werbekunst, 1926. Dessau, Ger.: Dünnhaupt, 1926. Schmoller, Hans. Two Titans, Mardersteig and Tschichold: A Study in Contrasts. New York: Typophiles, 1990. Skelton, Christopher. Eric Gill: The Engravings. Boston: Godine, 1990. Smock, William. The Bauhaus Ideal Then and Now: An Illustrated Guide to Modern Design. Chicago: Academy Chicago Publishers, 2004. Speaight, Robert. The Life of Eric Gill. London: Methuen, 1966. Thorp, Joseph. Eric Gill. London: Jonathan Cape, 1929. Tower, Beeke Sell. Klee and Kandinsky at the Bauhaus. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1981. Tschichold, Jan. Asymmetric Typography. New York: Reinhold, 1967. ———. Designing Books. New York: Wittenborn, Schultz, 1951. ———. Die neue typographie. Berlin: Verlag Des Bildungsverbandes, 1928. ———. The New Typography: A Handbook for Modern Designers. Translated by Ruari McLean. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1995. ———. Treasury of Alphabets and Lettering. New York: Norton, 1952. Van Dam, Peter. N. P. de Koo. The Hague, Netherlands: [Z]OO Producties, 2008. Weitz, Eric D. Weimar Germany: Promise and Tragedy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 2007. Whitford, Frank. Bauhaus. London: Thames & Hudson, 1984. Wilde, Edouard de. Sandberg “désigne” le stedelijk, 1945–-63. Netherlands: Ssteendrukkerij de Jjong & Cco. 1947. Wingler, Hans M. The Bauhaus: Dessau, Weimar, Chicago, Berlin. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1976.Witte, Arnold, and Esther Cleven. Design Is Geen Vrijblijvende Zaak: Organisatie, Imago En Context Van De PTT-vormgeving Tussen 1906 En 2002. Breda: Museum De Beyerd, 2006. Zwart, Piet. Keywords. The Hague: Staatsdrukkerij den Haag, 1966. ## Chapter 17 Bauret, Gabriel. Alexy Brodovitch. New York: Assouline, 2005. Blum, Stella. Designs by Erté: Fashion Drawings and Illustrations from “Harper’s Bazar.” New York: Dover, 1976. Carter, Ennis. Posters for the People: Art of the WPA. Philadelphia: Quirk Books, 2008. Chanzit, Gwen Finkel. Herbert Bayer and Modernist Design in America. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1987. ——. The Herbert Bayer Collection and Archive at the Denver Art Museum. Seattle: Univ. of Washington Press, 1988. Churchward, Charles. It’s Modern: The Eye and Visual Influence of Alexander Liberman. New York: Rizzoli, 2013. Darman, Peter. Posters of World War II. New York: Chartwell, 2011. DeNoon, Christopher. Posters of the WPA. Los Angeles: Wheatley Press, 1987. Duncan, Alastair. American Art Deco. New York: 1986. Dwiggins, William Addison. “New Kind of Printing Calls for New Kind of Design.” Boston Evening Transcript, August 29, 1922. Ehrlich, Frederic. The New Typography and Modern Layouts. New York: Stokes, 1934. Goudy, Frederic. Why Go Modern. New York: Diamant Typographic Service, 1944. Grundberg, Andy. Brodovitch. New York: Abrams, 1989. Hansen, Thomas S. Classic Book Jackets: The Design Legacy of George Salter. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2005. Harris, Neil, and Martina Roudabush Norelli. Art, Design, and the Modern Corporation: The Collection of Container Corporation of America. Washington, DC: Smithsonian, 1985. Hurlburt, Allen. Publication Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1976. Jacobson, Egbert, ed. Seven Designers Look at Trademark Design. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1952. Johnson, J. Stewart. The Modern American Poster. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1983. Judd, Denis. Posters of World War II. New York: St. Martin’s, 1973. Kepes, Gyorgy. Catalog Design Progress: Advancing Standards in Visual Communications. New York: Sweet’s Catalog Service, 1950. ———. Language of Vision. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1945. ———. The New Landscape. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1956. Landau, Ellen, and Claude Cernuschi. Pollock Matters. Chestnut Hill, MA: McMullen Museum of Art, Boston College, 2007. Lönberg-Holm, K., and Ladislav Sutnar. Catalog Design. New York: Sweet’s Catalog Service, 1944. Massey, John, ed. Great Ideas. Chicago: Container Corporation of America, 1976. McMurtrie, Douglas C. Modern Typography and Layout. Chicago: Eyncourt Press, 1929. Purcell, Kerry William. Alexey Brodovitch. London: Phaidon, 2002. Remington, R. Roger. American Modernism: Graphic Design 1920 to 1960. London: Laurence King, 2003. Remington, R. Roger, and Robert S. P. Fripp. Design and Science: The Life and Work of Will Burtin. Aldershot, UK: Lund Humphries, 2007. Rhodes, Anthony. Propaganda: The Art of Persuasion, World War II. New York: Chelsea House, 1976. Ryan, David. Letter Perfect: The Art of Modernist Typography, 1896–1953. Rohnert Park, CA: Pomegranate Communications, 2001. Schaeffer, Jean-Marie. Art of the Modern Age: Philosophy of Art from Kant to Heidegger. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 2000. Sutnar, Ladislav. Package Design: The Force of Visual Selling. New York: Arts, 1953. Tibbel, John. The American Magazine: A Compact History. New York: Hawthorne, 1969. Weber, Eva. Art Deco in America. New York: Exeter, 1985. Zapf, Hermann. Hermann Zapf and His Design Philosophy. Introduction by Carl Zahn. Chicago: Society of Typographic Arts, 1987. Zeman, Zbynek. Selling the War: Art and Propaganda in World War II. London: Orbis, 1978. ## Chapter 18 Aicher, Otl. Typographie. Berlin: Ernst and Sohn, 1988. Bill, Max. Modern Swiss Architecture, 1925–1945. Basel, Switz.: Verlag Karl Werner, 1945. Diethelm, Walter. Visual Transformations. Zurich: ABC Verlag, 1982. Douroux, Xavier. Art concret Suisse, mémoire et progrés: Andreas Christen, Camille Graeser, Marguerite Hersberger, Verena Loewensberg, Richard Paul Lohse, Nelly Rudin, Carlo Vivarelli. Dijon, Fr.: Coin du miroir, 1982. Englemann, Michael. Poster Collection. Switz.: Lars Müller, 2004. Frutiger, Adrian. Der Mensch und Seine Zeichen. Echzell, Ger.: Horst Heiderhoff Verlag, 1978. ———. Signs and Symbols: Their Design and Meaning. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1989. ———. Type Sign Symbol. Zurich: ABC Verlag, 1981. Gasser, Manuel. Exempla graphica. Zurich: Hug and Sohne, 1967. Gerstner, Karl. Compendium for Literates: A System for Writing. Translated by Dennis Q. Stephenson. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1968. ———. Designing Programmes. Teufen, Switz.: Verlag Arthur Niggli, 1968. Gerstner, Karl, and Marcus Kutler. Die Neue Grafik/The New Graphic Art. New York: Hastings House, 1959. Grieshaber, Judith M., and Manfred Kröplien. Die Philosophie der Neuen Grafik. Stuttgart, Ger.: Edition Cantz, 1990. Henrion, F. H. K. Top Graphic Design. Zurich: ABC Verlag, 1983. Hochuli, Jost, and Robin Kinross. Designing Books: Theory and Practice. London: Hyphen Press, 1997. Hofmann, Armin. Armin Hofmann: His Work, Quest, and Philosophy. Basel, Switz.: Birkhäuser Verlag, 1989. ———. Graphic Design Manual. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1965. Hollis, Richard. Swiss Graphic Design, 1920–1965. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2006. Kelly, Jerry, and Robert Bringhurst. About More Alphabets: Types of Henry Zapf. New York: Typophiles, 2011. Langer, Axel, and Indra Kupferschmid. Helvetica Forever: Story of a Typeface. Baden, Switz.: Lars Müller, 2009. Müller-Brockmann, Josef. The Graphic Artist and His Design Problems. Teufen, Switz.: Verlag Arthur Niggli, 1968. ———. Grid Systems. Niederteufen, Switz.: Verlag Arthur Niggli, 1981. ———. Josef Müller-Brockmann: Pioneer of Swiss Graphic Design. Edited by Lars Müller. Baden, Switz.: Lars Müller, 1996. Odermatt, Siegfried, and Rosmarie Tissi. Graphic Design. Zurich: Waser Verlag, 1993. Osterer, Heidrun, and Philipp Stamm. Adrian Frutiger Typefaces: The Complete Works. Berlin: Birkhäuser Verlag, 2009. Papanek, Victor. Design for the Real World. New York: Pantheon, 1970. Pirovano, Carlo. Max Huber. Milan: Electra, 1982. Purcell, Kerry W. Josef Müller-Brockmann. New York: Phaidon, 2006. Rotzler, Willy. Constructive Concepts. New York: Rizzoli, 1989. Ruder, Emil. Typographie. New York: Hastings House, 1967. ———. Typography: A Manual of Design. New York: Hastings House, 1981. Ruegg, Ruedi. Basic Typography: Design with Letters. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1989. Ryan, David. Letter Perfect: The Art of Modernist Typography, 1896–1953. Petaluma, CA: Pomegranate, 2001. Schmid, Helmut. The Road to Basel: Typographic Reflections. Tokyo: Robundo, 1997. ———. Typography Today. Tokyo: Seibundo Shinkosha, 1980. Shaw, Paul. Helvetica and the New York City Subway System. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011. Stankowski, Anton. Anton Stankowski: Art and Design, Photography. Stuttgart, Ger.: Institut für Auslandsbeziehungen, 1991. ———. Bildpläne. Stuttgart, Ger.: Edition Cantz, 1979. ———. Buchhandelsausg. Stuttgart, Ger.: Hatje, 1991. ———. Visual Presentation of Invisible Processes. Teufen, Switz.: Verlag Arthur Niggli, 1966. ———. Works of Anton Stankowski: Exhibition, Sponsored by the Composing Room, Inc. New York: The Gallery, 1964. Von Moos, Stanislaus, Mara Campana, and Giampiero Bosoni. Max Huber. New York: Phaidon, 2006. Wirth, Günther. Formfinden: Anton Stankowski. Stuttgart, Ger.: G. Hatje, 1991. Zapf, Hermann. About Alphabets: Some Marginal Notes on Type Design. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1970. —. Calligraphic Salutations: Hermann Zapf’s Letterheadings to Paul Standard. Rochester, NY: Rochester Institute of Technology, 1993. ———. Hermann Zapf: Ein Arbeitsbericht. Hamburg, Ger.: Maxmillian-Gesellschaft, 1984. ———. Manuale Typographicum. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1954. ———. Manuale Typographicum. Frankfurt: Z-Press, 1968. ———. Typographic Variations: On Themes in Contemporary Book Design. New Rochelle, NY: Myriade Press, 1978. ## Chapter 19 Bass, Jennifer, and Pat Kirkham. Saul Bass: A Life in Film and Design. London: Laurence King, 2011. Bass, Saul. Saul Bass. Tokyo: Ginza Graphic Gallery, 1993. Burns, Aaron. Typography. New York: Reinhold, 1961. Carter, Rob. American Typography Today. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1989. Challis, Clive. Helmut Krone: The Book—Graphic Design and Art Direction (Concept, Form and Meaning) after Advertising’s Creative Revolution. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Enchorial Press, 2005. Chermayeff, Ivan. Ivan Chermayef . Tokyo: Ginza Graphic Gallery, 1994. Dobrow, Larry. Ivan Chermayef : Collages, 1982–1995. Washington, DC: Corcoran Museum of Art, 1995. ———. When Advertising Tried Harder. New York: Friendly Press, 1984. Draper, Robert. Rolling Stone Magazine: The Uncensored History. New York: Doubleday, 1990. Heller, Steven. Merz to Emigre and Beyond: Avant-Garde Magazine Design of the Twentieth Century. London: Phaidon, 2003. ———. Paul Rand. London: Phaidon, 1999. Heller, Steven, and Seymour Chwast. Illustration: A Visual History. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2008. Heller, Steven, and Elaine Lustig Cohen. Born Modern: The Life and Design of Alvin Lustig. San Francisco: Chronicle, 2010. Higgins, Denis. The Art of Writing Advertising: Conversations with William Bernbach. Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Business, 1990. Hurlburt, Allen. Layout: The Design of the Printed Page. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1977. Kamakura, Yusaku, ed. Paul Rand: His Work from 1946–1958. New York: Knopf, 1959. Lee, Marshall, ed. Books for Our Time. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1951. Levenson, Bob. Bill Bernbach’s Book: A History of the Advertising That Changed the History of Advertising. New York: Villard, 1987. Lois, George. \$ellebrity: My Angling and Tangling with Famous People. London: Phaidon, 2003. Lois, George, and Bill Pitts. The Art of Advertising: George Lois on Mass Communications. New York: Abrams, 1977. McLuhan, Marshall. Culture Is Our Business. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970. ———. From Cliche to Archetype. New York: Viking, 1970. ———. The Mechanical Bride. New York: Vanguard, 1951. ———. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964. ———. Verbo-Voco-Visual Explorations. New York: Something Else Press, 1967. McLuhan, Marshall, and Quentin Fiore. The Medium Is the Message. New York: Bantam, 1967. Meggs, Philip B. Six Chapters in Design: Bass, Chermayef , Glaser, Rand, Tanaka, Tomaszewski. Hong Kong: Chronicle, 1997. Nunoo-Quarcoo, Franc. Paul Rand: Modernist Design. Baltimore: Center for Art and Visual Culture, Univ. of Maryland, 2003. Rand, Paul. Design Form and Chaos. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1993. ———. From Lascaux to Brooklyn. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1996. ———. Paul Rand: A Designer’s Art. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1985. ———. Thoughts on Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970. Regan, Kevin, and Steven Heller. Alex Steinweiss: The Inventor of the Modern Album Cover. Hohenzollernring, Ger.: Taschen, 2011. Rondthaler, Edward. Life with Letters—As They Turned Photogenic. New York: Hastings House, 1981. Snyder, Gertrude, and Alan Peckolick. Herb Lubalin: Art Director, Graphic Designer, and Typographer. New York: American Showcase, 1985. Thompson, Bradbury. The Art of Graphic Design. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1988. Wolf, Henry. Visual Thinking: Methods for Making Images Memorable. New York: Rizzoli, 1988. Woods, Gerald, Philip Thompson, and John Williams. Art without Boundaries. London: Thames & Hudson, 1972. ## Chapter 20 Aicher, Otl. World as Design. Berlin: Ernst + Sohn, 1994. Bass, Saul, et al. Saul Bass and Associates. Tokyo: Seibundo Shinkosha, 1978. Bayley, Stephen. Design Classics: The Lucky Strike Packet by Raymond Loewy. Frankfurt, Ger.: Verlag Form, 1998. Bruce, Gordon. Eliot Noyes. London: Phaidon, 2006. Celant, Germano, et al. Design: Vignelli. New York: Rizzoli, 1990. Consuegra, David, ed. ABC of World Trademarks. Bogotá, Col.: Primera Editions, 1988. Golden, Cipe Pineles, Kurt Weihs, and Robert Strunsky, eds. The Visual Craft of William Golden. New York: Braziller, 1962. Helms, Janet Conradi. A Historical Survey of Unimark International and Its Ef ect on Graphic Design in the United States. Ames: Iowa State Univ., 1988. Herdeg, Walter. Film & TV Graphics. Zurich: Graphis Press, 1967. ———. Film & TV Graphics 2. Zurich: Graphis Press, 1976. Hess, Dick, and Marion Muller. Dorfsman and CBS. New York: American Showcase, 1987. Igarashi, Takenobu, ed. World Trademarks and Logotypes II. Tokyo: Graphicsha, 1987. Iinkai, Kokomasu. Corporate Design Systems: Identity through Design. New York: PBC International, 1985. Lloyd, Peter B., and Mark Ovenden. Vignelli Transit Maps. Rochester, NY: RIT Cary Graphic Arts Press, 2012. Loewy, Raymond. Never Leave Well Enough Alone. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 2002. Morgan, Conway Lloyd. Logos: Logo, Identity, Brand, Culture. Hove, UK: RotoVision, 1999. Napoles, Veronica. Corporate Identity Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1988. Rawsthorn, Alice. “The Ups and Downs of Lowercase Logos.” Global Edition of the New York Times [London], June 4, 2012. Rosen, Ben. The Corporate Search for Visual Identification. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970. Rotzler, Willy. Constructive Concepts. New York: Rizzoli, 1977. Schmittel, Wolfgang. Corporate Design International. Zurich: ABC Editions, 1984. Shapira, Nathan H., et al. Design Process: Olivetti, 1908–1978. Milan: Olivetti, 1979. Vignelli, Massimo, and Lella Vignelli. Design: Vignelli. New York: Rizzoli, 1981. Yew, Wei. The Olympic Image: The First Hundred Years. Edmonton, Alberta: Quon Editions, 1996. ## Chapter 21 Alcorn, John, et al. The Push Pin Style. Palo Alto, CA: Communication Arts, 1970. Centre National d’Art et de Culture Georges Pompidou. Culture et révolution: L’af iche cubaine contemporaine: Exposition. Paris: Pompidou Center, 1977. Chwast, Seymour. The Left-Handed Designer. New York: Abrams, 1985. Cieslewicz, Roman. Posters: Collages. Heidelberg, Ger.: Braus, 1984. Czestochowski, Joseph S. Contemporary Polish Posters. New York: Dover, 1979. Davis, Paul. Faces. New York: Friendly Press, 1985. ———. Paul Davis Posters and Paintings. New York: Dutton, 1977. Glaser, Milton. Milton Glaser. Tokyo: Ginza Graphic Gallery, 1995. ———. Milton Glaser: Graphic Design. Woodstock, NY: Overlook, 1972. ———. The Milton Glaser Poster Book. New York: Harmony, 1977. Goines, David Lance. David Lance Goines: Posters 1970–1994. Berkeley, CA: Ten Speed Press, 1994. Heller, Steven. “Henryk Tomaszewski, Leader of the Polish School, Dies at 91.” New York Times, September 14, 2005. ———. Innovators of American Illustration. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1986. Heller, Steven, and Paula Scher. Seymour: The Obsessive Images of Seymour Chwast. San Francisco: Chronicle, 2009. Herring, Jerry, et al. Design in Texas. Houston: Graphic Design Press, 1986. Hornig, Norbert. Leipziger Plakatkunst. Leipzig: VEB E. A. Seeman, 1985. Jacobs, Karrie, and Steven Heller. Angry Graphics: Protest Posters of the Reagan/Bush Era. New York: Peregrine Smith, 1992. Kieser, Günther. Kieser, Plakate: Exchange. Mainz, Ger.: H. Schmidt, 1995. ———. Das zweite Gesicht: Plakate von Günther Kieser. Mainz, Ger.: H. Schmidt, 1989. Kowalski, Tadeusz. The Polish Film Poster. Warsaw: Filmowa Agencja Wydawnicza, 1957. Martin, Susan, ed. Decade of Protest: Political Posters from the United States, Viet Nam, Cuba, 1965–1975. Santa Monica, CA: Smart Art Press, 1996. Massin, Robert. Letter and Image. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970. McMullan, James. Revealing Illustrations. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1981. Moscoso, Victor. Sex, Rock, and Optical Illusions. Seattle, WA: Fantagraphics, 2005. Pierce, Donald L., Jr. 100 Texas Posters. Houston: Graphic Design Press, 1985. Rambow, Gunter. Plakate von Gunter Rambow im Museum Wiesbaden. Wiesbaden, Ger.: Museum Wiesbaden, 1988. Rouard-Snowman, Margo. Roman Cieslewicz. London: Thames & Hudson, 1993. Schubert, Zdzisław. H. Tomaszewski: Plakáty. Prague: Uměleckoprů myslové muzeum v Praze, 1994. Stermer, Dugald. The Art of Revolution: Castro’s Cuba, 1959–1970. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970. Testa, Armando. Armando Testa: 40 Years of Italian Creative Design. Turin, It.: Allemandi, 1987. Tomaszewski, Henryk. Henryk Tomaszewski. Tokyo: Ginza Graphic Gallery, 1992. Wesselius, Jacqueline. Grapus 85. Utrecht, Neth.: Reflex Verlag, 1985. Wieczorek, Stanislaw. Henryk Tomaszewski. Warsaw: Akademia Sztuk Pieknych, 1993. Wolff, Laetitia. Massin. London and New York: Phaidon, 2007. ## Chapter 22 Broos, Kees. Total Design. Utrecht, Neth.: Reflex Verlag, 1983. Bruinsma, Max. Beeld Tegen Beeld: Wild Plakken. Utrecht, Neth.: Centraal Museum Utrecht, 1993. Butler, Christopher. Postmodernism: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press, 2002. Dermody, Brenda, and Teresa Breathnach. New Retro: Classic Graphics, Today’s Designs. London: Thames & Hudson, 2009. Friedman, Dan. Dan Friedman: Radical Modernism. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1994. Fukuda, Shigeo. Posters of Shigeo Fukuda. Tokyo: Misumura Tosho Shuppan, 1982. ———. Visual Illusion. Tokyo: Rikuyosha, 1982. Gaetan-Picon, Geneviève, et al. L’af iche japonaise. Paris: Musée de l’Affiche, 1979. Gerken, Hanna. Studio Dumbar. Mainz, Ger.: Verlag Hermann Schmidt, 1993. Gibbs, David. Pentagram: The Compendium. London: Phaidon, 1993. Gorb, Peter, ed. Living by Design: Pentagram. London: Lund Humphries, 1978. Hefting, Paul, and Dirk Van Ginkel. Hard Werken Inízio: From Cultural Oasis to Multimedia. Rotterdam, Neth.: 010 Publishers, 1995. Hofland, H. J. A. Af iches Posters Plakate: Gielijn Escher. Amsterdam: Stichting Prent & Publiciteit, 1996. Igarashi, Takenobu. Igarashi Alphabets. Zurich: ABC Editions, 1987. ———. Rock, Scissors, Paper: Design, Influence, Concept, Image. Tokyo: Graphic-sha, 1991. . Seven Graphic Designers. Tokyo: Graphic-sha Publishing Company, 1985. ———. Space Graphics. Tokyo: Shoten Kenchiku-sha, 1983. Kamekura, Yusaku, et al. The Works of Yusaku Kamekura. Tokyo: Rikuyo-sha, 1983. Kunz, Willi. Typography: Macro-and Microaesthetics. Sulgen, Switz.: Verlag Niggli AG, 1998. Lupton, Ellen, ed. Graphic Design and Typography in the Netherlands: A View of Recent Work. New York: Cooper Union and Princeton Architectural Press, 1992. McLuhan, Marshall. The Mechanical Bride: Folklore of Industrial Man. Hamburg, Ger.: Gingko Press, 2002. Monguzzi, Bruno. A Designer’s Perspective. Baltimore: Univ. of Maryland, 1998. Myerson, Jeremy. Beware Wet Paint: Designs by Alan Fletcher. London: Phaidon, 1996. Nagai, Kazumasa. The Works of Kazumasa Nagai. Tokyo: Kodansha, 1985. Polano, Sergio, and Pierpaolo Vetta. ABC of 20th-Century Graphics. Milan: Electa Architecture, 2003. Purvis, Alston W., and Cees W. de Jong. Dutch Graphic Design: A Century of Innovation. London: Thames & Hudson, 2006. Shibata, Kaori, and Toru Hachiga, eds. New Typo Graphics. Tokyo: P-I-E Books, 1993. Sparke, Penny. Modern Japanese Design. New York: Dutton, 1987. Staal, Gert, and Hester Wolters. Holland in Vorm: Dutch Design, 1945–1987. The Hague: Stichting Holland in Vorm, 1987. Tadashi, Masuda. Works of the Masuda Tadashi Design Institute. Tokyo: Seibundo Shinkosha, 1966. Tanaka, Ikko. Ikko Tanaka. Tokyo: Ginza Graphic Gallery, 1993. ———. Posters of Ikko Tanaka. Tokyo, 1981. ———. The Work of Ikko Tanaka. Kyoto, Japan: Shinshindo Shuppan K. K., 1975. Tanikawa, Koichi. 100 Posters of Tadenori Yokoo. Tokyo: Kodansha, 1978. Thornton, Richard S. The Graphic Spirit of Japan. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1991. Waldmann, Geneviéve. The Activities of Pieter Brattinga. Tokyo: Kodansha, 1989. Yelavich, Susan, ed. Profile: Pentagram Design. London: Phaidon, 2004. Yokoo, Tadanori. The Complete Tadanori Yokoo. Tokyo: Kodansha, 1991. ## Chapter 23 Abedini, Reza, and Hans Wolbers. New Visual Culture of Modern Iran. Amsterdam: BIS, 2006. AIGA. 365: AIGA Year in Design 29. San Francisco: Chronicle, 2009. Aldersey-Williams, Hugh. New American Design. New York: Rizzoli, 1988. Andersen, Kurt. “All-American: Kurt Andersen on Michael Bierut.” In Profile Pentagram Design, edited by Susan Yelavich, 92–101. London: Phaidon, 2004. Beeke, Anton. “Chaz Maviyane-Davies.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 212–15. London: Phaidon, 2003. —. “Saed Meshki.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 220–23. London: Phaidon, 2003. Bell, Nick. “Experimental Jetset.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 92–95. London: Phaidon, 2003. Bertens, Hans. The Idea of the Postmodern. London: Routledge, 1995. Bingnan, Yu. Professor Yu Bingnan 50 Years Teaching Career Design Work Exhibition. Beijing: Visual Communication Department, Academy of Arts and Design, Tsinghua Univ., 2012. Boltz, William O. “Early Chinese Writing.” In The World’s Writing Systems, edited by Peter T. Daniels and William Bright. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1996. Bos, Ben, and Elly Bos, eds. AGI: Graphic Design since 1950. London: Thames & Hudson, 2007. Bourquin, Nicolas, Sasha Thoma, and Ben Wittner. Arabesque: Graphic Design from the Arab World and Persia. Berlin: Gestalten Verlag, 2008. Brand, Stewart. The Media Lab: Inventing the Future at M.I.T., New York: Penguin, 1997. Branzi, Andrea. The Hot House: Italian New Wave Design. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984. Brattinga, Pieter. “Posters by Anthon Beeke,” as Told to Pieter Brattinga. Amsterdam: Valeton & Henstra, 1993. Brody, Neville. The Graphic Language of Neville Brody. New York: Rizzoli, 1988. Broos, Kees, and Paul Hefting. Dutch Graphic Design: A Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997. Cato, Ken. “Gabriela Rodriguez.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 196–299. London: Phaidon, 2003. —. “Isidro Ferrer.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 100–3. London: Phaidon, 2003. —. “Siobhan Keaney.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 164–67. London: Phaidon, 2003. Chamaret, Sandra, Julien Gineste, Sebastien Morlighem, and Gerard Unger. Roger Excof on Et La Fonderie Olive. Paris: Ypsilon, 2010. Corb, Peter. Living by Design. London: Pentagram, 1979. Edelkoort, Lidewij. Anthon Beeke: It’s a Miracle! Amsterdam: BIS, 2013. Elam, Kimberly. Expressive Typography. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1990. Farias, Agnaldo, Adélia Borges, Rafael Cardoso, André Stolarski, and Rico Lins. Rico Lins: Graphic Borderlines. Sáo Paulo: Solisluna Editora, 2009. Fishler, Karen D. On the Edge: Breaking the Boundaries of Graphic Design. Gloucester, MA: Rockport, 1998. Forbes. Bob Gill’s Portfolio. London: Lund Humphries, 1968. Franciscono, Marcel, and Stephen S. Prokopoff. The Modern Dutch Poster: The First Fifty Years. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987. Friedman, Dan. Dan Friedman: Radical Modernism. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1994. Fukuda, Shigeo. “Victor Hugo Marreiros.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 200–3. London: Phaidon, 2003. —. “Ung Vai Meng.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 216–19. London: Phaidon, 2003. Gill, Bob, Alan Fletcher, Colin De Jong, Cees W. De Jong, Stefanie Burger, and Jorre Both. New Poster Art. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2008. Glaser, Milton, and Mirko Ilic. The Design of Dissent: Socially and Politically Driven Graphics. Gloucester, MA: Rockport, 2005. Godard, Keith. This Way That Way. Baden, Switz.: Lars Müller, 2001. Goldstein, Stephen, and Richard Doubleday. “The Graphic Language of Min Wang.” Baseline 53 (2007): 21–31. Gomez, Edward M. New Design: London. Gloucester, MA: Rockport, 2001. Greiman, April, and Liz Farrelly. April Greiman: Floating Ideas into Time and Space. New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1998. Haqhiqhi, Ebrahim. A Selection of Graphic Design by Ali Khorshidpour. Tehran, Iran: Nazar Printing and Publishing Cultural and Research Institute, 2007. He Jianping. New Generation of Design Series: Isidro Ferrer. Singapore: Page One, 2008. Heller, Steven (foreword). Elegantissima: The Design and Typography of Louse Fili. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2012. Hiebert, Kenneth J. Graphic Design Processes: Universal to Unique. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1992. Hongxing, Zhang, and Lauren Parker. China Design Now. London: V&A, 2008. Horn, Richard. Memphis. Philadelphia: Running Press, 1985. Hyland, Angus, and Steven Bateman. Symbol. London: Laurence King, 2011. ICEP. Design from Portugal. London: Edition Axel Menges, 1998. Index Book, ed. Select A: Graphic Design from Spain. Barcelona: Index Book, 2003. Ishino, Catherine Jo. “Losing in Translation? A Look at the State of Chinese Design Development.” Design Altrusim Project, 2008. http://design-altruismproject.org/2008/07/02/losing-in-translation-a-look-at-the-state-of-chinesedesign-development. . “Losing in Translation 2: Graphic Design in Hong Kong and the Peoples Republic of China.”Design Altrusim Project, 2009. http://design-altruismproject.org/2008/09/02/losing-in-translation-2-graphic-design-in-hong-kongand-the-peoples-republic-of-china. Jacobs, Karrie. “Three Letters: e.V.O.: Karrie Jacobs on Paula Sher.” In Profile Pentagram Design, edited by Susan Yelavich, 72–81. London: Phaidon, 2004. Javin, Mo. 3030 New Graphic Design in China. Hong Kong: 3030 Press, 2008. Jingren, Lu. A Play of Book: 40 Contemporary Chinese Book Designers. Beijing: Jingren Book Design, 2007. Kan Tai-keung. Selected Posters by Kan Tai-keung: Sentiments and Harmony. Hong Kong: Kan and Lau Design Consultants, 1998. Kidd, Chip. Go: A Kidd’s Guide to Graphic Design. New York: Workman, 2013. King, Emily. “Picture Story: Emily King on Angus Hyland.” In Profile Pentagram Design, edited by Susan Yelavich, 62–71.London: Phaidon, 2004. King, Emily, Louise Schouwenberg, and David Snellenberg. The ABC of De Designpolitie. Amsterdam: Valiz, 2008. Kirkham, Pat, ed. Women Designers in the USA, 1900–2000: Diversity and Dif erence. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2002. Kong Lüdi, Eva. Typo China Poster Collection. Baden, Switz.: Lars Müller, 2006. Lawrence, Richard. “Hong Kong on the Brink.” Print 47, no. 2 (1993): 21. Levin, Kim. Beyond Modernism. New York: Harper & Row, 1988. Livingston, Alan, and Isabella Livingston. The Thames & Hudson Dictionary of Graphic Design and Designers. London: Thames & Hudson, 2003. Loesch, Uwe. “Majid Abassi.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 8–11. London: Phaidon, 2003. —. “Anette Lenz.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 188–1. London: Phaidon, 2003. Lupton, Ellen, ed. Graphic Design and Typography in the Netherlands: A View of Recent Work. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1992. Lupton, Elaine. Mixing Message: Graphic Design in Contemporary Culture. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1997. Lupton, Elaine, and J. Abbott Miller. Design Writing Research. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996. Majoor, Martin, and Sebastien Morlighem. José Mendoza Y Almeida. Paris: Ypsilon, 2010. Mesghali, Farshid. Selected Works of Saed Meshki. Tehran: Nazar Printing and Publishing Cultural and Research Institute, 2007. Middendrop, Jan. “‘Ha, daar gaat er een van mij!”‘ Kroniek van het grafisch ontwerpen in Den Haag 1945–2000. Rotterdam, Neth.: Stroom HCBK, 2002. Minick, Scott, and Jiao Ping. Chinese Graphic Design in the Twentieth Century. London: Thames & Hudson, 1990. Muroga, Kiyonori. “‘Book Design in China Today’.” IDEA, International Graphic Art and Typography 56, no. 327 (March 2008). Peters, Robert L. “Land of Discovery: Visual Communication Design in Portugal.” Communication Arts 51 (May–June 2010): 56–65. Poynor, Rick. Jan van Toorn: Critical Practice. Rotterdam, Neth.: 010 Publishers, 2008. ———. No More Rules. London: Laurence King Publishing, 2003. Radice, Barbara. Memphis: Research, Experiences, Results, Failures, and Successes of the New Design. New York: Rizzoli, 1984. Rattermeyer, Volker. Plakate von Gunter Rambow im Museum Wiesbaden. Wiesbaden, Ger.: Museum Wiesbaden, 1988. Satué, Enric. El DiseÑo gráfico en EspaÑa: Historia de una forma comunicativa nueva. Madrid: Alianza Editorial, 1997. Schemo, Diana Jean. “The Overseas Odyssey of Rico Lins.” Graphis 321 (1999): 66–75. Schleger, Pat. Zero: Hans Schleger, a Life of Design. Hampshire, UK: Lund Humphries, 2001. Serov, Serge. “Ahn Sang-Soo.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 304–7. London: Phaidon, 2003. ———. “Reza Abedini.” In Area, edited by Valérie Vago-Laurer and the editors of Phaidon Press, 12–15. London: Phaidon, 2003. Simon, Thomas Mienke, and Gielijn Escher. Gielijn Escher: Living for Posters; Leven Voor Af iches. Amsterdam: De Buitenkant, 2012. Sottsass, Ettore, et al. Sottsass Associati. New York: Rizzoli, 1988. Sparke, Penny. As Long as It’s Pink: The Sexual Politics of Taste. London: Pandora, 1995. ———. Italian Design: 1870 to the Present. London: Thames & Hudson, 1988. Stanic, Elena, and Corina Lipavsky. Atlas of Graphic Designers. Beverly, MA: Rockport, 2009. Stone, Allucquére Rosanne. The War of Desire and Technology at the Close of the Mechanical Age. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995. Taborda, Felipe, and Julius Wiedemann. Latin American Graphic Design. Hong Kong: Taschen, 2008. Thackara, John, ed. Design after Modernism. London: Thames & Hudson, 1988. Triggs, Teal. Type Design: Radical Innovations and Experimentation. New York: Collins Design, 2003. Troxler, Niklaus. The Master of Design. Singapore: Page One, 2006. Trulove, James Grayson, ed. New Design: Amsterdam. Gloucester, MA: Rockport, 2001. Ueki, Hiroshi. Graphic Design Today. Tokyo: National Museum of Modern Art. 1990. Vago-Laurer, Valérie, ed. Area. London: Phaidon, 2003. Venturi, Robert, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour. Learning from Las Vegas: The Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1977. Vienne, Véronique. Chip Kidd. London: Laurence King, 2003. Vit, Armin, and Bryony Gomez-Palacio. Women of Design: Influence and Inspiration from the Original Trailblazers to the New Groundbreakers. Cincinnati: F+W, 2008. Wang Min. Twenty Years of Graphic Design. Beijing: Heilonggjiang, Science and Tech Publishing, Morningdesign Co., 2003. Wang Min and Xiao Hong Shen, “After Mao: Chinese Graphic Design Today.” Print 48, no. 3 (1993): 64. Weill, Alain. “Makoto Saito: The Image Maker.” Graphis 341 (Sept.–Oct. 2002): 30–51. Weingart, Wolfgang. Weingart: Typography: My Way to Typography. Baden, Switz.: Lars Müller, 2000. Why Not Associates. Why Not? London: Booth-Clibborn, 2000. Wiedemann, Julius, ed. Asian Graphics Now! Cologne, Ger.: Taschen 2010. Wlassikoff, Michel. The Story of Graphic Design in France. Corte Madera, CA: Gingko Press, 2006. Wong, Wendy Siuyi “Detachment and Unification: A Chinese Graphic Design History in Greater China Since 1979” Design Issues 17, no. 4 (Autumn 2001): 51–71. Woodham, Jonathan M., ed. Oxford Dictionary of Modern Design. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 2006. Wozencroft, John. The Graphic Language of Neville Brody. New York: Rizzoli, 1988. ———. The Graphic Language of Neville Brody 2. New York: Rizzoli, 1994. Yelavich, Susan, ed. Profile Pentagram Design. London: Phaidon, 2004. ## Chapter 24 Abrams, Janet. “The Choreography of Site-Specific Media: Janet Abrams on Lisa Strausfeld.” In Profile Pentagram Design, edited by Susan Yelavich, 52–61. London: Phaidon, 2004. Adobe Systems Incorporated. Adobe Type 1 Font Format. Mountain View, CA: Adobe Systems, 1990. AIGA. 365: AIGA Year in Design 29. San Francisco: Chronicle, 2009. Aldersey-Williams, Hugh, et al. Cranbrook Design: The New Discourse. New York: Rizzoli, 1990. Apeloig, Philippe. Inside the Word. Baden, Switz.: Lars Müller, 2001. Bantjes, Marian, and Rick Poynor. Marian Bantjes: Pretty Pictures. New York: Metropolis, 2013. Bass, Jennifer, and Pat Kirkham. Saul Bass: A Life in Film and Design. London: Laurence King, 2011. Beeke, Anthon. Dutch Posters 1960–1996: A Selection by Anthon Beeke. Amsterdam: BIS, 1997. Bierut, Michael, William Drenttel, Steven Heller, and D. K. Holland, eds. Looking Closer 2: Critical Writings on Graphic Design. New York: Allworth, 1997. Blackwell, Lewis, and David Carson. The End of Print: The Graphic Design of David Carson. San Francisco: Chronicle, 1995. Bos, Ben, and Frans van Lier. De Appels van Jan Bons: Af ices voor Toneelgroep de Appel. Hoorn, Neth.: Affichemuseum, 2004. Bourquin, Nicolas, Sasha Thoma, and Ben Wittner. Arabesque: Graphic Design from the Arab World and Persia. Berlin: Gestalten Verlag, 2008. Boutros, Mourad. Arabic for Designers. New York: Mark Batty Publisher, 2005. Brakhage, Stan. By Brakhage: An Anthology, 1954–2001. New York: Criterion Collection, 2010. DVD. Carson, David. Trek: David Carson Recent Werk, Corte Madera, CA: Gingko Press, 2003. Carter, Matthew. “Type Design Today.” AIGA: Journal of Graphic Design 6, no. 4 (1989): 1–2. Celant, Germano, and Gianfranco Maraniello. Vertigo: A Century of Multimedia Art from Futurism to the Web. Milan: Skira, 2008. Codrington, Andrea. Kyle Cooper. London: Laurence King, 2003. Dietwee. New Dutch Graphic Design. Amsterdam: BIS, 2002. Edwards, Owen. “Hunter Gatherer: Owen Edwards on Kit Hinrichs.” In Profile Pentagram Design, edited by Susan Yelavich, 182–91. London: Phaidon, 2004. Escher, Gielijn. Af iches Posters Plakate. Amsterdam: Stichting Prent & Publiciteit-Nederlands Reclamearchief, 1996. Farrelly, Liz. April Greiman: Floating Ideas into Time and Space, New York, Watson-Guptill, 1998. Fiell, Charlotte, and Peter Fiell. Contemporary Graphic Design. Cologne, Ger. Taschen, 2007. ———. Graphic Design for the 21st Century. Cologne, Ger. Taschen, 2003. Foster, John. New Masters of Poster Design: Poster Design for the Next Century. Beverly, MA: Rockport, 2008. Gibbs, David, ed. The Compendium: Pentagram. London: Phaidon, 1993. Gomez, Edward M. New Design: London. Gloucester, MA: Rockport, 2001. Greiman, April, and Liz Farrelly. April Greiman: Floating Ideas into Time and Space. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1998. Hall, Peter. Sagmeister: Made You Look. London: Booth-Clibborn, 2001. Halpern, Sue. “The iPad Revolution.” New York Review of Books 57, no. 10 (June 10, 2010): 22–26. He Jianping. All Men Are Brothers: Graphic Designers. Antwerp, Neth.: Tectum, 2008. Heller, Steven, and Gail Anderson. New Vintage Type: Classic Fonts for the Digital Age. New York: Watson-Guptill, 2007. Heller, Steven, and Mirko Ilic. Genius Moves: 100 Icons of Graphic Design. Cincinnati: North Light, 2001. Hoffland, H. J. A., et al. Grafische Verleiders: Af iches Van PTT 1920–Heden. Zwolle, Neth.: Uitgeverij Waanders b.v., 1998. Jacobs, Karrie. “Three Letters: e.V.O.: Karrie Jacobs on Paula Sher.” In Profile Pentagram Design, edited by Susan Yelavich, 72–81. London: Phaidon, 2004. Jong, Cees W. de, Stefanie Burger, and Jorre Both. New Poster Art. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2008. Kath, Gitte. 40 Plakater. Kolding, Den.: Jørn Thomsen Offset, 2000. Kepes, Gregory. The Nature and Art of Motion. New York: Braziller, 1965. Kirkham, Pat, ed. Women Designers in the USA, 1900–2000: Diversity and Dif erence. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2002. Klanten, Robert, Matthias Hübner, Andrew Losowsky, and Anna Sinofzik. Fully Booked: Ink on Paper: Design & Concepts for New Publications. Berlin: Gestalten, 2013. Klein, Manfred, Yvonne Schwemer-Scheddin, and Erik Spiekermann. Type & Typographers. The Hague, Neth.: SDU Uitgeverij, 1991. Krasner, Jon. Motion Graphic Design: Applied History and Aesthetics. 3rd ed. Burlington, MA: Focal, 2013. ———. Motion Graphic Design Fine Art Animation: Principles and Practice. Boston: Elsevier, 2004. Leslie, Jeremy. The Modern Magazine: Visual Journalism in the Digital Era. London: Laurence King, 2013. Licko, Zuzana, Rudy Vanderlans, and Mary E. Gray. Emigre: Graphic Design in the Digital Realm. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993. Livingston, Alan, and Isabella Livingston. The Thames & Hudson Dictionary of Graphic Design and Designers. London: Thames & Hudson, 2003. Lupton, Ellen. Paula Scher. Paris: Pyramid, 2008. Maeda, John. Creative Code: Aesthetics + Computation. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2004. Makinson, John. “Apple IPad’s and the Evolution of Books.” Wall Street Journal, February 8, 2010. Malsy, Victor, Philipp Teufel, Fjodor Gejko. Helmut Schmid: Design Is Attitude. Basel, Switz.: Birkhauser, 2002. Markoff, John. “Computer Visionary Who Invented the Mouse.” New York Times, July 4, 2013. Matsunaga, Shin. Shin Matsunaga: Design World. Japan: Sezon Museum of Art, 1997. Meggs, Philip B., and David Carson. Fotografiks. London: Laurence King, 1999. Miller, J. Abbott. Dimensional Typography: Word in Space. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1997. Mok, Clement. Designing Business: Multiple Media, Multiple Disciplines. San Jose, CA: Adobe Press, 1996. ———, ed. Graphis New Media. New York: Graphis, 1996. Morin, Tom. Threads of Influence: The Visual History of a Life in Graphic Design. New Mexico: Galisteo Press, 2011. Nakajima, Hideki. Clear in the Fog. Tokyo: Rockin’ On, 2006. Murray, Janet. H. Inventing the Medium: Principals of Interaction Design as a Cultural Practice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012. Poyner, Rick. The Graphic Edge. London: Booth-Clibborn, 1993. Poyner, Rick, and Edward Booth-Clibborn. Typography Now: The Next Wave. London: Internos, 1991. Re, Margaret, Johanna Drucker, and James Mosley. Typographically Speaking: The Art of Matthew Carter. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2003. Schmid, Helmut. Typography Today. Tokyo: Seibundo Shinkosha, 2003. Sherraden, Jim, Elek Horvath, and Paul Kingsbury. Hatch Show Print: The History of a Great American Poster Shop. San Francisco: Chronicle, 2001. Skolos, Nancy, and Thomas Wedell. Type, Image, Message: A Graphic Design Layout Workshop. Gloucester, MA: Rockport, 2006. Smeijers, Fred. Counterpunch: Making Type in the 16th Century, Designing Typefaces Now. London: Hyphen Press, 1996. Stanic, Elena, and Corina Lipavsky. Atlas of Graphic Designers. Beverly, MA: Rockport, 2009. Stone, Sumner. On Stone: The Art and Use of Typography on the Personal Computer. San Francisco: Bedford Arts, 1991. Tabatabai, Nahid. Bouf-e Kour Iranian Typography. Tehran: Yassavoli, 2003. Triggs, Teal. Type Design: Radical Innovations and Experimentation. New York: Collins Design, 2003. Trulove, James Grayson, ed. New Design: Amsterdam. Gloucester, MA: Rockport, 2001. Unger, G. A. Typography as a Vehicle of Science. Amsterdam: Uitgeverij De Buitenkant, 2007. VanderLans, Rudy. If We’re Standing on the Shoulders of Giants, What Are We Reaching For? New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2003. Venezky, Martin. It Is Beautiful—Then Gone. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2007. Vienne, Véronique. Chip Kidd. London: Laurence King, 2003. Vit, Armin, and Bryony Gomez-Palacio. Women of Design: Influence and Inspiration from the Original Trailblazers to the New Groundbreakers. Cincinnati: F+W, 2008. Wallis, Lawrence W. The Modern Encyclopedia of Typefaces: 1960–90. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1990. White, Jan V. Graphic Design for the Electronic Age. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1988. Why Not Associates. Why Not? London: Booth-Clibborn, 2000. Wild, Lorraine. “Designer = Editor = Curator = Collaborator = Designer: Lorraine Wild on Abbot Miller.” In Profile Pentagram Design, edited by Susan Yelavich, 132–41. London: Phaidon, 2004. Wurman, Richard Saul. Information Anxiety. New York: Doubleday, 1989. Wurman, Richard Saul, et al. Information Architects. Edited by Peter Bradford. Zurich: Graphis, 1996. Zapf, Hermann, and John Dreyfus. Classical Typography in the Computer Age. Los Angeles: Univ. of California Press, 1991.