# PREFACE Let each considerate person have his way and see what it will lead to. For not this man and that man, but all men make up mankind, and their united tasks the task of mankind. Thomas Carlyle Sartor Resartus Soon after the second edition of History of Modern Design appeared in 2010, I began making lists of changes and additions should a third edition ever materialize. Over the years that list grew through travel, and constant visits to museums and exhibitions both in the United States and abroad, along with continued teaching, reading, and networking both at conferences and in correspondence with an expanding group of colleagues whose research and insights contributed to my own understanding of design and its history. The original proposal for the third edition included more material that challenged the fine-art-based design history canon as well as six sections titled “Global Inspiration,” intended to introduce readers to the critique of Eurocentrism that also informs that canon. Of particular importance in formulating a rationale for changes to a third edition was the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) month-long Summer Institute I directed together with Carma Gorman, a group of six visiting scholars, and twenty-five actively engaged Summer Scholars in July 2015 in Philadelphia. The institute was entitled “Teaching the History of Modern Design: The Canon and Beyond,” and focused upon three themes: taste, gender, and globalism, acknowledging as well as challenging familiar art historical paradigms that define taste too narrowly, marginalize the role of women in design and generally fail to acknowledge the contributions of non-Western nations to a more inclusive and useful design history. On a daily basis, our month-long intensive dialogue suggested new material and fresh perspectives that might be integrated into a revision of History of Modern Design. While the institute contributed to revisions to every chapter of the present text, the most obvious result has been the Global Inspiration sections added to each of the book’s six parts. With the addition of those texts and images, I hoped to demonstrate that students’ understanding of modern design history benefits from a wider-angled lens, that a “Western” tradition could not exist without the travel, trade, and exchange of knowledge upon which that tradition was built, and that many of the products of design we admire and enjoy depend upon complex supply lines and partnerships that render questionable the very notion of a “national” design. The term “de-centering,” treated below in the Introduction, perhaps best explains my approach to the additions and revisions in the third edition. Design historian D. H. Huppatz observes that thinking about design globally doesn’t require global coverage; I’ve taken this to imply that introducing examples that shed light on interdependence and the multi-directional flow of and movement of designers, technologies, and objects can provide much-needed balance to a modern design history narrative. I submitted the first draft of a third edition at the end of April 2020. The Covid-19 pandemic had already begun to affect the daily lives of citizens around the world, as hospitals struggled to test and treat ill patients, and as governments grappled to find ways to effectively deal with the threat the virus posed to health and the effects of isolation on education, transportation, and commerce, and as contemporary demonstrations in the United States and abroad demanded social justice and equality for racial and ethnic minorities. As my editors reviewed the draft manuscript and accompanying list of illustrations, it became clear to me that the final version of the new edition would need to grapple with the relationship between the pandemic, climate change, social justice, and design. I also felt it was imperative to acknowledge and contextualize a broad political shift to the right, toward nationalism and authoritarianism, placing in question the progressive, post-World War II Cold War alliances and beliefs that informed the treatment of much of the material contained in the book’s final two parts (V and VI). Progressive views also came under attack from the left, simply for not having fulfilled the promises for social justice and a sustainable environment. As with the second edition of History of Modern Design I’ve made additional references both to women designers and to the ways in which gender intersects at many levels, charting a path that questions, circumvents, and challenges dominant male privilege. In addition to male privilege, there is white privilege that has hidden the role of people of color in the history of modern design. One cannot do justice to racial prejudice in design history with a few examples or paragraphs, but it’s been my aim to acknowledge that the theme of “progress” through technology informing so much of that history excluded the contributions of people of color and to a degree was even built upon practices of discrimination against them through education, wages, and other vehicles for opportunity. Adding to that balance are examples and references to the mass market and issues of taste that have expanded design history’s traditionally museum-based canon. In addition to general and reference works included in the bibliography for the second edition, Bloomsbury Publishing has produced several reference works recently that merit mention here: the Bloomsbury Encyclopedia of Design (BED) for which I served as a subject editor, Design: Critical and primary sources edited by D. J. Huppatz, and the Bloomsbury Design Library (BDL) which includes the two sources just listed along with the first two volumes of Victor Margolin’s World History of Design as well as several books by other design historians and critics. Additionally the journals Design and Culture, Design Issues, West 86<sup>th</sup> Street, and the Journal of Design History continue to publish examples of ongoing research and listings of recently published books and catalogs. The method of this book remains narrative and chronological; it is a generously illustrated survey whose goal is to familiarize students with the artifacts of design (products and services), the processes by which they were created, and the functions they serve for their designers, patrons, or manufacturers, and users. Balancing the generalization required of any survey with a wider variety of particular examples presents challenges and creates tension, but at the same time was stimulating, even energizing. I have tried to approach the history of design in a framework that acknowledges a variety of perspectives through which it might be understood and appreciated, that represent the dynamic interplay of multiple forces within a given society and historical moment, and to select and use examples to demonstrate how those perspectives emerge. Engaging directly with the material is the great reward of writing History of Modern Design. Perhaps adding the word “A” (rather than “The”) to the title would best convey that the book is the result of my own experience, enriched by travel and study, but nonetheless selective and personal. The history of art forms part of that framework, both because it has been a strain of inquiry as the discipline originated and developed, and as the basis for my own training and teaching, and because it is a convenient starting point, one that is natural while at the same time insufficient and in need of correctives. These include the need to present taste in a more inclusive way, to stress the role of commerce and business practice throughout the text, and to provide the political, social, and economic circumstances in which design activity transpires. It is my hope that the narrative is consistent and communicates the visual and intellectual rewards of studying the history of design. The selection of material, its organization, and the critical perspectives presented build upon the small number of previous surveys of the subject, numerous exhibitions as well as manufacturer and retail catalogs, and advertisements that remind us that museums and the statements of designers are not the only repositories or sources for learning about design. I have also included textual excerpts from a variety of primary sources, references to published studies of periods, movements, and designers by other historians and critics, as well as the author’s synthesis of these sources and direct study of examples over a period of more than 30 years. In addition, classroom experience (until my retirement in the fall 2017) helped considerably to shape the selection and presentation of material in the text. The book is divided into 16 chapters and 6 major parts, with each part followed by a “Global Inspiration” section. Each part presents and compares different and sometimes conflicting approaches and attitudes to design during a particular period and in particular locations and in relationship to historical circumstances and events, that is, embedded in and inseparable from culture. This conceptual and organizational framework might be summarized as follows: I. Demand, Supply, and Design (1700–1800): Chapters 1 and 2 a. France: Design and Monarchy b. England: Design and the Meaning of Fashion c. The United States: Design and Popular Taste Global Inspiration I: China and the Sinosphere II. Expansion and Taste (1801–1865): Chapters 3 and 4 a. Industrial and Commercial Expansion b. Taste and Reform Global Inspiration II: Muslim West Asia and North Africa III.Arts, Crafts, and Machines –Reconciling Progress and Fears of Industrialization (1866–1914): Chapters 5, 6, and 7 a. The Equality of the Arts and the Arts and Crafts Movement b. The Elevation of Craft and the Aesthetic Movement c. Efficiency and Early Modernity Global Inspiration III: Central and Western Africa IV.After World War I: Art, Industry, Commerce, and Utopias (1918–1944): Chapters 8, 9, and 10 a. Luxury and Industry: the Moderne (Art Deco) Ideal b. Designing the Future: Modernism c. The Beginnings of Industrial Design in the US Global Inspiration IV: The Americas V. Humanism and Luxury: International Modernism and Mass Culture After World War II (1945–1960): Chapters 11 and 12 a. International Modernism and the Cold War b. Mass taste and the Cold War Global Inspiration V: Japan VI.Progress, Protest, Pluralism, Responsibility (1961–2020): Chapters 13, 14, 15, and 16 a. Alternative Voices: Protest and Design b. Pluralism and Postmodernism c. The Expansion of the Design Enterprise; Design and Ethics; the Future Global Inspiration VI: Revisiting China The third edition of History of Modern Design includes several new and replacement illustrations. Every chapter has been substantially revised, perhaps most significantly Chapter 16 dealing with more recent design. As with the first and second editions of History of Modern Design, I’ve continued to benefit from the opportunity of seeing numerous exhibitions that have contributed to this third edition. These include the Cooper Hewitt’s triennials (2013, 2016, and 2019), the Philadelphia Museum of Art’s “Design for Different Futures,” visits to art and design museums and sites in Paris, Belgium, the Netherlands, Beijing, Nuremberg, Munich, Denmark, and Norway, along with the permanent and special exhibitions on view in many other museums and historic sites. As a teacher I always enjoyed the challenge of comparing works of art from different or even successive time periods that share formal or ideological similarities. I am happy for the students in the Westphal College of Media Arts & Design and other students I’ve met through travel who have made the study of design history part of their education and hope that what they have learned, whether in the classroom or in assignments that have taken them to experience design in museums or elsewhere in situ, will in some way be incorporated into the contributions they are certain to make to their chosen design professions.