Writing an academic book that is produced not just in multiple printings but also in multiple editions is a rare triumph that merits celebration. But tragically, David Raizman – the author of this book – is not here to celebrate the third edition of his landmark History of Modern Design. David died suddenly and unexpectedly on February 22, 2021 at the age of 69, just a couple of months after submitting his initial manuscript for the third edition. Given that this book is his last testament as a scholar, it is worth pausing to consider the impact it, and David himself, have had on the field of design history. That David began his career as a medievalist, not a modernist, strikes me as key to understanding his book and its contribution to the field. His University of Pittsburgh dissertation and the publications in his tenure dossier at Western Illinois University focused on Romanesque illuminated manuscripts from Spain. However, after he accepted a position at Drexel University’s College of Design Arts in 1989, his scholarly focus shifted in an unexpected direction. He had noticed that a design history survey listed in the course catalog was not regularly offered, and volunteered to teach it. At the request of the design faculty, he started offering a combined history of graphic design, industrial design, and decorative arts course in 1992. Then, struggling to find a suitable textbook to assign to his students, he decided to write his own. The first edition of History of Modern Design (HoMD) was published in 2003 and the second edition in 2010. As a medievalist, David was accustomed to thinking of all arts as useful, to seeing textiles as “finer” than paintings, and to seeking meaning in ensembles of spaces, objects, and texts. Where other scholars saw siloed subfields and hierarchies of media, he saw a unified field. Where others limited their scope to a century and a half, David tackled three centuries. Where others focused on a single country or region, David addressed multiple continents. David’s “medieval” way of thinking has had a significant impact on the field of design history, most notably by changing how, where, and how often it is taught. HoMD quickly became a standard text in design history courses around the world, including China, where the first and second editions were translated. And in the 2010s, after the National Association of Schools of Art and Design began encouraging member schools in the USA to offer design history as well as art history courses to BFA students in design, David’s book enabled many faculty who never had an opportunity to take a design history course themselves to teach credible introductory courses to their own students. HoMD also upped the ante for subsequent design historians, who have been engaged since 2003 in a productive arms race to write new survey textbooks that address ever-broader swaths of media, time, and geography. Teaching design history was a formative event in David’s career as a scholar. Though he continued publishing on Spanish medieval art into the early 2000s, during the last two decades of his life, he pivoted primarily to design history. He published not only History of Modern Design, but also Reading Graphic Design History: Image, Text, and Context (Bloomsbury, 2020) and two co-edited books, as well as numerous articles, book reviews, and reference entries on topics ranging from nineteenth-century World’s Fair presentation furniture to mid-twentieth-century aluminum chairs to twenty-first-century “DesignArt.” He worked tirelessly to advance the teaching of design history in the United States, most notably by organizing and leading a month-long National Endowment for the Humanities summer institute at Drexel University in July 2015 dedicated to teaching “Design History Beyond the Canon.” He also shouldered major service roles at his university and in national scholarly organizations. At Drexel, for example, he chaired two departments for a total of ten years and served twice as associate dean and twice as interim dean of his college. Nationally, he was treasurer of the International Center of Medieval Art (ICMA) from 2015 to 2018, treasurer of the College Art Association (CAA) from 2018 to 2020, and – for nine months in 2019 to 2020 – CAA’s full-time interim executive director, a role he accepted only on the condition that CAA not pay him a salary for his work. These roles, too, occasionally gave him a platform for championing the cause of design history. This book is perhaps David’s greatest legacy to the field, and for his colleagues and students, it is a fitting memento of an unusually brilliant and generous scholar, educator, colleague, and all-around mensch. It is also a monument to a life well and joyfully lived with Lucy Salem Raizman, his beloved partner in marriage for 46 years, and their children Rebecca Newman and Joshua Raizman and their partners, who supported, witnessed, and shared in David’s deep passions for art and music, and accompanied him on countless journeys to conduct the research for and view the objects illustrated in these pages. This new edition retains the broad scope, clear prose, and vivid images that made the first two editions so successful, but also reflects what David learned from the many new scholars he was delighted to have met over the last decade through the communities and field he did so much to help build. Carma Gorman University of Texas at Austin September 24, 2022