# SOURCES AND CREDITS FOR QUOTATIONS While every effort has been made to trace the copyright holders, we apologize in advance for any unintentional omission or error and will be pleased to insert the appropriate acknowledgement in any subsequent edition. ## Part I Josiah Wedgwood (Papers E25-18167, n.d., probably September 15, 1767), in Robin Reilly, Josiah Wedgwood 1730–1795, London, Macmillan, 1992, 42. Jane Austen, Mansfield Park, James Kinsley (ed.), Oxford University Press, 1998, 384. ## Part II Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Laurence Dickey (ed.), Indianapolis and Cambridge, Hackett Publishing Company, 1993, 4. Thomas Carlyle, Past and Present, Richard B. Attick (ed.), New York University Press, 1998, 7. Reprinted with permission of New York University Press. A. Welby Pugin, The True Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture, reprint of 1st edition (1841), London, Academy Editions/New York, St. Martin’s Press, 1973, 1. Owen Jones, The Grammar of Ornament, London, Bernard Quaritch, 1868, 5 and 6. Charles Dickens, Hard Times, George Frod and Sylvère Monod (eds.), New York and London, W. W. Norton and Company, 1990, 11. Charles L. Eastlake, Hints on Household Taste: The Classic Handbook of Victorian Interior Decoration, New York, Dover, 1969, 114 (first publ. 1868). Fernand Braudel, Civilization and Capitalism 15th–18th Centuries, vol. 2: The Wheels of Commerce, trans. Sîan Reynolds, New York, Harper & Row, 1979, 482. ## Part III John Ruskin, The Stones of Venice, vol. II, chapter VI, § 16 (Kenneth Clark [ed.], John Ruskin: Selected Writings, London, Penguin Books, 1991, first publ. 1964, 282–3). John Ruskin, The Seven Lamps of Architecture, V, § 24, (Kenneth Clark [ed.], John Ruskin: Selected Writings, London, Penguin Books, 1991, first publ. 1964, 236). John Ruskin, The Stones of Venice, vol. II, chapter VI, § 15, italics added (Kenneth Clark [ed.], John Ruskin: Selected Writings, London, Penguin Books, 1991, first publ. 1964, 282). John Ruskin, The Seven Lamps of Architecture, V, § 24, (Kenneth Clark (ed.), John Ruskin: Selected Writings, London, Penguin Books, 1991, first publ. 1964, 235–236). William Morris, “The Lesser Arts” (“The Decorative Arts”), lecture given to the Trades Guild of Learning, 1877, reprinted in Hopes and Fears for Art, London, 1882 (Clive Wilmer [ed.], William Morris: News from Nowhere and Other Writings, London, Penguin Books, 1993, 233–4). William Morris, The Ideal Book: Essays and Lectures on the Arts of the Book, William S. Peterson (ed.), University of California Press, 1982, 1. William Morris, evidence given to the Royal Commission on Technical Instruction (1882), reprinted in Gillian Naylor (ed.), William Morris by Himself: Designs and Writings, Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1988, 212. William Morris, “How I Became a Socialist,” published in Justice, 16 July 1894 (Clive Wilmer [ed.], William Morris: News from Nowhere and Other Writings, London, Penguin Books, 1993, 379). William Morris, “The Lesser Arts” (“The Decorative Arts”), lecture given to the Trades Guild of Learning, 1877, reprinted in Hopes and Fears for Art, London 1882 (Clive Wilmer [ed.], William Morris: News from Nowhere and Other Writings, London, Penguin Books, 1993, 250). William Morris, “Some Hints on Pattern-Designing”, lecture given at the Workingmen’s College, London, 1881, (Clive Wilmer [ed.], William Morris: News from Nowhere and Other Writings, 270). William Morris, News From Nowhere or An Epoch of Rest, being some chapters from a Utopian Romance, serialized in the Commonweal, 11 January to 4 October 1890, published in book form and revised, Boston, 1890 and London, 1891 (Clive Wilmer [ed.], William Morris: News from Nowhere and Other Writings, 122–23). Arthur Mackmurdo, from Gillian Naylor, The Arts and Crafts Movement, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1980 (first publ. 1971), 116. William Lethaby, from Gillian Naylor, The Arts and Crafts Movement, 181. Henri Matisse, “Notes of a Painter,” in Roger Benjamin, Matisse’s “Notes of a Painter”: Criticism, Theory, and Context, 1891–1908, Ann Arbor, MI, UMI Research Press, 1987, 208 (original in French, pp. 741–42, also reproduced in its entirety in Benjamin Charles Ashbee, from Gillian Naylor, The Arts and Crafts Movement, 167. Frank Lloyd Wright, “The Art and Craft of the Machine,” 1901, in Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer, Frank Lloyd Wright Collected Writings, vol. 1, 1894–1930, New York, Rizzoli in association with the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation, 1992, 64. Oscar Wilde, “The Critic as Artist,” The Artist as Critic: Critical Writings of Oscar Wilde, Richard Ellman (ed.), New York, Random House, 1968, 398. Christopher Dresser, Principles of Victorian Decorative Design, with 184 illustrations, New York, Dover Publications, 1995, 17, footnote. Christopher Dresser, Traditional Arts and Crafts of Japan, New York, Dover, 1994, 180 (originally published 1882 under the title Japan: Its Architecture, Art and Art Manufactures). C. R. Mackintosh, Letter, in Werner Schweiger, Wiener Werkstätte, Design in Vienna 1903–1932, New York, Abbeville Press, 1984, page 26. The letter was probably addressed to Fritz Waerndorfer, a wealthy patron of the Wiener Werkstätte, dating to March 17, 1903, and is a German translation from the English, probably by Waerndorfer for Hoffmann. Kathryn Bloom Hiesinger (ed.), Art Nouveau in Munich: Masters of Jugendstil from the Stadtmuseum, Munich and other Public and Private Collections, exh. cat. Philadelphia Museum of Art in association with Prestel Verlag, 1988, 95, from a drawing by Bruno Paul for Simplicissimus. Hermann Muthesius, The English House, Dennis Sharp (ed.), Janet Seligman (trans.), London, Crosby, Lockwood, Staples, 1979, 52. Reprinted by Permission of Frances Lincoln Ltd. Robert Kanigel, The Best Way: Frederick Winslow Taylor and the Enigma of Ef iciency, New York, Viking, 1997, 214. ## Part IV René Gimpel, Diary of an Art Dealer, trans. John Rosenberg, New York, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1966, 138. Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, “Futurist Manifesto,” 1909, in Umbro Apollonis (ed.), Futurist Manifestos, New York, Viking, 1973, 21–22. Amédée Ozenfant, and C.-E. Jeanneret, “Le Purisme” (trans.), in Robert L Herbert (ed.), Modern Artists on Art: Ten Unabridged Essays, Hoboken, NJ, Prentice Hall, 1964, 64. From De Stijl, vol. 2, no. 1, November 1918, translated in Paul Overy, De Stijl, London and New York, Thames & Hudson, 1991, 47. From De Stijl, vol. 2, no. 1, November 1918, 102–103, translated in Nancy Troy, The De Stijl Environment, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1983, 22. Piet Mondrian, “Neo Plasticism: The General Principle of Plastic Equivalency,” published in French by the Galerie de L’Effort Moderne, Paris, 1920, in Harry Holtzman and Martin S. James (eds and trans), The New Art – The New Life: The Collected Writings of Piet Mondrian, Boston, G. K. Hall & Company, 1986, 139–40. Reproduced by permission. Piet Mondrian, “The New Plastic in Painting,” published in De Stijl, 1917, in Harry Holtzman and Martin S. James (eds and trans.), The New Art – The New Life: The Collected Writings of Piet Mondrian, 50. Reproduced by permission. Piet Mondrian, “The Realization of Neo-Plasticism in the Distant Future and in Architecture Today,” published in De Stijl, 1922, in Harry Holtzman and Martin S. James (eds and trans), The New Art – The New Life: The Collected Writings of Piet Mondrian, 167. Reproduced by permission. Nancy Troy, The De Stijl Environment, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1983, 133. Manifesto of the Bauhaus, April 1919, Hans Wingler, Bauhaus, Cambridge, MA, and London, MIT Press, 1996, 31. Reprinted by permission of MIT Press. Paul Klee, in a letter to Alfred Kubin dated May 12, 1919, in O. K. Werckmeister, The Making of Paul Klee’s Career 1914–1920, University of Chicago Press, 1989, 177–78. Gillian Naylor, The Bauhaus Reassessed: Sources and Design Theory, New York, E. P. Dutton, 1985, 99. Josef Frank, Josef Frank, Architect and Designer: An Alternative Vision of the Modern Home, Nina Stritzler-Levine (ed.), New Haven and London, Yale University Press, 1996, 24; 51. Jan Tschichold, The New Typography: A Handbook for Modern Designers, trans. Ruari McLean, Berkeley and Los Angeles, University of California Press, 1995, 67; 70. Herbert Spencer, Pioneers of Modern Typography, New York, Hastings House, 1970, 4 (first publ. 1969). Gunnar Asplund, “Rationalism and Man,” speech delivered May 1935 at a meeting of the Swedish Arts and Crafts Society, in Stuart Wrede, The Architecture of Erik Gunnar Asplund, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1980, 153. (See also Göran Schildt [ed.], Sketches, trans. Stuart Wrede, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1978.) Henry Ford, as told to John Anderson (attorney), 1903, reprinted in Allan Nevins, with the collaboration of Frank Ernest Hill, Ford: The Times, the Man, the Company, vol. 1, New York, Scribners, 1954, 276. Roland Marchand, Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity 1920–1940, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985, 154. Paul Rand, Paul Rand: A Designer’s Art, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1985, 233. ## Part V Paul Rand, Thoughts on Design, New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970 (first publ. 1947), 36. Alvin Lustig, in The Collected Writings of Alvin Lustig, Holland R. Melson (ed.), New York, Thistle Press, 1958, 73. Cipe Pineles, from a speech given to the AIGA (1958), in Martha Scotford, Cipe Pineles: A Life of Design, New York, W. W. Norton & Company, 1999, 66. Reprinted by permission of Professor Martha Scotford. K. Lonberg-Holm and Ladislav Sutnar, Catalog Design Progress, New York, Sweet’s Catalog Service (Division of F. W. Dodge Corporation), 1950, Introduction (unpaged). Karl Gerstner, Die neue Graphic. The New Graphic Art. Le nouvel art graphique, Salenstein, Arthur Niggli, 1959, 148. Chuck Berry, “No Particular Place to Go,” released 1964 by Chess Records. Used by permission of Opus19 Music Company, Ventura, California. Bruce Springsteen, Academy Awards Presentation, March 21, 1994, from Atlanta Journal and Constitution, March 22, 1994, Section D, 6. Lewis Mumford, The City in History: Its Origins, Its Transformations, and Its Prospects, San Diego, New York, and London, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1961 and renewed 1989 by Lewis Mumford, 486. Used with permission from the Estate of Lewis and Sophie Mumford. Robert Hutchins, in James Sloan Allen, The Romance of Commerce and Culture: Capitalism, Modernism, and the Chicago-Aspen Crusade for Cultural Reform, rev. edition, Boulder, University Press of Colorado, 2002. Reprinted by permission of the University Press of Colorado. Vance Packard, The Hidden Persuaders, New York, David McKay, 1957, 4–5. ## Part VI Ken Garland, “First Things First,” published 1964, reprinted in Michael Bierut, Jessica Helfand, Steven Heller, and Rick Poyner (eds), Looking Closer 3, New York, Allworth Press, 1999, 154–55. Ronny and the Daytonas, GTO, 1964 (Renewed) Warner-Tamerlane Publishing Corp. and Warner Chappell Music Ltd. All rights reserved. Used by Permission of Alfred Publishing Co. Inc. Emilio Ambasz, Italy: The New Domestic Landscape. Achievements and Problems of Italian Design, Museum of Modern Art, New York, in collaboration with Centro Di, Florence, 19–20. Victor Papanek, Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change, New York, Random House (Pantheon Books), 1971, xxi. Victor Papanek, Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change, 51. Neville Brody, in Jon Wozencroft, The Graphic Language of Neville Brody, New York, Rizzoli, 1988, 60. Herbert Simon, “The Science of Design: Creating the Artificial,” The Sources of the Artificial, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1969, 54. Rudy VanderLans and Zuzana Licko, with Mary E. Gray, Émigré (The Book): Graphic Design into the Digital Realm, New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993, 23.