## Contributors

Carlos Bártolo is a Graphic Design graduate [ESBAP, 1990] with a master’s degree in Equipment Design [FAUP, 1998] and a PhD in Design [FAA-ULL, 2021]. He has taught project-related (Design) and theoretical (Art, Cinema and Design History) subjects at Lusíada University, Lisbon, Portugal, since 1995. His studies focus on the field of Portuguese Design History, researching the Design object as an ideological communication support, especially in extreme political spheres. His PhD research considered how the Portuguese dictatorship (1926-1974) tried to evoke its social and moral values through the design of ‘modern’ ideal home interiors by appropriating national archetypes. The chapter in this volume was written in the context of the project ‘Iberian modernisms and the primitivist imaginary’ (PTDC/ART-HIS/29837/2017) – co-financed by COMPETE 2020, Portugal 2020 and European Union (European Fund for Regional Development)

Dr Anne Burke is Senior Lecturer in Photography at Middlesex University. With an interest in ideas of place, mobility and belonging, her research has encompassed practices of slow travel, whether on foot, making long rowed journeys by sea in an Irish curach or cycling the Irish border. Her background in Latin American studies and as a human rights lobbyist has informed a focus on the role of visual culture in the construction and contestation of identities, including through exploring historical ethnographic archive collections and contemporary practices of protest

Dr Emily Candela is a historian of design and science, whose practice spans writing, curating and broadcasting. She produced the experimental radio show Atomic Radio, is a former curator at the Victoria & Albert Museum, and was awarded the Design History Society’s 2021 Design Writing Prize. Emily is a Senior Tutor at the Royal College of Art, where she leads the Communication Design MRes Pathway.

Barry Curtis initially taught at Hornsey College of Art and then at Middlesex Polytechnic where he was a founder and editor of BLOCK magazine and related publications and events (1979-1986). He was Head of the School of History of Art, Design and Film, Director of Research and Professor of Visual Culture at Middlesex University, before moving to the Royal College of Art. His ongoing research practice and areas of interest include media, environment and popular cultures.

Toke Riis Ebbesen is Associate Professor in the Department for Design and Communication at the University of Southern Denmark, Kolding. His focus is broadly on design communication, digital design and digital publishing, based somewhere in the cross-section between design history, material culture studies and design semiotics. He is the former owner of a digital book consultancy and has been employed as programmer, book editor and project manager, hence his interest in the temporal intricacies of digital reading devices. Currently, Toke is studying how design is mediated on social network media and the design of social network media.

Seher Erdoğan Ford, RA   (she/her) is an Assistant Professor in Architecture at Tyler School of Art and Architecture, Temple University in Philadelphia, PA. Seher received her BA in Architecture and MArch degrees at Yale University where she was selected as the co-editor of Perspecta 43, entitled ‘Taboo.’ Her current research and creative projects engage in sensory inquiry through the lenses of multisensory representation, architectural heritage and pedagogy, while experimenting with diverse media. Seher’s work has most recently been published in Modelwork: The Material Culture of Making and Knowing, and Journal of Architectural Education and supported by the AIA New York Center for Architecture’s Arnold W. Brunner Grant. Seher previously taught at Kadir Has University in Istanbul and practiced as a licensed architect in New York.

Michael Findlay lectures in architectural history in the Bachelor of Architectural Studies programme at Otago Polytechnic in Dunedin, New Zealand. His research focuses on New Zealand’s contribution to international modernism, particularly the infl uential group of architects that established themselves in England between the wars. He has been fascinated with the modernist house High and Over for over thirty years after seeing it by chance in an unbound 1931 copy of Architect and Building News at the Auckland School of Architecture library. Unless you like concrete- and steel-framed windows, do not sit next to him at conference dinners.

Dr Stephen Hayward teaches MA in Industrial Design and MA in Material Futures courses at Central St Martins, University of London. His main task is to foster critical thinking via projects, workshops and dissertation support. Over the past fifteen years, his research has tracked the concerns of contemporary designers. This agenda currently includes design for trust, play, superstition and the status of the post-digital object.

Dr Zoë Hendon is Head of Collections and Associate Professor (Practice) at the Museum of Domestic Design and Architecture (MoDA), Middlesex University. Her research interests include the history of the museum’s collections and the uses of these and other collections in teaching in a higher education context. She has published in Art, Design & Communication in Higher Education, the Journal of Design History, Architecture and Culture and Museum and Society.

Dr Sally-Anne Huxtable is Head Curator of the National Trust, and the Chair of the Board of Trustees of the Design History Society. She is also an Honorary Research Fellow in History of Art at the University of York, and a General Editor of the Manchester University Press series Studies in Design and Material Culture. Sally was previously the Principal Curator of Modern and Contemporary Design at National Museums Scotland and has worked for Dallas Museum of Art, Tate Britain and the De Morgan

Foundation, as well as being the former Editor of the Review of the Pre-Raphaelite Society. She has published widely on nineteenth and early twentieth century art and design, as well as contemporary receptions of Victorian and Edwardian visual and material culture. She is currently working on a Special Issue of  Journal of Design History on Design and the Occult.

Dr J. R. Jenkins is a design historian with a focus on socialist material and architectural culture, in particular the public art and design of the former East Germany. Her book Picturing Socialism: Public Art and Design in East Germany (Bloomsbury, 2021) looks at how art and design in public space developed in its function and visual and material forms as it intersected with internal discourses in the GDR and the broader influences of socialist realism, modernism and postmodernism. Other published research topics include the representation of the female figure in East German public art, colour in East German architecture, and the reception of East German public art in reunified Germany. She has taught graphic design history and theory and practiced as a designer in London, Berlin, Paris, Cairo and Cornwall.

Dr David Lawrence is an architectural historian, teacher, illustrator and writer. He is currently associate professor at Kingston University London. David teaches architectural and interior design, historic building conservation, museum studies and design history and theory, and has held honorary research fellowships with the London Transport Museum and Network Rail.

Professor Anne Massey is Professorial Fellow in Design and Culture at the University for the Creative Arts (UCA). She is best known for her work on the Independent Group and post-war British culture, including The Independent Group: Modernism and Mass Culture in Britain, 1945–59 (MUP, 1995), based on her PhD thesis. She wrote the definitive chronicle of the Institute of Contemporary Arts, ICA 1946–68 (ICA, 2014) and a biography of its first and only female Director, Dorothy Morland: Making ICA History  (LUP, 2020). She has published on design, including Interior Design Since 1900 (Thames & Hudson, 4<sup>th</sup> edition 2020) and Women in Design for the same publisher (2022).

Dr Claire McAndrew is a social scientist working within architectures and practices of care. She focuses on new frameworks for participation — drawing upon contemporary theory, research and debate around architecture, technology, community and public engagement in the production of the built environment. Her writing and practice consider the use of co-creation methodologies to shift social practices and enact more care-full capacities. Claire is a Senior Research Fellow in Public Engagement and Co-Director of Automated Architecture (AUAR) Labs at The Bartlett School of Architecture, UCL. She is also Co-Founder / Chief Communities Officer at AUAR Ltd.

Dr John Potvin is Professor in and Chair of the Department of Art History at Concordia University, Montreal, where he teaches on the intersections of art, design and fashion. He is the author of Material and Visual Cultures Beyond Male Bonding (2008), Giorgio Armani: Empire of the Senses (2013), Bachelors of a Different Sort: Queer Aesthetics,

Material Culture and the Modern Interior in Britain  (2014), winner of the Historians of British Art Book Prize, and most recently Deco Dandy: Designing Masculinity in 1920s Paris (Manchester UP, 2020). He serves on the editorial and advisory boards of several international peer-reviewed journals, was book review editor for Interiors: Interiors, Design and Architecture (2011–13) and is Associate Editor of the Journal of Design History.

Dr Niels Peter Skou is Associate Professor at the Department of Design and Communication, University of Southern Denmark (SDU). He has a background in intellectual history and a PhD on the Danish designer, architect and cultural critic Poul Henningsen and his views on design and democracy. Niels Peter is part of the Design Culture research group at SDU and co-editor of Design Culture: Objects and Approaches (Bloomsbury, 2016). His research interests include conceptions of time, use of history and changing concepts of nature and the common in Scandinavian Design Culture.