## 1 Designing Stone: Temporal Representation of a Timeless Material SEHER ERDOĞAN FORD

The philosopher Karsten Harries notes that architects build against the ‘terror of time’.<sup>1</sup> Jeremy Till, the educator and architect, confirms time as the common enemy for those who want total control over their design, and observes architects to be compelled in two directions: those who deny time and those who aim for timelessness.<sup>2</sup> One way of dealing with time entails considering and representing the temporal scale during the design process. While typical modes of architectural representation yield ‘frozen’ imagery – either by capturing a specific moment or by creating a veneer of ‘newness’  – new media technologies offer possibilities for built work to appear on a temporal continuum and to be understood in flux, by situating them in their historical and physical context. Time no longer poses a threat for architectural production if the tools and methodologies for representing it are implemented. Going even further, the representation of historical artefacts as projects that are no longer can offer insights into projects that are yet to be. With that, the critical question arises: How do we draw time? What form(s) and media does the temporal representation of architecture take?

In response to this question, I focus on stone and masonry construction, which are typically considered timeless in material culture. Based on ideas dealing with the close relationship between drawing and making, I propose a method of analysis that can span the extended history of an artefact. To understand the possibilities of drawing stone along the temporal scale, I look at historical, analogue examples – and their manipulation of media  – to propose how digital environments may deliver a tangible and dynamic sense of time. Emerging virtual environments (VEs), particularly those dealing with architectural heritage sites, can help us reimagine what drawings are: not only a mode of representation but also an act of analysis and interpretation. Considering drawing in VE or VE as drawings or even the act of drawing VE offers new insights into the transformation of how we understand what drawings look like, what they deal with and how they function. These projects, considered as a new type of drawing that yields complex VEs, represent stone as applied in its changing historical context and revealing its own making.

## Drawing decay, growth and regeneration

In Architecture Depends, Jeremy Till critiques the modernist architect’s unwillingness to accept the mutability of their design over time.<sup>3</sup> In an attempt to freeze the idea, architects disseminate perfectly crafted, calibrated and curated images of their work. How their buildings may change over time in their appearance, use, feel and overall ethos is difficult for architects to grasp. As a result, Till argues that the dichotomy between the intent of the architect and the materiality of architecture grows to the point of dissociation.

Two accounts of stone, one from architectural history and another from cultural anthropology, diminish this conceptual gap between the idea and its execution by relating the material to the traditions and understandings of making. Architect and historian Robin Evans, in the chapter entitled ‘Drawn Stone’ from his seminal book The Projective Cast, discusses the history of stereotomy – referring to the techniques related to cutting stone using geometry and to achieve a three-dimensional configuration  – as a direct extension of drawing. Going back to seventh-century France, stereotomic construction implemented drawing templates, called traits, which as a craft practice culminated during Renaissance architecture.<sup>4</sup> The traits are essential for the geometric understanding of the complex three-dimensional assembly, but also facilitate the off-site fabrication of components prior to construction. While Evans mentions the possibility that the traits did not document a finality but instead helped solve formal problems and resulted in design revisions, his focus is primarily directed towards the act of translation and interpretation. Traits, in masonry construction, functioned as the medium in which design registered during the collaborative process of fabrication.

Anthropologist Tim Ingold, in Making, extends the purview on the fabrication process to include the sourcing of the natural substance, its tooling and its continued transformation throughout the life of the building.<sup>5</sup> From his perspective, no built work is fixed in place or form. Unlike the traditional preoccupation with permanence in architecture, when considered as a material assembly in constant change, the narrative around a building also includes ‘growth, decay, and regeneration’.<sup>6</sup> As such, the building is never ‘finished’ except perhaps in a legal sense. Therefore, with Ingold’s broader framing of the idea of ‘building-in-the-making’, the function of drawing also expands to become a dynamic medium communicating an ad hoc and continuous process of change.

When discussing stone and its durability and transformation over time, the discipline of archaeology also offers insights. Chantal Conneller argues in An Archeology of Materials that the study of human activity from a material culture perspective is not only concerned with the functional significance of surviving artefacts but rather encompasses the entire chaîne opératoire – the sequence of social acts around the production, use and disposal of artefacts.<sup>7</sup> For example, with regard to a specific specimen of flint stone, the marks found on its surface create a visually interesting texture that are in fact residual from the act of removing fragments to use during various rites. Therefore, the texture represents something about the ritual of sourcing the substance from the earth, the act of manipulating it and its continued use as well. Could we, then, imagine chaîne opératoire as a methodology of studying an architectural artefact? This shift in our focus would suggest a kind of historiography that views materiality as understood through the amalgamation of textures. In turn, the built artefact can be situated not only in its physical context but also its cultural and historical milieu that resulted in the textural marks. The drawing would be not only of the project, but also would be an active process of reimagining the tactile presence of the building relative to its intangible past – an act of drawing forth the permeable and dynamic nature of any cultural invention.

## Experiments with media

To answer the question of how we draw time through this emphasis on the tactility of stone, first I take a closer look at several canonical examples of analogue drawing techniques, which manipulate the tactility of their physical medium to construct a historical context for the stone. In examples from the early twentieth century, the specific technique of ‘piquage’ was used primarily to layer textures in localized ways. For example, in a piquage-style depiction of a stone wall, a non-uniform texture is achieved by multiple passes of tone over individual stones and by carefully preserving the sharp white background on one side of each stone through pricking the paper, and implying the depth of the cut. The ink wash can mimic the fluidity of sunlight, but the sharp highlights on the stone help locate each piece in their specific positions against the sun at a particular time of the day and in their specific positions relative to the neighbouring components.

The American architect H. H. Richardson, in his pursuit of the Romanesque style, also represents the stone wall as a masonry assembly with particular texture, but instead of evoking the daily cycles of time, he overlays a sense of historic time. For example, in his drawings of the Glessner house, Richardson employs texture as an affectation of weathered stone, to eliminate the temporal distance from Roman architecture and to situate his work in close proximity to its classical precedents.<sup>8</sup> The will to see rusticated stone is not merely a graphic exercise, but one that hews closely to the structural logic of the building. The legibility of the three-dimensional components are not once compromised in service of the ‘aged effect’.

Further along the spectrum of imbuing age upon the drawing and therefore fixing it at a singular moment in history, we find Giovanni Battista Piranesi (1720–1778). The etchings of the eighteenth-century Italian artist reconstructed ruins and recast wellknown architectural artefacts in archaeological scenes, in a scenario where the built environment is in return to a natural state, almost to a prehistoric moment. While the narrative of the image is one of regrowth and decay, the visual message connotes a singular moment in a very distant past. This reading of ‘ancient’ owes much to content but perhaps even more to Piranesi’s particular choice of medium, where the etchings, through the use of incisions and repeated build-up of ink, display a unique texture that contributes to the reading of ‘fuzziness’ of the line and therefore of weathering and perhaps uncertainty. While Piranesi’s work transposes the viewer in time, it does so by narrative devices and only peripherally deals with actual material history.

The historical practice of architectural depiction offers a wide variety of experiments with medium to generate tactile qualities creating specific yet still singular temporal readings. Taken collectively, the drawings suggest the elasticity of the temporal scale in architectural representation; individually, they fail to convey the dynamic nature of materials in flux. What possibilities does the digital space offer? The same risk of ‘frozen imagery’ persists with computerized production, but in a different way. In contemporary, digital documentation of architecture, the distance from the physical medium in the making of the drawing often translates to a loss of touch with the physical properties of the represented artefact. It is common practice to employ abstract patterns or ‘hatches’ that designate various types of stone, where the scale of building blocks may be adjusted to some level of accuracy and visual detail, but the finalized rendition is strictly a-material. The hatch pattern operates as a notational device rather than a signifier of physical properties, communicating the architect’s specification of commodity as opposed to quality. (Interestingly, architects resort to exhaustive texts to achieve accuracy in product and material specifications.) This is partially because the graphic pattern, however specific in its geometry and dominating in its replicability, lacks medium specificity and therefore tactility. The resultant rendition connotes a drawing void of medium, an idea without mass, and exists in no particular moment in history but perhaps to fulfil the picture of the ‘legal completion’ Ingold refers to.

Another way in which images appear frozen or static results from the opposite strategy of abstraction and the striving for hyper-realistic renderings. Digital tools allow texture mapping to such great detail and ‘fidelity’ that the image asserts itself as exhaustive and true. As Baudrillard cautions in Simulacra and Simulation, the problem with virtuality is not that it is false but that is understood as singular manifestation of falsehood.<sup>9</sup> We understand the image to be a simulation – we do not mistake it for reality – but it oppresses any other image of possibility. In its brilliant appearance, the image functions as a black hole of possibilities, ambiguity or change. Propagated on the surface, textures with amazing level of detail function as visual patterns removed from their physical or historical context, that can be ‘wallpapered’ anywhere and everywhere since they impart such forceful convincing in their real-ness. Medieval-era stone exists without any connection to its traditions of making or cultural significance, and can be placed anywhere but cannot be further explored or known. Visually it mimics layers, but it has no depth to allow for discovery or imagination. Perceptually, the completeness of the visualization invites quick reads and material coding  – polished concrete, buffed stone, weathered brick  – shunning the slower tactile understanding of how the material feels to the touch as one is making it or living with it or experiencing it for the first time.