## Section 3 Days, Hours, Seconds

In this section, we turn our attention to the increasing pace of modern life and its consequences for our understanding of design. As Hartmut Rosa notes, there is a general consensus that time is speeding up:  ‘Fast food, speed-dating, powernaps and drive through funerals seem to testify our resolve to speed-up the pace of everyday actions, computers compute at ever higher speeds, transport and communication need only a fraction of the time they took a century ago,’<sup>1</sup> Logically we know that time is not passing more quickly; what is it, then, that causes us to perceive this to be the case? As historians, how might we interrogate this sense of the accelerated pace of life as an historical phenomenon, through an enquiry into the ‘designed’ nature of our temporal experiences? Speed implies not only rapidity but also ephemerality: How might we address design which exhibits the opposite characteristics, namely slowness and longevity?

Hartmut Rosa makes a distinction between two aspects of the increasing pace of modern life. On the one hand, there is the fact of technological acceleration, meaning we are now able to physically move more quickly from place to place: journeys that once took days or weeks may be completed in hours. Space seems to contract as a result, and here we are reminded again of Schivelbusch and his argument about the introduction of ‘railway time’ in the nineteenth century.<sup>2</sup> At the same time, we are experiencing an increasing pace of social change: people move jobs more frequently, there is less stability in social institutions, there is an increasing divorce rate and so on. To this we might add the dimension of accelerated obsolescence of the technological devices that are now part of our everyday lives. We now have a limited expectation of the lifespan of our mobile phones and computers, and we assume that at some point soon the technology with which we have become familiar will become outdated. Further, these digital devices contribute to another aspect of the perceived pace of modern life. As Judy Wajcman notes, actual working hours have not increased for many people, but the sense of being ‘always on’, always connected results in a ‘time pressure paradox’ whereby people feel more overworked, stressed and lacking in leisure time.<sup>3</sup>

David Lawrence’s chapter in this section develops the theme of speed, addressing the ways in which the expansion of the underground railway network in London changed city dwellers’ experience of time and space. The extension of London’s underground lines to the suburbs in the 1930s made possible a new kind of working day for commuters; the increased speed of travel made it possible to live much further from the workplace. Harry Beck’s tube map has famously been discussed as a contributing factor in the way in which the London Underground system presents a deceptive relationship between time and space: suburban stations are presented on the map as equally spaced, obscuring the fact that journey times between them are significantly longer than those in the centre of the city. Here Lawrence uses the notions of time and speed to construct an analysis of the whole of the London Underground system. He argues that it is a vast and complex organism in which industrial, graphic and information design systems come together to form one fully designed and  – crucially – highly time-regulated experience. For passengers, according to Lawrence, the speed of a journey is only one element, the other being a sense of certainty and predictability

The association of architecture with durability and permanence was discussed by Seher Erdoğan Ford in Chapter  1. Claire McAndrew addresses a similar idea from a different angle, exploring the 1960s neo-futurist plans for the Plug-In City and the Fun Palace, in Chapter 10. Both of these schemes were based on the radical suggestion that cities need not be permanent and that architecture might change and adapt according to users’ needs. The plans raise questions about ephemerality and disposability: all buildings are modifiable to some extent, but the schemes proposed here suggest a much greater rate of change. The Fun Palace and the Plug-In City were both conceived as projects with fundamentally socially improving goals in mind. But now that we are living in the digital age, what new kinds of temporality, and thus new kinds of subjectivity, are implied by apps or social media or big data? How might we develop a more cyclical conception of resources, economy and time in relation to design?

Stephen Hayward’s chapter considers the ways in which contemporary designers are incorporating ideas of temporality into their work, and once again raises questions about designers’ responsibility to imagine a better future. The Clock of the Long Now by Stewart Brand and others, for example, is intended as a catalyst for change in the present. The Long Now Clock– a solar-driven clock in the desert of New Mexico – is also a response to the accelerated pace of change in the present: this is a clock that ticks only once a year, and its hands move only once every one hundred years.<sup>4</sup> Rather like the Fun Palace and the Plug-In City, the Long Now Clock exists more as a prototype or provocation rather than a fully realized scheme. Yet the invitation to imagine the world 10,000  years into the future prompts us to recall a similar recalibration of mental time described in Huxtable’s chapter, though in this instance the imagined time stretches ‘ahead’ of us rather than ‘behind’ us.

As Simon Sadler has noted, The Clock of the Long Now developed from Brand’s conviction that the designer or architect should pay attention to the frequently overlooked dimension of time:

It is an intriguing commission to measure time, record culture, and preserve dying languages for a ‘long now’ of ten thousand years; but the clock is obviously a poetic device foremost, a memento of finitude (our lives) and seeming infinitude (the duration of the world), and thereby of our collective and individual responsibility in managing the world.<sup>5</sup>

Stewart Brand was also responsible for the design and production of the Whole Earth Catalog, famously one of the first publications to present an image of the whole globe, seen from space, on its cover, ‘picturing design’s raw material at a new and completely meta level’.<sup>6</sup> The image was intended as a kind of unifying metaphor, but can also be read as a visual representation of multiple temporalities, in the sense that at any one instance (the instance captured by the camera) it is both night and day somewhere in the world.

The Whole Earth Catalog emerged from 1960s’ counterculture and was built on an interest in evolutionary and cybernetic systems that encouraged an approach to design which foregrounded a sense of long-term responsibility. Brand’s other publications, such as How Buildings Learn, offer an alternative view of temporality for designers and architects, emphasizing duration rather than finitude.<sup>7</sup> Implicit in much of the discussion about ‘fast’ or ‘slow’ design is an underlying moral dimension, since ‘slow’ is associated with sustainability, mindfulness and environmental concerns. This is an issue of increasing interest to design historians: Michelle Labrague, for example, has discussed the clothing company Patagonia using the notion of ‘slow design’ to unpack the brand’s approach to the production and consumption of sportswear clothing. There is an ethical dimension to this, she argues, since ‘slow practitioners are questioning the values of a consumerist society and redefining them through a negotiation of the political-cultural clock of slow with commercial time’.<sup>8</sup> The idea that time and craft have a moral as well as an economic value is of course nothing new; this was after all the underlying principle of the Arts and Crafts movement. Niels Peter Skou develops these ideas further in Chapter 11 in his discussion of recent developments within the ‘slow design’ movement. Skou discusses the work of a number of contemporary designers whose work seeks to make time visible, and whose work enables consumers to purchase time symbolically ‘by proxy’.

Discussion of ‘slow design’ is in a sense a reaction to the perceived larger forces of the ‘network time’ now seen to be associated with the hypermodern age. Our new experience of ‘network time’ means that railway time and clock time are no longer adequate metaphors to describe the pace of life. As Robert Hassan argues, if modernity was characterized by the regularization of time through railway timetables and Fordist production processes, we are now living within the ever-present state of simultaneity implied by the notion of ‘network time’:

Network time constitutes a new and powerful temporality that is beginning to displace, neutralize, sublimate and otherwise upset other temporal relationships in our work, home and leisure environments.<sup>9</sup>

This is significant, according to Hassan, because,

unlike the clock, the network is unpredictable, volatile and chaotic; but it has an inner logic (that of commerce and instrumentality) that we adapt ourselves to and have difficulty in exercising control over. Moreover, the ‘shared experiences’ through the ‘shared temporality’ of the clock, however manipulative and exploitative these may have been, did contain the spaces and the ‘time’ for reflection, organization and resistance in ways the network leaves no time and no space for.<sup>10</sup>

Toke Riis Ebbessen explores these ideas in his discussion of the design of the Amazon Kindle, an e-book reader that promises to remove the ‘tiresome delay’ associated with actually purchasing a physical book. Network time implies an expectation of instant gratification, exemplified by the ‘order it now, get it delivered tonight’ culture in which we increasingly live. Once again, we address the issues raised by digital connectivity and the compression of time into ever-smaller units. Yet, as Ebbessen argues, the design of the e-reader itself is less future-focused than might be imagined: as a designed object, the Kindle retains some of the characteristics of the experience of reading a ‘real’ book. In a sense, the digital book is an example of non-synchronicity, looking simultaneously to the past and to the future but existing only in tenuous form in the present. Thus time remains a fascinating lens through which design historians can consider the design of objects and their relationship to their users, for the present and the future.

## Notes

1. Hartmut Rosa, Alienation and Acceleration: Towards a Critical Theory of Late-Modern Temporality (Malmo, Sweden: NSU Press, 2010), 15.

2. Wolfgang Schivelbusch, The Railway Journey: The Industrialization of Time and Space in the Nineteenth Century (Oakland: University of California Press, 2014).

3. Wajcman, Pressed for Time:  The Acceleration of Life in Digital Capitalism, (Chicago: University of Chicago, 2015), 5.

4. Stewart Brand, The Clock of the Long Now: Time and Responsibility (New York: Basic Books, 1999).

5. Simon Sadler, ‘An Architecture of the Whole’, Journal of Architectural Education 61, no. 4 (2008): 115.

6. Ibid., 123.

7. Stewart Brand, How Buildings Learn (London: Viking, 1994).

8. Michelle Labrague, ‘Patagonia: A Case Study in the Historical Development of Slow Thinking’, Journal of Design History 30, no. 2 (2017): 188, doi:10.1093/jdh/epw050.

9. Robert Hassan, ‘Network Time and the New Knowledge Epoch’, Time & Society 12, no. 2–3 (2003): 226–41. doi:10.1177/0961463X030122004.

10. Ibid., 236.