# Acknowledgements / Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\auto\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor.md

## Acknowledgements

This volume developed out of a Design History Society conference held at Middlesex University from 8 to 10 September 2016. As editors, we would like to express our thanks to all the participants in that conference:  speakers and delegates, peer reviewers and panel chairs. Thanks also to the Design History Society and to Middlesex University for hosting the event.

Our primary thanks are due to all the contributors to this volume: we are aware of the huge irony of asking people to write about ‘time’ when they are frequently already overcommitted, and we are grateful for the enthusiasm and professionalism shown by everyone involved.

We acknowledge the Design History Society’s continuing support in the form of a research grant for image reproduction costs associated with this book, and we are also deeply grateful for the help and support of our editors at Bloomsbury, Rebecca Barden and Claire Constable.

## Introduction

If you believed that there’s a bond between our future

And our past

Then try to hold on to what we had,

We build them strong, we built to last

’cause this is a mighty town,

It’s built upon solid ground

And everything they tried so hard to kill,

We will rebuild.

(Excerpt from ‘Big River’, Jimmy Nail, 1997 © Warner/Chappell Music, Inc., BMG RIGHTS MANAGEMENT US)

This lyric from the Jimmy Nail song ‘Big River’ speaks of the importance of the past, of history, for moving into the future. Reminiscing about growing up by the River Tyne in the north-east of England, Jimmy Nail recalls the days, still in living memory, when the region was a major producer and exporter of coal as well as an international centre for shipbuilding. This is all gone now, and Newcastle upon Tyne’s major industries include game design and call centres. This shift in the economy and in design has prompted the assembly of this volume, while not forgetting the importance of history in framing the present and the future.

Investigating the interplay between history and the contemporary, between future predictions and the present, this book presents new ways of investigating the subject of design history. The book offers different ways of thinking about changing attitudes to the temporal in the writing of histories of design. Design History as a discipline overlaps with several related fields, and contributors to this volume consider the subject from the point of view of design history, architecture, archaeology, archival studies, curating and queer studies. The edited collection asks how designers, design historians and design theorists might respond to the global challenges of time, the rhythms of work, the increasing speed of life and communication between different communities. How does the past inform the present and the future in terms of design? In the current era of rapid prototyping and slow design, this book reflects on the changing nature of time in relation to design history.

This introduction establishes time as a useful lens through which to view many of the issues of interest to the designers and design historians of today. In establishing this background, we also suggest some reasons why the question of time is particularly relevant to design historians now, in the early twenty-first century. The concept of time has recently been the subject of investigation in the fields of architecture, contemporary art, cultural theory, sociology, anthropology, philosophy and geography as well as within popular novels. From Christine Ross’s The Past is the Present: It’s the Future Too: The Temporal Turn in Contemporary Art<sup>1</sup> to Paula Hawkins’s popular thriller The Girl on the Train,<sup>2</sup> the theme of the folding and interleaving of time has become an everyday part of contemporary culture. Yet it seems that this temporal turn has received comparatively less attention from the perspective of design history. An exception is Judy Attfield, who opened up some important debates relating to design and time in Wild Things: The Material Culture of Everyday Life. In her chapter ‘Time: Bringing Things to Life’, she worked through the importance of everyday life and the subjective in the consideration of material culture, design and its history. She argues that each of us has a highly personal and subjective relationship to material culture and to our own bodies experienced through time:

Time implies a beginning and an end – birth and death, eternity and mortality. It is experienced through duration, frequency, longevity, change and finitude, through the relation of the body to the material world of things – as inexorably rushing towards the future or gradually evolving from the past but rarely, if ever, still.<sup>3</sup>

Design, History and Time:  New Temporalities in a Digital Age takes forward her arguments and traces the temporal from the point of view of design. Here we provide a brief overview of some of the arguments, outlining the ways in which they are relevant to the practice of design history, as well as the ways in which design history might extend and develop the arguments for other disciplines.

As humans, we are all aware of the phenomenon that we call ‘time’, and we have devised numerous methods to measure and regulate the passing of time. The design of sundials, clocks, astrolabes, calendars and other temporal devices were central to the development of modern society. The accurate measurement of longitude, for example, made possible exploration by sea and hence colonial expansion by Western powers. This book is not about clocks or other time-measuring devices per se, but it is worth briefly noting their importance as designed objects. As David Landes argues, ancient Chinese and Islamic horology was considerably more sophisticated than European. However, the invention of the mechanical clock was, he suggests, ‘one of a number of major advances that turned Europe from a weak, peripheral, highly vulnerable outpost of Mediterranean civilization into a hegemonic aggressor’.<sup>4</sup> Clocks were central to the rise of European power from the late Middle Ages because they facilitated commerce and navigation, and because accurate timekeeping was important for both scientific discovery and the mechanization of industrial processes.

But while Attfield notes the subjective or ‘existential’ nature of time, she also draws attention to ‘historical time’. How then might we deal with ‘historical time’ in the digital age? The post-industrial landscape of the north-east of England is an appropriate place to begin a discussion of the historiography of time. In his seminal essay, E. P. Thompson drew attention to the ways in which the experience of time was altered by industrialization in the period between the middle ages and the nineteenth century. ‘Clock time’, he argued, replaced the older patterns of work and rest, as industrialization meant that more people worked for a wage rather than for themselves.<sup>5</sup> According to Thompson, time became a commodity to be ‘spent’ rather than ‘passed’. Clock time became associated with thrift and with discipline, and with the related ideas of a separation between work and leisure, and between the spaces of work and the spaces of home. As Barbara Adam notes, the notion of clock time is linked to Max Weber’s Protestant work ethic. While not explicitly mentioning time, Weber’s ideas established an association between rationalization and a particular attitude to work:

The asceticism associated with the Protestant ethic is one not of contemplation and absence of activity but of rationally calculable action. Such action implies an expectation of predictable and controllable regularity within a universally applicable time, an empty time which measures the same abstract units anywhere and everywhere, a time that is applicable equally to work, leisure and caring activities.<sup>6</sup>

The regularization and control of time was thus central to industrialization, and implied a particular relationship to capital, as will be discussed in several chapters in this volume.

E. P. Thompson’s argument rested on the emergence of clock time as a replacement for older, premodern conceptions of time, based on the religious calendar and on the seasons. Benedict Anderson argued that the rise of nationalism in the nineteenth century was predicated on what he called ‘homogenous empty time’, developed as a secular alternative to previous religious or dynastic rule.<sup>7</sup> This was made possible in part by the development of print capitalism (i.e. newspapers and novels) in the nineteenth century, which enabled people to imagine themselves part of a new entity called a nation. Anderson’s ‘homogenous empty time’ is the idea of days, weeks and years proceeding as predetermined, equally spaced and infinite units, in contrast to the simultaneity implicit within religious notions of time, in which cosmology and history were inextricably linked. ‘Homogenous empty time’ thus implied both progress and secularism, and was the basis on which ideas of ‘nationhood’ could be built and shared between millions of people who had never met.

More recent scholars have questioned the universality of Thompson’s and Anderson’s conceptions of time, pointing to the ‘polytemporal’ nature of lived experience. Historians have challenged the universality of Thompson’s notion of clock time, or have drawn attention to the ways in which an overemphasis on commodified time risks the exclusion of those whose lives are not governed by the temporal constraints of hourly paid labour: women looking after young children, retired people, unemployed people and so on.<sup>8</sup> Partha Chatterjee notes that the idea of ‘homogenous empty time’ is not adequate for a discussion of postcolonial temporalities.<sup>9</sup> Both clock time and homogenous empty time describe a utopian ideal rather than a lived reality: we all arguably experience what Kevin Birth calls ‘polyrhythmic temporalities throughout each day, and indeed each lifetime.<sup>10</sup> Nevertheless, Thompson and

Anderson are a useful starting point for a discussion of time not as a ‘given’ but as a socially constructed idea which is thus capable of historical analysis.

Design history as a discipline is perhaps uniquely concerned with questions around the future because of its roots within design education and studio-based teaching. The subject grew out of the need to offer undergraduates studying vocational design subjects the opportunity to develop a critical understanding of their chosen field, in terms of both its history and its contemporary practice. From the beginning, design history therefore had a complex relationship with time: it was simultaneously situated in the present, looking back to the past and educating designers to design for a future. As Ton Otto argues, ‘All processes of design include a vision not only of the future but also of a past that makes the desired future possible.’<sup>11</sup> Perhaps as a result, design historians have long been interested in the new, the modern, underpinned by a future-focused concern expressed as a belief in the possibility of social improvement through better standards of design. Yet this future focus is not unproblematic: Dennis Doordan drew attention to the need for design historians to challenge the potentially exaggerated claims of designers for the futurity of their work:

One of the persistent arguments advanced by the cultural avant-garde in the early twentieth century involved the claim that the present was irrevocably separated from the past. ‘We stand on the last promontory of the centuries!’ wrote FT Marinetti, the founder of Italian Futurism, ‘Why should we look back?’<sup>12</sup>

In Doordan’s view, designers have often promised a better future based on the erasure of the past, but design historians need not accept such claims uncritically; they may apply a more nuanced approach to their considerations of utopian promises.

If a concern with time is partly therefore about the way in which designed objects embody notions of the future, it is also about how time is implicit within the design of objects that structure our lives. This book is an edited collection of papers presented at the Design History Society Annual Conference Design and Time, held at Middlesex University in 2016. Middlesex University (formerly Middlesex Polytechnic) also hosted the second conference of Twentieth Century Design History forty years ago in 1976, just at the time when design history was beginning. The theme of that conference was leisure and design in the twentieth Century, and it is interesting to reflect on just how the subject has changed and how much the intellectual and technical environment has altered in the intervening forty years. At the 1976 conference, Stanley Parker discussed the historical trajectory of time in relation to leisure within a sociological framework, relating the increase in leisure time over the twentieth century in the Western world and the increased pace of leisure due to the greater choice and accessibility of leisure pursuits:  ‘The harried leisure class is growing as more people, despite inflation, are able to buy cars, colour television sets, music centres, boats, second holiday homes, and so on.’<sup>13</sup> The connection between designed objects, design history and temporality was thus implicit from the very beginning of the discipline.

Parker’s arguments rested on a shared cultural understanding of the nature of time since, as Adam notes, it is possible to think of leisure time only once we have fully internalized the idea of work time: ‘“Free time” and its correlated leisure time are derived from commodified work time. They are produced time, time that has been wrested from employer’s time, a not-work time that exists only in relation to the time of markets and employment.’<sup>14</sup> Design historians have addressed this tension between unpaid/leisure time and paid/productive activity more recently – for example, Stephen Knott in his discussion of amateur craft.<sup>15</sup>

According to Jonathan Woodham, design history was initially expressed as an ‘embrace of such concerns as popular culture and ephemeral styling and consumption, and the study of the anonymous and every day’.<sup>16</sup> To express an interest in the ephemeral is to be concerned with time and its passing; and to be interested in consumption is to acknowledge the significance of the life cycle of objects, through time, beyond their initial conception by the designer, through patterns of promotion, sale, exchange, use and reuse. The recent focus within design history on the consumption and mediation aspects of our engagement with design is an indication of this greater awareness of the temporal nature of design histories.<sup>17</sup> An interest in the ‘everyday’ suggests temporality in an additional sense:  Michel de Certeau’s Practice of Everyday Life drew attention to the repetitive and routine aspects of our temporal experience. This is of interest to design historians because it raises questions about how we might write histories that use memory and personal experience to acknowledge what Moran calls the ‘validity of nonlinear historical explanation’.<sup>18</sup>

It is clear that time and temporality have been a useful tool of analysis for design historians in various ways, but how might we need to adapt within the digital age? The notion of ‘clock time’ has arguably been superseded by the ‘network time’, in which digital technologies offer simultaneity, speed, the always ‘on’ and the always instantaneous.<sup>19</sup> The twenty-four-hour digital clock is a permanent feature on personal electronic devices, which network with the digital displays in bus stops, railway stations and airports; as Christine Ross has outlined, ‘the flow of time has now been reduced to the instant, leading to quasi-instantaneous modes of connection between users. Digital media accelerates our experience of time and concomitantly reduces our sense of duration and distance.’ Digital media has revolutionized the ways in which designers design, and how design historians access and record their material. These technologies increasingly dominate our lives, blurring the distinction between ‘work’ time and ‘leisure’ time, and appearing to be both a natural and an inevitable part of our world. Yet it is useful to be reminded of the designed and intentional nature of this time, as Judy Wacjman notes:

Consider, for example, the fiber-optic cable between Chicago and New  York. While previous cables between the two cities had been laid along railway lines, the new cable takes the shortest route possible, even drilling through the Allegheny Mountains. It shaves 1.3 milliseconds off the transmission time of the earlier cables. ‘Speed’ is thus built directly into the design: the cable was laid where it was to make transmission faster. But what compels its use by financial trading firms isn’t anything directly technical; rather it is the structure of competition among such firms. Temporal demands are not inherent to technology. They are built into our devices by all-too-human schemes and desires.<sup>20</sup>

This tension between designers and design history has dogged the field over the intervening forty plus years. Design practitioners and theorists have developed the areas of design research and design thinking to emphasize the contemporary and future-facing nature of the design process. This approach is not without its problems,<sup>21</sup> as Tony Fry, Clive Dilnot and Susan C. Stewart argue: ‘In the vast majority of design research the capabilities of design are understood essentially ahistorically.’<sup>22</sup> This ‘end of history’ in the study of design has been paralleled by the development of design history as a subset of history itself.

This has led design historians to develop in-depth research which privileges the chronicling of the past and is linked with the ongoing concerns of history more broadly. With the dawn of the digital age, it would seem that another approach is to consider both within the same remit. As Penny Sparke has argued in the ‘Introduction’ to The Routledge Companion to Design Studies:

This book has side-stepped (or perhaps superseded) the heated debate that has gone on for over two decades about the relative strengths and weaknesses of design studies and design history. Rather than trying to defend, or attack, either of these areas the Companion is employing the term design studies in a new, uncomplicated, baggage-free way as, that is, an umbrella term that embraces, in a non-hierarchical way, the side range of scholarship relating to design  – theoretical, practice-based and historical – that have emerged over the past four decades or so.<sup>23</sup>

This volume takes a similarly inclusive view and comprises work from a broad range of disciplines including that of architectural historians, curators, designers, design historians, design theorists and photography. We are now in an age of the digital future, and design history has moved from the analogue into the digital age and includes both linear and more complex, variegated models for the conceptualization of time, a fact which this book hopefully represents. With the death of the avantgarde and with the ‘death of the author’, we are now in a moment when past, present and future fold into one another. How does design reflect this trend? What effect does it have on design and its histories?

As will become clear to readers, chapters in this book did not divide themselves into a neat order, chronological or otherwise. Themes recur and overlap across and between chapters, sometimes in unanticipated ways, suggesting syncopation and polyrythmia rather than linear progression. The division of this book into sections is therefore somewhat arbitrary, but broadly speaking represents a telescoping of time. Beginning with Millennia, Centuries, the focus is as broad as possible, with a look across hundreds of thousands of years. The idea of timelessness and eternity is touched upon before we zoom into millennia as the plural of millennium. The section then considers the time span of the century that then morphs into Section 2, Centuries, Decades, Years. This is perhaps more obvious for the study of design, which has been most concerned with the design of the nineteenth, twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Belying its roots in the teaching of design practice, the focus has necessarily been on the history of the recent past, what is now termed contemporary history.<sup>24</sup> The final section is devoted to Days, Hours, Seconds and considers the speeding up of the minutiae of everyday life, from the tube train to the process of designing digitized reading matter. As we hurtle into the microseconds that cannot hope to measure the speed of a contemporary computer, we arrive at a moment when all matter dissolves into atoms, back into the endless eternity of the universe, back to where we started from.

