# 1 Designing Stone: Temporal Representation of a Timeless Material SEHER ERDOĞAN FORD

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\auto\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor.md

## 1 Designing Stone: Temporal Representation of a Timeless Material SEHER ERDOĞAN FORD

The philosopher Karsten Harries notes that architects build against the ‘terror of time’.<sup>1</sup> Jeremy Till, the educator and architect, confirms time as the common enemy for those who want total control over their design, and observes architects to be compelled in two directions: those who deny time and those who aim for timelessness.<sup>2</sup> One way of dealing with time entails considering and representing the temporal scale during the design process. While typical modes of architectural representation yield ‘frozen’ imagery – either by capturing a specific moment or by creating a veneer of ‘newness’  – new media technologies offer possibilities for built work to appear on a temporal continuum and to be understood in flux, by situating them in their historical and physical context. Time no longer poses a threat for architectural production if the tools and methodologies for representing it are implemented. Going even further, the representation of historical artefacts as projects that are no longer can offer insights into projects that are yet to be. With that, the critical question arises: How do we draw time? What form(s) and media does the temporal representation of architecture take?

In response to this question, I focus on stone and masonry construction, which are typically considered timeless in material culture. Based on ideas dealing with the close relationship between drawing and making, I propose a method of analysis that can span the extended history of an artefact. To understand the possibilities of drawing stone along the temporal scale, I look at historical, analogue examples – and their manipulation of media  – to propose how digital environments may deliver a tangible and dynamic sense of time. Emerging virtual environments (VEs), particularly those dealing with architectural heritage sites, can help us reimagine what drawings are: not only a mode of representation but also an act of analysis and interpretation. Considering drawing in VE or VE as drawings or even the act of drawing VE offers new insights into the transformation of how we understand what drawings look like, what they deal with and how they function. These projects, considered as a new type of drawing that yields complex VEs, represent stone as applied in its changing historical context and revealing its own making.

