# Notes

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\auto\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor.md

## Notes

1. Colin Pill, ‘Let’s Get Spherical’, Vintage Explorer (February/March 2014): 40.

2. ‘Retro’ here refers to the revival of post-war styles of a ‘long’ 1950s, encompassing the late 1940s and early 1960s.

3. ‘Mediation’ in this context corresponds to what Grace Lees-Maffei calls the ‘mediating channels’ between producers and consumers, which include retailing and advertising. Grace Lees-Maffei, ‘The Production – Consumption – Mediation Paradigm’, Journal of Design History 22, no. 4 (2009): 354.

4. Sarah Elsie Baker, Retro Style:  Class, Gender and Design in the Home (London: Bloomsbury, 2013), 107.

5. Baker, Retro Style.

6. Hilda Kean and Paul Martin (eds), The Public History Reader (London: Routledge, 2013).

7. Zoe Trodd, ‘Reading eBay: Hidden Stores, Subjective Stories, and a People’s History of the Archive’, in Ken Hillis and Michael Petit (eds), Everyday eBay: Culture, Collecting, and

Desire (London: Routledge, 2006), 77–90; Ken Hillis, ‘Auctioning the Authentic: eBay, Narrative Effect, and the Superfluity of Memory’, in Hillis and Petit, Everyday eBay, 167– 84; Baker, Retro Style; Michele White, Buy It Now: Lessons from eBay (Durham: Duke University Press, 2012); Sharon Zukin, Point of Purchase:  How Shopping Changed American Culture (London: Routledge, 2004).

8. See e.g. Christopher Breward and Ghislaine Wood (eds), British Design From 1948:  Innovation in the Modern Age (London:  V&A, 2012); Jonathan M. Woodham, Twentieth-Century Ornament (London:  Studio Vista, 1990); Lesley Jackson, Contemporary: Architecture and Interiors of the 1950s (London: Phaidon, 1994).

9. Heal & Son, ‘Presents for Particular People’, 1953–1956, 2. V&A National Art Library Trade Catalogues Collection.

10. There is insufficient space for a detailed post-war history of ball-and-rod furnishings here. Research informing this section is covered in my doctoral thesis, ‘Mid-Century Molecular: The Material Culture of X-ray Crystallographic Visualisation across Post-war British Science and Industrial Design’, PhD dissertation, Royal College of Art and the Science Museum, 2016.

11. As a result of eBay search experiments carried out between 2013 and 2015 testing the relationship between ball-and-rod objects and several keywords, I  hypothesized that they were most strongly linked to the keyword ‘atomic’. Between May and July 2015, I analyzed the frequency with which ball-and-rod objects appear in results lists generated by searches using the keyword ‘atomic’ through data gathered weekly throughout this three-month period.

12. Office for National Statistics, National Life Tables, United Kingdom, 2012–2014, 23 September 2015, http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171778\_416983.pdf (accessed 26 September 2015).

13. Trodd, ‘Reading eBay’, 88.

14. Bevis Hillier, Austerity/Binge: The Decorative Arts of the Forties and Fifties (London: Studio Vista, 1975), 159.

15. Ibid.

16. Cara Greenberg, Mid-Century Modern (New York: Thames and Hudson, 1984), 45.

17. Paul Rennie, Miller’s 20th-Century Design Buyers Guide (Kent: Miller’s, 2003); Madeleine Marsh, Miller’s Collecting the 1950s (London: Miller’s, 1997); Christopher Pearce, Fifties Source Book: A Visual Guide to the Style of a Decade (London: Quarto, 1990).

18. Marsh, Miller’s Collecting the 1950s, 35, 78; Pearce, Fifties Source Book, 135.

19. Rennie, Miller’s 20th-Century Design.

20. Baker, Retro Style, 101.

21. Baker, Retro Style.

22. Judith Miller, Miller’s 20th Century Design:  The Definitive Illustrated Sourcebook (London: Miller’s, 2009), 146.

23. Cathy Hayes, The Easy eBay Business Guide: The Story of One Person’s Success and a Step-by-Step Guide to Doing It Yourself (London: Right Way, 2014).

24. Trodd, ‘Reading eBay’.

25. Sophie Forgan, ‘Atoms in Wonderland’, History and Technology 19, no. 3 (2003): 182.

26. David Edgerton, The Shock of the Old:  Technology and Global History Since 1900 (London: Profile Books, 2006), xi.

27. Jacques Derrida and Eric Prenowitz, ‘Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression’, Diacritics 25, no. 2 (1995): 17.

28. Raphael Samuel, Theatres of Memory (London: Verso, 1994), 17.

29. Meg Foster, ‘Online and Plugged In?: Public History and Historians in the Digital Age’, Public History Review 21 (2014): 1–19.

30. See Marquard Smith, ‘Theses on the Philosophy of History: The Work of Research in the Age of Digital Searchability and Distributability’, Journal of Visual Culture 12, no. 3 (2013): 375–403.

31. White, Buy It Now, 8.

32. Samuel, Theatres of Memory.

33. Ludmilla Jordanova, History in Practice (London: Arnold, 2000), 103.

34. Edgerton, The Shock of the Old.

