# Section 2 Centuries, Decades, Years

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\auto\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor.md

## Section 2 Centuries, Decades, Years

Chapters in this section consider ‘the archive’ as the physical embodiment of (official) memory and look at the ways in which the nature of the archive is changing in the digital age, prompting us to consider how notion of ‘network time’ might influence our practice as historians. The collective memory-making implied by the formation of the ‘archive’ is a political act: deciding what to keep and how to organize it has a direct relevance for both design historians of the future and design practitioners of the present.

Here we touch on the ways in which structures of time are in some way related to structures of power. That the notion that ‘time’ is a construct and can therefore be interrogated is perhaps particularly pertinent to discussion of design in relation to national identity. As Fallan and Lees Maffei have noted, scholars such as Ernest Gellner, Benedict Anderson and Eric Hobsbawm ‘sought to dismantle the idea of the nation as natural or inevitable’, arguing instead for nations as constructs, ‘the results of concerted engagements in the invention of tradition (Hobsbawm and Ranger1993) and imagined communities (Anderson 1983), albeit with a regrettable emphasis on high culture (Gellner 1983)’.<sup>1</sup> Benedict Anderson argued that the development of the idea of ‘homogenous empty time’ was necessary for the formation of a sense of national identity.<sup>2</sup> He argued that in the nineteenth century, time became understood to proceed in a linear fashion, in equal and measured units, equally available to all. While subsequent historians have taken issue with Anderson’s analysis, it nevertheless provides a useful starting point for discussion, offering a rational, secular and ‘modern’ framework on which to build a national narrative of progress.

A neglect by some historians of the more ‘everyday’ aspects of national identity has been criticized by historians such as Tim Edensor, who argues for the need for greater attention to popular culture. He suggests that aside from its spectacular and official aspects, ‘national identity is grounded in the everyday, in the mundane details of social interaction, habits, routines and practical knowledge’.<sup>3</sup> For Edensor, notions of time, of national identity and of the design of everyday objects can clearly be seen to intersect. This idea is developed by Jessica Jenkins in her chapter on postreunification Germany. Jenkins is interested in the ways in which collective memory operates in the former German Democratic Republic (GDR) via the preservation or erasure of key pieces of public art. The designed environment of streets and buildings, Jenkins argues, are part of the political discourse of collective remembering and forgetting. This is something that has a particular kind of resonance for the former East Germany. As Boyer notes:

In political and cultural discussions of the East, talk of transformation and futurity has been rendered into tropes of stasis and pastness.<sup>4</sup>

The fall of the Berlin Wall symbolized a loss of a particular kind of future that was promised under socialism, hence any discussion of the past, the present and the future is deeply problematic.

Carlos Bártolo explores the Portuguese government’s use of an everyday and familiar item, the pottery cock, derived from the nation’s peasant culture, to fashion a new symbol of nationhood and modernity. Bártolo argues that the Portuguese cock came to be seen as an embodiment of the nation’s morals and virtues, the product of a mythical past, and part of an attempt by the government to erase the present and halt the regular progression of time. Here, an attention to the temporal dimension of design can reveal the way in which ideas about a nation’s past, present and future are wrapped up within the design of one familiar and apparently inconsequential object.

In his chapter on High and Over, the house designed by Amyas Connell for Bernard Ashmole, Michael Findlay draws attention to ways in which time can be seen to fold in on itself in our reading of this one architectural example. Findlay’s suggestion is not simply that Connell drew on the work of Piranesi and of other evidence of Roman architecture in his design of High and Over. Instead, he draws attention to the deep connections between modernist architecture and the classical world, and to High and Over’s complex relationships with past, present and future as a consequence. Here we have another echo across time, since the work of Giovanni Battista Piranesi was discussed by Seher Erdoğan Ford in Chapter 1 in relation to historical practices of architectural depiction.

Emily Candela’s chapter points to the recent phenomenon of the online auction site eBay, which enables users to buy and sell objects, thereby turning unwanted items into desirable collectibles. Candela prompts us to consider how design historians might deal with the assumptions about time and timelessness embodied in notions of so-called retro-designed objects. Her discussion centres on the ‘atomic’ ball-androd furniture that characterized the mid-twentieth century’s faith in scientific progress and the nuclear age. These magazine racks and coffee tables were regarded as lowstatus objects at the time, yet now seem to have gone through a transition process from what Michael Thompson termed ‘rubbish’ to the category of ‘durable’, meaning recognized as increasing in value.<sup>5</sup> Perhaps more than a discussion of retro, however, Candela’s contribution draws attention to the ways in which eBay acts as an unofficia ‘museum’ or ‘archive’, in counterpoint to the official classification systems with which we are familiar. On the one hand, historians such as Raphael Samuel might have applauded eBay’s ability to act as a repository of popular memory and popular history-making.<sup>6</sup> Yet, Candela’s point is that eBay’s users are in a sense its subjects rather than the reverse, and that this has implications for researchers, requiring us to reconsider the ways in which we conceptualize both the future and our engagement with the past.<sup>7</sup>

Discussion of the archive leads us to John Potvin’s chapter on the queer archive, and a consideration of the notion of chrononormativity. Potvin argues that the inclusion of queer theories into the practice of design history is long overdue, and in one sense his contribution is a call to arms. But the relevance of his argument to the theme of time is much more than one of ‘timeliness’:  design history, he suggests, continues to be based on heteronormative assumptions about time and our relationship with the designed world. Once again we are reminded that ‘time’ is not neutral or inevitable but is a socially constructed metaphor, albeit one that has become so all-encompassing that we frequently overlook it.<sup>8</sup> Potvin draws on the work of Elizabeth Freeman, who argues that ‘queer time’ subverts the dominant notion of time and history that assumes a consequential narrative. ‘Heteronormative time’ assumes that individuals’ lifetimes are structured around the goals of heterosexual marriage and the production of children; these assumptions have become so pervasive that they underpin many aspects of society including healthcare, gender roles and  – importantly in this context  – our relationship to both past and future. Freeman’s preference would be ‘to elaborate ways of living aslant to dominant forms of object-choice, coupledom, family, marriage, sociability and self-presentation, and, thus, out of sync with state-sponsored narratives of belonging and becoming’.<sup>9</sup> Just as women’s domestic labour exists in opposition to the rigidly commodified notion of factory time, so queer temporalities also offer a place of resistance to dominant temporalities. There are clear implications here for design historians, as Potvin demonstrates.

