# Section 1 Millennia, Centuries

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\auto\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor.md

# Section 1 Millennia, Centuries

In this section, we consider the broad sweep of time across centuries and into millennia. The three chapters deal with time in the sense of ‘thick time’, events which echo down through hundreds of years and impinge on the understanding, making and history of design. As Jeremy Till has argued, ‘Everyday time is thus thick time, a temporal space that critically gathers the past and also projects the future.’<sup>1</sup> For Till, modern architecture has endeavoured to achieve the negation of time through its whitewashing of dirt as the ultimate trace of the rootedness of building in space and the passing of time.

The argument also relates to the history of design. As Barbara Penner and Charles Rice have argued in the case of the interior history of buildings, ‘Interiors exist physically as environments that can be lived in and visited; they also exist in images and objects that travel through space and across time and seed new ideas about decorations, style and inhabitation as they go.’<sup>2</sup> Judy Attfield devoted an entire chapter to the subject of time in Wild Things: The Material Culture of Everyday Life published in 2000.<sup>3</sup> Attfield argues for a material culture approach to the history of design, which needs to encompass the everyday and well as grand designs. She notes the compression of time and space, elucidated by postmodern scholar David Harvey, and makes a plea for a more subjective understanding of time:

At the conceptual level individuals consciously negotiate their relationship to time through life-choice decisions. But the material world of coffee spoons, clothes, and household goods also keep individuals in touch with life as a sense of timepassing in a day-to-day manner that is not necessarily articulated but just as, if not more, telling.<sup>4</sup>

It is this trans-temporal, non-linear sense of time, beyond analogue clock time that this section attends to.

In Chapter  1, Seher Erdoğan Ford takes the case study of the representation of stone over millennia as the temporal lens. Ford refers to Till in her analysis of the changing ways in which this material has been represented through time. She takes her discussion from early flint arrow-heads up to the latest in virtual reality technology. The apparent timelessness of stone is therefore challenged, and the time-based nature of its visual depiction for a range of specialisms, including archaeology, attests to the importance of thick time for understanding the history of design. How might our physical and tactile perceptions of the ‘age’ and ‘timelessness’ of the material world be challenged by our experience of Virtual Environments (VEs)?

Sally Anne Huxtable takes the work of designer Phoebe Anna Traquair as her subject. This overlooked artist and designer worked during the Victorian era, when Deep Time was controversially introduced in contention with the biblical understanding of time. Huxtable discusses Traquair’s drawings of ancient fossils and links this with the artist’s understanding of evolution within a Christian context. Her Arts and Crafts work is thus examined by way of a unique creative theoretical framework rather than simply as a follower of William Morris. Here a nuanced reading of a designer’s understanding of ‘time’ (meaning more than simply ‘nostalgia’ or ‘longing for the past’) can lead us to a better understanding of that designer’s work.

In Chapter  3, Anne Burke takes us on a train journey across Australia, with a detailed description in a style reminiscent of Nicholson Baker<sup>5</sup> or Iain Sinclair,<sup>6</sup> but this is a journey through unfamiliar territory. She skilfully incorporates a discussion of class separation, colonialism and different perceptions of time. Her glimpses of Aboriginal life and Dreamtime are contrasted with those of the colonizers, brought into stark relief by her occupation of the third class – ‘red’ class – of the train carriage. This different approach to considering the history of design succeeds in layering everyday experience with a broad history, with different perspectives on design and its history. Burke explores the negotiation of historical memory, with reference to landmarks of the aboriginal Dreamtime, in the design and laying of the Ghan’s route. The use of photography in Burke’s essay provides a further layer of meaning: photographs capture a fleeting moment of ephemeral time and ‘preserve’ it forever. These contrasting time perceptions bring together the broad sweep of this section, which consider time from a range of unexpected perspectives and, together, form a reminder that time itself is a cultural construction, which changes over time.

