# 8 A Queer Feeling and Its Future in/for Design History DR JOHN POTVIN / Queer leanings / Professional insinuations / From instinct to feelings

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor\auto\Design, History and Time _ New Temporalities in a Digital -- Hendon, Zoë (editor.md

## 8 A Queer Feeling and Its Future in/for Design History DR JOHN POTVIN

My research in general, and this chapter more specifically, is motivated by the ambition to provide a long overdue intervention into the state of Design History in which the study of sexuality has been systemically ignored and upon which queer theory has seemingly left no discernible trace twenty-five years after it first made its appearance in academic circles and activist networks. What fascinates me is how sexuality continues to be either taken for granted in the case of gay men as interior designers or simply omitted in the case of lesbians. As architect and essayist Joel Sanders once claimed: ‘If the history of the professional decorator has been neglected, the subject of homosexuality and interior decoration has been largely ignored.’<sup>1</sup> In the Journal of Interior Design, Mark Hinchman has more recently noted, even if in passing, that ‘one might think, [. . .], that the issues of design, sexuality, and identity would interest historians [.  .  .] but this [.  . .] remains largely unexpressed’.<sup>2</sup> In key Design History texts by leading scholars focusing on the field’s methodologies, historiography and its possible future directions, sexuality as a path of inquiry has consistently been missing.<sup>3</sup> This fact becomes even more distressing when one considers that the majority of these texts, which proclaimed to provide the blueprint of the future of Design Studies, were written during the most dire period of the AIDS crisis and the development and consolidation of queer theory itself. Yet, neither the texts nor their authors hint at queer theory’s and sexuality’s potential for the study of design and its histories. In short, the complex relationship between the practices and histories of design and sexuality remain the love that dare not speak its name. To what can we attribute this glaring lacuna?

Undoubtedly, the easiest way out of this dilemma is to simply blame the archives. But this would prove short-sighted. By moving in and out of time, this chapter seeks to ask, rather than definitively answer, what a queer design archives might be and concurrently how might we queer Design History and its archival landscape. As a result, without providing a definitive answer, I pose the following series of questions:

• What is a scholar to do when faced with an absence of images and notebooks? Is affect an effective means to fill in blanks, as some have suggested?

• How can queer theory and the study of sexuality more broadly help to shape the design archive?

• How might a queer-activist reading and intervention into historico-archival material provide the groundwork for a future Design History?

• Still excluded from Design Studies and Design History, what is the future of a queer design archive?

• What or how might queer theory intervene in our tacit understanding of the time and temporality of design?

In short, what is the queer future of the design archive and Design History itself?

Speculative and theoretical, my ambition is to queer Design History and its archives as much as it is to locate a queer feeling within and for the archive and history of design. Given the current state of Design History, both, I suggest, are required and equally of value as they offer a necessary critique as well as a recuperative exercise. Within the brief space of this chapter I aim to question, provoke and call upon my reader to help flesh out a long and sadly forgotten history. Finally, by exploring and moving forward queer theory’s more recent attention to queer futurity, this chapter attempts to fold into the narrative of Design History a queer concern for history and its future impact on the discipline and its archival landscape.

Scholarship in many ways parallels how designers and their pedagogues speak of design problems and design solutions, a structural logic that portends to find concrete answers to tangible human needs and demands. Not unlike traditional academic ‘rigour’, with its pretensions to near mathematical precision, design problems call for quantifiable solutions and tangible outcomes, reliant on empirical data. In this context, it can come as no surprise that queer theory and its ambiguous applicability provides a challenge to the so-called rigours of academic and industrial praxis. As the late queer scholar José Esteban Muñoz simply yet cogently queer-ied: ‘Who owns rigor?’ Muñoz provides the answer by claiming that it is to ‘institutional ideology’ that we owe our understanding of a notional rigour.<sup>4</sup> Queer theory all too often is seen as being too preoccupied with the surfaceness of style and taste and is victim, like feminism before it, of ‘lacking historical grounding and conceptual staying power [. . .]. Work and thinking that does not employ and subscribe to traditionalist scholarly archives and methodologies,’ Muñoz asserts, ‘are increasingly viewed as being utterly without merit. Work that attempts to index the anecdotal, the performative, or the ephemeral as proof is often undermined by the academy’s officiating structures.’<sup>5</sup>

## Queer leanings

I begin my excursion through queer theoretical territory by way of a slight diversion; one I hope will situate what I see as a much larger discussion and historical current, one which cannot, however, be fully fleshed out within the scope of this brief chapter. In a review of my recent book Bachelors of a Different Sort:  Queer Aesthetics, Material Culture and the Modern Interior in Britain, one reviewer wrote: ‘Potvin prefers to explore the “mood” of these domestic spaces and some of the ways in which their inhabitants experienced them, although much of the experiential material comes from accounts offered by the ephemeral visits made by guests and/or the carefully orchestrated performances of the occupants.’<sup>6</sup> While I  must confess to originally being affected by the author’s use of ‘mood’ in ironic quotation marks as well as the seemingly dismissive idea that the experiential is largely derived from so-called guests, I soon realized that the nerve it hit spoke to a larger concern at stake. For me, the idea of ‘mood’ and other cognate terms made me think about what constitutes the histories of design and the material world, and perhaps more specifically its objects, subjects and the methodologies best suited to understand this rich history. At the same time, it also seemed to pit ‘mood’ against ‘rigour’ and empirical fact. On another level, the nerve it hit, I  might further suggest, is one activated all too often by a common experience: one of justification in the face of an inhospitable, unaccommodating and incomplete archive which, by its very nature, leaves little, if any, room for marginal histories, however understood. Like many other marginal groups, the queer men I have studied in the past, and continue to investigate, did not leave extensive records, personal impressions or deep archives, seemingly the ‘stuff’ of rigour. Some made painfully clear their desire to have their records and archives destroyed posthumously. The Welsh artist and pedagogue Sir Cedric Morris (1889–1982) comes to mind in this context given that he made explicit his desire for all his letters, diaries and sketches to be destroyed following his death.<sup>7</sup>

Material legacy is a critical facet of the design archive and the site of deep tension, trauma and loss within queer identity and historiography. Elizabeth Freeman offers the notion of chrononormativity to describe the ‘use of time to organise individual human bodies toward maximum productivity’.<sup>8</sup> For Freeman, chrononormativity is the twinned outcome of industrial capitalism and the birth of the sexual deviant, historical realities of the mid- to late-nineteenth century. Following the self-perpetuating necessities of capitalism and its normalizing tendencies, chrononormativity sees its concern ‘beyond individual anatomies to encompass the management of entire populations’. The resulting effects are ‘teleological schemes of events or strategies for living such as marriage, accumulation of health and wealth for the future, reproduction, childrearing, and death and its attendant rituals’.<sup>9</sup> For the dissident queer subject, whose lack of progeny prevents inheritance and eventual cultural legacy, chrononormativity further enables an absence through the measuring, embodiment and progressive heteronormative stages of proper, diachronic and teleological time.

Rather than lamenting the lack of archival abundance and archival opacity, I  read the partial or at times full lack of visual or textual remnants of the spaces and the objects of queer design as products of personal legacies, the effects of history and the architecture of the archives, which I believe in turn compels a different sort of looking, especially as it concerns the history of the professional decorator, for example. In a different context, Peggy Phelan has made a plausible case for the power of invisibility and the potential agency that remaining unmarked might hold. She writes: ‘The binary between the power of visibility and the impotency of invisibility is falsifying. There is real power in remaining unmarked; and there are serious limitations to visual representation as a political goal.’<sup>10</sup> Residing in the unmarked, where moods, atmospheres, feelings and the ephemeral give or enhance the meaning and significance of spaces and objects provides a hidden language for a community outside and yet within the bounds of normative structures and meanings; below the radar, if you will. Moods, atmospheres and feelings are sometimes all we have as historians, and all too often they come from within but also from outside a community, a reminder that certain types of lives – queers in particular – have always been subject to a scrutinizing, surveying gaze.

As feminist queer scholar Anne Cvetkovich asserts, ‘Forged around sexuality and intimacy, and hence forms of privacy and invisibility that are both chosen and enforced, gay and lesbian cultures often leave ephemeral and unusual traces.’<sup>11</sup> This certainly becomes abundantly clear in any investigation of the domestic interior. These so-called ephemeral and unusual traces provide an alternative or queer way through Walter Benjamin’s well-cited notion of the ‘traces of inhabitation’. For Benjamin, faced with the effects of industrial modernity, the bourgeois sets out to ‘compensate for the absence of any trace of private life in the big city. He tries to do this within the four walls of his apartment. [. . .] Indefatigably, he takes the impression of a host of objects. [. . .] He has marked preference for velour and plush, which preserve the imprint of all contact. [. . .] The traces of its inhabitant are moulded into the interior’.<sup>12</sup> In another context, Benjamin also concludes that ‘photography made it possible for the first time to preserve permanent and unmistakable traces of a human being’.<sup>13</sup> The advent of the modern/ist interior was greatly facilitated by and earned its success almost entirely due to the rich photographic culture it generated.<sup>14</sup> As a critique to the hermeneutics of archival evidence, it might be prudent not to fall into the trap of the visibility of representation.

How the so-called traces of inhabitation, the material evidence of being in the world, is outlined, analysed and interpreted is a rather complicated and tense site for the queer subject. Ephemeral traces such as moods, gossip and innuendo are important facets of queer object relations. As Muñoz importantly notes,

Queerness is often transmitted covertly. This has everything to do with the fact that leaving too much of a trace has often meant that the queer subject has left herself open for attack. [. . .] Queer acts, like queer performances, and various performances of queerness, stand as evidence of queer lives, powers, and possibilities. <sup>15</sup>

Cvetkovich also writes:

Lesbian and gay history demands a radical archive of emotion in order to document intimacy, sexuality, love, and activism, all areas of experience that are difficult to chronicle through the materials of a traditional archive. Moreover, gay and lesbian archives address the traumatic loss of history that has accompanied sexual life . . . and they assert the role of memory and affect in compensating for institutional neglect [. . .]. Memories can cohere around objects in unpredictable ways, and the task of the archivist of emotion is thus an unusual one.<sup>16</sup>

What this suggests is an alternative pathway into the design archive; a method that takes into consideration the important ways instinct, affect, mood and feeling can and do affect the history of design and the modern interior.

## Professional insinuations

In one of two foundational essays from 1895, American decorator Candice Wheeler was among the very first to claim interior decoration as a suitable and natural profession for women. For her, the domestic realm was already largely understood to be the purview of women, themselves relegated to its confines. However, it was less social realities than a seemingly inherent instinct that gave women their clear advantage. According to Wheeler, ‘the apparently instinctive knowledge which women have of textiles, and which men have not, the intimate knowledge of the conveniences of domestic life – conveniences which may also be used as factors in a scheme of beauty – are great advantages to women who make this choice of a profession’.<sup>17</sup> Even before Wheeler’s brief but effective treatise extoling the virtues and social significance of legitimate professional women, Jacob von Falke asserted that ‘taste in women may, on the contrary [to men], be said to be natural to her sex. She is the mistress of the house in which she rules and which she orders like a queen.’<sup>18</sup>

Not long after, Elsie de Wolfe also affirmed that the domestic interior and its decoration was not the domain of men:

We take it for granted that every woman is interested in houses – that she either has a home in course of construction, or dreams of having one, or has had a house long enough wrong to wish it right. And we take it for granted that this American home is always a woman’s home: a man may build and decorate a beautiful house, but it remains for a woman to make a home of it for him. It is the personality of the mistress that the house expresses. Men are forever guests in our homes no matter how much happiness they may find there.<sup>19</sup>

De Wolfe’s choice of words reveals her ambition to legitimate women’s cultural and social position more broadly and more specifically in relation to the home and its decoration; an endeavour she, among others, deemed worthy of recognition. However, two short years later, Frank Alvah Parsons proclaimed, ‘The house is but the externalized man; himself expressed in colour, form, line and texture. To be sure, he is usually limited in means, hampered by a contrary and penurious landlord or by family heirlooms, and often he cannot find just what he wants in the trade; but still the house is his house. It is he.’<sup>20</sup> For Parsons, the home is the material manifestation of male subjectivity.

By the turn of the century, the professional decorating press set out to define the characteristics of the type of character best suited to a profession that ‘appeals to many people who have an inclination for the artistic, and it will appeal to many others who think they see in it possibilities of easily acquiring the ability to produce an income by a genteel vocation’.<sup>21</sup> Designations such ‘artistic’ and ‘genteel’, especially within a context of decoration, could only designate two types of people: women and effeminate men. David M. Halperin emphatically reminds us that ‘effeminacy deserves to be treated independently because it was for a long time defined as a symptom of an excess of what we would call heterosexual as well as homosexual desire. It is therefore a category unto itself.’<sup>22</sup> It is the effeminacy attributed to homosexuality that proves problematic in a cultural context that ensures and sanctions preferred and hegemonic masculinity as distinct from its (feminine) other. The gay decorator’s ‘effeminate manners and voice hinted [and] provided a foil for the “real” man  – productive, reproductive, and resolutely heterosexual’.<sup>23</sup> The effeminate male decorator quickly became a menacing, hybrid figure who was neither true decorator nor true man.

In ‘Interior Desecration’, Dorothy Rothschild narrates the fictional story of an afternoon encounter at the home of Mrs Endicott with a fictional friend, ‘one of our most talented interior decorators’, who was responsible for its decoration. Alistair St Cloud is ‘pale and tall and slim, and he droops a bit, like a wilted lily. He is always just a little weary. He has phenomenally long nervous hands, white and translucent, which are used principally for making languid gestures for though his voice is sweet and low like the wind of the western sea, he speaks but seldom.’<sup>24</sup> Throughout the interiors, ‘the delicate touch of Alistair was visible’. Oversaturated, Rothschild is consumed by the sensational decoration St Cloud has orchestrated. Physician and social critic Max Nordau feared the affective response to decadent and aesthetic decorative objects and interiors when he claimed that, for men like St Cloud, ‘everything in these houses aims at exciting the nerves and dazzling the senses. The disconnected and antithetical effects in all arrangements, the constant contradiction between form and purpose, the outlandishness of most objects, is intended to be bewildering.’<sup>25</sup> Rothschild continues: ‘He paced the floor, one delicate hand on his hip, one pressing his forehead, behind which great thoughts leaped and surged. But inspiration did not come with exercise.’<sup>26</sup> The image evoked is that of the ‘genteel’ and ‘artistic’ decorator. St Cloud embodies the characteristics of the female decorator, whose instinct, taste, affect and feeling are the only means through which to conjure interior décor.

## From instinct to feelings

In The Art of Decoration, Mrs H. R. Haweis made clear that ‘if taste means sensibility and judgement, there may be unhealthy sensibility and prejudiced judgement’.<sup>27</sup> For her part, Wheeler clarified this relationship along gendered lines, asserting that ‘now, truth compels me to confess that the man decorator – if he is not a mere man of trade, as many of them, alas! are – will follow the purpose of the – architect. Perhaps this is because he is more widely educated, and is less interested in and impressed by individual things; he feels them less strongly.’<sup>28</sup> Periodicals like The Upholsterer and Interior Decorator lamented the need for greater education as a means to ameliorate and legitimate the profession. Yet for Wheeler it was precisely education that disabled men from feeling objects as strongly as women did. The male decorator’s lack of feeling, for Wheeler, aligned him perfectly with male architects, and yet for architects too much feeling – or emotion – left a man vulnerable to suspicion of effeminacy. As

I have argued elsewhere, the simple and short, yet powerfully suggestive use of ‘too’ has long been deployed as a highly charged index of queer decadence and excess.<sup>29</sup> It is precisely, however, this excess, this overflowing of too much feeling where I think an important, though misplaced, history within decoration and design resides.

Following Raymond Williams’s notion of the ‘structures of feeling’, which acknowledges the material dimensions that shape feelings, Muñoz points out that ‘the ephemeral work of structures of feeling, is firmly anchored within the social’.<sup>30</sup> I wish to conclude by arguing for the important role ‘feeling’ seems to have played in these early and formative decades of the profession – at least within the Anglo-American context – best exemplified in a cartoon from 17 July 1926 in the New Yorker. In it, a young man and woman sit side by side on a settee. he with a noticeably cinched-in, wasp-like waist. The caption underneath reads as a question from the female companion who asks: ‘I hear you are an interior decorator. Tell me, how does it feel?’ As a question, it may appear simple and perhaps even mundane, but it speaks volumes about the dubious role of the male decorator. Perhaps it is even a trick question. For, at once her question points to an overall sense of professiona attainment and pride, the haptic implications of decoration, a clear (homo)sexual innuendo even and yet, at the same time, speaks to Wheeler’s, among others’, gender bias that affords only women with affective potential. However, in addition to the particular professional dimension of the cartoon, there is also that question of gender, one that harkens back to another similarly dubious and amusing picture from the late nineteenth century. Featured in the 14 June 1879 issue of the satirical periodical Punch, a cartoon by Georges Du Maurier depicts a young ‘Fair Aesthetic’ gazing longingly, almost desperately, at the man to whom she has just been introduced and who is to serve as her dinner companion. Wistful and in earnest, she asks: ‘Are you intense?’ Intensity, after all, is everything, for it is the affective embodiment of the ‘art for art’s sake’ mantra espoused by the willowy, lily-like Aesthetes, male and female alike. However, her companion is the embodiment of the straight-faced, straight-backed indifferent man, who does not even acknowledge her. He is not a kindred spirit, but rather a man without aesthetic inclination or, more exactly, without feeling. In English, to be intense refers to a number of intersecting definitions according to the Oxford English Dictionary. First and foremost, it refers to ‘a quality or condition:  Raised to or existing in a strained or very high degree; very strong or acute; violent, vehement, extreme, excessive; of colour, very deep; of a feeling, ardent.’ It also describes ‘feeling, or susceptible to, intense emotion or affection. Also, manifesting intense emotion or excitability, esp. in aesthetic or intellectual contexts.’ Her companion for the evening exhibits neither signs of excess or ardent, aesthetic feeling, neither emotion nor affection and, finally, he is neither earnest nor ardent. Indeed, he is the perfect foil to the decorator represented decades later in the New Yorker, whose real currency is indeed his feelings. For, without feeling he is simply another straight (up) and respectable man, but with it he is definitively queer.

In the end, feeling, that is, the queer affects of decoration and design itself, as a seemingly integral ingredient of interior decorating, doubles upon itself and offers both a feminist intervention and yet at the same a queer interpolation into the twentieth-century Anglo-American professional interior design landscape. Queer modernist designer and architect Eileen Gray once stated that ‘one must build for man, so that he may rediscover for himself the joy of feeling’.<sup>31</sup> Indeed, what I might assert is a queer history of design is not to be found necessarily in specific objects or entire spaces, but in those moods and feelings we have so long been told to repress throughout history and which require a different type of reading within the archives. These moods and feelings importantly resist and replace the tacit and assumed chrononormative reading of design historical sources. Indeed, as historians, we might do well to ask: How does the history of (interior) design feel? A queer question to be sure.

