# Notes on Contributors Paulina Bren, doctoral candidate at New York University, is currently working on a cultural history of post-Prague Spring Czechoslovakia. She has written extensively on the politics of popular and material culture and its intersections with late communism and ideology in East-Central Europe. David Crowley teaches the history of design at the Royal College of Art, London. He is the author of various books including National Style and Nation-state. Design in Poland from the Vernacular Revival (MUP, 1992) and is co-editor, with Susan E. Reid, of Style and Socialism: Modernity and Material Culture in Post-War Eastern Europe (Berg, 2000). Moving Warsaw, a book on the reconstruction of the Polish capital, will be published by Reaktion Books in 2003. Reuben Fowkes is a doctoral candidate at Essex University, and currently working on art and politics in postwar Eastern Europe. He has written widely on communist-era monumental sculpture in relation to war memorials, the cult of Stalin and the New Man and Woman of the socialist utopia. Katerina Gerasimova received her candidate degree in sociology from the European University at St Petersburg and is an associated researcher at the European University and researcher in the Centre for Independent Social Research in St Petersburg. She is the author of ‘The Soviet Communal Apartment' in J. Smith, ed., Beyond the Limits: The Concept of Space in Russian History and Culture (Helsinki: Studia Historica (62), 1999) and several articles on the history and sociology of housing in St Petersburg in Russian-language journals. Astrid Ihle is currently completing her Ph.D. on ‘GDR Women Photographers. 1949–1961' at the Courtauld Institute of Art in London, England. She worked as assistant to the director of the gallery EIGEN + ART in Berlin from 1995 to 1998. She was curator of Louise Bourgeois. Drawings and Sculptures at the Paula Böttcher Gallery, Berlin, 1999, and is curating an exhibition of photographs by Evelyn Richter at the Goethe-Institut in New York (Autumn 2002). Stephen Lovell is a lecturer in European history at King's College London. He is the author of The Russian Reading Revolution: Print Culture in the Soviet and Post-Soviet Eras (2000), and of Summerfolk: A History of the Dacha, 1710–2000 (Cornell University Press, forthcoming). Karl D. Qualls received his Ph.D. from Georgetown University and is assistant professor of history at Dickinson College. He is the author of Local-Outsider Negotiations in Sevastopol's Postwar Reconstruction, 1944–53', in Provincial Landscapes: The Local Dimensions of Soviet Power, Donald J. Raleigh, ed. (University of Pittsburgh Press, 2001) and Imagining Sevastopol: History and Postwar Community Construction, 1942–1953' (National Identities Journal, forthcoming). He is completing work on a book entitled Raised from Ruins: Localism, Urban Planning, and Reconstruction in Sevastopol, 1943–1953. Susan E. Reid is Lecturer in Russian Visual Arts in the Department of Russian and Slavonic Studies, University of Sheffield. She has published widely on Soviet art and visual culture from Stalin to the 1990s, with a special interest in the Khrushchev period. She is editor, with David Crowley, of Style and Socialism: Modernity and Material Culture in Post-War Eastern Europe (Berg, 2000). Olga Sezneva, doctoral candidate in sociology at New York University, New York, is completing her dissertation on The Russian Life of the German Past: Memory, History and Social Transformations in Kaliningrad, 1945–2000'. She has published widely on the politics of memory and urban history. Her research will appear in a forthcoming book edited by John Czaplicka and Blair Ruble entitled Composing Urban History and the Constitution of Civic Identities. Mark Allen Svede trained in art history and architecture, and is an independent scholar specializing in Latvian visual and material culture of the modern, Soviet and contemporary periods. He is the co-author of Art of the Baltics: The Struggle for Freedom of Artistic Expression under the Soviets, 1945–1991 (Rutgers University Press, 2002), and has made contributions to anthologies, exhibition catalogues and encyclopaedias. Other projects have included restoration of a Soviet underground film and serving as Latvian acquisitions advisor for the Dodge Collection of Nonconformist Art from the Soviet Union, Zimmerli Art Museum at Rutgers.