# Acknowledgments I am greatly indebted to many people who have generously shared their knowledge and time, and offered thoughtful and stimulating insights into the meanings of fashion. This work owes much to the influence and inspiration of my teachers at Yale, especially my thesis advisor, Professor Peter Gay, who has read hundreds of pages on "Fashion and Eroticism" since 1979. I would also like to thank Professors Jules Prown, Robert Herbert, and Nancy Cott; as well as Professor John Brewer (now at Harvard), and Dr. Robert Harding. Judy Coffin offered the original inspiration for my subject when she gave a presentation at Yale on the possible significance of the Victorian corset. Two years later, she provided the pleasantest possible introduction to historical research in Paris. Mark Micale read and commented on several chapters; Anne Higonnet, Anne Schirmeister, and Mary Lee Townsend also offered bibliographical information, assistance, and encouragement. Although this work has benefited greatly from their knowledge of Victorian sexuality, psychoanalysis, women's history, and the analysis of material culture and visual imagery, none of them are responsible for my conclusions (some of which they may not agree with), or for any errors I might have made. Writing is painful, but the research that accompanied it was almost invariably a delight, not least because it enabled me to make the acquaintance of so many interesting and charming individuals in the United States, Great Britain, France, and the Far East. Moving in geographical and roughly chronological order, I would like to begin by thanking the staff of The Costume Institute at The Metropolitan Museum of Art, especially Stella Blum (then Curator), Jean Druesedow, Assistant Curator, and Gordon Stone, Librarian. The late Herbert Callister, of The Wadsworth Atheneum, also showed me some of my first Victorian dresses, which he patiently explained. The staff of the Fashion Institute of Technology—and especially the librarians—smoothed my path at every turn. My grateful thanks to Laura Sinderbrand, Director of the Edward C. Blum Design Laboratory, and Harold Koda, Associate Curator, for arranging for me to see Poiret dresses and Edwardian tea-gowns. Many thanks to Lillian Clagett of the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, and to the staffs of The Brooklyn Museum Art Reference Library, The New York City Public Library, and The Library of Congress. Also to many individuals in The Costume Society of America, among them Elizabeth Ann Coleman of The Brooklyn Museum and Margaret Spicer of Dartmouth College. Michael Ermarth read the first part of the manuscript, vastly improving it. Dr. Peter Whybrow of the Dartmouth Medical School loaned me a rare copy of The Family Doctor. I would also like to express my appreciation to Mrs. Gail Patten for typing part of the text and most of the bibliography. I am profoundly indebted to Helene Roberts for stimulating me to think seriously about clothes, even when we sometimes disagreed in our interpretations. In Great Britain, I would especially like to thank Jane Tozer, Keeper, and Miss Sarah Levitt at The Gallery of English Costume, Platt Hall, who made every visit to Manchester as pleasant as it was informative, with discussions of fashion theory interspersed with viewing tea-gowns, corsets, and lingerie. Anthea Jarvis, Assistant Keeper of Decorative Arts of the Merseyside County Museums, showed me dozens of rare early twentiethcentury dresses. Penelope Byrde, Keeper of Costume, The Museum of Costume, Bath, and her associates there and at The Costume and Fashion Research Centre, arranged for me to see many items of dress and material in the Library. Annette Carruthers, Assistant Keeper of Decorative Arts of The Leicestershire Museum and Art Gallery, took the trouble to show me hundreds of items of corset literature, and provided a valuable service to all fashion historians with her exhibition of period corsetry. Many thanks also to Jacqueline Bailey, Librarian of The Liverpool Polytechnic Art Library, and the librarians of The British Library (including The Colindale Newspaper Library), The National Art Library of The Victoria and Albert Museum, and The Cambridge University Library—especially everyone in the West Room. Grateful acknowledgments to David Doughan, Assistant at The Fawcett Library (women's history); Murial Ross, Chief Librarian at The London College of Fashion; and Susanna van Langenberg, Library and Syndication Manager at The National Magazine Company Limited, all of whom provided valuable assistance. Special thanks are due to Mr. Peter Farrer of Liverpool, for generously sharing his extensive bibliographic knowledge and private library. Thanks also to Miss Cleo Witt, Mrs. Judy Tregidden, Mrs. Doris Langley Moore, and many other members of The Costume Society for their encouragement and excellent suggestions, and for inviting me to give a paper at The Costume Society's 1984 Symposium on "The Meaning of Dress," thus allowing me to test some of my ideas in front of a very knowledgeable audience. Mr. John Gibson permitted me to see and photograph his collection of fashion and corset memorabilia. Friends at Cambridge University offered intelligent criticism and ideas about medical history. Thanks especially to Dr. Toril Moi for obtaining information for me at The Bodleian Library, Oxford. Thanks also to the President and members of Clare Hall for their hospitality that made our year in residence at Cambridge so pleasant. Three individuals in particular offered unique personal insights into the fashions of the early twentieth century. My deepest thanks to Mrs. D., Mrs. I., and Lady Naomi Mitchison, for consenting to be interviewed. In France, I would especially like to thank Madame Fabienne Falluel, Conservateur of the Musée de la Mode et du Costume, for her many kindnesses, and for arranging for me to visit the offices of Le Corset de France. My thanks there to Madame Bonhomme. Although the Bibliothèque Nationale has an intimidating reputation, I found only cordial assistance there. I also enjoyed working at the delightful Library of the Musée des Arts Décoratifs and at the Bibliothèque Forney. Although I was never able to gain admittance to the Centre d'Enseignement et de Documentation du Costume (Union Française des Arts du Costume), I would like to thank Lord and Lady V., for trying to help me do so. In Japan, I would like to thank Mr. Koichi Tsukamoto, President of The Kyoto Costume Institute, and the Director, Atsuo Ohtomo, for permitting me to see the collection on short notice. My thanks also to Miss Atsuko Miyoshi, who took the trouble to show me virtually everything, from hats and corsets to Poiret and Fortuny dresses. To Midori Ogawa and her family, a special thanks for their hospitality, and for helping me learn to tie an obi. Thanks to friends and acquaintances in The People's Republic of China, Indonesia, India, Yemen, Bahrain, and Morocco, for sharing their knowledge of their own costume traditions, without which this study of western fashion would have been immeasurably impoverished. Returning to America, I would like to thank my friends and colleagues at The Smithsonian Institution, especially those associated with the Division of Costume: Claudia Kidwell, Fath Ruffins, Carol Kregloh, Shelly Foote, Barbara Dickstein, Karen Harris, Laurice Stewart, and Brenda Moore. Mrs. Kregloh and I debated the "leg" versus "limb" question; and Mrs. Kidwell's analysis of men's clothing influenced my interpretation of fashion and gender roles. Thanks also to Dr. Laurence Angel, for a provocative discussion about corsets and bone disease. Thanks to my family for all of their support, from baby-sitting to photocopying several entire books at The Library of Congress. And thanks to all of my fashionable friends, especially Jane Barry, Suzie Cahill, Jo Covey, Mary Doering, Susan Hewitt, Mary Scattergood, and Hallie Gay Walden. I would like to thank my editors at Oxford University Press, Nancy Lane and Rosemary Wellner, for their encouragement and meticulous work on the manuscript. Victoria Wong's design was also everything an author could hope for. New York November 1984