## PROLOGUE Introduction Design management is about the management of design. In its most basic sense, design management is about managing design projects; projects paid for by a client, a business or an organization, and carried out by a designer, a design team or a design consultancy. For some, this is where design management stops, but for others, it is more than just a form of project management. Design management as an approach has a myriad of other uses. Design describes both the process of making things (designing), and the product of this process (a design). Design plays a key role in shaping the world and generating new products, systems and services in response to numerous market conditions and user needs. According to a recent Intellectual Property Office (IPO) report, there are 315,000 designers working in the United Kingdom alone, and another 590,000 working in design-related employment. Can design be used to add more value to business? What roles can design play in society and politics? Designers are often labeled as ‘creatives’, but they are just as likely to employ analytical skills when faced with a problem. Similarly, public and private sector managers tend to be quite analytical, but they are just as likely to adopt a creative approach when seeking a business solution. Designers and managers both exhibit the ability to be analytical and creative, but in different ways, using different tools, and with different outcomes. The stereotypes of designers and managers overly-simplifies the complexity of design management (and of people), and this book extends beyond these simple generalizations. Design is intrinsically linked to business, in a way that can both add and create value for organizations and the wider context as a whole. Beyond the superficialities of the style and aesthetics debate, and beyond the simplistic view of designers and managers, there are opportunities for individuals at various stages of their career, working in a wide range of organizations, and at different project stages, to promote and utilize the value of design. Design management is not a clearly defined vocation, career path or academic subject area; no two ‘design managers’ will have the same background, training or experience in how they got to the position of being the decision-maker about the management of design. Design management can be a strategic leadership role, one that requires explaining, inspiring, persuading and demonstrating how design can positively contribute to an organization in many different ways. It can also be a tactical managerial role, where the focus is on delivering a specific project, task or outcome. The aim of this book is to promote a clearer understanding of design’s role in business and the broader context, and the importance of design as a way of creating value in any organization. The book is a guide for students of design, design management, marketing, media communications and business studies, and for anyone involved in the management of design and creativity. The book begins with a contextual overview of design management, which is followed by three ‘parts’. These parts fully explore the management of the design strategy, process and implementation respectively. Part One: Managing the Design Strategy looks at the first stage of design management, where design projects and initiatives are conceived. The focus of this stage is on identifying and creating the conditions in which design projects and ideas can be proposed, commissioned and promoted. At this stage, design management engages design thinking in an organization’s strategy, identifying the opportunities for design, interpreting the needs of its customers, and looking at how design contributes to the overall business. Once an organization has made the decision to invoke a design strategy, design management deals with the establishment and promotion of it, securing the support and commitment of the stakeholders in the business, and planning for long-term growth – not just immediate and shortterm gains. Part One investigates the skills required in managing client relations and guiding design decisions, building relationships, and developing the necessary verbal communications skills to achieve the effective exchange of ideas and information. This stage is about how those responsible for the management of design can inspire design thinking, projects and possibilities. Part Two: Managing the Design Process looks at the second stage of design management, where design projects and agendas are developed. The focus of this stage is on demonstrating how strategy can be made visible and tangible through design. At this point, design management is about how design can be used to craft the presence and experience of an organization, and in doing so influence how the organization and its brand are expressed and perceived. To help identify the management challenges that will be faced when initiating design projects, models from a range of design-related processes and disciplines are provided. Theoretical models can never provide an instant solution, as they are abstract representations of real-life situations, and no single model will fit all solutions. These models are intended as starting points from which to develop project-specific approaches, ones which enable an organization to explore competitive advantage through design. Part Two investigates the skills that are required to effectively manage creative teams, facilitate the design process, lead designers, develop a culture of collaboration and develop solid visual communication skills in order to make thoughts and ideas presentable. This stage is about how those responsible for the management of design can lead design agendas, projects and processes. Part Three: Managing the Design Implementation looks at the stage of design management where design projects and outcomes are delivered. The focus of this stage is the process and practice of managing projects, including the decision-making involved in specifying design materials, working relationships and ethical responsibilities. Once a design project has been completed, the delivery of it can entail further stages of design management, such as developing design guidelines and manuals, the maintenance and evolution of the design, and translating design solutions for the global context. Evaluating the success of the design project allows positive feedback to inform and promote the effective use of design. Part Three investigates the skills required when managing creative projects, such as leading and advocating design project successes, developing good written communication skills and understanding the differences between the management and the leadership of design agendas. This stage is about how those responsible for the management of design can manage design agendas, projects and people.