Fairchild Books An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc 50 Bedford Square 1385 Broadway London New York WC1B 3DP NY 10018 UK USA www.bloomsbury.com Bloomsbury is a registered trade mark of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc This electronic edition published in 2015 by Bloomsbury Publishing Plc First published 2015 © Bloomsbury Publishing Plc, 2015 ## All rights reserved You may not copy, distribute, transmit, reproduce or otherwise make available this publication (or any part of it) in any form, or by any means (including without limitation electronic, digital, optical, mechanical, photocopying, printing, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of the publisher. Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages. Kathryn Best has asserted her right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as author of this work. No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting on or refraining from action as a result of the material in this publication can be accepted by Bloomsbury or the author. ## British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. ISBN: PB: 978-1-4725-7367-4 ePDF: 978-1-4725-7368-1 ePub: 978-1-4742-6037-4 ## Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Best, Kathryn. Design management : managing design strategy, process, and implementation / Kathryn Best. Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-1-4725-7367-4 (alk. paper) – ISBN 978-14725-7368-1 (ePDF) 1. Industrial design – Management. I. Title. TS171.4.B46 2015 658.5 – dc23 To find out more about our authors and books visit www.bloomsbury.com. Here you will find extracts, author interviews, details of forthcoming events and the option to sign up for our newsletters.