learning organization and systemic integration the design disciplines of communication, construction, and strategic planning do not disappear. They are given new expression and development in the context of integration, where many kinds of knowledge and the participation of many people withdifferent backgrounds and perspectives are required for effective product development.

However, it is not my goal in this paper to address the specific changes that are now underway in the design professions, design education, and some of the leading corporations and design consultancies in an effort to rethink the meaning of design in the new circumstances of organizational learning.19Rather, I want to explain the bearing of strategic planning and systemic integration on Branzi's dilemma, because these themes, operating in the philosophic engine of contemporary culture, suggest a third alternative which Branzi and others do not consider.

## Design, Humanism, and the Philosophy of Culture

Branzi's dilemma presents two choices: the individual in the contemporary world may find identity and moral purpose either in individual vision, personal codes, pluralistic diversity, and tribalism or in a new general ideology—whatever that ideology may be— substituted for the old ideology of modernism. We have argued that both alternatives are distasteful and dangerous. Reliance on personal vision may easily lead not to productive pluralism but to relativism and a struggle for tribal power that ultimately suppresses alternative views. In turn, reliance on a new general ideology begs the question of what that ideology should be. We do not individually create a new cultural ideology; the candidates (such as Branzi's second modernity) are most likely to be no more than the projection of individual and tribal visions, as if they had universal warrant and assent.

The either/or form of the dilemma is characteristic of the style of argumentation in the impoverished two-term dialectic of most postmodernist theory. For example, some writers delight in the exercise of presenting two parallel columns of terms, with “modernist" terms on one side and opposing “postmodernist“ terms on the other side, as if history or intelligence offered a clear choice between one term or the other. However, if we are correct in identifying deliberation and dialogue—dialogue as a new form of rhetoric and dialectic in community activity—as central themes in the new circumstances of the contemporaryworld, then a third alternative also exists, representing a more supple three-term dialectic suited to the needs of our complex situation. The third term is the mediated middle in any good discussion. It is the domain, not of dogmatically asserted truth on either side of an issue, but of honest uncertainty, hypothesis, and possibility. It is the domain of cooperation in common enterprise, despite differences of personal values or ideologies.

The key to this alternative lies in what we mean by culture and, subsequently, in a new relationship between culture and the individual. If culture is ideology, then there can be no single culture: noideology achieves universal assent in thehumancommunity. Instead, there are many cultures, often in conflict and competition with each other on an ideological battlefield. Indeed, culture-asideology may be a tired and decadent stage in the development of culture, when conservative forces attempt to consolidate a particular philosophic, religious, or political position and close-off further exploration, hastening a descent into tribalism.But if culture is an activity of ordering, disordering, and reordering in an ongoing search for principles and their expression, then the picture changes Culture can be, in the words of philosopher Richard McKeon, "the framework within which many cultures are developed, interact, and communicate." 20Instead of a new ideology shared by allin the contemporary world, there is the alternative of responsible discussion, deliberation, and collaborative decision-making on critical issues of action, where the participants recognize that there may be some truth in the arguments, beliefs, and perceptions of their opposing colleagues.

The hope for such an alternative may seem dim at the moment. We are moving through a difficult period where conflicting values often seem irreconcilable in practical affairs. Yet this is where design and the work of designers may offer an exampleof new ways of thinking and acting. By focusing on concrete problems and practicalsituations—on what designer's call "the project"— design shifts attention away from ideology and theory as the ultimate goal of cooperative work and towards action and production This does not lessen the value of theory, but it makes theory accountable in the objective results of what is done andwhat is made.

Perhaps the focus on the concrete and objective is one reason why design attracts increasing attention in the contemporary world and is given broader scope than at any time in the past: there is hope that design thinking, applied in many new areas, can serve as an alternativeto the old formsof technocracy based onscientific specialization, where experts in narrow areas of learning once believed that they could improve and enrich life merely by applying technical knowledge to solve the problems of everyday life. In contrast with technocracy, design increasingly seeks to include in its processes of deliberation and decision-making all of those who will be affected by a new product. This is not a vague or sentimental gesture. The new disciplines of strategic design planning and systemic integration, as they are now explored by many designers, are providing theinstrumentalities for inclusion in the group processes of product development. They are providing tools for addressing the conflict of competing values and directing attention towards agreement on what is possible.

The result of the new disciplines of design thinking is typically not agreement on an ideology that may stand behind a new product. Instead, the result is an agreement that this or that is what shall be done today, so that ideological disagreement may be suspended and production move forward with the support of all of those involved in the planning process. Such support—practical agreements reached through discussion—serves as the shared vision of a group and as the ground for objective evaluation and choice among competing alternatives in product development. The ground is a mediated middle of reasonable possibility and intentional operations, not a claim of universal infallibility or truth. It is a contribution to the search that we have described as culture. Instead of a new general ideology that is substituted for modernism, design can advance culture as a an ongoing search for values and understanding.²

There is an important parallel between this approach to contemporary culture and the earlier cultural revolution in man's relation to nature that occurred at the beginning of the twentieth century. Philosopher John Dewey explains the earlier revolution as a change in the center of the universe: from the mind seeking to understand a separate exterior material world to the mind as part of nature.

The old center [of the universe] was the mind knowing by means of an equipment of powers complete within itself, and merely exercised upon an antecedent external material equally complete in itself. The new center is indefinite interactions taking place within a course of nature which is not fixed and complete, but which is capable of direction to new and different results through the mediation of intentional operations.

In the new turn of the revolution that began in the early decades of the twentieth century, culture is not a fixed ideology existing outside the individual, something comparable to the old metaphysical idea of nature. We are all embedded in the course of a culture that is not fixed and complete. Culture is what we do individually and together through our intentional operations and projects.

In contrast to Branzi's dilemma, where individuality is threatened ineither of the twoalternatives—threatened bythe power of tribes or submerged in an oppressive ideological order— the new philosophy of culture offers a suitable ground for defending the individual. Universality in the new philosophy of culture is not achieved through consensus in a general ideology.Rather, universality is an expression of individuality placed in its context. The emphasis is on the dynamic functional relations among individuals and groups, not on the old dichotomies of ideology which impede interaction. Paradoxically, collaborative work and the group processes which play an increasingly important role in the design and development of complex products is not a threat to individual vision. The task of the individual is to find his or her place in relation to others, and this is precisely what is at stake in exploring values in the context of what is good, just, useful, and pleasurable. Identity and moral purpose come from considering our relations with others, from learningto perceive what is trueand valuable when the world is regarded from other perspectives. The pluralism of individual perspectives is essential to ensure that the exploration does not become entrapped in a single ideology. Design is the most vivid domain for this cultural activity in the contemporary world, because it deals with concrete and objective results whose consequences affect us all.

## Conclusion: Designing for the individual

There is one observation that has immediate bearing on the work of designers today. If the arguments we have advanced are valid and useful, the task is no longer to design for a universal audience, or national groups, or market segments, or even the ideological abstraction known as“the consumer." Despite the continuing role of mass-production in many societies, the task is to design for the individual placed in his or her immediate context. Our products should support the individual in the effort to become an active participant in culture, searching for locally significant coherence and connection. Products should be personal pathways in the otherwise confusing ecology of culture.

Designing such pathways is a difficult challenge. However, there is some hope that designers are increasingly equipped for the task. Improvement of design educationmay help to make them more sensitive to the individual than they already are, while also increasing their awareness of the diverse kinds of knowledge that bear on design. There is no reason to be unhappy with the pluralism of design explorations in the contemporary world, so long as these explorations are not entrapped in ideology and each of us may pursue our own paths in design within the reasonable boundsof responsibility, based on informed discussions of what is good, just, useful, and pleasurable. We may be distressed by some of the work that we see in graphic and industrial design today and delighted by a wide range of other work. Design is very young and has far to go in the exploration of its role in culture. For many of us, this means better understanding of the disciplines of design thinking, not merely changes in style and surface treatment. Our hope that the quality of discussion about design continues to improve and that designers do not become afraid of having their ideas and work subjected to wider and more insightful discussion than in the past. We all have much to learn about living together in a culture that is not fixed and changeless, and this is both our pleasure and our responsibility.