## Notes ## Prologue 1. Gaby Wood, Living Dolls (London: Faber and Faber, 2002), xix. 2. See Marina Warner, “The Making of Pandora,” in Warner, Monuments and Maidens: The Allegory of the Female Form (New York: Vintage, 1996), 214–219. 3. This is testimony Oppenheimer gave to a government committee in 1954, reprinted in Jeremy Bernstein, Oppenheimer: Portrait of an Enigma (London: Duckworth, 2004), 121–122. 4. Two illuminating if depressing studies are Nicholas Stern, The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), and George Monbiot, Heat: How to Stop the Planet from Burning (London: Penguin, 2007). 5. Martin Rees, Our Final Century? Will the Human Race Survive the Twenty-First Century? (London: Random House, 2003). 6. Heidegger quoted in Daniel Bell, Communitarianism and Its Critics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993), 89. See also Catherine Zuckert, “Martin Heidegger: His Philosophy and His Politics,” Political Theory, February 1990, 71, and Peter Kempt, “Heidegger’s Greatness and His Blindness,” Philosophy and Social Criticism, April 1989, 121. 7. Martin Heidegger, “Building, Dwelling, Thinking,” in Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, trans. Albert Hofstadter (New York: Harper and Row, 1971), 149. 8. See Adam Sharr, Heidegger’s Hut (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2006). 9. Quoted by Amartya Sen in The Argumentative Indian: Writings on Indian History, Culture and Identity (London: Penguin, 2005), 5. 10. Quoted in Bernstein, Oppenheimer, 89. 11. David Cassidy, J. Robert Oppenheimer and the American Century (New York: Pi, 2005), 343. 12. Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition [1958], 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 176. 13. See ibid., 9, or again, 246. 14. Raymond Williams, “Culture,” in Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (London: Fontana, 1983), 87–93. 15. See Georg Simmel, “The Stranger,” in The Sociology of Georg Simmel, trans. and ed. Kurt Wolff (New York: Free Press, 1964). 16. John Maynard Smith, The Theory of Evolution (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 311. ## CHAPTER 1. The Troubled Craftsman 1. “‘Homeric Hymn to Hephaestus,” in H. G. Evelyn-White, trans., Hesiod, the Homeric Hymns, and Homerica (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Loeb Classical Library, 1914), 447. 2. Indra Kagis McEwen, Socrates’ Ancestor: An Essay on Architectural Beginnings (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1997), 119. My thanks to McEwen for connecting weaving, boat making, and urban design in ancient Greece. 3. See ibid., 72–73, for a full list. 4. For a summary of the few literary descriptions of potters, see W. Miller, Daedalus and Thespis: The Contributions of the Ancient Dramatic Poets to Our Knowledge of the Arts and Crafts of Greece, 3 vols. in 5 (New York: Macmillan, 1929–1932), 3:690–693. 5. Aristotle Metaphysics 981a30–b2. The English translation appears in Hugh Tredennick, ed., The Metaphysics (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Loeb Classical Library, 1933). 6. Again, my thanks to Indra Kagis McEwen for pointing this out. 7. See Richard Sennett, Flesh and Stone: The Body and the City in Western Civilization (New York: W. W. Norton, 1993), 42–43. 8. Plato Symposium 205b–c. 9. For a good general description, see Glyn Moody, Rebel Code: Linus and the Open Source Revolution (New York: Perseus, 2002). 10. The standards used by the Open Source Initiative can be found on http://opensource.org/docs/def–print.php. 11. See Eric S. Raymond, The Cathedral and the Bazaar: Musings on Linux and Open Source by an Accidental Revolutionary (Cambridge, Mass.: O’Reilly Linux, 1999). 12. Two views of the social problem involved are Eric Hippel and Georg von Krogh, “Open Source Software and the ‘Private Collective’ Innovational Model,” Organization Science 14 (2003), 209–233, and Sharma Srinarayan et al., “A Framework for Creating Hybrid-Open Source Software Communities,” Information Systems Journal 12 (2002), 7– 25. 13. See André Leroi-Gourhan, Milieu et techniques, vol. 2 (Paris: AlbinMichel, 1945), 606–624. 14. C. Wright Mills, White Collar: The American Middle Classes (New York: Oxford University Press, 1951), 220–223. 15. Karl Marx, The Grundrisse, trans. Martin Nicolaus (New York: Vintage, 1973), 301. 16. Ibid., 324. 17. Karl Marx, “Critique of the Gotha Program,” in Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Selected Works (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1968), 324. 18. Darren Thiel, “Builders: The Social Organisation of a Construction Site” (Ph.D. thesis, University of London, 2005). 19. Martin Fackler, “Japanese Fret That Quality Is in Decline,” New York Times, Sept. 21, 2006, A1, C4. 20. Richard K. Lester and Michael J. Piore, Innovation, the Missing Dimension (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2004), 98. 21. Ibid., 104. 22. The three books in this study are: Richard Sennett, The Corrosion of Character: The Personal Consequences of Work in the New Capitalism (New York: W. W. Norton, 1998); Sennett, Respect in a World of Inequality (New York: W. W. Norton, 2003); and Sennett, The Culture of the New Capitalism (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2006). 23. See Christopher Jencks, Who Gets Ahead? The Determinants of Economic Success in America (New York: Wiley, 1979); Gary Burtless and Christopher Jencks, “American Inequality and Its Consequences,” discussion paper (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, March 2003); and Alan Blinder, “Outsourcing: Bigger Than You Thought,” American Prospect, November 2006, 44–46. 24. For this debate, see Robert D. Putnam, Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2000), and Sennett, Corrosion of Character. 25. For a good general study, see Wayne Carlson, A Critical History of Computer Graphics and Animation (Ohio State University, 2003), available at http://accad.osu.edu/waynec/history/lessons.html. 26. Sherry Turkle, Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995), 64, 281n20. 27. Quoted in Edward Robbins, Why Architects Draw (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1994), 126. ## 28. Ibid. 29. Quoted in Sherry Turkle, “Seeing through Computers: Education in a Culture of Simulation (Advantages and Disadvantages of Computer Simulation),” American Prospect, March–April 1997, 81. 30. Elliot Felix, “Drawing Digitally,” presentation at Urban Design Seminar, MIT, Cambridge, Mass., 4 October 2005. 31. Bent Flyvbjerg, Nils Bruzelius, and Werner Rothengatter, Megaprojects and Risk: An Anatomy of Ambition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 11–21. See also Peter Hall, Great Planning Disasters (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1980). 32. For an excellent journalistic account of how piecework defines medical practice, see Atul Gawande, “Piecework,” New Yorker, Apr. 4, 2005, 44–53. 33. The most concise statement of this view is Julian Legrand, The Provision of Health Care: Is the Public Sector Ethically Superior to the Private Sector? (London: LSE Books, 2001). 34. A good guide to views on practice appeared in the debate on the privatization of nursing at the 2006 conference of the Royal Council of Nursing. This material can be found on their Web site at http://www.rcn.org.uk/news/congress/2006/5.php. 35. The complete text of the speech can most easily be found online: http://bma.org.uk/ap.nsf/content/ARM2006JJohnson. ## CHAPTER 2. The Workshop 1. Quoted, in English, in Peter Brown, Augustine of Hippo: A Biography (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967), 143. 2. Augustine, Sermons. The Standard Edition authorized by the Vatican uses a common system of reference in all languages. This key passage occurs in 67,2. 3. See Richard Sennett, Flesh and Stone: The Body and the City in Western Civilization (New York: W. W. Norton, 1993), 152–153. 4. See Ernst Kantorowicz, The King’s Two Bodies: A Study in Mediaeval Political Theology (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1981), 316ff. 5. Robert S. Lopez, The Commercial Revolution of the Middle Ages, 950–1350 (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1971), 127. 6. Sennett, Flesh and Stone, 201. 7. Edward Lucie-Smith, The Story of Craft (New York: Van Nostrand, 1984), 115. 8. See J. F. Hayward, Virtuoso Goldsmiths and the Triumph of Mannerism, 1540–1620 (New York: Rizzoli International, 1976). 9. Ibn Khaldun, The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History, abridged version, trans. Franz Rosenthal, ed. and abridged N. J. Dawood (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2004), 285–289. 10. Bronislaw Geremek, Le salariat dans l’artisinat parisien aux XIIIe–XVe siè-cles: Étude sur la main d’oeuvre au moyen âge (Paris: Mouton, 1968), 42. 11. Gervase Rosser, “Crafts, Guilds and the Negotiation of Work in the Medieval Town,” Past and Present 154 (February 1997), 9. 12. See Hayward, Virtuoso Goldsmiths. 13. See Benjamin Woolley, The Queen’s Conjurer: The Science and Magic of Dr. John Dee, Adviser to Queen Elizabeth I (New York: Holt, 2001), 251. 14. Keith Thomas, Religion and the Decline of Magic (London: Penguin, 1991), 321. 15. S. R. Epstein, “Guilds, Apprenticeship, and Technological Change,” Journal of Economic History 58 (1998), 691. 16. See Philippe Ariès, Centuries of Childhood: A Social History of Family Life, trans. Robert Baldick (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1962). 17. For an interesting discussion of this, see Rosser, “Crafts, Guilds, and Negotiation of Work,” 16–17. 18. Ibid., 17. 19. See Rudolf and Margot Wittkower, Born under Saturn; The Character and Conduct of Artists: A Documented History from Antiquity to the French Revolution (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1963), 91–95, 134–135; or again, Lucie-Smith, Story of Craft, 149. 20. See Wittkower and Wittkower, Born under Saturn, 139–142. 21. Benvenuto Cellini, Autobiography, trans. George Bull (London: Penguin, 1998), xix. The translator, like all scholars of Cellini, owes much to the textual labors of Paolo Rossi. Rossi struggled with establishing the text of this sonnet, and even in clear copy the Italian is not straightforward in sense. I have taken the liberty of inserting “only” before “one” in the lines I have quoted because this is what the boast seems meant to imply; remove my insertion, and it remains an astounding statement. 22. T. E. Heslop, “Hierarchies and Medieval Art,” in Peter Dormer, ed., The Culture of Craft (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1997), 59. 23. See John Hale, The Civilization of Europe in the Renaissance (New York: Atheneum, 1994), 279–281. 24. The following account is indebted to the Royal Commission on the Historical Monuments of England, which has reconstructed the sequence of building in “The Cathedral Church of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Salisbury” from 1220 to 1900. I thank Robert Scott for making this map available. 25. Augustine quoted in Stephen J. Greenblatt, Renaissance Self-Fashioning: From More to Shakespeare (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981), 2. 26. Benvenuto Cellini, Autobiography, trans. George Bull (London: Penguin, 1998), xiv– xv. 27. See Elizabeth Wilson, Mstislav Rostropovich: The Legend of Class 19 (London: Faber and Faber, 2007), chaps. 11, 12. 28. See Toby Faber, Stradivarius (London: Macmillan, 2004), 50–66. Though Faber is both accurate and evocative, the reader in search of a more technical account should consult what is still the greatest of all Stradivarius studies: William H. Hill, Arthur F. Hill, and Alfred Ebsworth, Antonio Stradivari [1902] (New York: Dover, 1963). Another biographical source is Charles Beare and Bruce Carlson, Antonio Stradivari: The Cremona Exhibition of 1987 (London: J. and A. Beare, 1993). ## 29. See Faber, Stradivarius, 59. 30. Duane Rosengard and Carlo Chiesa, “Guarneri del Gesù: A Brief History,” in Metropolitan Museum catalogue for the exhibition, The Violin Masterpieces of Guarneri del Gesù (London: Peter Biddulph, 1994), 15. 31. Almost every issue of the luthiers’ professional journal, The Strad, is occupied with these problems. A particularly good guide to the varnishing issues in particular remains L. M. Condax, Final Summary Report of the Violin Varnish Research Project (Pittsburgh: n.p., 1970). 32. John Donne, Complete Poetry of John Donne, ed. John Hayward (London: Nonesuch, 1929), 365. 33. Robert K. Merton, On the Shoulders of Giants (New York: Free Press, 1965). 34. Etienne de la Boétie, The Politics of Obedience: The Discourse of Voluntary Servitude [1552–53], trans. Harry Kurz (Auburn, Ala.: Mises Institute, 1975), 42. ## CHAPTER 3. Machines 1. See Simon Schama, The Embarrassment of Riches: An Interpretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden Age, 2nd ed. (London: Fontana, 1988). 2. Jerry Brotton and Lisa Jardine, Global Interests: Renaissance Art between East and West (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2000). 3. John Hale, The Civilization of Europe in the Renaissance (New York: Atheneum, 1994), 266. 4. Werner Sombart, Luxury and Capitalism [1913], trans. W. R. Dittmar (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1967), esp. 58–112. 5. See Geoffrey Scott, The Architecture of Humanism: A Study in the History of Taste (Princeton, N.J.: Architectural Press, 1980). 6. These replicants have speaking roles in Thomas Pynchon’s novel Mason and Dixon (New York: Henry Holt, 1997). Gaby Wood provides more precise and purely historical information: see Wood, Living Dolls (London: Faber and Faber, 2002), 21–24. ## 7. Wood, Living Dolls, 38. 8. Immanuel Kant, “Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?” Berlinische Monatsschrift 4 (1784), 481. I am indebted to James Schmidt for this English translation, in Schmidt, What Is Enlightenment? Eighteenth-Century Answers and Twentieth-Century Questions (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), 58. 9. Moses Mendelssohn, “Über die Frage: ‘Was heisst aufklären?’” Berlinische Monatsschrift 4 (1784), 193. 10. Mendelssohn’s original reply was published in the Berlinische Monatsschrift 4 (1784), 193–200; the phrase comes from a letter to August v. Hennings in that same year, appearing in Moses Mendelssohn, Gesammelte Schriften Jubiläumsausgabe, vol. 13, Briefwechsel III (Stuttgart: Frommann, 1977), 234. 11. I am grateful to the late Karl Weintraub, of the University of Chicago, for drawing the connection between Mendelssohn and Diderot to my attention. Unfortunately, Weintraub did not live to complete his essay on their relations. His extant writings (he wrote little but always authoritatively) are best found in Karl Weintraub, Visions of Culture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969). 12. The original text is Denis Diderot and Jean d’Alembert, Encyclopédie, ou Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers, par une société de gens de lettres, 28 vols. (Paris: various printers, 1751–1772). I’ll be using in English translation the Dover edition (1959) of parts of this immense work, well if anonymously translated. To understand the complexities of the publishing enterprise, see Robert Darnton, The Business of Enlightenment: A Publishing History of the Encyclopédie, 1775–1800 (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1979). 13. The best life in English remains, in my view, N. Furbank, Diderot (London: Secker and Warburg, 1992). 14. Philipp Blom, Encyclopédie (London: Fourth Estate, 2004), 43–44. 15. Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments [1759] (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979), 9. 16. David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, ed. E. C. Mossner (London: Penguin, 1985), 627. 17. Jerrold Siegel, The Idea of the Self: Thought and Experience in Western Europe since the Seventeenth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 352. 18. C. Wright Mills, The Sociological Imagination (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959), 223; Adriano Tilgher, Work: What It Has Meant to Men through the Ages (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1930), 63. 19. See Albert O. Hirschmann, The Passions and the Interests: Political Arguments for Capitalism before Its Triumph (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1992). 20. Quoted in Furbank, Diderot, 40. 21. Ibid., as for the sentences quoted in the next paragraphs. 22. Sabine Melchior-Bonnet, The Mirror: A History, trans. Katharine H. Jewett (London: Routledge, 2002), 54. 23. The reader interested in teasing out this complicated history might look at three classics: Lawrence Stone, Family, Sex, and Marriage in England, 1500– 1800 (London: Penguin, 1990); Edward Shorter, Making of the Modern Family (London: Fontana, 1977); and Philippe Ariès, Centuries of Childhood: A Social History of Family Life, trans. Robert Baldick (London: Penguin, 1973). 24. See Francis Steegmuller, A Woman, a Man, and Two Kingdoms: The Story of Madame D’Épinay and the Abbé Galiani (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1991), and Ruth Plaut Weinreb, Eagle in a Gauze Cage: Louise D’Epinay, Femme de Lettres (New York: AMS Press, 1993). 25. Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, vol. 1 [1776] (London: Methuen, 1961), 302–3. 26. David Brody, Steelworkers in America, rev. ed. (Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1998), gives an excellent general picture of the steel industry in the nineteenth century. 27. See Richard Sennett, The Corrosion of Character (New York: W. W. Norton, 1998), 122–135. 28. The two volumes of Tim Hilton’s biography are John Ruskin, The Early Years and John Ruskin, The Later Years (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1985, 2000). 29. For a review of this literature, see Richard Sennett, The Culture of the New Capitalism (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2006), chap. 3. 30. The concept of a “type-form” owes to Harvey Molotch, Where Stuff Comes From: How Toasters, Toilets, Cars, Computers, and Many Other Things Come to Be as They Are (New York: Routledge, 2003), 97, 103–105. 31. For information on the history of plate glass, see Richard Sennett, The Conscience of the Eye: The Design and Social Life of Cities (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1990), 106–114. 32. The reader might want to know that I’ve described both the Great Exposition and in particular Count Dunin’s robot in more detail in a historical novel. See Richard Sennett, Palais-Royal (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1987), 228–237. 33. Quoted in Hilton, Ruskin, The Early Years, 202–203. 34. John Ruskin, The Stones of Venice [1851–1853] (New York: Da Capo, 2003), 35. 35. The following is summarized from John Ruskin, The Seven Lamps of Architecture, in the original 1849 “working-man’s edition” (reprint, London: George Routledge and Sons, 1901). 36. For a full account of this phenomenon, see Richard Sennett, The Fall of Public Man (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1977), pt. 3. 37. Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class [1899], in The Portable Veblen, ed. Max Lerner (New York: Viking, 1948), 192. 38. A useful compendium of Veblen’s rather scattered ideas on conspicuous consumption is Penguin Great Ideas: Conspicuous Consumption (London: Penguin, 2005). 39. Mills, Sociological Imagination, 224. ## CHAPTER 4. Material Consciousness 1. For the potter’s wheel, see Joseph Noble, “Pottery Manufacture,” in Carl Roebuck, ed., The Muses at Work: Arts, Crafts, and Professions in Ancient Greece and Rome (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1969), 120–122. 2. Suzanne Staubach, Clay: The History and Evolution of Humankind’s Relationship with Earth’s Most Primal Element (New York: Berkley, 2005), 67. 3. John Boardman, The History of Greek Vases (London: Thames and Hudson, 2001), 40. 4. See E. R. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational, 2nd ed. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004), 135–144. 5. For an excellent summary, see Richard C. Vitzthum, Materialism: An Affirmative History and Definition (Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus Books, 1995), 25–30. 6. Plato Republic 509d–513e. 7. Plato Theaetitus 181b–190a. 8. See Andrea Wilson Nightingale, Spectacles of Truth in Classical Greek Philosophy: Theoria in Its Cultural Context (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005). 9. M. F. Burnyeat, “Long Walk to Wisdom,” TLS, Feb. 24, 2006, 9. 10. Harvey Molotch, Where Stuff Comes From: How Toasters, Toilets, Cars, Computers, and Many Others Things Come to Be as They Are (New York: Routledge, 2003), 113. 11. See Henry Petroski, To Engineer Is Human: The Role of Failure in Successful Design (London: Macmillan, 1985), esp. 75–84. 12. See Annette B. Weiner, “Why Cloth?” in Weiner and Jane Schneider, eds., Cloth and Human Experience (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1989), 33. 13. For a simple statement, see Claude Lévi-Strauss, “The Culinary Triangle,” New Society, Dec. 22, 1966, 937–940. A full explication of the culinary triangle appears in Lévi-Strauss, Introduction to a Science of Mythology, vol. 3, The Origin of Table Manners, trans. John and Doreen Weightman (New York: Harper and Row, 1978). 14. Michael Symons, A History of Cooks and Cooking (London: Prospect, 2001), 114, is wrong to believe that this famous formula represents status and prestige; for Lévi-Strauss the “thinking physiology” unifies all human sensation through symbols. 15. See James W. P. Campbell and Will Pryce, Brick: A World History (London: Thames and Hudson, 2003), 14–15. 16. Frank E. Brown, Roman Architecture (New York: G. Braziller, 1981). 17. See Joseph Rykwert, The Idea of a Town: The Anthropology of Urban Form in Rome, Italy and the Ancient World (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1976). 18. See James Packer, “Roman Imperial Building,” in Roebuck, ed., Muses at Work, 42– 43. 19. Keith Hopkins, Conquerors and Slaves (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978). 20. Vitruvius, On Architecture, ed. Frank Granger (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Loeb Classical Library, 1931), 1.1.15–16. 21. Vitruvius, The Ten Books of Architecture, trans. Morris Vicky Morgan (New York: Dover, 1960) see 2.3.1–4, 2.8.16–20, 7.1.4–7. 22. For this observation, I am indebted to Campbell and Pryce, Brick, 44. 23. Alec Clifton-Taylor, The Pattern of English Building (London: Faber and Faber, 1972), 242. 24. See M. I. Finley, Ancient Slavery and Modern Ideology (London: Chatto and Windus, 1980). 25. Clifton-Taylor, Pattern of English Building, 232; the embodied language appeared in journals such as Builder’s Magazine, cited in note 28, below. 26. See Jean André Rouquet, The Present State of the Arts in England [1756] (London: Cornmarket, 1979), 44ff. 27. See Builder’s Magazine, a periodical published from 1774 to 1778; its descriptive language is analyzed in Martin Weil, “Interior Details in Eighteenth-Century Architectural Books,” Bulletin of the Association for Preservation Technology 10, no. 4 (1978), 47–66. 28. Clifton-Taylor, Pattern of English Building, 369. 29. See Richard Sennett, The Fall of Public Man (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1977), pt. 2. 30. Alvar Aalto, quoted in Campbell and Pryce, Brick, 271. 31. William Carlos Williams, Imaginations (New York: New Directions, 1970), 110. See the excellent discussion of this declaration and its associations in Bill Brown, A Sense of Things: The Object Matter of American Literature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003), 1–4. ## CHAPTER 5. The Hand 1. Or so he is quoted by Raymond Tallis, The Hand: A Philosophical Inquiry in Human Being (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2003), 4. 2. Charles Bell, The Hand, Its Mechanism and Vital Endowments, as Evincing Design (London, 1833). This is the fourth of the so-called Bridgewater Treatises on “the power, wisdom and goodness of God as manifested in the creation.” 3. Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man [1879], ed. James Moore and Adrian Desmond (London: Penguin, 2004), 71–75. 4. Frederick Wood Jones, The Principles of Anatomy as Seen in the Hand (Baltimore: Williams and Williams, 1942), 298–299. 5. Tallis, Hand, 24. 6. See John Napier, Hands, rev. ed., rev. Russell H. Tuttle (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993), 55ff. An excellent popular summary of this change of views appears in Frank R. Wilson, The Hand: How Its Use Shapes the Brain, Language, and Human Culture (New York: Pantheon, 1998), 112–146. 7. Mary Marzke, “Evolutionary Development of the Human Thumb,” in Hand Clinics 8, no. 1 (February 1992), 1–8. See also Marzke, “Precision Grips, Hand Morphology, and Tools,” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 102 (1997), 91–110. 8. See K. Müller and V. Homberg, “Development of Speed of Repetitive Movements in Children…,” Neuroscience Letters 144 (1992), 57–60. 9. See Charles Sherrington, The Integrative Action of the Nervous System (New York: Scribner’s Sons, 1906). 10. Wilson, Hand, 99. 11. A. P. Martinich, Hobbes: A Biography (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999). 12. Beryl Markham, West with the Night, new ed. (London: Virago, 1984). 13. See Tallis, Hand, chap. 11, esp. 329–331. 14. See Shinichi Suzuki, Nurtured by Love: A New Approach to Talent Education (Miami, Fla.: Warner, 1968). 15. D. W. Winnicott, Playing and Reality (London: Routledge, 1971); John Bowlby, A Secure Base: Parent-Child Attachment and Healthy Human Development (London: Routledge, 1988. 16. David Sudnow, Ways of the Hand: A Rewritten Account, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001). 17. Ibid., 84. 18. For an interesting discussion of this phenomenon, see Julie Lyonn Lieberman, “The Slide,” Strad 116 (July 2005), 69. 19. See Michael C. Corballis, The Lopsided Ape: Evolution of the Generative Mind (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991). 20. Yves Guiard, “Asymmetric Division of Labor in Human Bimanual Action,” Journal of Motor Behavior 19, no. 4 (1987), 488–502. 21. For this history, see Michael Symons, A History of Cooks and Cooking (London: Prospect, 2001), 144. 22. Norbert Elias, The Civilizing Process, rev. ed., trans. Edmund Jephcott (Oxford: Blackwell, 1994), 104. The reader should note that the revised edition incorporates some historical material unknown to the author in the original edition, Über den Prozess der Zivilisation, in 1939. 23. Cited in ibid., 78. 24. David Knechtges, “A Literary Feast: Food in Early Chinese Literature,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 106 (1986), 49–63. 25. John Stevens, Zen Bow, Zen Arrow: The Life and Teachings of Awa Kenzo (London: Shambhala, 2007). 26. Elias, Civilizing Process, 105. 27. Ibid., 415. 28. For an account of how the Powell and Rumsfeld strategies conflicted in the war America began in Iraq in 2003, see Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor, Cobra II (New York: Pantheon, 2006). 29. See, e.g., Neil Postman, Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business (New York: Viking, 1985). 30. Daniel Levitin, This Is Your Brain on Music (New York: Dutton, 2006), 193. 31. Erin O’Connor, “Embodied Knowledge: The Experience of Meaning and the Struggle towards Proficiency in Glassblowing,” Ethnography 6, no. 2 (2005), 183–204. 32. Ibid., 188–189. 33. Maurice Merleau-Ponty, The Phenomenology of Perception [1945] (New York: Humanities Press, 1962). 34. Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), 55. ## CHAPTER 6. Expressive Instructions 1. Frank R. Wilson, The Hand: How Its Use Shapes the Brain, Language, and Human Culture (New York: Pantheon, 1998), 204–207. 2. Sheila Hale, The Man Who Lost His Language: A Case of Aphasia, rev. ed. (London: Jessica Kingsley, 2007). 3. See D. Armstrong, W. Stokoe, and S. Wilcox, Gesture and the Nature of Language (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995). 4. See Oliver Sacks, Seeing Voices: A Journey into the World of the Deaf (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989). 5. Richard Olney, The French Menu Cookbook (Boston: Godine, 1985), 206. 6. Julia Child and Simone Beck, Mastering the Art of French Cooking, vol. 2 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1970), 362. 7. Elizabeth David, French Provincial Cooking (London: Penguin, 1960, rev. 1970), 402. 8. Max Black, “How Metaphors Work: A Reply to Donald Davidson,” in Sheldon Sacks, ed., On Metaphor (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979), 181–192; Donald Davidson, “What Metaphors Mean” in ibid., 29–45; Roman Jakobson, “Two Types of Language and Two Types of Disturbances,” reprinted in Jakobson, On Language, ed. Linda R. Waugh and Monique Monville-Burston (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1995). ## CHAPTER 7. Arousing Tools 1. Reproduced in James Parakilas et al., Piano Roles: Three Hundred Years of Life with the Piano (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2002), fig. 8. 2. See the admirable book by David Freedberg, The Eye of the Lynx: Galileo, His Friends, and the Beginnings of Modern Natural History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003), 152–153. 3. Quoted, in this context, in Steven Shapin, The Scientific Revolution (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 28. Shapin’s book, along with that of Peter Dear, Revolutionizing the Sciences: European Knowledge and Its Ambitions, 1500–1700 (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001), provides an excellent overview. 4. Cited in Shapin, Scientific Revolution, 147. 5. Herbert Butterfield, The Origins of Modern Science, rev. ed. (New York: Free Press, 1965), 106. 6. Andrea Carlino, Books of the Body: Anatomical Ritual and Renaissance Learning, trans. John Tedeschi and Anne Tedeschi (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 1. 7. See the excellent explanation of Peter Dear, Revolutionizing the Sciences: European Knowledge and Its Ambitions, 1500–1700 (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001), 39. 8. Roy Porter, Flesh in the Age of Reason: The Modern Foundations of Body and Soul (London: Penguin, 2003), 133. 9. Douglas Harper, Working Knowledge: Skill and Community in a Small Shop (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), 21. 10. Dear, Revolutionizing the Sciences, 138. 11. Francis Bacon, Novum Organum, trans. Peter Urbach and John Gibson (Chicago: Open Court, 2000), 225. 12. Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1981). 13. See Robert Hooke, Micrographia [1665] (reprint, New York: Dover, 2003), 181. 14. Christopher Wren, letter to William Petty, ca. 1656–1658, quoted in Adrian Tinniswood, His Invention so Fertile: A Life of Christopher Wren (London: Pimlico, 2002), 36. 15. Ibid., 149. 16. Ibid., 154. 17. Ibid. 18. Jenny Uglow, The Lunar Men: Five Friends Whose Curiosity Changed the World (London: Faber and Faber, 2002), 11, 428. 19. This phrase from G. W. F. Hegel’s Philosophy of Fine Art is translated by F. P. B. Osmaston and appears in Hazard Adams, ed., Critical Theory since Plato, rev. ed. (London: Heinle and Heinle, 1992), 538. 20. Edmund Burke, A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origins of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (1757). I’ll list the references in the Standard Edition and in the Boulton edition of 1958, which purged the text of impurities: 3.27 (Boulton, 124); 2.22 (Boulton, 86). 21. Quoted in Mary Shelley, Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus [1818] (London: Penguin, 1992), xxii. 22. Ibid., 43. 23. The process is helpfully elucidated by Maurice Hindle, editor of the current Penguin edition of Frankenstein, at 267. 24. Ibid., 52. 25. Available at http://www.foresight.gov.uk/index.html. 26. Noel Sharkey, quoted in James Randerson, “Forget Robot Rights, Experts Say, Use Them for Public Safety,” Guardian, Apr. 24, 2007, 10. 27. There are many editions of Hobbes’s Leviathan. I’ll be using the text as carefully established by Richard Tuck in the series Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought. Because readers may own different versions, for reference purposes I’ll provide the chapter and section divisions that are by now standard in Hobbes scholarship, as well as page numbers in this edition. Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. Richard Tuck (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 2.5.15. 28. See Peter Dear, Revolutionizing the Sciences (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001), 61–62, from which the phrases by Bacon are cited. This text is an excellent introduction to changes in seventeenth-century science. ## CHAPTER 8. Resistance and Ambiguity 1. William R. B. Acker, Kyudo: The Japanese Art of Archery (Boston: Tuttle, 1998). 2. Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1934), 69–70. 3. David Freedberg, The Eye of the Lynx: Galileo, His Friends, and the Beginnings of Modern Natural History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003), 60. 4. The historian Rosalind Williams gives a brief account of this story in Notes on the Underground: An Essay on Technology, Society, and the Imagination (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992), 75–77. 5. The history of this work is also recounted in Steven Brindle, Brunel: The Man Who Built the World (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2005), 40–50, 64–66. 6. See Gustave Le Bon, The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind [1896] (New York: Dover, 2002). 7. Leon Festinger, A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1957). Bateson prepared the way for this work in his theory of the “double bind”; see Gregory Bateson et al., “Toward a Theory of Schizophrenia,” Behavioral Science 1 (1956), 251–264. 8. Henry Petroski, To Engineer Is Human: The Role of Failure in Successful Design (London: Macmillan, 1985), 216–217. 9. Coosje Van Bruggen, Frank O. Gehry: Guggenheim Museum, Bilbao (New York: Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, 1997), app. 2, statement by Frank Gehry, “Gehry on Titanium,” 141, from which subsequent quotations are also taken. 10. John Dewey, Art as Experience (New York: Capricorn, 1934), 15. 11. For a fuller explanation, see Richard Sennett, Flesh and Stone: The Body and the City in Western Civilization (New York: W. W. Norton, 1993), 212–250. 12. See Liane Lefaivre, “Space, Place, and Play,” in Liane Lefaivre and Ingeborg de Roode, eds., Aldo van Eyck: The Playgrounds and the City (Rotterdam: NAi in cooperation with Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam, 2002), 25. 13. Illustrated in ibid., 6. 14. Illustrated in ibid., 20. 15. Illustrated in ibid., 19. 16. Aldo van Eyck, “Whatever Space and Time Mean, Place and Occasion Mean More,” Forum 4 (1960–1961), 121. ## CHAPTER 9. Quality-Driven Work 1. The most useful guide to his work is W. Edwards Deming, The New Economics for Industry, Government, and Education, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000). 2. Elton Mayo et al., The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization (New York: Macmillan, 1933). 3. Tom Peters and Robert Waterman, In Search of Excellence (New York: HarperCollins, 1984). 4. See Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste, trans. Robert Nice (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986). 5. Elliott A. Krause, Death of the Guilds: Professions, States, and the Advance of Capitalism, 1930 to the Present (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1996); Robert Perrucci and Joel E. Gerstl, Profession without Community: Engineers in American Society (New York: Random House, 1969). 6. See Kenneth Holyoke, “Symbolic Connectionism: Toward Third-generation Theories of Expertise,” in K. Anders Ericsson and Jacqui Smith, eds., Toward a General Theory of Expertise: Prospects and Limits (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 303– 335. 7. Vimla Patel and Guy Groen, “The Nature of Medical Expertise,” in Ericsson and Smith, eds., General Theory of Expertise, 93–125. 8. Douglas Harper, Working Knowledge: Skill and Community in a Small Shop (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), 21. 9. A foundational piece of research here is William Kintch, “The Role of Knowledge in Discourse Comprehension: A Construction-Integration Model,” Psychological Review 95 (1987), 163–182. 10. Howard Gardner, Mihaly Csikszentmihaly, and William Damon, Good Work: When Excellence and Ethics Meet (New York: Basic Books, 2002). 11. Matthew Gill, “Accountants’ Truth: Argumentation, Performance and Ethics in the Construction of Knowledge by Accountants in the City of London” (Ph.D. thesis, University of London, 2006). 12. Richard Sennett, The Corrosion of Character: The Personal Consequences of Work in the New Capitalism (New York: W. W. Norton, 1998), 64–75. 13. See Miriam Adderholdt, Perfectionism: What’s Bad about Being Too Good (Minneapolis: Free Spirit, 1999), and Thomas Hurka, Perfectionism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993). 14. Otto F. Kernberg, Borderline Conditions and Pathological Narcissicism (New York: J. Aronson, 1975). 15. These labels have been the subject of an internal debate between Kernberg and the analyst Heinz Kohut. See Gildo Consolini, “Kernberg versus Kohut: A (Case) Study in Contrasts,” Clinical Social Work Journal 27 (1999), 71–86. 16. Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. The standard English translation is by Talcott Parsons (London: Allen and Unwin, 1976); the translation is more wooden than Weber’s German. This passage, as translated by Martin Green, appears in Martin Green, The Von Richthofen Sisters; The Triumphant and the Tragic Modes of Love: Else and Frieda von Richthofen, Otto Gross, Max Weber, and D. H. Lawrence, in the Years 1870–1970 (New York: Basic Books, 1974), 152. 17. Quoted in Paul Wijdeveld, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Architect, 2nd ed. (Amsterdam: Pepin, 2000), 173. 18. Quoted in ibid., 174. 19. Hermine Wittgenstein, “Familienerinnerungen,” manuscript, quoted in ibid., 148. 20. Ibid. 21. Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, dual-language, 3rd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 2002), 208e–209e. 22. See Max Weber, “Science as a Vocation,” in Weber, From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, trans. Hans Gerth and C. Wright Mills (New York: Oxford University Press, 1958). 23. Trevor Blackwell and Jeremy Seabrook, “Len Greenham,” in Blackwell and Seabrook, Talking Work (London: Faber and Faber, 1996), 25–30. 24. Ibid., 27. 25. See Simon Head, The New Ruthless Economy: Work and Power in the Digital Age (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), chaps. 1, 9, 10. ## CHAPTER 10. Ability 1. Friedrich Schiller, On the Aesthetic Education of Man, trans. Reginal Snell (Mineola, N.Y.: Dover, 2004). In the passage quoted from the fourteenth letter, I have taken the first phrase from page 75, the second from page 74. 2. This is a tantalizing subject that I am tempted, but forbid myself, to pursue. The two key texts are Freud’s Interpretation of Dreams, and his writings on infantile sexuality in vol. 17 of The Complete Works of Sigmund Freud, trans. James Strachey (London: Hogarth, 1947). 3. See Johan Huizinga, Homo Ludens (London: Routledge, 1998). 4. Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays (London: Hutchinson, 1975). 5. See Erik Erikson, Childhood and Society (New York: Vintage, 1995). See also Erikson, Toys and Reasons: Stages in the Ritualization of Experience (New York: W. W. Norton, 1977). 6. Erikson, Toys and Reasons. 7. A foundational text in a large literature is Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Beyond Boredom and Anxiety: Experiencing Flow in Work and Play (New York: Jossey-Bass, 2000). 8. See Jerome Bruner and Helen Weinreich-Haste, Making Sense: The Child’s Construction of the World (London: Methuen, 1987), and, as this book’s basis, Jerome Bruner, On Knowing (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1962). 9. The most accessible study I have read on this subject is Daniel Levitin, This Is Your Brain on Music (New York: Dutton, 2006), esp. 84–85. (The reader should not be put off by the unfortunate title; this is an excellent study.) More technical information appears throughout Isabelle Peretz and Robert J. Zatorre, eds., The Cognitive Neuroscience of Music (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003). 10. If I’ve understood right, this is the view of Gerald M. Edelman and Giulio Tononi in A Universe of Consciousness: How Matter Becomes Imagination (New York: Basic Books, 2000). 11. Plato Republic 614b2–621b6. 12. See Steven Pinker, The Language Instinct (New York: Morrow, 1994), and Pinker, The Blank Slate: The Denial of Human Nature in Modern Intellectual Life (New York: Viking, 2002). 13. Richard Lewontin, “After the Genome, What Then?” New York Review of Books, July 19, 2001. 14. See Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scales, 5th ed. (New York: Riverside, 2004). 15. The reader interested in this infamous story might look at Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray, The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life (New York: Free Press, 1994), and its critics: see Charles Lane, “The Tainted Sources of the Bell Curve,” New York Review of Books, Dec. 1, 1994. 16. The best guide to his work remains an early book: Howard Gardner, Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences (New York: Basic Books, 1983). 17. I have taken the liberty of drawing this example from another of my books, The Culture of the New Capitalism (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2006), 119. 18. See ibid., chap. 2. ## Conclusion 1. See Ibn KhaldÛn, The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History, abridged ed., trans. Franz Rosenthal (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2004), 297–332; Confucius, The Analects of Confucius, trans. Arthur Waley (London: Allen and Unwin, 1938). 2. Pragmatism in its current state is illuminated by Hans Joas, The Creativity of Action, trans. Jeremy Gaines and Paul Keast (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996); William Eggington and Mike Sandbothe, eds., The Pragmatic Turn in Philosophy (Albany: State University Press of New York, 2004); Richard Rorty, Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989); and Richard Bernstein, “The Resurgence of Pragmatism,” Social Research 59 (1992), 813–840. 3. Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition [1958], 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 108. 4. John Dewey, Democracy and Education [1916] (New York: Macmillan, 1969), 241– 242. 5. A criticism leveled at my own work, for instance, by Sheldon Wolin; see “The Rise of Private Man,” New York Review of Books, Apr. 14, 1977. 6. Homer, The Iliad, trans. A. T. Murray (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard-Loeb Classical Library, 1924). Houses: 1.603–4; chariots: 18.373–77; jewelry: 18.400– 402. 7. See Kristina Berggren, “Homo Faber or Homo Symbolicus? The Fascination with Copper in the Sixth Millennium,” Transoxiana 8 (June 2004). 8. Hesiod, Theogony, Works and Days, Testimonia, trans. Glenn W. Most (Cambridge, Mass.: Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press, 2006), 51. 9. See Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil (New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1963). The best revisionist history in English is David Cesarani, Becoming Eichmann (Cambridge: Da Capo, 2005). 10. The text of the Russell-Einstein Manifesto can be found online at www.pugwash.org/about/manifesto.htm.