5 Chartjunk: Vibrations, Grids, and Ducks The interior decoration of graphics generates a lot of ink that does not tell the viewer anything new. The purpose of decoration varies —to make the graphic appear more scientific and precise, to enliven the display, to give the designer an opportunity to exercise artistic skills. Regardless of its cause, it is all non-data-ink or redundant data-ink, and it is often chartjunk. Graphical decoration, which prospers in technical publications as well as in commercial and media graphics, comes cheaper than the hard work required to produce intriguing numbers and secure evidence. Sometimes the decoration is thought to reflect the artist's fundamental design contribution, capturing the essential spirit of the data and so on. Thus principles of artistic integrity and creativity are invoked to defend—even to advance—the cause of chartjunk. There are better ways to portray spirits and essences than to get them all tangled up with statistical graphics. Fortunately most chartjunk does not involve artistic considerations. It is simply conventional graphical paraphernalia routinely added to every display that passes by: over-busy grid lines and excess ticks, redundant representations of the simplest data, the debris of computer plotting, and many of the devices generating design variation. Like weeds, many varieties of chartjunk flourish. Here three widespread types found in scientific and technical research work are catalogued—unintentional optical art, the dreaded grid, and the self-promoting graphical duck. A hundred chartjunky examples from commercial and media graphics have been forgone so as to demonstrate the relevance of the critique to the professional scientific production of data graphics. ## Unintentional Optical Art Contemporary optical art relies on moiré effects, in which the design interacts with the physiological tremor of the eye to produce the distracting appearance of vibration and movement.