proportion of chartjunky graphics in the more recent publications. Computer graphics are particularly active: <table><tr><td>Textbooks and handbooks of statistical graphics; and manuals for computer graphics programs (ordered by date of publication)</td><td>Percentage of graphics with moiré vibration</td><td>Total number of graphics</td></tr><tr><td>Willard C. Brinton, Graphic Methods for Presenting Facts (New York, 1914)</td><td>12%</td><td>255</td></tr><tr><td>R. Satet, Les Graphiques (Paris, 1932)</td><td>29%</td><td>28</td></tr><tr><td>Herbert Arkin and Raymond R. Colton, Graphs: How to Make and Use Thenı (New York, 1936)</td><td>17%</td><td>95</td></tr><tr><td>Mary Eleanor Spear, Charting Statistics (New York, 1952)</td><td>46%</td><td>134</td></tr><tr><td>Anna C. Rogers, Graphic Charts Handbook (Washington, D.C., 1961)</td><td>32%</td><td>201</td></tr><tr><td>F. J. Monkhouse and H. R. Wilkinson, Maps and Diagrams (London, third edition, 1971)</td><td>14%</td><td>322</td></tr><tr><td>Calvin F. Schnid and Stanton E. Schmid, Handbook of Graphic Presentation (New York, second edition, 1979)</td><td>22%</td><td>399</td></tr><tr><td>A. J. MacGregor, Graphics Simplified (Toronto, 1979)</td><td>34%</td><td>65</td></tr><tr><td>The user&#x27;s manual for a widely distributed computer graphics package: SAS/GRAPH User&#x27;s Guide (Cary, North Carolina, 1980)</td><td>68%</td><td>28</td></tr><tr><td>The manual for a very extensive computer graphics program: Tell-A-Graf User&#x27;s Manual (San Diego, 1981)</td><td>53%</td><td>459</td></tr></table> Can optical art effects ever produce a better graphic? Bertin exhorts: "It is the designer's duty to make the most of this variation; to obtain the resonance [of moiré vibration] without provoking an uncomfortable sensation: to flirt with ambiguity without succumbing to it."1 But can statistical graphics successfully "flirt with ambiguity"? It is a clever idea, but no good examples are to be found. The key difficulty remains: moiré vibration is an undisciplined ambiguity, with an illusive, eye-straining quality that contaminates the entire graphic. It has no place in data graphical design. 1 Jacques Bertin, Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks, Maps (Madison, Wisconsin, 1983, translated by William J. Berg), p. 8o; this book is the English translation of Bertin's important work, Sémiologie graphique (Paris, 1967). ## The Grid One of the more sedate graphical elements, the grid should usually be muted or completely suppressed so that its presence is only implicit—lest it compete with the data. Grids are mostly for the initial plotting of data at home or office rather than for putting