## Conclusion The first part of a theory of data graphics is in place. The idea, as described in the previous three chapters, is that most of a graphic's ink should vary in response to data variation. The theory has something to say about a great variety of graphics—workaday scientific charts, the unique drawings of Roger Hayward, the exemplars of graphical handbooks, newspaper displays, computer graphics, standard statistical graphics, and the recent inventions of Chernoff and Tukey. The observed increases in efficiency, in how much of the graphic's ink carries information, are sometimes quite large. In several cases, the data-ink ratio increased from .1 or .2 to nearly 1.o. The transformed designs are less cluttered and can be shrunk down more readily than the originals. But, are the transformed designs better? (1) They are necessarily better within the principles of the theory, for more information per unit of space and per unit of ink is displayed. And this is significant; indeed, the history of devices for communicating information is written in terms of increases in efficiency of communication and production. (2) Graphics are almost always going to improve as they go through editing, revision, and testing against different design options. The principles of maximizing data-ink and erasing generate graphical alternatives and also suggest a direction in which revisions should move. (3) Then there is the audience: will those looking at the new designs be confused? Some of the designs are self-explanatory, as in the case of the range-frame. The dot-dash-plot is more difficult, although it still shows all the standard information found in the scatterplot. Nothing is lost to those puzzled by the frame of dashes, and something is gained by those who do understand. Moreover, it is a frequent mistake in thinking about statistical graphics to underestimate the audience. Instead, why not assume that if you understand it, most other readers will, too? Graphics should be as intelligent and sophisticated as the accompanying text. (4) Some of the new designs may appear odd, but this is probably because we have not seen them before. The conventional designs for statistical graphics have been viewed thousands of times by nearly every reader of this book; on the other hand, the rangeframe, the dot-dash-plot, the white grid, the quartile plot, the rugplot, and the half-face just a few times. With use, the new designs will come to look just as reasonable as the old.