# 7 Multifunctioning Graphical Elements The same ink should often serve more than one graphical purpose. A graphical element may carry data information and also perform a design function usually left to non-data-ink. Or it might show several different pieces of data. Such multifunctioning graphical elements, if designed with care and subtlety, can effectively display complex, multivariate data.1 Consider, for example, the multifunctioning blot of the blot map. It simultaneously locates the geographic unit on a twodimensional surface, describes the shape of the geographic unit, and indicates the level of the variable displayed by color or intensity of shading. That is a great deal of information for a small patch of ink—and the different pieces of information are not confounded and mixed together. 1 The idea of double-functioning elements appears in architectural criticism; see Robert Venturi, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (New York, second edition, 1977), ch. 5. Venturi in turn cites Wylie Sypher, Four Stages of Renaissance Style (Garden City, N.Y., 1955). In contrast, the conventional graphical frame performs only a modest design function, the separation of the grid and data measures from the labels. And it is a place to hang the grid ticks. With all that ink doing so little, it is a prime candidate for mobilization as a double-functioning graphical element. Hence the range-frame, the quartile frame, and the dot-dash-plot. The principle, then, is: Mobilize every graphical element, perhaps several times over, to show the data. The danger of multifunctioning elements is that they tend to generate graphical puzzles, with encodings that can only be broken by their inventor. Thus design techniques for enhancing graphical clarity in the face of complexity must be developed along with multifunctioning elements. ## Data-Built Data Measures The graphical element that actually locates or plots the data is the data measure. The bars of a bar chart, the dots of a scatterplot, the dots and dashes of a dot-dash-plot, the blots of a blot map are data measures. The ink of the data measure can itself carry data; for example, the dots of the scatterplot can take on different shadings in response to a third variable.