Maps routinely present even finer detail. A cartographer writes that "the resolving power of the eye enables it to differentiate to o.1 mm where provoked to do so. Clearly, therefore, conciseness is of the essence and high resolution graphics are a common denominator of cartography."2 Distinctions at o.1 mm mean 254 per inch. 2D. P. Bickmore, "The Relevance of Cartography," in John C. Davis and Michael J. McCullagh, eds., Display and Analysis of Spatial Data (London, 1975), p. 331. How many statistical graphics take advantage of the ability of the eye to detect large amounts of information in small spaces? And how much information should graphics show? Let us begin by considering an empirical measure of graphical performance, the data density. ## Data Density in Graphical Practice The numbers that go into a graphic can be organized into a data matrix of observations by variables. Taking into account the size of the graphic in relation to the amount of data displayed yields the data density: $$
\mathrm { d a t a \ d e n s i t y \ o f \ a \ g r a p h i c = \frac { n u m b e r \ o f \ e n t r i e s \ i n \ d a t a \ m a t r i x } { a r e a \ o f \ d a t a \ g r a p h i c } }
$$ Data matrices and data densities vary enormously in practice. At one extreme, this overwrought display (originally printed in five colors) presents a data matrix of four entries, the names and the numbers for the two bars on the right. The left bar is merely the total of the other two. The graph covers 26.5 square inches (171 square centimeters), resulting in a data density of .15 numbers per square inch (.02 numbers per square centimeter), which is thin indeed.