based on about 5o numbers shown at the rate of 10 per square inch. Among the world's newspapers, the Wall Street Journal, The Times (London), and Asahi publish data-rich graphics, with data densities equal to those of the Journal of the American Statistical Association. Most of the American papers and magazines, along with Pravda, publish less data per graphic than the major papers of other industrialized countries. Very few statistical graphics achieve the information display rates found in maps. Highly detailed maps portray 100,000 to 150,o0o bits per square inch. For example, the average U.S. Geological Survey topographic quadrangle (measuring 17 by 23 inches) is estimated to contain over 10o million bits of information, or about 250,000 per square inch (40,000 per square centimeter).3 Perhaps some day statistical graphics will perform as successfully as maps in carrying information. ## High-Information Graphics Data graphics should often be based on large rather than small data matrices and have a high rather than low data density. More information is better than less information, especially when the marginal costs of handling and interpreting additional information are low, as they are for most graphics. The simple things belong in tables or in the text; graphics can give a sense of large and complex data sets that cannot be managed in any other way. If the graphic becomes overcrowded (although several thousand numbers represented may be just fine), a variety of data-reduction techniques—averaging, clustering, smoothing—can thin the numbers out before plotting.4 Summary graphics can emerge from high-information displays, but there is nowhere to go if we begin with a low-information design. Data-rich designs give a context and credibility to statistical evidence. Low-information designs are suspect: what is left out, what is hidden, why are we shown so little? High-density graphics help us to compare parts of the data by displaying much information within the view of the eye: we look at one page at a time and the more on the page, the more effective and comparative our eye can be.5 The principle, then, is: Maximize data density and the size of the data matrix, within reason. High-information graphics must be designed with special care. As the volume of data increases, data measures must shrink (smaller dots for scatters, thinner lines for busy time-series). The clutter of