The maps repay careful study. Notice how quickly and naturally our attention has been directed toward exploring the substantive content of the data rather than toward questions of methodology and technique. Nonetheless the maps do have their flaws. They wrongly equate the visual importance of each county with its geographic area rather than with the number of people living in the county (or the number of cancer deaths). Our visual impression of the data is entangled with the circumstance of geographic boundaries, shapes, and areas — the chronic problem afflicting shadedin-area designs of such "blot maps" or "patch maps." A further shortcoming, a defect of data rather than graphical composition, is that the maps are founded on a suspect data source, death certificate reports on the cause of death. These reports fall under the influence of diagnostic fashions prevailing among doctors and coroners in particular places and times, a troublesome adulterant of the evidence purporting to describe the already sometimes ambiguous matter of the exact bodily site of the primary cancer. Thus part of the regional clustering seen on the maps, as well as some of the hot spots, may reflect varying diagnostic customs and fads along with the actual differences in cancer rates between areas. Data maps have a curious history. It was not until the seventeenth century that the combination of cartographic and statistical skills required to construct the data map came together, fully 5,ooo years after the first geographic maps were drawn on clay tablets. And many highly sophisticated geographic maps were produced centuries before the first map containing any statistical material was drawn.3 For example, a detailed map with a full grid was engraved during the eleventh century A.D. in China. The Yü Chi Thu (Map of the Tracks of Yü the Great) shown here is described by Joseph Needham as the . . . most remarkable cartographic work of its age in any culture, carved in stone in + 1137 but probably datingfrom before +1100. The scale of the grid is 100 li to the.division. The coastal outline is relatively firm and the precisionof the network of river systems extraordinary.The size of theoriginal, which is now in the Pei Lin Museum at Sian, is about3 feet square. The name of the geographer is not known. . .. Anyone who compares this map with the contemporary productions of European religious cosmography cannot but be amazed at the extent to which Chinese geographywas at that time ahead of the West. . . . There was nothing like it in Europe till the Escorial MS. map of about + 155o. . . .4 3Data maps are usually described as "thematic maps" in cartography. For a thorough account, see Arthur H. Robinson, Early Thematic Mapping in the History of Cartography (Chicago, 1982). On the history of statistical graphics, see H. Gray Funkhouser, "Historical Development of the Graphical Representation of Statistical Data," Osiris, 3 (November 1937), 269–404; and James R. Beniger and Dorothy L. Robyn, "Quantitative Graphics in Statistics: A Brief History," American Statistician, 32 (February 1978), 1-11. 4Joseph Needham, Science and Civilisation in China (Cambridge, 1959), vol. 3, 546-547.