## 9 Aesthetics and Technique in Data Graphical Design Along with the amazing graphic of the French losses in the Russiar invasion, Minard includes a second "Carte Figurative." It portrays Hannibal's fading elephant campaign in Spain, Gaul, and Northern Italy. Minard uses a light transparent color for flow-lines, allowing the underlying type to show through. This refined use of color to depict more information contrasts with the garish tones too often seen in modern graphics. Charles Joseph Minard, Tableaux Graphiques et Cartes Figuratives de M. Minard, 1845-1869, a portfolio of his work held by the Bibliothèque de l'École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées, Paris. What makes for such graphical elegance? What accounts for the quality of Minard's graphics, of those of Playfair and Marey, and of some recent work, such as the new view of the galaxies? Good design has two key elements: Graphical elegance is often found in simplicity of design and complexity of data. Visually attractive graphics also gather power from content and interpretations beyond the immediate display of some numbers. The best graphics are about the useful and important, about life and death, about the universe. Beautiful graphics do not traffic with the trivial. On rare occasions graphical architecture combines with the data content to yield a uniquely spectacular graphic. Such performances can be described and admired but there are no easy compositional principles on how to create that one wonderful graphic in millions. As Barnett Newman once said, "Aesthetics is for the artist like ornithology is for the birds." What can be suggested, though, are some guides for enhancing the visual quality of routine, workaday designs. Attractive displays of statistical information • have a properly chosen format and design • use words, numbers, and drawing together • reflect a balance, a proportion, a sense of relevant scale • display an accessible complexity of detail • often have a narrative quality, a story to tell about the data • are drawn in a professional manner, with the technical details of production done with care • avoid content-free decoration, including chartjunk,