can be quite small, since the phrases and sentences are usually not too long—and therefore the small type will not fatigue viewers the way it does in lengthy texts.) The principle of data /text integration is Data graphics are paragraphs about data and should be treated as such. Words, graphics, and tables are different mechanisms with but a single purpose—the presentation of information. Why should the flow of information be broken up into different places on the page because the information is packaged one way or another? Sometimes it may be useful to have multiple story-lines or multiple levels of presentation, but that should be a deliberate design judgment, not something decided by conventional production requirements. Imagine if graphics were replaced by paragraphs of words and those paragraphs scattered over the pages out of sequence with the rest of the text—that is how graphical and tabular information is now treated in the layout of many published pages, particularly in scientific journals and professional books. Tables and graphics should be run into the text whenever possible, avoiding the clumsy and diverting segregation of "See Fig. 2," (figures all too often located on the back of the adjacent page).3 If a display is discussed in various parts of the text, it might well be printed afresh near each reference to it, perhaps in reduced size in later showings. The principle of text/graphic/table integration also suggests that the same typeface be used for text and graphic and, further, that ruled lines separating different types of information be avoided. Albert Biderman notes that illustrations were once well-integrated with text in scientific manuscripts, such as those of Newton and Leonardo da Vinci, but that statistical graphics became segregated from text and table as printing technology developed: The evolution of graphic methods as an element of the scientific enterprise has been handicapped by their adjunctive, segregated, and marginal position. The exigencies of typography that moved graphics to a segregated position in the printed work have in the past contributed to their intellectual segregation and marginality as well. There was a corresponding organizational segregation, with decisions on graphics often passing out of the hands of the original analyst and communicator into those of graphic specialiststhe commercial artists and designers of graphic departments and audio-visual aids shops, for example, whose predilections and skills are usually more those of cosmeticians and merchandisers than of scientific analysts and communicators.4 3"Fig.," often used to refer to graphics, is an ugly abbreviation and is not worth the two spaces saved. 4Albert D. Biderman, "The Graph as a Victim of Adverse Discrimination and Segregation,"Information DesignJournal, 1 (1980), 238.