Page after page of Leonardo's manuscripts have a gentle but thorough integration of text and figure, a quality rarely seen in modern work: :234. Leonardo da Vinci, Treatise on Painting [Codex Urbinas Latinus 1270], vol. 2, facsimile (Princeton, 1956), p. 234, paragraph 827. chevai le cose ucdute cifere tanro minirtre che noche lemembva ma il tutto quasi tipara impossibile a'po teve figuvare Come sell'occhio fuse, o, e'la busa dun quiavto di bvaccio cqual alla tua tauola dipinta sia,a.bidiscosta m n. dal'occhio mezo Gvaccio allova tu ucdvai per esfo spa cis tutte le cose che. 6f a. weder siporfiden ivo alla lunghiza .o. dnno ovizonte di cento miglia intana confusa diminuttione cheno che figurar di quelle atcuna pavte c'habbia fiqutval ma apena potrai povve si piccolo punto di pencllo che non sia maggiore c'hogm gvan' casamento posto in dicc miglia di distantia. Perche limonti in langha distantia sidimostromo pin saur nollacima che milla basa Coro basa o'nella vuicimita' che nella vemottione, Pro nasi,o. pi, d,s,,c, V, a.R, saño gvadi dellavia churrem pve sasotiglian guanro pin s'inalzano, a f, f, h,, h,k, soño Gialtvi gvadi transuoisali dore laria acgista Finally, a caveat: the use of words and pictures together requires a special sensitivity to the purpose of the design—in particular, whether the graphic is primarily for communication and illustration of a settled finding or, in contrast, for the exploration of a data set. Words on and around graphics are highly effective— sometimes all too effective—in telling viewers how to allocate their attention to the various parts of the data display.⁵ Thus, for graphics in exploratory data analysis, words should tell the viewer how to read the design (if it is a technically complex arrangement) and not what to read in terms of content. 5Experiments in visual perception indicate that word instructions substantially determine eye movements in viewing pictures. See John D. Gould, "Looking at Pictures," in Richard A. Monty and John W. Senders, eds., Eye Movements and Psychological Processes (Hillsdale, N.J., 1976), 323-343.