## Acknowledgments I am indebted to many for their advice and assistance with this book. For leave and research support during several academic years, the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, the John Simon Guggenheim Foundation, the Woodrow Wilson School of Princeton University, and Yale University. For providing access to their superb collections, the Bibliothèque Nationale and the Bibliothèque de l'École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées in Paris, and,at Yale University, the Historical Medical Library and the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library. For helping me appreciate the practicalities in the production of statistical graphics, several members of the art department at the New York Times and my students in Graphic Design and in the Department of Statistics at Yale. For assistance in establishing Graphics Press, Peter B. Cooper, Earle E. Jacobs, Jr., and Trudy Putsche. For design and artwork, Howard I. Gralla and Minoru Niijima. For their help and hospitality in Paris during my work on the Minard drawings, Michel Balinski, Jean Dubout, André Jammes, and Claudine Kleb. For providing examples and for suggesting improvements in the manuscript, James Beniger, Inge Druckrey, Timothy Gregoire, Joanna Hitchcock, Joseph LaPalombara, Kathryn Scholle, Stephen Stigler, Howard Wainer, and Ellen Woodbury. For their reviews of the manuscript and for their inspiration and encouragement through all the years of this enterprise, Frederick Mosteller and John W. Tukey. June 1982 Cheshire, Connecticut