of those lines being from right to left, or from left to right, shews whether in proportion to its population the country is burdened with heavy taxes or otherwise" (pages 13-14). The slope of the dotted line is uninformative, since it is dependent on the diameter of the circle as well as the height of the two verticals. However, the sign of the slope does make sense, taking Playfair to his familiar point about what he regarded as excessive taxation in Britain (sixth circle from the right, with the slope running opposite to most countries). Playfair was enthusiastic about the multivariate arrangement because it fostered comparisons: The author of this work applied the use of lines to matters of commerce and finance about fifteen years ago, with great success. His mode was generally approved of as not only facilitating, but rendering those studies more clear, and retained more easily by the memory. The present charts are in like manner intended to aid statistical studies, by shewing to the eye the sizes of different countries represented by similar forms, for where forms are not similar, the eye cannot compare them easily nor accurately. From this circumstance it happens, that we have a more accurate idea of the sizes of the planets, which are spheres, than of the nations of Europe which we see on the maps, all of which are irregular forms in themselves as well as unlike to each other. Size, Population, and Revenue, are the three principal objects of attention upon the general scale of statistical studies, whether we are actuated by curiosity or interest; I have therefore represented these three objects in one view. . . . [page 15] But here Playfair had a forerunner—and one who thought more clearly about the abstract problems of graphical design than did Playfair, who lacked mathematical skills. A most remarkable and explicit early theoretical statement advancing the general (nonanalogical) relational graphic was made by J. H. Lambert in 1765, 35 years before The Statistical Breviary: We have in general two variable quantities, x, y, which will be collated with one another by oûservation, so that we can determine for each value of x, which may be considered as an abscissa, the corresponding ordinate y. Were the experiments or observations completely accurate, these ordinates would give a number of points through which a straight or curved line should be drawn. But as this is not so, the line deviates to a greater or lesser extent from the observational points. It must therefore be drawn in such a way that it comes as near as possible to its true position and goes, as it were, through the middle of the given points.13