For many people the first word that comes to mind when they think about statistical charts is “lie." No doubt some graphics do distort the underlying data, making it hard for the viewer to learn the truth. But data graphics are no different from words in this regard, for any means of communication can be used to deceive. There is no reason to believe that graphics are especially vulnerable to exploitation by liars; in fact, most of us have pretty good graphical lie detectors that help us see right through frauds. Much of twentieth-century thinking about statistical graphics has been preoccupied with the question of how some amateurish chart might fool a naive viewer. Other important issues, such as the use of graphics for serious data analysis, were largely ignored. At the core of the preoccupation with deceptive graphics was the assumption that data graphics were mainly devices for showing the obvious to the ignorant. It is hard to imagine any doctrine more likely to stifle intellectual progress in a field. The assumption led down two fruitless paths in the graphically barren years from 1930 to 197o: First, that graphics had to be "alive," "communicatively dynamic," overdecorated and exaggerated (otherwise all the dullards in the audience would fall asleep in the face of those boring statistics). Second, that the main task of graphical analysis was to detect and denounce deception (the dullards could not protect themselves). Then, in the late 196os, John Tukey made statistical graphics respectable, putting an end to the view that-graphics were only for decorating a few numbers. For here was a world-class data analyst spinning off half a dozen new designs and, more importantly, using them effectively to explore complex data.1 Not a word about deception; no tortured attempts to construct more graphical standards" in a hopeless effort to end all distortions. Instead, graphics were used as instruments for reasoning about quantitative information. With this good example, graphical work has come to flourish. Of course false graphics are still with us. Deception must always be confronted and demolished, even if lie detection is no longer at the forefront of research. Graphical excellence begins with telling the truth about the data.