Why do artists draw graphics that lie? Why do the world's major newspapers and magazines publish them?1 Although bias and stereotyping are the origin of more than a few graphical distortions, the primary causes of inept graphical work are to be found in the skills, attitudes, and organizational structure prevailing among those who design and edit statistical graphics. ## Lack of Quantitative Skills of Professional Artists Lurking behind the inept graphic is a lack of judgment about quantitative evidence. Nearly all those who produce graphics for mass publication are trained exclusively in the fine arts and have had little experience with the analysis of data. Such experience is essential for achieving precision and grace in the presence of statistics, but even textbooks of graphical design are silent on how to think about numbers. Illustrators too often see their work as an exclusively artistic enterprise—the words "creative,""concept," and “"style" combine regularly in all possible permutations, a Big Think jargon for the small task of constructing a time-series a few data points long. Those who get ahead are those who beautify data, never mind statistical integrity. ## The Doctrine That Statistical Data Are Boring Inept graphics also flourish because many graphic artists believe that statistics are boring and tedious. It then follows that decorated graphics must pep up, animate, and all too often exaggerate what evidence there is in the data. For example: • Time's first full-time chart specialist, an art-school graduate, says that in his work, "The challenge is to present statistics as a visual idea rather than a tedious parade of numbers."2 • The opening sentence of the chapter on statistical charts in Jan White's Graphic Idea Notebook: "Why are statistics so boring?" Sample illustrations supposedly reveal "Dry statistics turned 1"It is difficult to know why these same errors are being repeated. In Playfair's original work these kinds of mistakes were not made; moreover, these errors were not as widespread in the 193o s as they are now. Perhaps the reason is an increase in the perceived need for graphs . . . without a concomitant increase in training in their construction. Evidence gathered by the committee on graphics of the American Statistical Association indicates that formal training in graphic presentation has had a marked decline at all levels of education over the last few decades." Howard Wainer, "Making Newspaper Graphs Fit to Print," in Paul A. Kolers, et al., eds. Processing of Visible Language 2 (New York, 1980), p. 139.