into symbolic graphics" and "Plain statistics embellished or humanized with pictures."3 • A fine book on graphics, Herdeg's Graphis/Diagrams, is described by its publisher: “An international review demonstrating convincingly that statistical and diagrammatic graphics do not necessarily have to be dull."4 The doctrine of boring data serves political ends, helping to advance certain interests over others in bureaucratic struggles for control of a publication's resources. For if the numbers are dull dull dull, then an artist, indeed many artists, indeed an Art Department and an Art Director are required to animate the data, lest the eyes of the audience glaze over. Thus the doctrine encourages placing data graphics under control of artists rather than in the hands of those who write the words and know the substance. As the art bureaucracy grows, style replaces content. And the word people, having lost space in the publication to data decorators, console themselves with thoughts that statistics are really rather tedious anyway. If the statistics are boring, then you've got the wrong numbers. Finding the right numbers requires as much specialized skill statistical skill—and hard work as creating a beautiful design or covering a complex news story. ## The Doctrine That Graphics Are Only for the Unsophisticated Reader Many believe that graphical displays should divert and entertain those in the audience who find the words in the text too difficult. For example: • Consumer Reports describes the design of their new consumer magazine for children: "For the first test issue, CU's professional staff produced an article about sugar that was longer on graphics than on information. We had feared children might be overwhelmed by too many facts."5 • An art director with overall responsibility for the design of some 3,00o data graphics each year (yielding 2.5 billion printed images) said that graphics are intended more to lure the reader's attention away from the advertising than to explain the news in any detail. "Unlike the advertisements," he said, "at least we don't put naked women in our graphics."6 5Consumer Reports, 45 (July 1980), 408. 6Louis Silverstein, "Graphics at the New York Times," presentation at the First General Conference on Social Graphics, Leesburg, Virginia, October 23, 1978.