Japanese graphical distinction is consistent with that country's heavy use of statistical techniques in the workplace and extensive quantitative training, even in the early years of school: 11 Andrew H. Malcolm, "Data-Loving Japanese Rejoice on Statistics Day,"New York Times, October 28, 1977, p. A-1. . . . no nation ranks higher in its collective passion for statistics. In Japan, statistics are the subject of a holiday, local and national conventions, awards ceremonies and nationwide statistical collection and graph-drawing contests. "This year," said Yoshiharu Takahashi, a Government statistician, "we had almost 30,000 entries. Actually, we had 29,836." Entries in the [children's] statistical graph contest were screened three times by judges, who gave first prize this year to the work of five 7-year-olds. Their graph creation, titled "Mom, play with us more often," was the result of a survey of 32 classmates on the frequency that mothers play with their offspring and the reasons given for not doing so. . . . Other children's work examined the frequency of family phone usage and correlated the day's temperature with cicada singing.11 Note the relational design of the last children's graphic mentioned. The five U.S. publications examined rank toward the bottom of the world list, along with Pravda and a few European papers. Note, in Table 1, the complete dominance of non-relational designs at the lower-ranked newspapers and magazines. This is unfortunate because the relational graphic, unlike the simpler designs, is an explanatory graphic—surely a natural for news reporting and analysis. The statistical graphics found in college and even high school textbooks are more sophisticated than those in news publications. Indeed, grade school children may experience a greater density of relational graphics than someone who reads only Business Week, the New York Times, Time, the Wall Street Journal, and the Washington Post. Tables 2 and 3 record the graphical sophistication of textbooks and of a variety of standardized educational tests. A comparison between these data and Table 1 suggests that most news publications outside of Japan operate at a pre-adult level of intelligence in graphical design.12 12Readers of news publications, particularly the elite press, have considerable educational and professional attainments, with the resulting graphical skills. About 80 percent of the 1.5 million readers of the Sunday New York Times attended college, according to a 198o Times market survey. The audience for statistical graphics is smarter than many illustrators believe.