Table 3 Graphical Sophistication, Educational Tests
<table><tr><td></td><td>Percentage of statistical graphics based on more than one variable, but not Number of a time-series or a map</td><td>graphics</td></tr><tr><td>National university entrance examinations Japan, 1979 and 1980</td><td>100%</td><td>16</td></tr><tr><td>Review materials, Law School Admission Test, United States 1975</td><td>48%</td><td>29</td></tr><tr><td>Standardized tests for grade school, high school, and college; United States, 1970s:*</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Science, 14 tests</td><td>67%</td><td>64</td></tr><tr><td>Arithmetic, mathematics, algebra, and analytic geometry; 21 tests</td><td>41%</td><td>37</td></tr><tr><td>Social studies, history, and</td><td>24%</td><td>49</td></tr><tr><td>government; 14 tests General ability, 5 tests</td><td>21%</td><td>47</td></tr></table> \*Graphics collected in James R. Beniger, compiler, Selected Standardized Test Items that Measure Ability with Graphics (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Social Science Research, 1975). And so, just as there is a double standard of integrity at a good many news publications—one for words, another for graphics— so there is a double standard of sophistication. The statistical graphics are stupid; the prose is often serious and sometimes even demanding of expertise, as can be seen in these sentences from a single issue of the New York Times: Recycling petrodollars may postpone the day of reckoning, but its effects would soon become intolerable without a steady depreciation in their purchasing power. Floating rates of exchange cannot restore even a semblance of equilibrium. Numerous facets of the performance seem decidedly unfashionable if not downright eccentric: the square-toed instrumental phrasing and the frequent plodding tempos in the arias, the Romanticized treatment of the chorales, the generous retards at every cadence, the often intrusively elaborate continuo improvisations and an inconsistent attitude toward expression which ranges from heaving Mahlerian emphases to mechanical literalism. The Court shows no sign of retreating from its view that a state government is protected by sovereign immunity against court orders to pay retroactive damages for past violations. And Dr. Garth Graham, a medical director with Smithkline Corp., makers of Thorazine, noted that neuroleptics produce no euphoria, and are therefore unlikely to be abused by patients with a history of drug or alcohol dependence. "They are, if anything, dysphorogenic," Dr. Graham said.