people who don’t know the patterns can benefit from the structure they lend to the framework’s documentation. Enhancing documentation is important for all types of software, but it’s particularly important for frameworks. Frameworks often pose a steep learning curve that must be overcome before they’re useful. While design patterns might not flatten the learning curve entirely, they can make it less steep by making key elements of the framework’s design more explicit.

Because patterns and frameworks have some similarities, people often wonder how or even if they differ. They are different in three major ways:

1 . Design patterns are more abstract than frameworks. Frameworks can be embodied in code, but only examples of patterns can be embodied in code. A strength of frameworks is that they can be written down in programming languages and not only studied but executed and reused directly. In contrast, the design patterns in this book have to be implemented each time they’re used. Design patterns also explain the intent, trade-offs, and consequences of a design.

2 . Design patterns are smaller architectural elements than frameworks. A typical framework contains several design patterns, but the reverse is never true.

3. Design patterns are less specialized than frameworks. Frameworks always have a particular application domain. A graphical editor framework might be used in a factory simulation, but it won’t be mistaken for a simulation framework. In contrast, the design patterns in this catalog can be used in nearly any kind of application. While more specialized design patterns than ours are certainly possible (say, design patterns for distributed systems or concurrent programming), even these wouldn’t dictate an application architecture like a framework would.

Frameworks are becoming increasingly common and important. They are the way that object-oriented systems achieve the most reuse. Larger object-oriented applications will end up consisting of layers of frameworks that cooperate with each other. Most of the design and code in the application will come from or be influenced by the frameworks it uses.

## 1.7 How to Select a Design Pattern

With more than 20 design patterns in the catalog to choose from, it might be hard to find the one that addresses a particular design problem, especially if the catalog is new and unfamiliar to you. Here are several different approaches to finding the design pattern that’s right for your problem:

• Consider how design patterns solve design problems. Section 1.6 discusses how design patterns help you find appropriate objects, determine object granularity, specify object interfaces, and several other ways in which design patterns solve

design problems. Referring to these discussions can help guide your search for the right pattern. • Scan Intent sections. Section 1.4 (page 8) lists the Intent sections from all the patterns in the catalog. Read through each pattern’s intent to find one or more that sound relevant to your problem. You can use the classification scheme presented in Table 1.1 (page 10) to narrow your search. • Study how patterns interrelate. Figure 1.1 (page 12) shows relationships between design patterns graphically. Studying these relationships can help direct you to the right pattern or group of patterns. • Study patterns of like purpose. The catalog (page 79) has three chapters, one for creational patterns, another for structural patterns, and a third for behavioral patterns. Each chapter starts off with introductory comments on the patterns and concludes with a section that compares and contrasts them. These sections give you insight into the similarities and differences between patterns of like purpose. • Examine a cause of redesign. Look at the causes of redesign starting on page 24 to see if your problem involves one or more of them. Then look at the patterns that help you avoid the causes of redesign. • Consider what should be variable in your design. This approach is the opposite of focusing on the causes of redesign. Instead of considering what might force a change to a design, consider what you want to be able to change without redesign. The focus here is on encapsulating the concept that varies, a theme of many design patterns. Table 1.2 lists the design aspect(s) that design patterns let you vary independently, thereby letting you change them without redesign.

## Table 1.2: Design aspects that design patterns let you vary

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Purpose</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Design Pattern</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aspect(s) That Can Vary</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=5 colspan=1>Creational</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Abstract Factory (87)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>families of product objects</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Builder (97)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>how a composite object gets created</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Factory Method (107)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>subclass of object that is instantiated</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Prototype (117)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>class of object that is instantiated</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Singleton (127)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>the sole instance of a class</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=7 colspan=1>Structural</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Adapter (139)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>interface to an object</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Bridge (151)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>implementation of an object</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Composite (163)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>structure and composition of an object</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Decorator (175)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>responsibilities of an objectwithout subclassing</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Facade (185)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>interface to a subsystem</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Flyweight (195)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>storage costs of objects</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Proxy (207)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>how an object is accessed; its location</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=11 colspan=1>Behavioral</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Chain of Responsibility (223)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>object that can fulfill a request</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Command (233)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>when and how a request is fulfilled</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Interpreter (243)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>grammar and interpretation of a language</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Iterator (257)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>how an aggregate&#x27;s elements are accessed,traversed</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Mediator (273)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>how and which objects interact witheach other</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Memento (283)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>what private information is stored outsidean object, and when</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Observer (293)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>number of objects that depend on anotherobject; how the dependent objects stayup to date</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>State (305)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>states of an object</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Strategy (315)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>an algorithm</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Template Method (325)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>steps of an algorithm</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Visitor (331)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>operations that can be applied to object(s)without changing their class(es)</td></tr></table>

## 1.8 How to Use a Design Pattern

Once you’ve picked a design pattern, how do you use it? Here’s a step-by-step approach to applying a design pattern effectively:

1. Read the pattern once through for an overview. Pay particular attention to the Applicability and Consequences sections to ensure the pattern is right for your problem.

2. Go back and study the Structure, Participants, and Collaborations sections. Make sure you understand the classes and objects in the pattern and how they relate to one another.

3. Look at the Sample Code section to see a concrete example of the pattern in code. Studying the code helps you learn how to implement the pattern.

4 . Choose names for pattern participants that are meaningful in the application context. The names for participants in design patterns are usually too abstract to appear directly in an application. Nevertheless, it’s useful to incorporate the participant name into the name that appears in the application. That helps make the pattern more explicit in the implementation. For example, if you use the Strategy pattern for a text compositing algorithm, then you might have classes SimpleLayoutStrategy or TeXLayoutStrategy.

5 . Define the classes. Declare their interfaces, establish their inheritance relationships, and define the instance variables that represent data and object references. Identify existing classes in your application that the pattern will affect, and modify them accordingly.

6. Define application-specific names for operations in the pattern. Here again, the names generally depend on the application. Use the responsibilities and collaborations associated with each operation as a guide. Also, be consistent in your naming conventions. For example, you might use the “Create-” prefix consistently to denote a factory method.

7 . Implement the operations to carry out the responsibilities and collaborations in the pattern. The Implementation section offers hints to guide you in the implementation. The examples in the Sample Code section can help as well.

These are just guidelines to get you started. Over time you’ll develop your own way of working with design patterns.

No discussion of how to use design patterns would be complete without a few words on how not to use them. Design patterns should not be applied indiscriminately. Often they achieve flexibility and variability by introducing additional levels of indirection, and that can complicate a design and/or cost you some performance. A design pattern should only be applied when the flexibility it affords is actually needed. The Consequences sections are most helpful when evaluating a pattern’s benefits and liabilities.