# 1.7 How to Select a Design Pattern

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Erich Gamma：《Design Patterns Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software》\Erich Gamma：《Design Patterns Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software》\Erich Gamma：《Design Patterns Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software》\auto\Erich Gamma：《Design Patterns Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software》.md

## 1.7 How to Select a Design Pattern

With more than 20 design patterns in the catalog to choose from, it might be hard to find the one that addresses a particular design problem, especially if the catalog is new and unfamiliar to you. Here are several different approaches to finding the design pattern that’s right for your problem:

• Consider how design patterns solve design problems. Section 1.6 discusses how design patterns help you find appropriate objects, determine object granularity, specify object interfaces, and several other ways in which design patterns solve

design problems. Referring to these discussions can help guide your search for the right pattern. • Scan Intent sections. Section 1.4 (page 8) lists the Intent sections from all the patterns in the catalog. Read through each pattern’s intent to find one or more that sound relevant to your problem. You can use the classification scheme presented in Table 1.1 (page 10) to narrow your search. • Study how patterns interrelate. Figure 1.1 (page 12) shows relationships between design patterns graphically. Studying these relationships can help direct you to the right pattern or group of patterns. • Study patterns of like purpose. The catalog (page 79) has three chapters, one for creational patterns, another for structural patterns, and a third for behavioral patterns. Each chapter starts off with introductory comments on the patterns and concludes with a section that compares and contrasts them. These sections give you insight into the similarities and differences between patterns of like purpose. • Examine a cause of redesign. Look at the causes of redesign starting on page 24 to see if your problem involves one or more of them. Then look at the patterns that help you avoid the causes of redesign. • Consider what should be variable in your design. This approach is the opposite of focusing on the causes of redesign. Instead of considering what might force a change to a design, consider what you want to be able to change without redesign. The focus here is on encapsulating the concept that varies, a theme of many design patterns. Table 1.2 lists the design aspect(s) that design patterns let you vary independently, thereby letting you change them without redesign.

