# The Idea of Design A Design Issues Reader edited by Victor Margolin and Richard Buchanan The contents of this book were first published in Design Issues (ISSN 0747- 9360), a publication of The MIT Press. Except as otherwise noted, copyright in each article is owned by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Richard Buchanan, "Wicked Problems in Design Thinking," vol. 8, no. 2, (Spring 1992): 5-21; Yves Deforge, "Avatars of Design: Design Before Design," vol. 6, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 43–50; Alain Findeli, "Moholy-Nagy's Design Pedagogy in Chicago (1937–1946)," vol. 7, no. 1, (Fall 1990): 4–19; Jorge Frascara, "Graphic Design: Fine Art or Social Science?", vol. 5, no. 1, (Fall 1988): 18–29; Victor Papanek, "The Future Isn't What It Used To Be," vol. 5, no. 1, (Fall 1988): 4-17; Rudolph Arnheim, "Sketching and the Psychology of Design," vol. 9, no. 2, (Spring 1993): 15–19; Richard Buchanan, "Myth and Maturity: Toward a New Order in the Decade of Design," vol. 6, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 70–80; Martin Krampen, "Semiotics in Architecture and Industrial/Product Design," vol. 5, no. 2, (Spring 1989): 124–140; Ann Tyler, "Shaping Belief: The Role of Audience in Visual Communication," vol. 9, no. 1, (Fall 1992): 21–29; Martin Solomon, "The Power of Punctuation," vol. 6, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 28–32; Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, "Design and Order in Everyday Life," vol. 8, no. 1, (Fall 1991): 26-34; S. Balaram, "Product Symbolism of Gandhi and Its Connection with Indian Mythology," vol. 5, no. 2, (Spring 1989): 68–85; Clive Dilnot, "The Gift," vol. 9, no. 2, (Spring 1993): 51–63; Klaus Krippendorff, "On the Essential Contexts of Artifacts or On the Proposition that 'Design Is Making Sense (of Things),"" vol. 5, no. 2, (Spring 1989): 9–38; Rajeswari Ghose, "Design, Development, Culture, and Cultural Legacies in Asia," vol. 6, no. 1, (Fall 1989): 31–48; Tony Fry, "A Geography of Power: Design History and Marginality," vol. 6, no. 1, (Fall 1989): 15–30; Takuo Hirano, "The Development of Modern Japanese Design: A Personal Account," vol. 7, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 54–62; A. Čheng, "Line," vol. 7, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 5–16; Gert Selle, "Untimely Opinions (An Attempt to Reflect on Design)," vol. 6, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 33–42; Tomas Maldonado, "The Idea of Comfort," vol. 8, no. 1, (Fall 1991): 35–43; Barbara Usherwood, "The Design Museum: Form Follows Funding," vol. 7, no. 2, (Spring 1991): 76–87; Abraham Moles, "Design and Immateriality: What of It in a Post Industrial Society?" vol. 4, no. 1–2, (Special Issue 1988): 25–32; Victor Margolin, "Expanding the Boundaries of Design: The Product Environment and the New User," vol. 4, no. 1–2, (Special Issue): 59–64. ## Second printing, 1996 Selection and introduction; copyright© 1995 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from The MIT Press. For information, please address The MIT Press, Journals Department, 55 Hayward Street, Cambridge, Mass. 02142. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data The idea of design/edited by Victor Margolin and Richard Buchanan p. cm.—(A Design issues reader) ISBN 0-262-63166-0 (alk. paper) 0.1 Design. I. Margolin, Victor. II. Buchanan, Richard. NK1525.I34 1995 745.4—dc209 5-24675 5-2467 To our families Sylvia and Myra and Barbara, Stephanie and Rick ## Contents ixi Acknowledgments xi Introduction Section I Reflecting on Design Richard Buchanan 3 Wicked Problems in Design Thinking Yves Deforge 21 Avatars of Design: Design Before Design Alain Findeli 29 Moholy-Nagy's Design Pedagogy in Chicago (1937–1946) Jorge Frascara 44 Graphic Design: Fine Art or Social Science? Victor Papanek 56 The Future Isn't What It Used To Be Rudolf Arnheim 70 Sketching and the Psychology of Design Richard Buchanan 75 Myth and Maturity: Toward a New Order in the Decade of Design Section II The Meaning of Products Martin Krampen 89 Semiotics in Architecture and Industrial/Product Design Ann C. Tyler 104 Shaping Belief: The Role of Audience in Visual Communication Martin Solomon 113 The Power of Punctuation Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 118 Design and Order in Everyday Life S. Balaram 127 Product Symbolism of Gandhi and Its Connection with Indian Mythology Clive Dilnot 144 The Gift ## Klaus Krippendorff On the Essential Contexts of Artifacts or on the Proposition that "Design Is Making Sense (of Things)" ## SectionIII ## Design and Culture Design and Culture Rajeshwari Ghose 187 Design, Development, Culture, and Cultural Legacies in Asia Tony Fry 204 A Geography of Power: Design History and Marginality Takuo Hirano 221 The Development of Modern Japanese Design: A Personal Account A Cheng 227 Line Gert Selle 238 Untimely Opinions (An Attempt to Reflect on Design) Tomás Maldonado 248 The Idea of Comfort Barbara Usherwood 257 The Design Museum: Form Follows Funding Abraham A. Moles 268 Design and Immateriality: What of It in a Post Industrial Society? Victor Margolin 275 Expanding the Boundaries of Design: The Product Environment and the New User 281 Sources 283 About the Contributors ## Acknowledgments We are indebted to the following individuals who have contributed their editorial skills, insights, time, and passion to Design Issues during the period of publication from which the essays in this anthology were drawn: Leon Bellin, Stephen Bloom, Marco Diani, Dennis Doordan, John Heskett, Martin Hurtig, and Lawrence Salomon. We also acknowledge others for their efforts on behalf of the journal during the same period: John Cullars, Bonnie Osborne, and Faith Van Alten. In addition we would like to thank Karen Moyer for her design assistance. The School of Art and Design at the University of Illinois at Chicago (under the directorship of Martin Hurtig, then Susan Sensemann, and finally Judith Kirshner) served as the original home for Design Issues and sustained the journal for its first nine volumes (1984–1993). Design Issues is now edited at the Department of Design at Carnegie Mellon University and published by The MIT Press.