# The Power of Punctuation Martin Solomon COMMASEMICOLONCOLONPERIODDASH OR EM DASHDASH OR EN DASHSWING DASHHYPHENQUESTION MARKQUESTION MARKS, SPANISHEXCLAMATION POINTEXCLAMATION POINTS. SPANISHASPOSTROPHEPARENTHASISBRACKETSBRACKET ANGLE{} BRACESQUOTATION MARKSDOUBLE & SINGLEELLIPSIS Figure 1
<table><tr><td>pp</td><td>(pianissimo) – very soft</td></tr><tr><td>p</td><td>(piano) – soft</td></tr><tr><td>mp</td><td>(mezzopiano) — sort of soft</td></tr><tr><td>m,f</td><td>(mezzoforte) — sort of loud</td></tr><tr><td>fº</td><td>(forte) – loud</td></tr><tr><td>S.f</td><td>(fortissimo) - very loud</td></tr></table> Figure 2 Punctuation (pǔngk'chōō-ā shən) n. The use of standard marks and signs in writing and printing to separate works into sentences, clauses, and phrases in order to clarify meaning. The American Heritage Dictionary One of the first rules of grammar we learn is the proper use of punctuation marks. Their application abides by traditional standards, indicated in the style guides that dictate punctuation usage in formal texts. In general writing, however, most of us use punctuation in a more flexible manner. We omit, substitute, improvise, and alter many of the given rules. Application is determined by both tradition and the writer's personal style. Because of this casual treatment, punctuation is often taken for granted. Most punctuation marks are composed to be seen but not heard. These subtle, often understated, devices are quite important, however, for they are the meter that determines the measure within the silent voice of typography (figure 1). Punctuation directs tempo, pitch, volume, and the separation of words. Periods signify full stops. Commas slow the reader down. Question marks change pitch. Quotation marks indicate references. Symbols in music perform comparable functions (figure 2). During the performance of a piece of music, each conductor interprets the intensities and durations of these notations according to his or her own style. Similarly, designers can improvise upon the standards of punctuation. Punctuation marks have tonal value just as letter forms do; they also have mass and energy, which may vary according to their structure. The various marks can be classified as major ? ! [], intermediate : ; " " () /, and minor - ' \* in correspondence with their mass. Full-bodied punctuation marks, such as question marks and exclamation points, contain the definite characteristics of their type style. Intermediate and minor punctuation marks, although in keeping with their type style, correspond more closely with the typeface weight. Punctuation marks vary widely from one type style to the next. A period, for example, is round in Futura, square in Helvetica, diamond shaped in Goudy, and oval in Ultra Bodoni (figure 3). Designers need not be confined to using only the punctuation included in a type font. They can utilize punctuation from other