# Design and Immateriality: What of It in a Post Industrial Society? Abraham A. Moles An immaterial culture is emerging. It exists only because a heavily material base supports it and makes it possible. It is from the very outset a phenomenon—indeed, an epiphenomenon—resulting from technology. The future of design, then, for an artificial reality depends on the design of the hardware and specialized techniques, that are the fundamental constituents of an artificial reality and that contribute to the creation of what one could call imago—generalized images, not necessarily confined to a visual mode. Thus, a post industrial society (Bell) is a superindustrialized society, or one which has pushed to extremes the consequences of its industrialization. It is true that we are surrounded by so-called electric phantoms, to use a phrase of Villiers de l’Isle Adam, which more and more are invading both our work and recreational environments. One of the problems posed to the human spirit is its capacity to exercise control over reality, while adjusting to the blurring of barriers between reality and images, or between real objects and their appearances. As we enter the age of telepresence we seek to establish an equivalence between “actual presence" and “vicarial presence." This vicarial presence is destroying the organizing principle upon which our society has, until now, been constructed. We have called this principle the law of proximity: what is close is more important, true, or concrete than what is far away, smaller, and more difficult to access (all other factors being equal). We are aspiring, henceforth, to a way of life in which the distance between us and objects is becoming irrelevant to our realm of consciousness. In this respect, telepresence also signifies a feeling of equidistance of everyone from everyone else, and from each of us to any world event. At the same time, we live in an age of communicational opulence. We now have at our disposal more sources of communication and interaction than we will ever be able to make use of in our relatively short lifetime. This is the age of a social system of networks, decorated with the futuristic name of the "Information Society." Henceforth, the bulk of our effort will be spent more for manipulating information than for manipulating objects, which are now no more than products of far-out robots, controlled by abtruse programs, inaccessible models, and a ubiquitous creator. Nevertheless, these new living conditions, which are also cultural conditions, and thus what one used to call the conditions for art, can subsist only on a spectacular hardware or material base. This underlying structure is spectacular, most evidently, because of the astonishing omnipresence and sheer size of the machines and the specialized manufacturing plants making cars, video equipment, audio components, and so on. While generally unaware of the highly specialized, technical origin of such objects, the layman has to live with this material accumulation. But sheer size is not the most significant aspect of this material base. Rather, it is especially spectacular because of its complexity which stands as today's paradigm for technological advancement. A 3cm² microprocessor comprises more "things" than an automobile—more components, more functions, more connections, more relays, and, conceivably, more raw intelligence. Yet, the structural complexity of today's hardware, which can be quantitatively measured, finds itself subject to one of the general laws of the universe, the law of entropy, or, simply put, the tendency of all conjunctions of things toward disorder. This irrepressible agitation of the physical world counteracts and eventually destroys the order imposed by the hardware creator. The consequences are overloads, short circuits, and equipment failure. ## A maintenance society replaces a performance society While transmitting and receiving messages and imagoes constituting an artificial reality, man encounters more frequently, like the diabolus in machina (“devil in the machine") of the religious era, the bug, the hitch, and the malfunction, largely random in nature, which erode the fundamental virtue that any mechanical aid or appliance must possess: reliability. All other factors being equal, the more our world is complex, in reality or appearance, the more it is fragile, and the more it is subject to mishaps. As a result, the hardware builder must adopt particular strategies or plans of action designed to control the demon of disorder. Such action gives rise to a maintenance mentality, which perfuses the world of support groups and technicians, for making "immaterials." The creators of the new immaterial culture have devoted most of their effort to the permanent reproduction of what, for them, was once practically inconceivable—the transmission of sounds and speech over distance and the storage of data in memory banks. All this, which a century ago was hailed as "the miracle of communication," has become commonplace in our lives. From a social perspective, the inventors and the builders seem to have won the battle waged on the continual insurrection of nature against the complex pattern of circuits and transistors. They have learned how to incorporate a reasonable degree of reliability into an uncertain miracle, and have mastered the multiple and diverse causes of disorder through deduction and quantitative reasoning. The digital compact disc or the satellite numerical repeater are two noteworthy examples. The immaterial civilization must be reliable; otherwise, it could have no social impact and would be the subject of little or no debate today. But the minimal reliability established by the industrial complex still does not inspire in the individual sufficient confidence to participate in an immaterial culture. He or she is reluctant to depend completely on telerepresentations being confronted by a heterogenous array of equipment that originated from various sources, was assembled at random, and offers uncertain compatibility. The situation of the individual, then, is different from that of the society at large, and consequently the meaning of the term "reliability" becomes more strict according to the scope of the human or material circumstances to which the word is applied. To live and experience a culture is to interact with innumerable, disparate forms of that culture, as well as to find oneself presented with a myriad of possibilities for successful—and unsuccessful--operation. The demands that the individual presents to society, therefore, are more important than the demands of society on its subjects, which is the situation we are faced with today. The task of the designer is, precisely, to ensure reliability by mastering the factors that jeopardize it. Therefore, the first field of investigation of design for an immaterial culture is to furnish largely material assurance of the universal reliability of the systems that make it possible. ## Design by a model or immaterialism of design? A second direction of inquiry into the relationship between design and the immaterial culture is to investigate the impact of the stratagem on the designer's task in a computerized society. We used to say that the designer, an environmental engineer, was responsible for each of the systems he installs, as well as for their integration into the particular life-style of each person. Each of these systems required a material task of design, done in a workshop that until now, was hardly susceptible to automation. All this is changing, however, with the advent of computer processing and computeraided manufacturing, which are modifying the phenomenological nature of the design process (Tuchny, Larroche). It is useless to ask if design is an artistic activity or a scientific one; the etymology of the word "technology," or techne (art), provides a sufficient response. With respect to doing, the confusing etymology of the word "engineer" (the genius who drives the engine or machine) applies also. The designer creates the environment of others. Until now the designer's vocation has been both conceptual and concrete. The workshop has been a place to perceive and build models destined to be copied for mass production. The question now, however, is how this vocation has been modified, for better or for worse, by the inexorable development of the immaterial culture. The design activity itself is changing because the designer's tools are becoming immaterial, as are the lives of those to whom the products are marketed. Design by holographic models may still be far in the future, but the concrete activity of design even now partakes substantially of immaterial techniques, or usage of artificial representations, images, and diagrams composed by image generating machines. Affecting more than workshop activity alone, the trend toward immaterialism includes all projectional conception in a concrete model, a process which used to depend on a situation of permanent interaction between conception and construction. The dialectic game between the abstract (the idea, the mental vision) and the concrete (the struggle with the material and disparate tools and appliances) is giving way to work done essentially with computerintegrated manufacturing at a computer desk. The designer's task now consists of construction based on three precepts: (a) the work order, (b) the rules of an exploratory program, (c) articulated in a field of liberty defined by certain parameters—often of ergonomic origin and eventually of creative fantasy. This suggests to the designer, regarded as the master of the work, an ensemble of more or less pertinent variations on which he will have to exercise his critical abilities, themselves controlled by functional optimization principles in the broadest sense. The designer, who assumes a more and more important social role in a society where power is evanescent, must confront the new fundamental idea of "Initial Form plus Variations," in order to realize an often monotonous variation of possible forms with respect to given parameters. This is what we have called "variational creativity." We are passing from a time of hands-on creation of a model to one of an initial form plus a field of variations, which stem from any already existing object, whether traditional or modern. Thus, from this established model a whole series of new models is determined, with the intention of forever satisfying the avidity of the consumer market. This process is done using the most refined and the most abstract creative techniques, in order to express them in programs, through creative methods (Alexander). Not only the designer, but also the manufacturer of forms and models faces this situation, but with a different perspective. The manufacturer confronts a kind of creation in immateriality, which encompasses the definition of the field of possibilities and its methodical exploration, which, in turn, generates auxiliary criteria for judgment. These criteria are then reapplied in order to furnish vet another new field of possibilities. Henceforth, one expects no longer to find drafting tables, sculptor's tools or carpenter’s chisels in the design room. They are being phased out by drawing and image-creating machines that yield computer graphics, so that the material objects themselves, as products of these images or of audio and visual simulations, are, at a distance, mere products of the imagination, and seem more credible than real. From 1850 to 1950, industrialization was characterized by the predominance of a system of drafted plans and diagrams, which were essential to the materialization of ideas, and which caused a proliferation of design patents. DeForge, in a notęworthy book, illustrated well this "kingdom of drawings" or technical diagrams, which were the rule in nineteenth century workshops. For several decades the complexity and precision of drawings have rendered them amenable to both the computer's memory and the drafting table. Now, however, the draftsman and the modelist are disappearing from the finishing laboratory or the graphic workshop itself; the computer is supplanting them with its ability to generate, on demand, any view, profile, or cross section of any part or whole of the factory or machine in question. Furthermore, the implicit and intuitive relationship itself of a small part to the whole, or of a particular machine to the whole factory, is vanishing. In many complex systems the global design breaks loose, becomes accessory, indeed superfluous, because the whole changes with each moment of its construction. Certain parts are replaced by others and modifications are made during construction, even during the useful life of the product itself, because the conditions determining the integration of smaller parts into the whole are automatically taken into account by the computer. In short, the scale model is losing its significance; it serves only as a rough estimate or guide to the builder. It is only a palpable illustration of the concept involved and, most important, is no longer necessary. One could say that neither the designer, the engineer, nor the architect knows the system in all its exact detail, though any one of these persons could simply ask the computer for any piece of information concerning the function of the object under construction. Thus, we are arriving at a kind of conceptual immateriality of complex systems in the wake of those who create them in fragments. ## The designer at the center of combinations of esthetic effects Finally, it seems appropriate to consider the relationship of design with a fundamentally artificial reality, which is another systematic exploration of the field of possibilities and which will be one new sensorial combination, generated from a "new art," defined by the sensory parameters that it manipulates and the new esthetic arrangement it proposes. If, in the foreseeable future, art remains (for those unperfused to or allergic to the idea of chance) a programmed sensualization of the environment, the designer, as an environmental engineer, finds himself endowed with considerable ability to manipulate the new artistic matter, a step which transforms the designer himself into a neo-artist. Or, could the designer be called a meta-artist, the potential maker of new “art"? In this respect, our senses of the close range of those affecting us by contact (touch, smell, sensitivity to temperature, vibration, and balance) remain a relatively unexplored area of human sensoriality. We lack the means to evaluate objectively certain aspects of the real, which we could call transduction (to transform messages from one medium to another) or interfacing (to set up a partition of illusions for the projection of tele-images for example, a screen, a tactile sensor, a sonorous background, a simulated landscape, or a virtual actor). The immense technological structure proposed by the post industrial society seems precisely to have to fill quickly this gap. It is becoming the function of design to examine this new field of “programmed sensualizations" (what one used to call a “work of art" and what one could call from now on a “scene of esthetic action"). What would become, for example, of an electronic tactile detector combined with a Minitel or Compuserve system? In a purely philosophical sense, would the result be a by-product of the immaterial culture, or would it be a new event in the sphere of esthetic valorization? ## The positions of design during the age of the invasion of immateriality Any immaterial civilization will be heavily materialized because its immaterial products are necessarily linked to the mechanical infrastructure that generates, stabilizes, and governs them. By misinterpretation, a recent exposition celebrated, not an “immaterial world," but a form of the binomial object-images, forms, and support. This is another attitude of man vis-à-vis an artificial world—a world created by him as the only source of his reactions. Does such an attitude imply a danger of technological narcissism, at the moment when nature becomes inaccessible or restricted to parks with limited access? Thus, every symphony has its compact disc; every audio experience its loudspeaker; every visual image its camera and video disc. Behind every outward image or symbol lies mechanical support, and if the immateriality of these images and symbols gives rise to a new approach to the relationship between human being and object, the analysis will be one of the individual's connection with the material support underlying the new culture of immateriality. The real problem, though, resides in the kind of relationship man will establish with the new material foundation that he will consider simply as part of the decor of the environment, consequently that he rejects from his own field of consciousness, and thus forgets entirely for the benefit of the immaterial imago (which is slightly material in itself), which directs him and the credibility of which is becoming more important than its verity. But since this same individual is constantly reminded of this material base by screens and terminals, the question is this: under what conditions of reliability will the material foundation be truly forgotten and replaced by the dubious, hazy, generalized images as only points of reference for a subsequent conscious activity? These material supports reveal themselves only by their imperfections—by the necessity to plug in a computer, for example, and to turn it on in order to make it work. The infrastructure subsists in the fact that the elimination of the most insignificant contact——indeed, a telecontact—can extract all that the most advanced technology has put into a computer. The material supports remind us of our dependence on them, especially by such defects as the smudge on a poorly cleaned vinyl disc, the highrise apartment building that interferes with radio reception, or the interfering lines that intrude in our private telephone conversations. As an individual, here and now, I could forget all the hardware, if only it were to reach perfection, something rarely attained in practice. Striving for that perfection and that absolute reliability is precisely the fundamental role of the one who designs the machinery of imagery, simulation, and communication; the standing of quality, without which no post industrial world could subsist, is always questioned, as is the fleeting "perfect moment" of my relationship with the world. The role of the designer, then, is not so much to create "new" objects to serve as structural supports of an immaterial culture, as to insist on an environment of implacable stability. Before introducing something new, the designer must protect the status quo, which permits individuals to participate spontaneously and with little effort in the seductive immateriality of today's world. ## Translated from the French by David W. Jacobus ## Bibliography Adam, Villiers de l'Isle, L'Eve Future, a science fiction poetical novel (Paris: Ed 10.18,1962). Alexander, Christopher, Notes on the Synthesis of Form (Boston: Harvard University Press, 1974). Bell, Daniel, The Coming of Post Industrial Society (New York: Basic Books, 1973). DeForge, Yves, Le Graphisme Technique (Paris: Champvallon, 1981). Moles, Abraham A., Vivre Avec Yes Choses: Contre Une Culture Immaterielle (Paris: Art Press, 1987), 1–28. Moles, Abraham A., "Vom Design des Gegenstandes zum Design der Umgebung," Design ist Unsichtbar (Wien: Locker, 1981): 93–100, Moles on page 98. Moles, Abraham A., "The comprehensive guarantee: a new consumer's value," Design Issues 2, no. I (Chicago: University of Illinois, 1985), 53–65. Moles, Abraham A., Theorie Structurale de la Communication et Societé (Paris: Masson, 1986). Moles, Abraham A., Theory of information and Aesthetic Perception (Champaign: University of Illinois Press [French edition, 1958]). Simon, Herbert A., The Architecture of Complexity (Pittsburgh: Carnegie Institute of Technology, 1962). Tuchny, Larroch, Objet Industriel en Question (Paris: Ed du Regard 1985).