## CHAPTER 9 ## Meaning and survival In preceding chapters we have tried to unravel the ways in which the self develops through transaction with the symbolic environment of the home. The objects that constitute this environment help to channel their owners' psychic energy toward goals that give meaning to life. Some of these goals appear to be limited to satisfying a person's needs; some include the well-being of others, some aim toward wider patterns of harmony. It is now time to view this process of cultivation more closely, in order to attempt to provide a context for individual development within the history of the human species. Only from this broader perspective can we evaluate the significance of symbolization and assess the various goals that men and women create to direct their lives. Throughout the millions of years of the evolution of life on our planet, the various species of bacteria, plants, and animals have struggled to create their form and to maintain it through time. To do so they had to capture energy from the environment – sunlight, chemicals, the fibers and flesh of other living things – and to use it to shape matter according to the blueprint contained in their genes. Thus the basic sources of energy were transformed into tens of thousands of differentiated life forms, each attempting to impose and retain its own form of order. One of the reasons that the Earth has supported such a variety of life forms has been the fact that none of them have been able to gain an advantage over others in this process of transformation. Éach species has found a few or only one way to use energy for its own purposes. A lion needs the protein from the flesh of its prey but cannot utilize any of the innumerable other sources of energy contained in leaves, grasses, wood, the ores and shales of the earth, or the bonds that keep molecules and atoms together. Other species, specialized in transforming each of these other manifestations of energy, use them to perpetuate their own life form. Therefore no one organism has been able to monopolize life, and the various forms have in time developed that ever shifting interdependence that we usually refer to as “the balance of nature." This balance was disrupted in the last thousands of years – the equivalent of a few seconds in evolutionary time – by the human conceptual ability to abstract the idea of energy from its various objective manifestations and by the technological ability to extract energy from wherever it could be found. From the discovery of fire to that of steam, electricity, and nuclear energy, the history of humankind is an incredibly rapid takeover by one animal species, a species that has learned to shape manifold energies to its own purpose. Until recently, this history was greeted with pride and complacency by most fellow humans. The flexibility humans had shown in adapting to every ecological niche was pointed out as proof of their superiority over all other forms of life. Such ingenious creatures could not fail to prevail. But the sturdy optimism of the recent past has by now developed some worrisome cracks. The very success of our species has caused problems that few had anticipated. Despite the fact that self-awareness and a high degree of self-control are what characterize humankind, one of the main problems has been the gradual loss of controls over the use of energy. These controls had been built into former species by their ignorance. A given species of plant, bird, or mammal was no threat to the livelihood of most others simply because it had no way to exploit the source of energy other species were depending on for their own survival. These “natural" restraints have fallen, one after the other, to human ingenuity - so have the traditional cultural restraints that have guided human conduct for millennia. In their place are the principles of utility and expediency, which now dominate modern culture over much of the world. Thus humans are in the presumably unprecedented position on this planet of being able to absorb all the physical energy they can find and to reshape it to their purpose. The ability to extract energy from the environment has not developed at a uniform rate across all human groups. The technological societies of the West have broken away from the rest of the world and now consume an inordinate amount of planetary resources, whereas the others look on with envy and increasing rage. Already the disparity is such that it almost qualifies as a social “speciation"– a differentiation of human groups into separate species distinguished by utterly different behaviors and energy requirements. Because cultural information (as opposed to genetic) is passed on through socialization, one might expect that sociocultural “speciation" will continue to create impassable barriers separating the haves from the have-nots. Possibly, this splitting of humanity might be reversed by either decreasing the rate of energy transformation of the industrial nations or increasing the rate of underdeveloped societies until it approaches parity. The second solution is, of course, the one pursued by the newly self-conscious underdeveloped countries. This would be a fine goal, except that according to what we know now it would lead even more speedily to the final depletion of planetary resources and thus to the destruction of the world as a lifesupporting system. The problem seems to be that modern industrial modes of thought are based on a foundation of the dia-bolic, the raising of utility and unlimited differentiation to the level of an ultimate goal. When utility or the “expected pleasure" an object can bring is taken as the ultimate, the doorway to fragmentation is opened, because presumably the only limitations placed on a given utility value are other utilities or “expected pleasures," and effects in the long run need not be considered – or are at least of secondary importance. The philosophy of utility is based on a series of discrete individual sensations of pleasure and not on a continuous cultivation of the purposes that make up one's life and integrate one with others and with enduring patterns of meaning. Thus the earth, the forests, the dwellings, and the psychic energy of people can all be mined for the specific utility of the transaction, regardless of what wider consequences or outcomes these acts might cause. How can humankind escape this vicious circle in which its unlimited appetite devours the world on which its life depends? No question requires an answer more urgently nor is more difficult to know how to begin answering than this one. We might start by asking the simple questions, where does all the energy go? What do we do with the life-sustaining resources we transform according to our purpose? For other kinds of animals the answers would have been easy. The energy goes to keep the animal alive until it reproduces and to ensure the survival of the species. To achieve this, a certain limited amount of calories have to be taken from the environment and transformed into both the physical shapes of the organism and its movements. Generation after generation, for millions of years, from mosquitoes to whales, the only energy requirement of an animal was to keep its biological order intact. With the development of self-consciousness humans increasingly began to need energy not only to maintain their biological form; now they needed it also to give shape to forms envisioned in their thought. Thus they labored to build pyramids and Gothic cathedrals; they wrought snowmobiles and television sets. It is not possible to assess the survival needs of humans simply in terms of biological requirements; the dreams of new forms, of new patterns of matter and action, must also be reckoned in the equation simply because they are inseparable from the evolution of the human species (Geertz, 1973). Humans have ceased to be purely biological beings content with reproducing genetic form. Each generation seems to create new desires for what we assume is needed for our existence: for the average contemporary American it might be owning two cars, a private jet to take us wherever we want, and a market that can provide for all our whims. The problem, then, is that there are no limits to these aspirations. Yet the physical energy that is needed to give them shape and the psychic energy that is necessary to extract, transform, maintain, and dispose of those shapes we create have definite limits. The drain on the material world subsequent to our constantly escalating needs is almost certainly going to result in a catastrophic failure of the ecology. Unless we humans learn to change the kind of creatures we have become, unless we alter our purpose, we shall be remembered among the galaxies only as a form of cancer that destroyed its host and killed itself in the process. What form this change may take and how it is to be accomplished is difficult to know at this point. But pieces of the answer are available, and the first steps may be to look them over and begin to wonder how they could fit together. Essentially, this problem can be stated in a simple form: How can we break our addiction to material energy without losing the specifically human ability to give shape to our dreams? The solution to this problem is implicit in the analysis presented in the previous chapters. This consists in learning to find meaning in signs that enrich life and offer opportunities and possibilities for growth without requiring great inputs of material energy or the depletion of scarce and contested resources. In principle, it is a simple solution, one that worked for millennia before the dawn of the modern age. In practice, however, it might be as difficult to carry out as would be curing a heroin addict by telling him to stop using the drug and, instead, to do something constructive. Yet faced with the alternative of a declining economy and, even more important, an ever escalating exhaustion of the environment, one must consider the necessity of a radical cure no matter how painful and difficult it becomes. First, we should examine more closely the nature of the addiction. Why have humans been using increasing amounts of physical energy to shape material objects far beyond their needs? A great deal of the energy we consume goes to provide comfort: more and more elaborate houses, clothes, food, and gadgets. The energy we use still serves ends that mimic bașic needs – food, warmth, security, and so on – but have now become addictive habits rather than necessities. Although the distinction between habit and necessity is so elusive, it is no less essential to draw. At what point does the natural enjoyment of food fade into gluttony? When does a desire for a comfortable home provided with laborsaving devices escalate into an inexhaustible drive to possess for the sake of possession? Such questions were asked in the past within the context of the great religions. Since the Enlightenment and the rise of “classical materialism" they have been dismissed as questions based on the limited moral assumptions of Christianity – merely “symbolic" - and hence having only a quaint historical interest. It now seems, however, that the mortal sins of Christianity are sound intimations of the kind of excess that can lead humankind to its doom. These moral issues of the past are revealed as scientific questions bearing on our future survival. Anthropologists and historians have recently begun to point out that the apparent poverty of Stone Age hunters and gatherers should not be viewed as helpless deprivation but more as a matter of choosing a style of life that provided a comfortable margin of survival and more leisure time than people have experienced since: Scarcity is not an intrinsic property of technical means. It is a relation between means and ends. We should entertain the empirical possibility that hunters are in business for their health, a finite objective, and that bow and arrow are adequate to that end. (Sahlins, 1972, p.5) The main thrust of Marshall Sahlins's argument is that the quality of life in the most “primitive" cultures is not demonstrably inferior to that of ours. The concern with accumulation, the fear of not making it in the “struggle" for existence that haunts our days is foreign to them. The world's most primitive people have few possessions, but they are not poor. Poverty is not a certain small amount of goods . . . above all, it is a relation between people. Poverty is a social status. As such it is the invention of civilization. (Sahlins, 1972, p.37) ## Two kinds of materialism By becoming entirely dependent on a market economy, we have become vulnerable to fears that we have tried to assuage by developing increasingly expensive symbolic demonstrations of our autonomy and power. Material possessions serve as pacifiers for the self-induced helplessness we have created. That terminal materialism is a recent achievement of Western industrial culture, rather than a “fact of nature" has been argued by many, notably by Karl Polanyi: Animal dependence on food has been bared and the naked fear of starvation permitted to run loose. Our humiliating enslavement to the material, which all human culture is designed to mitigate, was deliberately made more rigorous. (Polanyi, 1957, p.115) Although food itself is a necessity of life, who owns it, how we get it, what we eat, how we eat, when we eat, and how much we eat are specific habits cultivated within a range of cultural options. The question, then, becomes: What goals do these habits represent and how might they be cultivated toward the optimal direction? The point is that a habit of consumption can become an end in itself, feeding on its autonomous necessity to possess more things, to control more status, to use more energy. Consumption for the sake of consumption becomes a fever that consumes all the potential energy it can get access to. In a different context we have called this runaway habit of possession “terminal materialism" and contrasted it with “instrumental materialism," in which the possession of things serves goals that are independent of greed itself and have a specific limited scope within a context of purposes (Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton, 1978). This distinction illustrates the moral or pragmatic basis for the valuation of material goods – how the purpose, rather than the bare fact of material possession itself, should form the ground of a criticism of materialism. For most people the term materialism conjures up an image of crass self-centeredness, of mindless consumers buying needless things and devoting their lives to a shallow quest for the acquisition of money and possessions that will serve as status symbols. But it is also apparent that goods can serve the “common good" for a person or culture. Indeed, they are essential to it, which is why we were led to develop the second definition of materialism. This is a use of “instrumental" in the Aristotelian, not functionalist, sense (Aristotle, 1973 pp.600ff.). Instrumental materialism involves the cultivation of objects as essential means for discovering and furthering goals, so that the objects are instruments used to realize those goals. In this type of materialism there is a sense of directionality, in which a person's goals themselves may be cultivated through transactions with the object. This does not imply that possessions are used solely as means, because they also produce immediate enjoyment, consummations of experiences that are in a sense their own ends. What is being emphasized is that even these ends operate within a context whose purpose is the fuller unfolding of human life. This, then, is a context-related materialism, as opposed to terminal materialism, in which there is no sense of reciprocal interaction in the relation between the object and the goal. The end is valued as final, not as itself a means to further ends and hence not subject to cultivation. In other words, outcomes of transactions that conflict with the terminal goal are ignored. In this sense of materialism “the end justifies the means" because when one values something only as an end in itself, other possible ends or outcomes can be ignored. In fact, when these distinctions are applied to a theory of human cultural evolution, it appears that Darwinian theory, and certainly the more individualistic sociobiology, are terminal theories of evolution when applied to humans. They are terminal because they exclude what is most characteristic about the human species – the ability to cultivate ultimate goals through self-control. In the Darwinian and sociobiological perspectives only the survival of the species or of one's own genes constitutes the ultimate goal, and this a priori goal is considered final and not subject to criticism through cultivation. Growth only serves as a mere means for the mechanical principles of the goal and is ultimately separable from it. In our view, by contrast, real growth is the essence of the goal of evolution itself: The ultimate purpose of evolution is also subject to growth. Although the ultimate “goal" of other animals is to live, the ultimate goal of humankind is conditioned by additional evolutionary purposes as well, which determine us to live well. The development of communicative capabilities for artistic expression and pragmatic activities, for purposeful “inquiry" in a broad sense of this term, infused new goals into evolution itself and are embodied in our very physical being. Thus human evolution consists in the cultivation of adaptive and creative ways of living. It is the realization and embodiment of purposes and goals – intelligence in its broadest sense – in concrete patterns of emotion and thought. This is what constitutes a culture, not the mere fact that it is a genetic blueprint nor even a “system of symbols and meanings," but that it is a concrete belief that lives and breathes in the minds and hearts of its members. A vital culture is one in which persons devote their psychic energy through continual cultivation and in return are given a broader conception of themselves. It depends on the cultivation of its members for its continued existence. How can one escape the deadly inertia of terminal materialism? The prognosis is not very bright, given that our goals and institutions are now geared to maximize each person's drive to consume. The most basic change needed to turn things around is a change in the meaning we derive from possession of goods and energy. We must realize that the relationship between well-being and consumption is not linear. It is true that ownership of things and control over physical energy are “good" because they provide the means for living. But as many have indicated it does not necessarily follow that more means better. Although consumption approaches a point of diminishing returns in terms of physical and psychic comfort, its costs keep mounting. There is no rational way to justify the ravaging of the planet's resources in terms of any real benefits that we are supposed to derive from escalating consumption. We must face the fact that we are squeezing our world dry simply to feed a habit that gives no joy. The disparity between benefits and costs of consumption is nowhere as obvious as when one considers optional leisure habits. Although only about 5 percent of energy expenditure goes to formal leisure activities, this in itself is still not an inconsiderable proportion of the total resources we consume (Fritsch and Castleman, 1974). Spending an hour on a snowmobile uses up about a hundred times as much energy calculated in BTUs as an hour spent in cross-country skiing. Is the former activity a hundred times "better" than the second? If not, why do we expend scarce resources on it? Again, the answer seems to be that habit encourages us to engage in senselessly wasteful behavior (Csikszentmihalyi, 1979). Or, to take another example, to make and operate a color television set takes many times the physical energy needed to make books. Yet watching TV appears to be a much less positive experience than reading, if we are to trust what respondents themselves say (Csikszentmihalyi et al., 1977). We are not advocating the abolition of snowmobiles and television sets in a latter-day, scientifically based Savonarola-like revulsion against conspicuous waste. Such movements have little chance of succeeding. On the other hand, we have already questioned the assumption that happiness lies in a blind pursuit of terminal materialism. And we should begin in earnest to explore alternative goals for huan ingenuity, goals that will allow for the realization and even evolution of human potentials without destroying the environment. The obvious lack of relationship between the costs and benefits of material consumption has thus far gone unnoticed by those in charge of social and economic policies. When in the last magazine issue of the seventies the New York Times asked two dozen leading economists about how to stem the spiraling inflation and consequent social problems, the experts agreed on precious little, except on two goals shared by almost all: (1) production must somehow be increased and (2) consumption must be stimulated. Not one of these famous economists questioned the consequences of persevering in the pursuit of these goals. Like good technicians, they thought within the framework of their discipline and no further. They argued about how to get the next fix to the addict and how to find increasingly large doses of the drug in the face of dwindling supplies. While economists with Nobel prizes and similar accomplishments view the future in terms of ever expanding consumption with no compunction, a small but growing group within the profession has begun to explore alternative visions of a life that is not exclusively dependent on terminal materialism. Some of their book titles suggest the tack they are taking: The Joyless Economy (Scitovsky, 1976); Small Is Beautiful (Schumacher, 1975); The Household Economy (Burns, 1977); Muddling Toward Frugality (Johnson, 1978); The Sane Alternative (Robertson, 1979); The Conserver Society (Valskakis et al., 1979). From a perspective of ultimate survival, it seems quite clear that the direction pioneered by the maverick economists is the only sane one. One point on which the defenders of a life of increasing material comforts will surely take a stand is that all the objects we own and all the energy at our command decrease our slavery to routines, thus increasing our free time. Therefore “labor saving devices" are liberating, and the more we own the freer and better life becomes. Up to a certain point this argument is true. However, here again, the relationship between possessions and freedom is not linear but, rather, resembles an inverted "U." The Swedish economist Linder noted some years ago, on purely theoretical grounds, that increases in productivity and ownership actually reduce one's available free time (Linder, 1970). The three main reasons for this are: (1) when one's time is worth more on the market, one will lose more by not working, hence free time becomes increasingly expensive until one “cannot afford" to relax; (2) the more consumer objects one owns, the more time one has to spend in consuming; and (3) material possessions require increasing allocations of time for their maintenance. Because of these processes, Linder argues, productivity and consumption decrease the amount of psychic energy under one's control. If Linder is right, the ultimate irony of our addiction to material goals becomes even more poignant. The more a person's psychic energy is invested in terminal values, the less is left to experience the benefits that objects usually provide, and thus less remains to pursue other goals. The petrification of consciousness seeping into material objects is not merely a metaphor but a concrete fact. ## The cultivation of new goals The only weapon we have against the deadly power of a terminal materialism is the human ability to create meaning. By attributing meaning to a goal, we can channel psychic energy in practically any direction we choose. We possess the capacity to change goals and grow in new directions; however, our current dilemma is that this very ability has created terminal materialism and has brought us to the dead end we seem to be headed for. But what goals are being cultivated in this vast expenditure of the earth's resources? At what point in the process of the dia-bolic, the fragmenting force of terminalism, are psychic resources – the ultimate goals that motivate one's life – exhausted? Why does the time of greatest material wealth in the United States appear to be marked by so many signs of purposelessness and lack of direction? The bright guiding principles of rationalism and enlightenment never predicted that the “black box" of science and technology would unleash Pandora's troubles on to the world. Perhaps this age, which holds linear progress and differentiation as ultimate goals, has reached its end, and now it is time to put the coin, the sym-bol, back together. The human ability to create meaning, our chief asset and deficit, is the only hope for changing our deadly habit. If the distinguishing feature of human beings is self-awareness and self-control, we must exercise and cultivate this capability to alter the direction of our culture – revising and redirecting our goals. It is not entirely unrealistic to hope for such a change in values. After all, there are enough examples of people who have made such a change in their lives, in both the past and the present – those inspired by a religious vision, for instance. Occasionally, such individuals claim that “their kingdom is not of this world." This was usually taken to mean that there exists a divinely ordered kingdom of God beyond our planet, and the believer lives by its rules instead of earthly material values. But we might reinterpret the statement to simply referring to a way of life that is not yet of this world, to one of those revolutionary possibilities that foreshadow a future order of things. Some artists also have been notorious for living in a different world, less concerned about material rewards than most of us. Vasari's descripton of the character of Tommaso di Ser Giovanni di Simon Guido, although drawn four centuries ago, is typical of many other artists before and since: He was a very absent-minded and careless person, as one who, having fixed his whole mind and will on the matters of art, cared little about himself, and still less about others. And since he would never give any manner of thought to the cares and concerns of the world, or even to clothing himself, and was not wont to recover his money from his debtors, save only when he was in the greatest of straits, his name was therefore changed from Tommaso to Masaccio ["Oafish Tom"], not, indeed, because he was vicious, for he was goodness itself, but by reason of his great carelessness. (Vasari, 1959 (1550), pp. 42–3) This “great carelessness" is simply explained: the artist has not enough psychic energy left to invest in practical concerns because most of his attention is consumed by creative activity – “having fixed his whole mind and will on matters of art . . ." This does not mean that he is not also a realist in his everyday life; his whole existence is dedicated to the reality of the imagination, to actualizing his dreams and turning them into beauty. In the process he makes the possibilities of his imagination “of this world," while investing the world with vision. The apparent carelessness to the affairs of this world, which has been the hallmark of many creative persons, might ultimately be extremely practical. It might seem strange, for instance, that the author of the Critique of Practical Reason was alleged to have held an egg in his hand for three minutes, waiting for his watch to boil in the pot. But on the other hand, it is also rumored that the townspeople in his community used to set their watches to his afternoon walks. The important fact is that Kant's vision of a new order has had such a profound effect on subsequent thought that it actually created a new world. Consider the case of scientists whose lives are dedicated to learning the laws of “this world." Scientists are most peculiar seeming beings who unlike most people take delight in discovering that they have been wrong about some scientific question. Scientists are actually (or should be) glad about this because they move that much closer to the truth of nature through such a discovery. Those who discover alternative worlds find compelling goals in them by which to redirect their lives. These examples suggest that it is not hopelessly unrealistic to expect that goals can be cultivated to exert a moderating restraint on terminal materialism. They prove that it is indeed possible for people to invest most of their psychic energy in goals that are “not of this world" - that include possibilities for experience and growth transcending existing conditions and conventions. To create new meanings, however, is not easy. To be a viable alternative, “symbolic feedback" must be valued for its own sake and not for what it can buy in the marketplace. Together with the skills learned in cultural activities, we must also learn to appreciate symbolic rewards – not as pale substitutes for “real" material rewards but as things having their own intrinsic worth as well as being capable of further cultivation. To learn a cultural practice – art, music, philosophy, or mathematics – takes time. To do so voluntarily takes a felicitous match between the person's skills and motivation, on the one hand, and the specific form of the symbolic order, on the other. It is more difficult to get involved in the world of music if one is tone deaf, or in the world of mathematics if one is unable to deal in abstract cognitive operations. Yet presumably all humans have the potential to respond to some motivating goals that do not rely solely on great physical expenditures – to love, for instance, in which a relationship with another becomes the reward for the self and a goal worth cultivating in its own right. Having the potential for learning a set of cultural skills is, however, not enough. One must be introduced to the skills early, have models to imitate, and be supported by a social milieu that finds meaning in the given pursuits. To provide such conditions is the task of “cultivation" at the sociocultural level. Without doubt, the cultivation of resourceful goals is a very expensive proposition, mainly in terms of psychic energy rather than in terms of nonrenewable physical resources. In recent history the cultivation of symbolic skills at the social level was attempted through the institution of universal education. At least some of its proponents had hoped that training all youth in skills such as reading, writing, mathematics, and various other symbolic crafts would increase the possibilities for the authentic development of the self. Needless to say, in this respect the compulsory education experiment has not been a great success. Instead of becoming a training ground for alternative goals, it has been co-opted to serve the production and consumption needs of existing conditions. The only concession to the aims of training survival skills for a new world, to liberate youth from the deterministic grip of unlimited material needs, is the so-called “liberal education" now available only to the very rich or the very talented, confirming again, alas, the prejudice that symbolic skills are a frill for the few who can afford it rather than a necessity for all if the human species is to survive and flourish. Besides the fact that schools are expected to train youth to perform in the world, the dozen years or so of formal compulsory education pose another obstacle to finding meaning in symbolic feedback. That is, a system of actions and rewards can become more meaningful when people attend to it voluntarily. When attention is coerced, the things on which it focuses may not be sought for their own sake and thus will not become intrinsically valuable. It is possible, of course, to start learning something under compulsion, gradually begin to like it, and then become captivated by it. When Plato said in the Laws that the secret of education was to teach young people to find pleasure and pain in the right objects, this is what he possibly had in mind: Education consists in getting people to be intrinsically motivated to pursue the ultimate goals that give meaning to life. Compulsory mass education can rarely achieve such a difficult change. What it typically does is to provide youth with symbolic tools to pursue terminal material goals. The students' goals are not affected; they learn to use the symbols of science, mathematics, or art without absorbing their autonomous meanings. Their intrinsic motivation remains that of pursuing a “good life” defined in terms of production and consumption, without gaining a glimpse of the alternative worlds that these practices potentially make available. There are exceptions, of course. A few athletes learn to live for the sake of perfection in the symbolic world of their sport, undeterred by the terminal materialism engrained into the goals of professional athletics. A few artists are content with the rewards of their art, unmindful of the rampant commercialism of the national “art scene." A few scientists derive more reward from the knowledge they acquire than from the government grants or professional reknown that they might obtain. It is these "mutants" that we need to understand if we wish to know how, despite all the pressures to the contrary, some persons are able to avoid having terminal materialism control their lives. These reflections might seem to have strayed rather far from the empirical content that provided the basis for the study reported in the earlier chapters of this volume. Yet such is not the case. The far-reaching speculations about the emergent power of cultivation have developed quite naturally from considering what respondents said about their relationships with objects in their home. For example, we found that things are cherished not because of the material comfort they provide but for the information they convey about the owner and his or her ties to others. The market value, the physical energy invested in an object is not the reason that it becomes special to its owner. A battered toy, an old musical instrument, a homemade quilt provide meaning that is more central to the values of people than any number of expensive appliances or precious materials. Yet despite this fact, it is doubtful that many of our respondents would willingly forsake the pursuit of limited material resources. The habit of acquisition and the addiction to consumption will motivate their expenditure of energy even though these are not the source of their most significant rewards. The important question that needs to be answered is whether these patterns of meaning can provide the continuity that is so vital to a culture. As expressed by John Dewey: The best we can accomplish for posterity is to transmit unimpaired and with some increment of meaning the environment that makes it possible to maintain the habits of decent and refined life. Our individual habits are links forming the endless chain of humanity. Their significance depends upon the environment inherited from our forerunners, and it is enhanced as we foresee the fruits of our labors in the world in which our successors live. For however much has been done, there always remains more to do. We can retain and transmit our own heritage only by constant remaking of our own environment. (Dewey, 1957, p. 23) The transmission of a heritage and the process of cultivation, which are at the heart of cultural life, are dependent on some enduring continuity to the meanings that are to be conveyed, which in turn involves an internalization of the moral standards and norms of the community and a continual refinement of these standards. Community, as Arendt (1958) has said, is a state of plurality. It is the social world in which we live: the sum of the people, transactions, habitats, traditions, and institutions that form a vital aspect of everyday life. Insofar as community is the ensemble of relationships, experiences, values, norms that serve to orient our actions and ultimate goals, then community is itself purposive or normative or directive. It is by internalizing those around us, as well as the broader community, that we cultivate the goals through which the self develops and which in turn enrich the vitality of and give direction to community life. We may live in a finite and limited community of people, habitats, and beliefs, but the meaning of this actual community is only realized when it is projected against the horizon of an unlimited community, the personification of cosmos, whose aims are capable of being continually revised toward some ultimate goals. It is this unlimited community that forms the ground of our social ideals and toward which our actual community life is aimed. What characterizes the community represented by this sample? Perhaps what is most notable is the diversity of the artifacts themselves as well as the range of meanings that can be symbolized even by the same types of objects. We see a group of individuals of various ages who have many things symbolizing personal experiences, but the artifacts themselves tend to be idiosyncratic, perhaps indicating the intense need to differentiate oneself from the surrounding community as one of the ideals of the community of modern life. American culture seems to be based largely on goals of novelty for its own sake, pure individuality, and the passion to possess people and things briefly. But when differentiation, originality, and individuality are taken as ultimate goals in themselves, apart from the discourse of the common life, they ultimately lead to chaos, fragmentation, and nothingness (Rochberg-Halton, 1979c). What good is it to gain a world totally of one's own when there is no one else to appreciate it? Actually, the achievement of pure originality, novelty, and individuality leaves no one at all to appreciate it because even self-awareness and self-control consist of a dialogue with the internalized signs of community – Mead's “generalized other." The pure “I" apart from all others is merely a vanishing point. Yet the modern quest is to find a single Archimedean point with which to move the world. What we need to realize is that the Archimedean center is not an atomistic vanishing point but that community itself is the fulcrum with which to move the whole world. Perhaps the major icons of continuity in American culture today are photographs. They seem able to provide a record of one's life, and of the lives of one's ancestors, and can be handed down to one's descendents. But these again are individualized to particular families and may not have the publicly shared value of a religious item or perhaps even a coat of arms. On the one hand, this may be a sign of a fragmentation of shared cultural values. This freedom imposed by the relaxation of standardized cultural values may have the unwanted effect of making it easier for the patterns of meanings symbolized in the environment of the home to become ephemeral – to be manipulated by a mass culture whose ultimate goal is utility rather than quality of living. On the other hand, the variety and originality of these meanings may actually be a sign of the health and the vitality of contemporary urban life. If nothing else, our study has begun to indicate some of the alternative symbolic values that are operating within the shadow of the main terminal material goals. These might provide new directions for the investment of psychic energy, more in line with a continued evolution. ## Summary Perhaps the most important goal evident in the sample we studied is the one referring to family relationships. This, of course, is one of the oldest symbolic inventions of man; as Lévi-Strauss has said, it is with the creation of kinship systems that man made culture possible (Lévi-Strauss, 1949). At the same time, the meaning of kinship is still in the process of emergence, and no one knows its ultimate form and power. The values associated with a child's relation to his or her parents, the relationship of husbands to wives, of each to his wider kin, are continually redefined both in terms of intensity and quality. At present, for instance, the bond between spouses is as weak as it has ever been in the recent history of Western societies. Yet the quality of the relationship might have gained in consequence: As marriage becomes more voluntaristic, it has a chance to be more intrinsically motivating. As family cooperation dwindles in its economic importance, its symbolic rewards might increase. Clearly, even in contemporary America the symbolic value of kinship is extremely important. Family relations provide an enormously rich variety of information that only they can provide; in this sense the family is an emergent goal, not just an entity that can fulfill existing needs. Reading an old Bible with the names of one's ancestors inscribed on the frontispiece gives a person a direct experience of his or her origins, a link with the past; it provides an identity with a specific ethnic group and with a set of historic events. Such information helps to define one's selfconcept, extending the roots of individuality into a network of past existences. Conversely, the drawings and photos of one's children that so many adults cherish are signs of the self's extension into the future; they prefigure the development of one's descendents who will carry on the psychic order one has created to generations to come. Objects of this type embody the attention that persons invest in each other, thereby forming transpersonal units. They are tokens of remembrance, respect, and love; that is, of the reaching out beyond the constraints of self-interest narrowly defined to establish bonds that enlarge the being of the individual and unite people. When used in this way, household objects serve a sym-bolic purpose; the materialism involved in the transaction is instrumental. We have seen that homes in which objects are signs of warm symbolic ties between family members are different from homes in which such meanings are absent. Families that lack shared positive emotional meanings live in a barren symbolic environment: The houses they inhabit and the objects they own are material things – having no other value – to be used and consumed. In such homes children grow up concerned with the safety of their own selves, with little psychic energy left over to care for others. Their goals, like the goals of their fathers, are bent on the achievement of terminal rewards, on the immediate gratification of needs conditioned by the consumer culture. Emotional isolation prevents members of these families from getting involved in broader community affairs; deprived of meaning within the home, they cannot find it outside the home either. Probably, the habit of terminal consumption thrives most glaringly in those families that cannot generate warm symbolic meanings. A “cold" family seems to breed terminal materialism by not being able to cultivate the basic symbolic skills and rewards of human existence, that of representing the transpersonal value of the individual. This conclusion was not proven by our study and its findings but emerges as a hypothesis. It remains the task of future research to explore whether in fact “warm" families are less addicted to the consumption of physical energy, in an objectively quantified sense, than the members of “cold" families are. Although kinship was found to be a strong source of meanings at least in some of the households we studied, broader symbolic systems referring to larger cultural aggregates were conspicuously absent. We have seen that ethnic, political, national, or religious relations rarely gave meanings to the objects that people cherished in their homes. From this we might conclude that, as a culture, we lack at present a system of pervasive goals that could act as active restraints on terminal materialism. There is, for instance, no clear indication of a status system independent of material value that could serve as a meaningful source of rewards. “Status symbols" are, by and large, usually reducible to the expensiveness of the object. This lack of generally accepted alternatives to materialism could be interpreted as an ominous sign for our future survival. At the same time, there is evidence that although goals of universal currency are lacking, both subgroups and individuals within the sample find ways to assign meanings to certain values. Books may represent universal human concerns, or the particular lore of a profession; tools reflect the discipline of a craft and cameras the aesthetic requirements of photography; and plants are tokens of a complex of beliefs representing nurturance and concern for the ecology. For some, sports equipment expresses athletic values; for others, art objects or antiques symbolize participation in a system of aesthetic goals. This diversity suggests a pluralism of material culture, which overlaps with the political and ethnic pluralisms said to characterize our society. It might be taken as a sign of vigorous health, unless the fragmentation of values turns out to weaken the power of any combination of discrete alternatives to stem the attraction of terminal materialism. Also, on this score, the present study permits no clear prediction; it can only raise the issue for further study. The majority of cherished objects do not relate the user to any larger system or to any other individual; they are valued because they produce an enjoyable sensation or interaction. Stereo sets, for instance, help to modulate moods, to change the direction of consciousness from boring or worrisome information to a more enjoyable state by redirecting attention into the pleasing patterns of music and lyrics. A child values a bicycle because it represents freedom, the acquisition of skills, pleasurable experiences, and the opportunity for future enjoyment. Such meanings might at first seem to be entirely self-centered, without ties to any enduring patterns transcending the personal self. This is not necessarily the case, however. It depends to a large extent on the inherent character of the experience. Music, for instance, can have a powerful transformative value in addition to its immediately enjoyable qualities. It may direct the listener's attention to the values of a great tradition (see Redfield and Singer, 1954), a counterculture, or a social protest movement. Or it might provide, in its syntactic structure, a foretaste of a cosmic order that in many cases has “religious" or “spiritual" consequences (Heifetz, 1980). Similarly, sports not only produce a sense of physical well-being and psychological satisfaction but might also relate the participant to other people and often give a sense of transcendent harmony that is similar to the consequences that music, art, literature, or other symbolic systems provide (Novak, 1976). Thus even objects cherished for the experience they make possible, those we categorized as referring to the Self, might involve important values that go far beyond the person as an individual. Here we must conclude that the medium is not necessarily the message: By knowing that a person values a stereo set, we cannot know for sure what consequences the interaction will produce. These depend on what music is being played and on how the music is interpreted. Unfortunately, in the present study we were not able to measure such subtle distinctions. But the enjoyment objects make possible has another, more radical impact on terminal materialism. Enjoyment, or the flow condition in which one acts with total involvement and excludes the pressing concerns of everyday life, is an excellent prototype for alternative goals. This seems to be the evolutionary significance of what Bentham has scornfully dismissed as “deep play": It provides scaled-down models of how it feels to live in terms of different sets of goals. In play the values of terminal materialism may be temporarily subverted, and one can directly experience how it would be if we lived by different rules (Csikszentmihalyi, 1980). Thus through play the gambler suspends concern for economic actualities and the wisdom of the marketplace; the athlete ignores pain and fatigue; the musician disregards the criteria of “usefulness" that may otherwise apply in everyday life. Playful, enjoyable activities are again like mutations of mainline material goals and means. Like genetic ones, many of these symbolic mutations may be unviable as substitutes for the demands existence places on us to develop a workable livelihood. However, as Huizinga (1950) has suggested, many of the symbolic forms that by now are more or less integrated into mainline culture, and partially leaven the heavy dough of terminal values – systems such as art, religion, and science – may have started out as games that, through mimicry, could reflect the ultimate goals of a culture. Most of the time enjoyment provides only an escape from the conflicts of life, that is, when the person still holds on to terminal goals and uses play as a relief from their irritations. But if the play experience causes one to release terminal values, even for a while, then it is no longer useful to speak of escape; it is more like an emigration, the moving to a new place to build a different life, and for this reason enjoyment should be distinguished from pleasure. It is in this sense that Einstein used the word “escape," as the creation of a new reality, when he wrote: “I agree with Schopenhauer that one of the most powerful motives that attracts people to science and art is the longing to escape everyday life" (quoted in Nisbet, 1976, p. 12). Thus it is essential to cultivate enjoyment because it is one of the most powerful means to experiment with alternatives to the trap of routine. Pleasure does not lead into new territory because the means to it may change but the goal itself does not grow. Enjoyment, on the other hand, consists in satisfying goals themselves capable of cultivation. The “good life" is not a life of pleasure seeking, but it does involve the pleasurable experience of enjoyment. We derive enjoyment from the use of our own skills or the skills of others: from superior performance in athletics, music, work, or social interaction. Enjoyment, which leads into the future, must be tended to survive; otherwise, it turns into mere pleasure. To find enjoyment in life, and new goals to give value to it, one must have a peculiar relationship to one's environment. We have attempted to describe this by borrowing Dewey's term perception. We have seen that some people tend to see their world primarily in terms of already defined meanings; they encounter only embalmed experiences drained of life and the possibility of growth. Experience ruled by recognition prevents learning, precluding the discovery of new alternatives. In a culture ruled by material values, a person who depends on recognition sees only material values. He or she is consigned to live on the one dimension of agreed-upon reality, without the skills to break out of its constraints. Perception is perhaps the most basic skill, the key to learning and even to evolution. Its loftier manifestations we call “creativity," but by doing so we risk placing the end of a continuum of skills on a pedestal, and ignoring the rest of the spectrum. The habit of perception must be cultivated. This is the real goal of a liberal education. To “liberate” people is not just to set them free of the already determined meanings in things but to impose on them the choice to discover the objective possibilities in things and the freedom to conserve the past and to create new values and a new world. This process of liberation does not happen spontaneously because the wisdom of the past has trained us to hold on to goals that have been of service before. But the wisdom of the past must constantly be reinterpreted and cultivated in order to create the wisdom of the future. Perception appears to be the starting point for both individuaļ liberation and rescuing the species from the limitations of terminal goals. Perception is a precondition to enjoyment, to learning, to growth, to freedom – hence to the qualities of experience that transform people from totally determined entities into open systems of self-cultivating energy. It gives value to life by making each act of perception a unique, objective experience. In the words of an English psychoanalyst, "It is creative apperception more than anything else that makes the individual feel that life is worth living" (Winnicott, 1971, p. 65). At the same time, it is through the outcomes of acts of perception that new patterns of thought and emotion emerge, patterns that might constrain terminal materialism and redirect its energies. ## Envoi In conclusion, reflection on the results of this study have led us to see materialism in a somewhat new light. Material production and consumption cannot serve as the main goals of our communal efforts. Instrumental, or context-related, refinable goals can provide alternative directions for psychic energy and rewards that are worth living for. The task of retooling our motivational system from one set of values to the other is not simple, requiring the intense cultivation of goals at all levels: from the self-conscious development of skills on the part of individuals to the indispensable formative efforts of parents, to the institutional practices of schools and community organizations and, finally, to the policy decisions of national governments. At this point most European nations have ministries of culture and even of leisure; what would be fitting – at least symbolically – is to have a department of symbolism whose mandate would be to encourage the development of “symbolic" skills in the population, thereby setting them free as persons and helping to prevent the material collapse of society. Unfortunately, such a turn of events is highly improbable. Whenever the power of symbols is recognized by à government, more often than not it is exploited to repress rather than to liberate people – witness Goebbels's Propaganda Ministry. But, by and large, symbolic power is simply ignored because it does not show up in the gross national product (GNP), and there are no strong constituencies clamoring to learn how to use it. Yet somehow we must learn how to use symbolic energy before all the physical resources are burned up. The world is not made just of fuel, it contains things that can make us grow and change our natures – change our needs. Things can have meanings that may transform the very world in which we live. But things by themselves alone cannot help us; only in the way we relate to them is their symbolic energy released. The meaning that releases the symbolic power of things is created, first of all, by the act of perception. The primary skill one needs to unlock the magic of things is that of seeing them objectively and subjectively at the same time, thus joining the nature of the perceiving subject with the nature of the object. This act of bringing together two entities in a process that unites while preserving the distinctive characteristics of the elements is the basic symbolic act – sym-ballein, to "throw together." The second skill naturally grows out of the first: the ability to enjoy one's actions. The flow experience, which focuses a person's attention on the task at hand, is symbolic because it brings together the psychic processes of the person and unites them with a set of objective stimuli in the environment. This is opposite from the state of alienation, in which one feels separated from oneself and from the elements of one's life. Flow gives intrinsic value to whatever one is doing, even when the task is not meaningful in terms of material values. The ability to perceive and to flow make it possible to develop the third skill that is necessary to control the need for material rewards: cultivating the ultimate goals of one's existence. People who discover the objective possibilities of things through perception cease to see the world strictly in terms of their own needs and thus see many new things to do in it. If these actions are enjoyed, they will gain meaning and be valued independently of the hierarchy of terminal material goals that is our modern heritage. There is an urgent need to develop vital cultural practices – ways of living – that have the potential for long-term growth. We need to cultivate those objects, activities, and environments that can inspire the fullest unfolding of human potential now and in the future; patterns of meaning that do not have a self-destructive exhaustion of physical and psychic resources built into them. If there is any truth to the myth of progress that has gripped the modern mind it is that things can be changed for the better. The mistake in the modern pilgrim's progress has been to equate better with more so that all life's problems can be solved technically simply through more goods or more information. But as Herman Melville said over a century ago in his fantastic documentary of the modern mind, Moby Dick: "Why then do you try to enlarge' your mind? Subtilize it." The cultivation of a way of living calls for pragmatic and not simply technical or expedient solutions (Habermas, 1973). We Americans pride ourselves on being a “pragmatic" people, but it is a shallow, inverted, modern definition of pragmatic that equates it with utility or expedience – “better" with "more" – that is increasingly proving to be unrealistic. To be pragmatic means that one is guided by moral standards oriented toward the good life of the wider community and that one willingly redirects one's goals when it appears that one's own actions, or the actions of one's community or culture, will have self-defeating or even disastrous consequences. The goals one can create are not all at the same symbolic level but can be seen to range on a continuum of increasing synthetic power or generalizability. At the lower end, the goal is to prove one's individual existence, one's control over the environment. At this level, flow joins the elements of one's self into an active participation with a domain of challenges: Toys, sports equipment, books, tools, and musical instruments are some of the concrete signs through which this goal may be achieved. The next level usually is the one in which the self grows to include – and be included in – the network of family relationships. Here the goal expands from seeking rewards to one's own intentions to finding meaning in rewards obtained by others. The self expands to the “social" level, and one's ability to enjoy is increased by being able to share the enjoyment of others. Finally, one might reach the level of what we have called “cosmic" goals. Here one perceives objective relationships between the self and the wider patterns of order: the community, the species, the ecology as a whole, and practices like one's occupation or craft, art, music, or religion. Now the possibilities for meaningful action expand geometrically, as do the opportunities of experiencing perception and flow. Motivated by a broad, enduring set of goals, the self is no longer dominated by the needs that have shaped it thus far. It can take on the challenges and responsibilities of freedom and use meaning to fashion a new world in which to live.