# APPENDIX A # Procedures and interview notes ## Procedures The selection criteria for this study were to gather a socioeconomically stratified sample of three-generation families from Evanston and Rogers Park. To accomplish this, census tract information concerning income was used to select neighborhoods in Evanston for canvassing, which would range from lower to upper income. Once the neighborhoods were selected, teams of canvassers would cover an area on a door-to-door basis. They described the general outline of the study to potential respondents and established whether the family possessed the characteristics needed for the study: three interviewable generations all living within the general Chicago area. The usual course was to interview both parents, one child, and one grandparent. Potential respondents were given a flyer that restated the goals of the study and which listed telephone numbers they could call for more information. Rogers Park respondents were selected on the basis of telephone canvassing, and in some instances two-generation families were selected. Approximately 1,000 households were canvassed in Evanston, and at over half of these there were no response on the initial round. Of those households where there was a response, 21 percent of those contracted refused participation, 61 percent were not qualified for some reason, and 15 percent were interested in participating in the study and also met the criteria. Some who accepted dropped out before the entire family could be interviewed, but it is also important to point out that the acceptance rate might have been somewhat higher if the criteria did not include three generations of one family who all lived within the Chicago area. The acceptance rate for the 20 families from Rogers Park was lower, closer to 10 percent, which was due primarily to the use of telephone canvassing instead of personal contact. Rogers Park is the northernmost community within the Chicago city limits and is contiguous with Evanston. Of the total sample, 69 percent live in single-family houses. In Evanston, where single family housing predominates, 75 percent of the families live in this type of housing, as opposed to 50 percent in Rogers Park. Evanston was selected as the target site of the “program project," a group of independent studies carried out by the Committee on Human Development and funded by the Naional Institute of Aging (grant no. PHS-5P01-AG00123). It was originally selected because the age of distribution matched predictions for the general U.S. population of the year 2000. Both Evanston and Rogers Park are very old communities for the Chicago area, and both have a long tradition of social, ethnic, and economic diversity. The sample thus consists of 315 persons (141 males and 174 females). There are 79 children, consisting of 46 males and 33 females. Their ages range from 8 to about 30, with 80 percent of the children under 21. A few older "children" were actually young married adults who were the youngest generation that could be interviewed, and who had interviewable parents and grandparents. In the middle generation there were 82 mothers and 68 fathers. Seventy-seven persons comprise the grandparents' generation, with 26 males and 51 females. Nine great-grandparents were also interviewed, of which 8 were women, forming a small subgroup of four-generation families within the sample. Of the total sample, 67 percent are white, 30 percent are black, and about 3 percent are Latin, Oriental, or some other racial compositions. Socioeconomic status was determined on the basis of the middle-generation father. For families without a father in the middle generation, the mother was used as the index. Families were divided into either upper-middle class or lower-middle class on the basis of the father's education and occupation. Occupational status was based on the Hollingshead index, whereas college degree or beyond was taken as a measure of upper educational status. If educational achievement and occupational status differed greatly, as they did in a few families, the occupational status was taken as the more important indicator. Interrater reliability in determining the socioeconomic status of families was 94 percent. Of the whites, 66 percent received an upper-middle class socioeconomic status rating on our two-point scale, and the remaining 34 percent were placed in the lower-middle class, whereas only 22 percent of the blacks were in the upper-middle class and 79 percent were in the lower-middle class. The composition of the lower-middle class is 50 percent white and 50 percent black, whereas the upper-middle class is 87 percent white and 13 percent black. These standings are fairly representative of the lower socioeconomic status of American blacks. The fieldwork began in April 1977 and was completed by January 1978. Each respondent was interviewed in his or her home (with the exception of some grandparents) for about two hours, with mostly open-ended questions and checklists. These ranged across three “concentric" areas of reference: the home, the neighborhood-community, and the Chicago Metropolitan area. The main question in the home section of the interview dealt with (1) what objects in the home were special to the person being interviewed; (2) why these things were special; (3) what it would mean not to have the object; (4) when the object was acquired; (5) how the object was acquired; and (6) in which room the object was located. Other questions concerning objects were also asked, such as what things were most personal or private and what all of one's objects meant as a whole. While respondents filled out checklists and a shortened form of the Jackson Personality Research Form, the interviewers filled out an inventory of the living room, which accounted for the presence or absence, as well as stylistic aspects, of various objects. All interviewers underwent an intensive training before doing actual interviews. They were instructed in the purposes of each of the questions and were asked to complete at least one practice interview with someone of their choosing before entering the field. The practice interview was reviewed by the project director with the interviewer, or in some cases the trainee would discuss the practice interview with experienced interviewers. Each of the interviewers were also given the following notes: ## Interview notes (General) 1. When taking out new interview forms, check and make sure they are complete. There are two sets of interview forms. All the differences pertain only to the URBAN LIFE-STYLES QUESTIONNAIRE. Form 1 has the Neighborhood and Holiday checklists and Form 2 has the Activities and Metropolitan checklists. 2. There may not be enough room on the form for a lengthy answer. Use the back of the form if necessary, marking the front with an (over) and putting the number of the question on the back of the form. 3. Be sure to write down general comments on a question, particularly when the respondent (R) is unable to think of an answer for that question, e.g., “I don't really have any objects that are special to me . . . Ever since the fire when I was a little boy and all my baseball cards were burned up, I haven't really gotten attached . . ." 4. Probes (statements made by the interviewer) should be written in parentheses. Probes that are normally part of the question need not be written in, e.g., (any others?) But, at the end of a section, probes and final statements should both be written in, e.g., (anyone else?) No, not offhand Probes serving as labels should be written in to delineate the parts of the question being answered. 5. When asking questions about what is special, occasionally one is asked whether this means something special in the present or from the past. Answer to the effect that we are interested in what is special now, but if something used to be special and still holds an important place for a person, we are also interested in this information. 6. If you can, sit so the R cannot see your forms, but don't go to any great lengths to hide them. The idea is that if R sees the number of slots to fill up, he may feel compelled to do so. Also, if a person is taking a while and is having trouble thinking of things to say, then tell him or her that we are interested in what springs to his mind, that it isn't necessary to force the issue. 7. Reflect back to R his level of excitement and let him know that you are hearing what's important to him, e.g., the R may feel an object has extra special meaning. Reflect this back to him in the tone of your comments. 8. Turning in Interviews: Each answer on the forms you turn in should be self-contained, e.g., if a person has already told you how he or she acquired an object, you may not have to ask this again when you come to that part of the question. But when you are filling in the form to be turned in, BE REDUNDANT and state again how the object was acquired – and put a note that this was mentioned before (e.g., 13 years ago, cf., #4B), if necessary. When turning in interviews, please write your name and R's name in pencil. Also, please pencil in whether it's Evanston or Rogers Park. If the people live outside these areas, write down in pencil where they live, the name of the Evanston or Rogers Park family it is to be put with, and then mark it Evanston or Rogers Park. Also mark $\mathbf { G _ { 1 } } , \mathbf { G _ { 2 } } , \mathbf { G _ { 3 } } ,$ accordingly. Finally, draw lines to separate responses if it is necessary. ## Beginning the interview 1. Try to situate yourself so that one R cannot be influenced by another person, i.e., seat yourself alone with R and out of the hearing range of other Rs who may be answering the same question. 2. If you are going to be doing more than one person in a sitting, you can give the second person the Jackson Personality Inventory to fill out while waiting. Do NOT give any other forms, even the Urban Life-styles Questionnaire, as this will bias their responses on the oral part of the interview. 3. If R has any questions at the beginning of the interview, you might briefly explain the general structure of the interview – that it moves from questions about Chicago to R's own neighborhood and home, and then to questions about holidays, important life events, etc. If R has particular questions that might influence what he or she is going to say on the interview form, tell R that it would be better if you could answer the questions after the interview itself and then remember to do this if the questions are still relevant. 4. Explain that we would like to tape the interview in order to save time, because one can't write as fast as one talks. The tapes are then erased and used again. If R seems to be upset about being taped and asks you not to use it, then just try to get the answers as verbatim as possible. The tape allows you to establish more rapport with R because you will not have to be busy writing and can listen and look at R more. ## Consent form 1. Treat the consent form as nonchalantly as possible. People become a bit afraid when they have to sign something. You might try to explain what it says first and then let them read and sign it. Some people do have trouble understanding what it means, too. Thus explanations may help save them some embarrassment as well as ease their minds. 2. Get parents to cosign for minors. 3. Note the time to yourself when you begin the interview.