## APPENDIX C # Coding categories and definitions ## Object categories The first step in analyzing the data consisted in grouping the household artifacts that people mentioned as special into a limited number of categories. The 41 categories that are subsequently listed seemed adequate to account for all the 1,694 objects mentioned by the 315 respondents. Some of the 1,694 “objects" are groupings of objects, for example, if a respondent said “my plants" or “my art” and did not choose to differentiate separate objects, it would be scored as one object. In formulating the main kinds of objects, the attempt was to inductively draw the categories from the objects named by respondents. Some of the categories are grosser than others, e.g., furniture may be broken down into separate categories of dining room sets, chairs, and so on. But the intention was to draw out categories that would characterize different general kinds of objects and the resulting categories did seem accurate, because interrater reliability was 95 percent. 1. Furniture. Refers to objects on or in which to place things or sit, e.g., tables, chairs, dressers, desks, etc. Beds, lamps, carpets, and other appliances will be scored separately. 2. Bed. R explicitly names a bed, not a couch. 3. Visual art. Refers to the full range of two-dimensional representations other than photographs, commonly hung on a wall. (E.g., an original Picasso as well as a Last Supper reproduction from a 5¢ & 10¢ store would be included in this category. Paintings by children or other family members are included in this category.) 4. Sculpture. Refers to all plastic art, or the range of three-dimensional representations and crafted objects, excluding weavings and furniture, which are usually displayed for generalized “aesthetic" reasons. Like the Visual Art category, it includes the range from “high art" (e.g., a maquette by Chicago artist Richard Hunt) to mass-produced items (such as a Don Quixote statue), and objects made by friends or relatives (e.g., a burnt match crucifix made by one woman's son). 5. Collections. Refers to objects that people collect, which do not fall into any of the other object categories, e.g., an art collection named as an object would be coded under Visual Art, not under Collections. The kinds of objects that would be coded under Collections would include rock or butterfly collections, comic books, letters. 6. Musical Instruments. Includes the mention of all musical instruments, e.g., piano, guitar, etc. 7. TV 8. Stereo, Tape Players. 9. Radio. 10. Books. Includes books in general, as well as particular books, e.g., Bible, Proust. 11. Photos. All mention of photos coded under this category. If R mentions “pictures," check to see if this refers to Photos or Visual Art. 12. Plants. 13. Plates. This category includes the mention of “dishes," china, “cups," “mugs," pewter dishes. 14. Silverware. 15. Glass. 16. Pets. Make sure the animal is alive and not a stuffed toy. 17. Aquariums. 18. Appliances. Includes the mention of washers, dryers, toasters, microwave, etc. 19. Refrigerator. 20. Lamps, Chandeliers, Sconces. 21. Clocks. Includes all wall clocks, alarm clocks, grandfather clocks, etc. 22. Tools. Includes lathes, hammers, “tools" in general, and electric tools. 23. Sports Equipment. Includes golf clubs, basketballs, jogging shoes, etc. Does not include athletic clothes, which will be coded under Clothes. 24. Trophies. Includes all trophies, awards, medals, ribbons, badges, citations or merit of achievement, and animals caught or shot and stuffed, e.g., dolphin, moose. 25. Camera. Refers to all photographic equipment, not the photographs, which will be coded under Photos. Includes cameras, tripods, dark rooms, and other photographic equipment. 26. Toys. All mention of toys, excluding objects that are explicitly athletic equipment and the subcategory of stuffed animals. 27. Stuffed Animals. Includes all mention of toy stuffed animals. Be careful to check that the named animal is stuffed and not alive, especially when a name is used, e.g., “Arfie." A formerly live animal that has been stuffed by a taxidermist should be coded under Trophy, e.g., dolphin, moose. 28. Clothes. Includes all mention of attire, excluding athletic footwear 29. Jewelry. Includes all mention of jewelry, wedding rings, high school rings, watches. 30. Quilts, Textiles. Includes all forms of weaving, excluding carpets. 31. Carpets. 32. Fireplace. 33. Bath. 34. Room. Kitchen, breakfast nook, bedroom, recreation room, etc. 35. Miscellaneous. Refers to the idiosyncratic objects that do not fit any of the other categories. Make a separate list of any object that falls into this category, e.g., clubhouse. 36. All. “Everything," includes mention of the whole house or all objects. 37. Scrapbooks. Family trees, papers, poetry, diaries. 38. Vehicles. Cars, trucks, bicycles. 39. Telephone. C.B. radio, two-way communication devices. 40. Yard. Garden, backyard, etc. 41. Candlesticks. For some operations the object categories were grouped into two broad classes: action objects and contemplation objects. Those objects whose use involves some physical handling, interaction or movement were coded in the action category; those whose use is mainly through reflection or contemplation were coded in the contemplation category. <table><tr><td colspan="3">Action objects</td><td colspan="2">Contemplation objects</td></tr><tr><td>2 Bed</td><td></td><td>22 Tools</td><td></td><td>3 Visual art</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>Musical instrument</td><td>23 Sports equipment</td><td></td><td>4 Sculpture</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>Television</td><td>25 Camera</td><td></td><td>5 Collections</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>Stereo</td><td>26 Toys, games</td><td>10</td><td>Books</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>Radio</td><td>27 Stuffed animals</td><td>11</td><td>Photos</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>Plants</td><td>28 Clothes</td><td>13</td><td>Plates</td></tr><tr><td>16</td><td>Pets</td><td>32 Fireplace</td><td>14</td><td>Silverware</td></tr><tr><td>17</td><td>Aquariums</td><td>33 Bathroom</td><td>15</td><td>Glass</td></tr><tr><td>18</td><td>Appliances</td><td>38 Vehicles</td><td>30</td><td>Quilts, textiles</td></tr><tr><td>19</td><td>Refrigerator</td><td>39 Telephones, etc.</td><td>41</td><td>Candleholders</td></tr></table> ## Meaning classes and categories The next step was to develop “meanings" categories (such as the object is valued as a “souvenir," or because it was a “gift," or for the “experiences” it provides) in an attempt to classify and statistically compare the meanings embodied in the various kinds of objects by respondents. Like the objects categories, the meanings categories were drawn out of what seemed to be the most common descriptions given by respondents, and were proven to be statistically reliable by comparing the results of two independent coders (approximately 85 percent for all generations). The two coders spent considerable time and effort to define the rules for coding, because this portion of the coding was so context-bound. A total of 7,875 “significations" were recorded for the 1,694 objects, and these were coded into the following 37 categories of meaning. These 37 categories of meaning were also grouped into 10 broader meanings classes for comparisons that did not need as much detail. The broad class of Memories, for example, includes the categories of meanings referring to Mementos, Recollections, Heirlooms, Souvenirs, and “Had It for a Long Time." ## Nonpersons coding classes and categories ## I Past A Memories 1 Memento. Memories in general, not associated with particular occasion. Includes description of sentimental associations. “It gives me memories of my aunt in California’ “It connects me with the past" “Reminds me of family dinners we used to have" “I guess it's just a lot of sentiment” “Because I love them” “We've had it for so many years" is not coded for memento but will be coded under “Had it for so long" category. 2 Recollection. Memories of specific occasion(s) in respondent's lifetime. “Reminds me of last Christmas” “I got it as a wedding present" “I got it for my birthday" "We signed the bottom of this" 3 Heirloom. Object handed down in family. “It belonged to my grandfather” “These pewter mugs have been in my family since the 1700s" 4 Souvenir. Memory of a place. The object was purchased at the place by either the respondent or by someone known to the respondent who gave it to the respondent, e.g., “We got these in Tunisia." Don't forget that this is a memory of a place, so a description of a memory of some place would be coded here instead of under memento. 5 "Had it for a long time." The respondent describes the object as special because he has had it for such a long time, either in R's own possession or in the environment that the person has lived in (e.g., “this clock has been here since before I was even born, and so it's special just because I'm used to it always being here"). The reference must be to the length of time the object has been around. E.g., simply stating, “I've had it since the kids were born’ would not be sufficient to be scored for this category, because the reference might be to the birth of children. This would include examples indicating an actual time period the object was in the respondent's possession, e.g., “We've had it for 15 years." Any time reference of 10 years or longer will fall under this category. ## B Associations 6 & 7 Ethnic, Religious. Some reference is given to R's own ethnic or religious group (or own religious belief). “This porkskin plate comes from Mexico and reminds me of my country" Check R's ethnic identity before coding this one. 8 Collections. Object or set of objects are explicitly valued as a collection. “My comics” But “We have a lot of art" would not be a collection because there is no mention of the art as a collection as being special. 9 Gift. Object is special because it was given as a gift. “I would never want to part with that egg cup because it was given to me by a very dear friend." ## II. Present-Future A Experience 10 Enjoyment. Refers to positive feelings associated with the object and somehow explicitly described by the respondent. “It makes me happy" “I like to work with these tools" “Entertaining” “I dig it” “Unhappy without object" does not get coded as enjoyment. 11 Ongoing Occasions. Object used for events or everyday activities that regularly occur. Includes descriptions of regular use of object. “We sit in front of this fireplace each Christmas" "We sit in front of this fireplace on weekends" "I enjoy the piano and I learn a lot from my lessons each week" “My bed is very special because it's warm and because I sleep in it every night" "Kitchen – I cook all the meals here and like the room" “Silverware – We use this for our Sunday dinner" NOT: “I like to cook gourmet meals,"no indication of frequency 12 Release. The feeling of release that some of the respondents said the object enabled them to achieve – escape, venting frustration. “My piano is a release for me" “Venting frustration” ## B Intrinsic Qualities of Object 13 Craft. Made by hand either by respondent, kin, friend, or someone or someone known by respondent. Tools used to make other things are not Craft but Accomplishment. “My daughter made this potholder for me" 14 Uniqueness. The object is described as being one of a kind, unique. The object is either physically unique or explicitly described as unique because of personal associations connected with that object for the respondent. The object is unique, not the personal association. “I could never replace this" “I made this at a certain point in my life and could never do the same thing again" “It's one of a kind” NOT Unique: “These are very rare” “There were only 100 of these ever made” Original oil painting. Even though this is a unique object, it must be explicitly described as such by the respondent. "It's all I have from my father's family, I wouldn't have it to pass on" 15 Physical description. Respondent gives a physical description of the object. Usual descriptions include references to size, texture, or color, and employ such characteristic words as: Large, wood, brass, copper, mahogany, chipped, naugahyde, etc. For painting and sculpture, a description of the representation itself will be coded as a physical description (even though this will sometimes be coded as style also), e.g., “Painting. It is a fiesta scene." “I like his work, especially the way he depicted the cloud formation” “Sculpture. It's all brass. It's a fourth-century Sumerian [sic] sculpture” The preceding example would be coded for physical description as well as for style “Painting. This is a painting of someone in my wife's family" Descriptions of people represented in family photos, etc., are to be taken as physical descriptions. This also includes references to the contents of an object – e.g., enumerating different kinds of pictures in a photo album Examples of Style not physical description: "Living room. That's à very warm room. It has a comfortable atmosphere” "Chair. It's a good piece of furniture” “Painting. It's got a sense of antiquity" ## C Style 16 Style. Some decorative, fashion, or design aspect is mentioned. Also includes descriptions of ambiance, atmosphere. “The colors match the rest of the room" “My new Jaguar says something – it is distinctive" ## D Utilitarian 17 Utilitarian. The object is valued for convenience, saving time, money, energy. Also includes a description of the value of the object as an investment. “My washer allows me to have more time" “And someday I'll be able to sell these paintings at a tremendous profit" Be careful that descriptions of appliances, etc. actually include a functional referent: “my new sewing machine was a Christmas gift" would not be scored as utilitarian. ## E Personal Values 18 Embodiment of an Ideal. The object is described as embodying personal values, aspirations, goals, achievement, that are desired or sought after. The object embodies the sought goal, not just something already achieved, which will fall under the Accomplishment category. If the object embodies the sought goal and the achieved goal, it will be coded for both. But there must be some explicit description of the object as embodying an ideal for the respondent. “I've been taught to live by the Bible as close as I can” “Books. Cause you can learn a lot and grow from them' “Plants. Because my plants are a symbol of life for me" “Reminds me of what a good friend he was, of our relationship and the friendship." Here the value of friendship is embodied. 19 Accomplishment. The object is described as manifesting the creativity or accomplishment or some achievement of the respondent. It refers to something already achieved. The object indicates that the respondent is competent in some endeavor or in life in general. This category refers to the accomplishment of the actual respondent. It refers to the respondent's immediate family only when it is clear that the respondent is a part of the activity or signification. “It makes me feel like I can do something" "It makes me feel like I'm accomplishing something" "These pots show that even though I'm handicapped, I can still create something beautiful" “Our whole famly pitches in on decorating these Christmas eggs. It shows our talent" 20 Personification. The object is described as having the qualities of a person, either an actual person or a metaphoric person. The object represents some known person or the respondent himself or has a quality of personhood itself. The object should have the quality of a whole person, not just a partial quality. "Dog. He's a part of the family" "I'd feel almost like I was missing a person with it" “It's me” “Poochie is like one of the family" NOT Personification: “It reminds me of my grandmother" “It reflects her warmth” ## Person codes ## A Self 1 Self. Code for self any time the respondent is an explicit reference of the object. The respondent singles out something about himself or herself in relation to the object. E.g., "Tools. Because I like to work with tools" “TV. Bęcause I like to watch TV" “Air conditioner. You really need it in the summer. It keeps you cool" “This is special because I can make something" “Game. I love to play it” BUT: “I love to play pool with my family" would not be scored as self; it would be scored as Family, and all family references implicitly include the respondent. HOWEVER: "TV. I love watching it by myself, or with the whole family" would be scored for both Self and Family, because R. singles himself or herself out. “Books. I learn from my books. You can get lost in them" “Guns. Shooting is my hobby" ## B Immediate Family 2 Spouse 3 We. We or us use when description is vague – any mention of other person not specified. 4 Children 5 Parents. Mother/Father 6 Siblings 7 Grandparents 8 Grandchildren 9 Whole Family (Nuclear). Respondent refers to the whole family, e.g., "I enjoy watching it with my whole family," or names all the members of the nuclear family, e.g., "The children and my wife and I all get around the table for breakfast on Sundays." Code 2 through 9 when one of these family members is mentioned, BUT if the entire nuclear family is mentioned individually, code under whole Family (Nuclear) only, not for each individual. ## C Kin 10 Relatives. (Outside immediate family, e.g., the three generations). “It used to belong to my uncle, who I thought a lot of" "Photo. It was taken when we were visiting my cousins . . .' 11 Ancestors. (Outside respondent's own grandparent) “Family tree. You can trace our family all the way to 1600" “Photo. This is an old family photo from the last century” 12 In-Laws. ## D Nonfamily 13 Friends. Person is described as a friend, e.g., "We got this from friends." 14 Associates. Respondent names someone from an associational context. Relation of the respondent to the person named is primarily through the association, e.g., "I got that from a friend at work" (person named in work context) “Cadillac. My Clients may resent it, but I think I deserve it" 15 Role models, heroes, admired people. Object is valued in reference to some public figure or role model, e.g., teacher. “Books. I admire all of Robbe-Grillet's books. They have so much personality" "TV. I love to watch The Hulk" ## Acquisition categories The following are the categories used in coding how special objects were originally acquired (interrater reliability for all generations 86 percent). For a discussion of how acquisition affects the meaning of special objects see Rochberg-Halton, 1979b, Chapter 6. 1 Purchased. The object was acquired as a purchase regardless of who bought it. 2 Gift. The object was given as a present to the respondent. 3 Inherited. The respondent must mention the fact that the object was owned and not recently purchased by the previous generation, or the respondent lived with the object as a child and it was out of his possession for a number of years (e.g., in parents' possession) or the object was part of an inheritance (e.g., “When my grandfather died my sister got the statue and I got this plinth"). 4 Crafted. The respondent either made the object, designed it, grew it, created the idea, or somehow performed the operations that yielded the object (e.g., took the photos, grew the plants, etc.). Or someone else made the object in one of these ways but has not given the object to the respondent (e.g., “I like the wall hanging my sister made"). The object must be accessible to the respondent and is usually found in his home. If someone else made it and then gave it to the respondent, code it as Gift. 5 Found. The respondent found the object. 6 Award. The object was acquired as an award or trophy (e.g., a diploma, bowling trophies, etc.). 7 Hand-me-downs. An older sibling or relative has outgrown the object (e.g., clothes, toys) and these now belong to the respondent. 8 Traded. The respondent traded or bartered something for the object. 9 Moved into house. The object was acquired when the respondent moved into the house. 10 Other. Gift: subcodes Occasions Persons 1 Birthday 1 Spouse/Lover 2 Christmas 2 Parents or Parents-in-Law 3 Wedding 3 Grandparents 4 Anniversary 4 Grandchildren 5 Religious Occasion 5 Children 6 Multiple Occasions 6 Relatives or “family gave it to me” 7 Nonrelatives 8 Sibling(s) 9 Multiple Persons ## Attitudes toward the home By using the following coding system below, two raters scored blindly all protocols with a 90.8 percent agreement. ## Coding of home interview question #1 Three codes to be used: 1 Positive 2 Neutral 3 Negative ## 1 Positive a Any description of the home that uses adjectives connoting a positive emotional tone; e.g., “warm; happy; fun; affirmative; cheery; cozy; special ambience; friendly; free." Do Not code “comfortable" here, nor positive descriptions of physical characteristics, i.e., “large; beautiful; warm" (when referring to temperature) b Or any statement of positive affect toward the home, e.g., “I rę- ally like it; There are a lot of things in it I like; I love my home.' ## 2 Neutral a Any description of the home that does not use adjectives connoting positive emotional tone. i.e., “It is pretty; it is a good home; it's medium sized; it's OK; it's nice; it's relaxing; it's comfortable; it's spacious." b Qualified descriptions, i.e., "we work to make it feel somewhat homey, sometimes we succeed;" “cluttered, disorganized, but comfortable;" I wouldn't say it's serene . . . I wouldn't say it's chaotic;" “it's warm . . . messy mostly." When such statements are accompanied by unqualified positive feelings, Score 1 (Positive). ## 3 Negative a Any description of the home that uses adjectives connoting negative emotional tone. E.g.: “It's kind of dead; it makes me feel scared; frustration; oppresion; no family spirit; it's cold; disorganized."