## References Adams, H. Mont Saint-Michel and Chartres. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday Anchor, 1959 (1905). Adams, J. R., Schuaneveldt, J. D., and Jenson, G. O. Sex, age and perceived competency as correlates of empathic ability in adolescence. Adolescence, 1979, 14(56), 811–18. Alighieri, D. De monarchia. Florence: Rostagno, 1921 (1317). Altmann, J. The ecology of motherhood and infancy in the savannah baboon. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980. Ardrey, R. The territorial imperative. New York: Atheneum, 1966. Arendt, H. The human condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958. Aristotle. Politics. In R. P. McKeon (Ed.), Introduction to Aristotle. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973. Augustine, Saint. Confessions, ii, 4. In G. Howie (Ed.), St. Augustine: On education. Chicago: Regnery, 1969 (orig. ca. 450 A.D.). Bakan, P. (Ed.). Attention. New York: Van Nostrand, 1966. Bailin, H. The development of physical concepts. In T. Mischel (Ed.), Cognitive development and epistemology. New York: Academic Press, 1971. Baldwin, J. M. Mental development in the child and race. New York: Macmillan, 1906 (3rd ed. rev.). Barrett, W. The illusion of technique: A search for meaning in a technological civilization. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday/Anchor, 1978. Beaglehole, E. Property: A study in social psychology. New York: Macmillan, 1932. Bellah, R. N. Introduction. Emile Durkheim on morality and society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973. Benedict, R. The chrysanthemum and the sword: Patterns of Japanese culture. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1946. Berger, P. L. and Luckmann, T. The social construction of reality. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday/Anchor, 1967. Bernstein, R. Peirce's theory of perception. In E. C. Moore and R. S. Robin (Eds.), Studies in the philosophy of Charles Sanders Peirce. Amherst, Mass.: University of Massachusetts Press, 1964. John Dewey. New York: Washington Square Press, 1966. Praxis and Action. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1971. The restructuring of social and political theory. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1976. Bettelheim, B. Symbolic wounds: Puberty rites and the envious male. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1954. Binet, A. La concurrence des états psychologiques. Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’étranger, 1890, 24, 138–55. Bloch, M. Land and work in medieval Europe. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967. Block, J. H. Conceptions of sex role: Some cross-cultural and longitudinal perspectives. American Psychologist, 1973 (June), 512-26. Boorstin, D. J. The Americans: The democratic experience. New York: Vintage Books, 1973. Booth, L. Ten specialists in different fields discuss life in the future. Chicago Tribune, September 23, 1979, Sec. 9, p. 34. Bronfenbrenner, U. Two worlds of childhood. New York: Pocket Books, 1973. Burns, S. The household economy. Boston: Beacon Press, 1977. Canaan, J. Symbol development in adolescence. Unpublished research paper, Committee on Human Development, University of Chicago, 1976. Chance, M. R. A. Attention structure as the basis of primate rank orders. Man, 1967, 2, 503–18. Chapin, F. S. Contemporary American institutions. New York: Harper and Bros., 1935. Chodorow, N. Family structure and feminine personality. In M. Rosaldo and L. Lamphere (Eds.), Woman, culture and society. Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1974. Comstock, G. et al. Television and human behavior. New York: Columbia University Press, 1978. Coser, L. A. The case of the Soviet family. The American Journal of Sociology, 1951, 56(5), 424–54. Csikszentmihalyi, M. Sociological implications in the thought of Teilhard de Chardin. Zygon, 1970, 5(2), 130–47. From thermodynamics to human values: A transition yet to be accomplished. Zygon, 1971 (6(2), 163–7. Beyond boredom and anxiety. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1975. The release of symbolic energy. Paper presented at the American Art Therapy Association Meetings, Baltimore, 1976a. What play says about behavior. Ontario Psychologist, 1976b, 8(2), 5–11. Phylogenetic and ontogenetic functions of artistic cognition. In S. Madeja (Ed.), The arts, cognition and basic skills. St. Louis: Cemrel, 1978a Attention and the wholistic approach to behavior. In K. S. Pope and J. L. Singer (Eds.), The stream of consciousness. New York: Plenum, 1978b. The value of leisure: Towards a systematic analysis of leisure activities. Research papers on leisure and cultural development, #2. Waterloo, Ontario: Otium Publications, 1979. Some paradoxes in the definition of play. In A. T. Cheska (Ed.), Play as context. West Point, N.Y.: Leisure Press, 1981, 14-26. Csikszentmihalyi, M. and Beattie, O. Life themes: A theoretical and empirical exploration of their origins and effects. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 1979, 19(1), 45–63. Csikszentmihalyi, M. and Graef, R. Socialization into sleep: Exploratory findings. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 1975, 21(1), 1; 3–18. Csikszentmihalyi, M. and Kubey, R., Television and the rest of life. Public Opinion Quarterly, 1981 (in press). Csikszentmihalyi, M. and Larson, R. Intrinsic rewards in school crime. Crime and Delinquency, 1978, 24(3), 322–35. Csikszentmihalyi, M., Larson, R., and Prescott, S. The ecology of adolescent activity and experience. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 1977, 6(3), 281– 94. Csikszentmihalyi, M. and Rochberg-Halton, E. People and things: Reflections on materialism. The University of Chicago Magazine, 1978, 70(3), 6–15. Cumming, E. and Henry, W. Growing Old. New York: Basic Books, 1961. Davis, J. A. Living rooms as symbols of social status: A study in social judgment. Unpublished PhD dissertation, Harvard University, 1955. Dawkins, R. The selfish gene. New York: Oxford University Press, 1976. de Chardin, T. The phenomenon of man. New York: Harper & Row, 1965. De Quincy, Q. Raphael. In R. Duppa and Q. De Quincy, The lives and works of Michael Angelo and Raphael. London: Bell and Daldy, 1872. Dewey, J. Human nature and conduct. New York: Random House, 1957 (1922). Art as experience. New York: Minton, Balch, 1958 (1934). Peirce's theory of linguistic signs, thought and meaning. Journal of Philosophy, 1946, 43(4), 85–95. Dewey, J. and Bentley, A. F. Knowing and the known. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1975 (1949). Dixon, J. C. and Street, J. W. The distinction between self and non-self in children and adolescents. The Journal of Genetic Psychology, 1975, 127, 157-62. Douglas, M. Purity and danger. London: Routledge, Kegan, 1966. Duncan, J. S. and Duncan, N. G. Social worlds, status passage and environmental perspectives. In G. T. Moore and R. G. Golledge (Eds.), Environmental knowing. Stroudsberg, Penn.: Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross, 1976. Durkheim, E. The division of labor in society. New York: Free Press, 1964 (1893). The elementary forms of the religious life. New York: Free Press, 1965 (1915). Suicide. New York: Free Press, 1966 (1897). Erikson, E. H. Childhood and society. New York: Norton, 1950. Evans, Pritchard, E. E. Nuer religion. New York: Oxford University Press, 1974 (1956). Fairbairn, W. R. An object relations theory of personality. New York: Basic Books, 1954. Fortune, R. F. Sorcerers of Dobu. New York: Sutton, 1963 (1932). Freedman, B. J. The subjective experience of perceptual and cognitive disturbances in schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1974, 30, 333-40. Freud, S. The interpretation of dreams. New York: Avon Books, 1965 (1900). Fritsch, A. J. and Castelman, B. L. Lifestyle index. Washington, D.C.: Center for Science in the Public Interest, 1974. Fromm, E. The sane society. New York: Rinehart, 1955. Furby, L. Socialization practices with respect to possession and ownership. Oregon Research Institute Bulletin, 1974, 14(20). Possessions: Toward a theory of their meaning and function throughout (Vol. 1). New York: Academic Press, 1978, pp. 297–336. the life cycle. In P. B. Baltes (Ed.), Life-span development and behavior. Geertz, C. The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books, 1973. Getzels, J. W. Creative thinking, problem-solving, and instruction. In E. R. Hilgard (Ed.), Theories of learning and instruction. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964. Getzels, J. W. and Csikszentmihalyi, M. The creative vision. New York: Wiley, 1976. Gloag, J. A social history of furniture design. New York: Bonanza Books, 1966. Goffman, E. Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience. New York: Harper Colophon Books, 1974. Goodman, N. Languages of art: An approach to a theory of symbols. Indianapolis and New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1968. Guntrip, H. Psychoanalytic theory, therapy, and the self. New York: Basic Books, 1971. Gusdorf, G. L’expérience humaine du sacrifice. Paris: P.U.F., 1948. Habermas, J. Theory and practice. Transl. John Viertel. Boston: Beacon, 1973 (1971). Harvey. P. H. and Greene, P. J. Group composition: An evolutionary perspective. In H. Kellerman (Ed.), Group cohesion. (in press). Hauser, A. The social history of art. (Vol. 2). New York: Vintage, 1951. Heifetz, M. L. An empirical examination of music listening as an autotelic activity. Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Chicago, 1980. Hilgard, E. R. The trilogy of mind: cognition, affection, and conation. In Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 1980, 16, 107–17. Holingshead, A. B. Elmtown's youth. New York: Wiley, 1949. Huizinga, J. Homo Ludens. Boston: Beacon Press, 1950. Husserl, E. Ideas: General introduction to pure phenomenology. New York: Collier, 1962 (1931). Isaacs, S. Property and possessiveness. In T. Talbot (Ed.), The world of the child. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday/Anchor, 1967 (1949). Jackson, D. Personality research form. Goshen, N.Y.: Research Psychologists Press, 1967. James, W. Principles of psychology. (Vol. 1). New York: Dover, 1950 (1890). Johnson, W. Muddling toward frugality. San Francisco: Sierra, 1978. Two essays on analytical psychology. Trans. R. F. C. Hull. Cleveland, Ohio: Meridian Books, 1961 (1953). Junker, B. Room compositions and life styles: A sociological study in living rooms and other rooms in contemporary dwellings. Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Chicago, 1954. Kahneman, D. Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1973. Kohut, H. The analysis of the self. New York: International Universities Press, 1971. The restoration of the self. New York: International Universities Press, 1977. Lefebvre des Noettes, M. L’attelage et le cheval de selle à travers les âges. Paris, P.U.F. 1931. Le gouvernail: Contribution à l’histoíre de l’ esclavage. Mémoires de la sociét des Antiquaires de France, 1932, 78, 712–45. Larson, R., Csikszentmihalyi, M., and Graef, R. Mood variability and the psycho-social adjustment of adolescents. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 1980, 9, 6, 469–90. Laumann, E. O., and House, J. S. Living room styles and social attributes: The patterning of material artifacts in a modern urban community. Sociology and Social Research, 1970, 54(3), 321-42. Lepper, M. R. and Greene, D. (Eds.), The hidden costs of reward. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1978. Le Roy Ladurie, E. Montaillou. New York: Vintage, 1979. Lévi-Strauss, C. Les structures élementaires de la parenté. Paris: P.U.F., 1949. Linder, S. B. The harried leisure class. New York: Columbia University Press, 1970. McGhie, A., and Chapman, J. Disorders of attention and perception in early schizophrenia. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 1961, 34, 103-16. MacLuhan, M. Understanding media. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964. Marcel, G. Etre et Avoir. Paris: Aubier, 1935. Martin-Barro, L. Household density and crowding in lower-class Salvadorans. Unpublished PhD dissertation. University of Chicago, 1979. Marx, K. Economic and philosophic manuscripts of 1844. In R. C. Tucker (Ed.), The Marx-Engels reader. New York: Norton, 1972. Maslow, A. H. The creative attitude. The Structuralist, 1963, 3, 4–10. Mauss, M. The gift: Focus and functions of exchange in archaic societies. New York: Norton, 1967 (1925). Mayr, E. Animal species and evolution. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1963. Mead, G. H. Mind, self, and society from the standpoint of a social behaviorist. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1934. Mead, M. Growing up in New Guinea. New York: Morrow, 1930. Mehrabian, A. Public places and private spaces: The psychology of work, play, and living environments. New York: Basic Books, 1976. Merleau-Ponty, M. Phenomenology of perception. London: Routledge, Kegan, 1962. Milgram, S. The Experience of Living in Cities. Science, 1967, March 13, 1970,1461–8. Neugarten, B. (Ed.) Middle Age and Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968. Nisbet, R. Sociology as an art form. London: Oxford University Press, 1976. Noelle, E. and Neumann, E. P. (Eds.), The Germans: Public opinion polls 1947 – 1966. Allensbach: Verlag für Demoskopie, 1967. Novak, M. The joy of sports. New York: Basic Books, 1976. O'Dell, F. A. Socialization through children's literature: The Soviet example. Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge University Press, 1978. Parsons, T. and Bales, R. T. Family, socialization, and interaction process. Glencoe, Illinois: Free Press, 1955. Peirce, C. S. The collected works of Charles Sanders Peirce. Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. (Eds.), Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1931–5, Vol. 1-6. ## REFERENCES Perec, G. Les Choses: Une histoire des années soixante. Paris, Julliard, 1965. Piaget, J. Six psychological studies. New York: Random House, 1967. Polanyi, K. The great transformation. Boston: Beacon Press, 1957. Portmann, A. Animals as social beings. New York: Harper, 1961. Redfield, R. and Singer, M. The cultural role of cities. Economic development and cultural change, 1954, 3(1), 53–73. Richards, O. W. The social insects. New York: Harper, 1961. Robertson, J. The sane alternative. St. Paul, Minn.: River Basin, 1979. Rochberg-Halton, E. The meaning of personal art objects. In J. Zuzanek (Ed.), Social research and cultural policy. Waterloo, Ontario: Otium Publications, 1979a. Cultural signs and urban adaptation: The meaning of cherished household possessions. Unpublished PhD dissertation. University of Chicago, 1979b. Reality, community, and the critique of modernism in Melville and Peirce. Paper presented at the Peirce session of the joint meeting of the Charles S. Peirce Society and Semiotic Society of America. Bloomington, Indiana, 1979c. Object relations and role models: Adolescent possessions and the cultivation of the self. Paper presented at the 1980 Psychology of Adolescence Conference. Michael Reese Hospital, Chicago, June 1980a. Where is the self? A semiotic and pragmatic theory of self and environment. Paper presented at the 1980 Annual American Sociological Association Meeting. New York City, August 1980b. The triadic theory of meaning: Why Peirce's semiotic is as simple as 1,2,3. Paper presented at the 1980 Society for the Study of Symbolic Interaction Meeting. New York City, August 1980c. Qualitative immediacy and the communicative act. Qualitative Sociology, in press. Rochberg-Halton, E. and Csikszentmihalyi, M. The symbolic use of household objects. Paper presented at the 1978 Annual American Sociological Association Meeting. San Francisco, September 1978. Rosenmayr, L. and Köckeis, E. Patterns of Living and Housing of Middle Aged and Older People. U.S. Govt. Printing Office: Public Health Service Publication #1496, F. M. Carp and W. Burnett, (Eds.), 1966, pp. 29–46. Sahlins, M. Stone age economics. Chicago: Aldine, 1972. Sanlins, M. Stone age economics. Chicago: Aldine, 1972. Culture and practical reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976. The Use and Abuse of Biology. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1977. Sartre, J-P. Being and nothingness. New York: Philosophical Library, 1956. The meaning of “to make" and “to have": Possession. In Clark E. Moustakas (Ed.), The self: Explorations in personal growth. New York: Harper Colophon Books, 1956. Schachtel, E. G. Metamorphosis: On the development of affect, perception, attention, and memory. New York: Basic Books, 1959. Schudson, Michael S. Review essay: On tourism and modern culture. American Journal of Sociology, 1979, 84(5), 1249–58. Schumacher, E. F. Small is beautiful: Economics as if people mattered. New York: Harper & Row, 1975. Schutz, À. Der sinnhafte aufbau der sozialem Welt. Vienna: Springer, 1960. Scitovsky, T. The joyless economy. New York: Random House, 1976. Searles, H. F. The nonhuman environment. New York: International University Press, 1960. Seligman, M. E. P. Helplessness: On depression, development and death. New York: Freeman, 1975. Sherman, E. and Newman, E. S. The meaning of cherished personal possessions for the elderly. Journal of Aging and Human Development, 1977–8, 8(2), 181–92. Shield, P. H., Harrow, M., and Tucker, G. Investigation of factors related, to stimulus overinclusion. Psychiatric Quarterly, 1974, 48, 109–16. Shweder, R. Illusory correlation and the MMPI controversy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1977, 45, 917–24. Simmel, Ġ. On individuality and social forms. Ed. intro. Donald Levine. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971. The philosophy of money. Transl. T. Bottomore and D. Frisby, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1978 (1900). Slater, P. Social limitations on libidinal withdrawal. American Journal of Sociology, 1961, 67(3), 296–311. Smith, M. B. Competence and socialization. In J. A. Clausen (Ed.), Socialization and society. Boston: Little, Brown, 1968. Perspectives on selfhood. American Psychologists, December, 1978, 1053–63. Strauss, A. L. Mirrors and masks: The search for identity. San Francisco: Sociology Press, 1969. Sullivan, H. S. The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. New York: Norton, 1953. Thompson, E. P. The making of the English working class. New York: Vintage, 1963. Turnbull, C. M. The forest people. New York: Simon, Schuster, 1961. Turner, V. The forest of symbols. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1967. The Ritual Process. Chicago: Aldine Co., 1969. Liminal to liminoid in play, flow, and ritual: An essay in comparative symbology. Rice University Studies, 1974, 60, 53–92. Turner, V. and Turner, E. Image and pilgrimage in Christian culture. New York: Columbia University Press, 1978. Valaskakis, K., Sindell, P. S., Smith, J. G., and Fitzpatrick-Martin, M. The conserver society. New York: Harper & Row, 1979. Vasari, G. Lives of the most eminent painters, sculptors and architects. New York: Random House, 1959 (1550). Veblen, T. The theory of the leisure class. New York: Mentor Books, 1953 (1899). Warner, W. L. American life: Dream and reality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953. Yankee city. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1963. Washburn, S. L. Speculations on the interrelations of the history of tools and biological evolution. In J. N. Spuhler (Ed.), The evolution of man's capacity for culture. Detroit, Mich.: Wayne State University Press, 1959. Weber, M. The protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism. New York: Scribner, 1958 (1934). Werner, H. The concept of development from a comparative and organismic point of view. In D. Harris (Ed.), The concept of development. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1957. White, L., Jr. Medieval technology and social change. New York: Oxford University Press, 1966. Winnicott, D. W. Collected papers. New York: Basic Books, 1958 (1951). Playing and reality. New York: Basic Books, 1971. Wolfe, Tom. The painted word. New York: Ferrar Straus and Giroux, 1975.