# LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS (following p. 164) 1. Religious Utopia: the Vyg Old Believer Community (18th century). R. Crummey, The Old Believers and the World of Antichrist (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1970). 2. Gruzino: the Militarized Estate of Arakcheev (c. 1800). M. Jenkins, Arakcheev (New York: Dial, 1969). 3. Phalanstery: from the Collection of a Petrashevskian (1840s). V. Leikina, Petrashevtsy (Moscow, 1924). 4. Utopian Landscape on Mars: Bogdanov's Red Star (1908). A. Bogdanov, Red Star (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1984). 5. Euphoric Vision: "A Year of Proletarian Dictatorship" (1918). Sovetskii politicheskii plakat (Moscow, 1984). 6. Dreamers in the Kremlin (1920). Lenin and H. G. Wells. Wells, Russia in the Shadows (New York: Doran, 1921). 7. Trotsky and the Train: The Intellectual Militarized (c. 1919). H. Salisbury. Russia in Revolution (New York: Holt, 1970). 8. Pugachev Redivivus: "The Ukraine Insurgent" (c. 1918). P. Avrich, ed. The Anarchists in the Russian Revolution (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1973). 9. The Gutted Litovsky Fortress: A Photograph (1917). H. Salisbury. Russia in Revolution (New York: Holt, 1970). 10. The Gutted Litovsky Fortress: A Romanticized Postcard (1917). H. Salisbury. Russia in Revolution (New York: Holt, 1970). 11. Lenin Sweeps Away the Old Order (1920). M. Guerman, Art of the October Revolution (New York: Abrams, 1979 and Aurora Art Publishers, Leningrad). 12. Citizens, Preserve Monuments of Art (1920). Sovetskii politicheskii plakat (1984). 13. February Days, Moscow (1917). Finnish Labor Archives, Helsinki. 14. The Two-Headed Eagle of the Provisional Government (1917). M. Lyashchenko, Rasskazy o Sovetskom gerbe (Moscow, 1963). 15. The Soviet Hammer and Sickle (1918). Konstitutsiya Rossiiskoi Sotsialisticheskoi Federativnoi Sovetskoi Respubliki (Moscow, 1918). 16. Toward the Worldwide Commune, Petrograd (1920). M. Guerman, Art of the October Revolution (New York: Abrams, 1979 and Aurora Art Publishers, Leningrad). 17. Fighting God with Religious Imagery: a Banner of the Agit-Train Red Cossack (1920). M. Guerman, Art of the October Revolution (New York: Abrams, 1979 and Aurora Art Publishers, Leningrad) 18. Fighting God with Technical Imagery: the Anti-Religious Express of the Five Year Plan (c. 1930). Sovetskii politicheskii plakat (1984). 19. New Ritual: Octobering a Communist Baby (1920). Voinstvuyushchee bezbozhie v S.S.S.R. za 15 let (Moscow, 1932). 20. New Ritual: Melnikov's Crematorium and Columbarium (1919). S. F. Starr, Melnikov (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978). 21. Woman and Man Are Equal: Chekhonin's Medallion (1918). M. Lyashchenko, Rasskazy o Sovetskom gerbe (Moscow, 1963). 22. Country and Town Are Equal: A Smychka Poster (1925). Sovetskii politicheskii plakat (Leningrad, 1975). 23. Simplicity in the Dress: Kustodiev's Design (1918). H. Salisbury, Russia in Revolution (New York: Holt, 1970). 24. Equality in the Dress: Exter's Designs (1920s). T. Strizhenova, Iz istorii sovetskogo kostyuma (Moscow, 1972). 25. Gastev: Prophet of the Machine (c. 1923). A. Gastev, Trudovye ustanovki (Moscow, 1973). 26. Man as Clock: Advertisement suggesting that "A Human Being Is Only Human with a Watch." Tiede ja edistys, 1 (1985). 27. "Take the Blizzard of the Revolution in the USSR, add the American Pulse of Life, and We'll Regulate Work with the Precision of a Chronometer" (1920s). A. Gastev, Trudovye ustanovki (Moscow, 1973). 28. Model of Gastev's Social Engineering Machine (1920s). A. Gastev, Trudovye ustanovki (Moscow, 1973). 29. Map of Mars: Bogdanov's Engineer Menni (1913). A. Bogdanov, Inzhener Menni (Moscow, 1913). 30. Model of a Martian City by I. Rabinovich for the film Aelita (1923). C. Lodder, Russian Constructivism (New Haven; Yale University Press, 1983). 31. Cityroad in the Year 2927: Nikolsky, In a Thousand Years (1927). V. Nikolsky, Cherez tysyachu let (Leningrad, 1927). 32. Ritual in Utopia. Nikolsky, In A Thousand Years (1927). V. Nikolsky, Cherez tysyachu let (Leningrad, 1927). 33. Disurbanist Vision: A Ginzburg Project (1929). Russian History, 11/2-3 (Summer-Fall, 1984). 34. Soviet Phalanstery: Tverskoi and Buryshkin, designers (1921). Russian History, 11/ 2-3 (Summer-Fall, 1984). 35. House Commune: Barshch and Vladimirov, designers (1929). Russian History, ll/ 2-3 (Summer-Fall, 1984). 36. Laboratory of Sleep: Melnikov (1929). S. F. Starr, Melnikov (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978). 37. Commune of the 133: Epoch of Storm and Strife (1920s). M. Yankovsky, Kommuna sta tridtsati trekh (Leningrad, 1929). 38. Women Communards of the Urals (early 1930s). V. Krupyanskaya et al., Kultura i byt gornyakov i metallurgov Nizhnego Tagila (Moscow, 1974). 39. The Stalin Team (early 1930s). H. Salisbury, Russia in Revolution (New York: Holt, 1970). 40. Stalin and the Twelve Apostles. Russian History 1 1/2-3 (Summer-Fall, 1984). REVOLUTIONARY DREAMS This page intentionally left blank