## Introduction The present work of history is rooted in the intuitive belief that what large numbers of people want to know about a society of the past is actually what is important about that society. It is rich in illustrative material but simple in design. Its main argument is about the fate of utopianism and social experiment in the Russian revolutionary process, roughly from 1917 to 1930. That argument challenges the view that utopianism in the Revolution was largely or only Marxist and that this Marxism was (depending on one's view) either distorted in the final outcome by Lenin, Stalin, or both; or that it was fulfilled. Without expelling Marxism from the Revolution—an impossible thing—I ground my interpretation on the larger field of the social, intellectual, and cultural history of Russia-before, during, and after 1917. This broader focus has led me to the inevitable conclusion that the Russian Revolution took on its main spiritual, mental, and expressive forms from the collision and collusion of the major utopian traditions in Russian history: those of the people, those of the state, and those of the radical intelligentsia. Utopianism, social and cultural experimentation, and drastic self-conscious innovation——symbolic and concrete—occur in the midst of all major social revolutions of modern times. They occur because of analogy, infection, and euphoria. The spectacle of falling idols and fallen kings erases the myth of infallible authority—on thrones, in books, in ways of life. The urge to symmetry in cultural instinct impels some people to remake everything, once the binding system has been repudiated and renounced. Revolution opens up new space and discloses endless vistas; it invites rebirth, cleansing, salvation. Revolution is Revelation, an eschatological moment in human experience that announces the New Order, the New World, the New Life. The motifs of release, liberation, and devolving power that infuse the rhetoric and symbolism of the revolutionary moment are invitations to refashion and redesign. The Russian Revolution possessed all of these features, and its pathos was deepened by the confluence of two remarkable facets of its history: the traditions of utopian dreaming and alternative life experiments that marked its past and the intersection of the moment of revolution (1917) with the swelling of the twentieth century technological revolution. Russia's was the first revolution to occur when both politics and technology were seen to be globally interlocked. The political side gave its international messianism a special force; its technological side added tremendous Promethean power to its visions and aspirations, releasing a much greater surge of futuristic fantasy than any previous revolution in history. This book is about revolutionary dreams, utopianism in fancy, in programs and designs, and in behavior. As a study of revolutionary imagination and innovative action, it deals with the stormy period of history before and after the Great Russian Revolution of 1917. In it I have taken a fresh look at the familiar terrain of revolutionary historiography—high politics, the quest for power, party programs and ideology, and economic policies, all of which have been much written about by eminent scholars. And I have something to say about art and high culture. But my emphasis is on the feelings, words, thoughts, and actions that express, evoke, or symbolize what has been called '"the utopian propensity." 1 It has long been a generally accepted, though seldom examined, commonplace that the Russian Revolution was a particularly utopian phenomenon. Writers often employ the word "utopian' to mean wholly unrealistic, harmful, or naive. This study is not an exposé of the "utopianism'’ of the Bolshevik movement though I will certainly have occasion to comment upon the 'utopian"' in Bolshevism, both in theory and in practice. My purpose is to uncover and retell in an interpretive framework the story of the rich, colorful, and deep currents of utopianism that swirled around the Russian Revolution. Few scholars have analyzed the role of utopianism in the Revolution as a device for exciting the fantasy, dismantling an old order, forging a new world, or constructing a New Man. Yet, utopianism in this sense is the key to the emotional force of the Russian Revolution—as it is to any successful revolution. In this study, I deal with the poetics"’ of revolution: its adornments, its goals related to the life of people, its forms, ideas, languages, feelings, inventions, temper, action, pathos, experiments, visions, and hopes. In other words, it is about revolutionary culture—as that term is now widely used by historians—about the building of a new civilization, the rich texture of social tradition and habit, and the interplay of material life and intellectual activity. By focusing on the utopian motif in the emerging revolutionary culture (including those currents in the Revolution that were defeated), I hope to advance the study of this remarkable phenomenon and to help humanize the subject which has often been the analysis of an enemy. Why was utopianism so prominent in the Russian Revolution? What accounts for the blazing color, the luxuriant growth of experiment in the realms of society and culture? Is it simply that Marxism itself is "utopian' (i.e. impossible of realizing) and that the Russian Revolution was simply one among many twentieth century attempts to create a socialist society along Marxist principles of economic life? Even the most superficial glance at communist regimes wherein the Marxist programs have been imported and imposed from above—as in most of Eastern Europe for example—reveals at once that Marxism in and of itself (however defined) does not generate the kind of enthusiastic dreaming, the maximalism, and the euphoric expectation that occurred in Russia— and elsewhere—during its revolutions. The answer is to be found both in the indigenous utopian traditions as well as in the violent and explosive circumstances of its revolution. Utopian dreaming was a psychological mechanism experienced by many different kinds of people and induced by their perception of how to survive—as a state, a nation, a people, a culture—in a geopolitical and material-physical milieu that rendered survival and success questionable. Both social reverie and social design were alternatives to a system that seemed unable to deliver the two things essential to human happiness: a victory over nature to insure material abundance and a victory over egoism and exploitation to insure social justice. There are many ways of classifying utopia, and scholars have constructed endless schemes of toponymy—without ever exhausting the types or explaining much about the role of utopia in history.² We all know that there are utopias, eutopias, eupsychias, and dystopias; that utopias come in pairs of hot and cold, hard and soft, time and space, near and far. The applications of these terms to my material will be perfectly clear to the reader, springing as they do from logic and common sense rather than from "utopiology." More essential to historical understanding than these mechanical devices is the social mentality of utopian dreaming in traditional Russia and in the Revolution. I have summarized these mentalities as popular utopia, administrative utopia, and socialist utopia. It has long been a convention to characterize the major social outlooks in Old Russia as those of state, people, and intelligentsia. Each of these was enormously complicated and subject to modulation over time. For the statesmen of the administrative utopian persuasion, Russia seemed difficult to govern and defend, threatened from without, too big, too poor, too weak. A survival mechanism emerged from their training and their perception of Russia's paucity of educated rulers and lack of a self-governable population. They did not wish to impose repressive slavery upon the masses, but to create order and purvey justice. Isolated psychologically from the common people because of Peter the Great's cultural revolution that Westernized an elite and retained a deeply rooted manorial and patrimonial system, they developed a compulsion to organize, shape, and train (not educate) the rural population on the model of an army, to regiment life, symmetricize living space, militarize part of society, and surround it with graphic and living symbols of solidarity, prosperity, obedience, and order. Peasant utopianism was fed by fear of the state, anxiety about change that periodically led peasants to escape from the unreal Russia to a more "real" one by flight, rebellion, or sectarianism, to a quest for order---their own order. The changes wrought by reform and development in the decades from 1860 to 1917 were not sufficient to obliterate these psychic mechanisms of administrative or popular utopia however much they may have eroded the harsh conditions that gave birth to them in past times. The eruption of dormant forces in the Great Revolution of 1917 proves beyond the shadow of a doubt that subterranean mentalities had migrated down the generations, causing ancient visions to flash again on the screen of consciousness, latent feelings to be driven to the surface, hidden energies to be released. After the Bolshevik Revolution, a saddened and angry moderate socialist, voicing fear and aversion, saw it as a combination of tsarist military utopia (symbolized by Arakcheev) and violent peasant revolt (symbolized by Pugachëv). He was perhaps the first chronicler of this relationship between the events of 1917 to the deep forces and visions in Russian history.3 For the intelligentsia of the radical socialist persuasion, social daydreaming was a vocation, almost the only permissible one to a man or woman of culture and conscience. They felt alienated both from the state that they despised and from the narod (peasants, poor people, toiling masses) whom they worshipped, and they endured the agonies of repentance and shame at the backwardness and the oppressiveness—-as they saw it—of the entire Russian system. Armed with elaborate ideas and intellectual systems partly imported from the West, they built utopias and taught personal revolt and dedication to the reshaping of society along the lines of social justice and a viable economic system. The maximalist cast of their thought, which was extraordinarily informed by passion and feeling, led them to the only "ideology" that fit their "utopia"—socialism, a way of life that overturned autocracy and class oppression, taught equality and justice, and repudiated capitalism—-the evil menace that lurked around the corner of the future. Each of these belief systems sought welfare and justice but through different means. For administrative utopians, the dominant metaphor was parade——-marching and laboring under benevolent orderly authority; for peasant utopians it was volya, untrammeled freedom combined with village order or religious rule. Among the radical intelligentsia, order and freedom intermixed in their visions, their behavior patterns, and the organizations they created to overthrow the state. The urban and industrio-centric utopians that arose at the dawn of the twentieth century—in particular the Bolsheviks, the Russian Marxists with radical designs and insurgent energies——shifted the intelligentsia's utopia sharply from the country to the city, from the peasantry to the proletariat, from the pastoral idyll of minimal, healthy consumption to the throbbing dynamo of development, national greatness, and power. Their rosy images of harmony and virtue in the coming dawn of liberation were set in a frame of control and centralized organization. The position of the intelligentsia in this history was complicated by the fact that on the eve of the Revolution, it was undergoing extreme change and fragmentation, and was achieving new levels of articulation and self-analysis at the very moment that West European avant-garde culture began flowing into elitist circles at flood volume. Rapidly assimilated, reinterpreted by the Russian artistic intelligentsia, European modernism in many forms was introduced onto the stage of Russian revolutionary culture-making and speculation. Thus even before the outbreak of the Revolution, an avant-garde utopia, called by some a 'revolution of the spirit," coexisted with, though seldom touched, the utopian visions of the radical intelligentsia. Although the culture of the Silver Age (roughly 1890–1917) was often at odds with social consciousness in the political sense, some of its later outgrowths, particularly Futurism, generated extravagant visions of the total transformation of the world—if not the cosmos——through an aesthetic revolution. This strand of speculation, proclaimed in a very loud voice, melded in with the social and technical utopia of the revolutionary years, enriching it, enlivening its mode of expression, and often enough conflicting with it. My study is not a history of revolutionary high culture—many qualified scholars have written on this. But it does examine certain key elements of culture in the broad sense to illustrate how people tried to live the revolution, to express revolutionary feelings through myth, ritual, symbol, cult, or community; some of these intersect at points with the history of early Soviet architecture, sculpture, ritual design, theater, music, literature, and graphic art. When the Revolutionaccompanied as it was at almost every stage with violence and rapid change (both contrived and spontaneous)—demolished old authorities and old alienating forces with the suddenness of a summer storm, the whole structure of utopianism underwent drastic change. Minds, feelings, emotions, gestures, and acts boiled up in a cauldron of revolutionary speculation and experimentation. The hatred and fear of power, authority, cities, central government, deference, luxury and wealth, outsiders, science, technology, and machines—and conversely the exaltation of some of these things—erupted in a blaze of imaginative metaphor and physical violence. The slumbering animosity between State, People, and Intelligentsia, among classes, regions, and nations, and between town and country produced extravagant dreams and solutions to the hideous terrors arising out of war, revolution, famine, and collapse. The victorious branch of the radical intelligentsia—the Bolsheviks—-was caught up in the drama of spontaneous mass behavior and appalled by its “"excesses"', delighted at the breakup of familiar forms and symbols but frightened at the prospect of unending destruction, preaching freedom and demanding order, shattering the power edifices of the old order and designing new and bigger ones to house the perfect society, applauding Pugachëv and emulating Arakcheev. Revolutionary dreamers and fighters now became rulers armed with the Bolshevik dream of an urban industrial order of modernity and productivity combined with justice and armed against competing dreams of the "people" and of the old intelligentsia. The vistas opened up by the chaos of the Civil War allowed peasants and many other kinds of people to activate old dreams of withdrawal, flight, anti-urbanism, and rural communalism. The war between Populism and Marxism that had accounted for a major strain in Russian intellectual history now became a more complicated and active war between dreamers, between the agents and apostles of Bolshevism on the one hand and a whole range of peasants, workers, sailors, and intellectuals formed under the green and black banners of peasant withdrawal and anarchical freedom on the other. The intelligentsia, hopelessly splintered, joined the camp of Bolshevism in order to promote their own visions and timetables of utopia, fought the Bolsheviks by enlisting in the opposition, or-as artists and cultural figures——tried to impose an avant-garde interpretation of revolutionary restructuring on the Bolshevik regime. The result was an extraordinarily lively market-place of ideas and feelings, projects, and experiments that adorned the social and cultural landscape of the next decade. The utopianizing of the nineteenth century now became a broad enterprise, continuing some of the themes of the prerevolutionary period but intermixed with new perspectives and hyperbolized by the atmosphere of reordering that was going on all around. The utopias, projects, and novels that emerged from this frenetic environment sometimes fit the general outline of the Marxist-communist future, sometimes opposed it, and at other times transcended it. Simultaneously, the rich variety of customs and revolutionary styles of life cultivated in the decades before 1917 were now harnessed into the service of experiments in the remaking of culture and everyday life, experiments conducted in the full gaze of revolutionary society and drawing from the regime attitudes ranging from approval and support through skeptical tolerance to hostility. It is the tentative and hesitant attitude of Bolshevik leaders in the period 1917 to the early 1930s towards utopianism and experiment that marks off so visibly and palpably its political culture from that of the period that follows. I have given special attention to revolutionary utopian behavioriconoclasm in all its variants, carnival and ritual, moral practices and quasi-religious experience, egalitarianism, machinism, and communalism, among others. The connection between written utopias and utopian energies unleashed is well established in the history of millenarianism, East and West. The best known historians of utopian thought in the western world have even devised a cunning name for it: “applied utopistics."4 In the Russian Revolution—as in the English and the French before itutopian behavior was the living texture and illustration of utopianism itself. The fresh breezes of revolutionary innovation (as well as its devastating winds) cannot be felt unless one steps from the pages of written utopias to examine the quasireligious experiments of revolutionary innovators and the interiors of the workshops and laboratories of Revolution. One must make the distinction between a “"mental model" or “"blueprint'’ (utopia) on the one hand and the "practical enactment" or "experiment'’ (utopian community) on the other.³ But experiment in this sense is to be sought not only in the isolated subcultures of small groups, but in the vast tableau of revolutionary life itself—from the onset of the Revolution in 1917 up into the Stalinist period when it was drastically transformed into something else. In time of revolution, a utopia is a script for the coming drama of life, a scenario of novel human relations, and a guide to the use of space, time, and technologies. But one must not envision the utopianizing process of the revolution as one where actors scrutinize a text in order to find a guide to action—though this often happened—-but rather as a very thick and rich interaction between what is sometimes called life and art, one imitating the other and each reshaping both. The writers, directors, actors, and audiences of the utopian world were part of an entire revolutionary performance inspired by vision and fantasy, driven by daily needs and aspirations—together creating a whole and distinctive epoch of revolutionary remaking. This book is the story of a laboratory of revolution, a theater of future life, and what Moshe Lewin calls "society in the making. ,6 The structure of the book reflects the general argument outlined above. The principal forms of utopian thinking and experimental impulse are established in the first chapter. Chapter 2 shows how the authoritarian elements in the dreams of the victorious intelligentsia—-the Bolsheviks——and their surging vision of city, machine, and industrial organization clashed inevitably with their sponsorship of the libertarian behavior of the revolutionary masses and with large segments of the population who saw revolution as a gate thrown open for the escape to localism, freedom, and withdrawal. It was a brief and terrible season (1917-21) of frenzied, unfocused collision between the two views, the urbanite and the pastoral, grandly articulated in the former case, more often expressed in the language of action in the latter. It was in a sense a national performance of that great metaphor of Russian nineteenth century literature wherein the master talks, smiles, offers, and urges and the peasant nods mutely and then proceeds to wreck his lofty plans. During the 1920s, utopia building proceeded in a more self-conscious and formal way. It took two forms: independent experiments in life and culture building (described in chapters 3 through 7) and the construction of ideal societies of the future and present (in chapters 8 through 10). The experiments and cultural innovations generated behavior patterns and values, the living components of the utopian pictures being constructed by writers, architects, city planners, economists, planners, and sociologists, which were combined into functioning "utopian' communities through the 1920s up into the early 1930s, when the experiments were dissolved and the utopian speculations prohibited. The utopian visions of the 1920s contain the assembling of dreams, the recapitulation of revolutionary experience as genuine expectations for the future. On a time scale, they fall into visions of the far future, the immediate future, and the present. Science fiction and futurology, dealing with the far future, synthesized speculations in the scientific possibilities of human and material change. Utopian city and building plans were specific blueprints of life in the coming decade rather than in the future millennium. Communalists—the utopians of the present life—went a step further and endeavored with some astonishing successes and some predictable failures-to begin utopia in the here and now from the bottom up. Their movement was both the ultimate utopia and the ultimate experiment of the revolutionary era, applying to life a whole range of revolutionary dreams. The concluding chapters explain how revolutionary utopianism was replaced by Stalin's "utopia in power," how the old dreams and their experimental variants in the 1920s were repudiated by those in power in favor of an ideology of bureaucratic state centralism and a theology of the Stalin personality cult. The pathos of the radical idealist rotting away in a revolutionary prison is one of the great themes in the literature of the Stalin purges. How the Bolshevik Revolution, premised as it was on the destruction of class enemies——capitalists, White Guards, Romanov dynasts, high officials—was transformed into a ravenous and thirsty god who devoured its own children has been one of the most compelling intellectual puzzles of the twentieth century. The war against revolutionary utopianism waged in the first decade of Stalin's power (1928–38) provides a key to this puzzle of Russian history. In the very process of negating and attacking the main currents of utopianism of the 1920s, the Stalinists created a structure of force and power designed to transform a nation's economic base overnight, but used also to sweep away the dreams and dreamers that would remind the world of the original goals and ways of revolutionary fantasy. Stalinism was a novel phenomenon, undreamed of either by the dreamers of the nineteenth century or by those of the revolutionary era, a deified mystification of the revolution, a composite of dream and nightmare. The only book that has previously addressed itself in detail to the subject of the present work is the well known Mind and Face of Bolshevism (1926) by the versatile Hungarian philosopher and journalist René Fueloep-Miller. It is unique and indispensable for its first-hand reportage by a learned and sophisticated intellect. But it is seriously flawed as a true record of the utopian impulse because of its pervading irony, its unabashed animosity to revolutionary experimentalism, and most of all its lack of understanding. Fueloep-Miller, though surrounded on all sides by prophets and practitioners of utopian life, relied too readily upon the printed word and took the most extravagant abstractions as a picture of reality in Soviet Russia. This is particularly true of his critique of collectivism and "the mass" which he uses in a sloppy and undifferentiated manner. Yet the book remains, and should remain, a classic of revolutionary reportage from the inside; in vividness of style and colorfulness of subject matter, it surpasses all books ever written about the 1920s.7 The nineteenth century Russian radical community had always asked questions about the future: What would be the nature of the new society after the revolution? Would the present culture be preserved or destroyed? What would be the role of religious feeling? What kind of moral code would replace the old one? How equal would people be? How would people live and work together in harmony and productivity? Yet largely because of the artificial professional wall between students of the prerevolutionary and the postrevolutionary periods these old questions, nursed and debated for three generations, have rarely been treated in the standard accounts of Soviet history. One of my purposes is to connect nineteenth century Russian ideas with their fate in the Revolution itself. In the words of Marshall Shatz: "For all its limitations and shadows, the twenties-roughly from the end of the civil war to the introduction of the first Five Year Plan in 1928-29—can be considered the one time in Russian history when an attempt was made to put into effect some of the intelligentsia's aspirations."8 I believe it is necessary to break down the barrier of 1917 in the study of Russia's past. I have written a book about the dream of human liberation and about the pathos of remaking society and mankind in the heat of revolution because I believe it is a process of thought, feeling, and action that is both eternal and relevant to our times. The utopian vision—a surging altruism accompanied by towering confidence and free-flowing social fantasy—was the best thing that nineteenth century Russian intellectual and cultural history bequeathed to the twentieth century, and not the disaster that some critics have called it. Revolutionary utopianism in its broadest sense not only summed up and took into the social laboratory of the 1920s this tradition. It also survived as vestigial idealism all the way through the bitter Stalinist years, even in the camps, even in the hearts of some of Stalin's victims. Most important of all, elements of it survive today, particularly at this moment of extraordinary change taking place in the Soviet Union. Russian revolutionary utopia contained an abundance of star-gazing-sometimes in a literal sense of cosmic thinking and space fantasy, sometimes in the figurative sense of social daydreaming. Its history allows us to look from the dreamy cloudland of social utopia down into the day-to-day reality of life which, in timcs of revolution, all too often meant turmoil, confusion, brutality, and civil war. No one should blame revolutionary leaders for not succumbing to all the rosy appeals of utopia as they faced the grueling and exacting tasks of state-building. But neither should one blame utopians for plotting the parameters of the coming age and engaging in futuristic discourse. Their dreams were a major ingredient in the poetics of the revolution, lending it the needed sense of justness and dignity, the human dimension without which reality might be unbearable for all instead of only for the victims. Utopianism hovered like a religious aura over a land that was cutting its ties with the old faiths, a glowing myth in a landscape of darkness and struggle. But this is only part of the story. Those who took utopia down from the light blue skies of Russian fantasy into living experimentalism enriched the revolutionary process. They invented and contrived, tried and erred, innovated and lived their innovations in what they believed to be the central spirit of the revolution. They attempted to bring the theory alive in a physical setting. The merging of practical need with experimental striving in the revolutionary years is striking in its incidence and density. The practitioners viewed these experiments not as the ‘impossible dream,"the well-known Quixotic leaning of the Russian intelligentsia, but as the only antidote to the impossible reality. The irony of their effort and their fate has brought sarcastic smiles and disapproving shrugs from commentators ever since. Yet what they deserve is empathic laughter, sympathetic tears and an occasional burst of applause for their courageous, outlandish, and at the same time hardheaded view of reality and their determination to affirm what is best in the human condition. The German philosopher Ernst Bloch, thc most brilliant and touching commentator on utopia in our century, called this whole tendency the “principle of hope" without which man cannot remain sane and survive in a world beset by the madness of our times.9