# NOTES ## Introduction 1. Frank and Fritzie Manuel, Utopian Thought in the Western World (Oxford: Blackwell, 1979) 1-29. 2. Lars Kleberg, "Utopia and its Negations" in Utopia in Russian History, Culture, and Thought, eds. Kleberg and Richard Stites (special issue of Russian History 11/2-3 (Summer-Fall, 1984) 209–19, describes how scholars have tried to type literaty utopias. See also the Manuels' Utopian Thought. 3. Quoted in Jane Burbank, Intelligentsia and Revolution: Russian Views of Bolshevism, 1917–1922 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986) 19. The commentator was the Menshevik leader, Yu. O. Martov. 4. Manual and Manuel, Utopian Thought, 9. 5. Henrik Infield, Utopia and Experiment (Kennikat, 1971), 18–25. 6. Moshe Lewin, The Making of the Soviet System (New York: Pantheon, 1985). 7. Harper edition, revised with an epilogue (New York, 1965). 8. Soviet Dissidence in Historical Perspective (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980) 77. 9. Ernst Bloch, The Principle of Hope (1938–47), tr. N. Plaice, S. Plaice, and P. Knight, 3 v. (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986). ## Chapter 1: Social Daydreaming Before the Revolution 1. "Revolyutsionnaya propagandistskaya literatura 70-kh godov XIX v.," Istoricheskie zapiski, 71 (1962) 74–112 (p. 97). 2. See Manuel and Manuel, Utopian Thought, 7. 3. Chalinder Allen, The Tyranny of Time (New York: Philosophical Library, 1947), 97, 190-91. 4. James Michael Holquist, "How to Play Utopia: Some Brief Notes on the Distinctiveness of Utopian Fiction," in Mark Rose, ed., Science Fiction (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1976). 5. Henry Berger, Jr., "The Renaissance Imagination: Second World and Green World," Centennial Review, IX (1965) 36–78 (p. 46). 6. Kleberg and Stites, Utopia. 7. For these contrasting perspectives, see James C. Scott, "Protest and Profanation: Agrarian Revolt and the Little Tradition," Theory and Society, 4/1 (Spring 1977) 1–38 and 4/2 (Summer 1977) 211–47; and Samuel Popkin, The Rational Peasant (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979). 8. For a fine study of real life in a serf village, sec Steven Hoch, Serfdom and Social Control (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987). 9. Wada Haruki, "The Inner World of Russian Peasants," Annals of the Institute of Social Science (Tokyo), 20 (1979) 61–65. On folkloric evidence for peasant visions, see Elena Hellberg, "Folklore, Might, and Glory," in Nordic Journal of Soviet and East European Studies, 3/2 (1986). 10. K. V. Chistov, Russkie narodyne sotsialno-utopicheskie legendy XVII–XIX vv. (Moscow: Nauka, 1967), see esp. 251–53; Luka's dream with commentary in Vechnoe solntse: russkaya sotsialnaya utopiya i nauchnaya fantastika (vtoraya polovina XIX-nachalo XX veka), Moscow, Molodaya Gvardiya, 1979, pp. 5, 27, 218; Darko Suvin, Metamorphoses of Science Fiction (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979), 250. 11. Haruki, "Inner World,"' 66; Michael Cherniavsky, Tsar and People (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1961) 47–49 and passim; Paul Avrich, Russian Rebels, 1600–1800 (New York: Schocken, 1972); Daniel Field, Rebels in the Name of the Tsar (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1976). 12. Terence Emmons, "The Peasant and the Emancipation" in Wayne Vucinich, ed., The Peasant in Nineteenth Century Russia (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1968) p. 60. See Field, Rebels. 13. Field, "A Far-off Abode of Work and Pure Pleasure," Russian Review, 39 (July 1980) 348-58. 14. Serge Zenkovsky, "The Ideological World of the Denisov Brothers," Harvard Slavic Studies, III (1957) 57. 15. Ibid., 56. 16. Robert Crummey, The Old Believers and the World of Anti-Christ: the Vyg Community and the Russian State, 1694–1855 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1970); Frederick Conybeare, Russian Dissenters (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1921). 17. A. I. Klibanov, Narodnaya sotsialnaya utopiya v Rossii: XIX vek (Moscow: Nauka, 1978) (to be cited as NSU). For a translated excerpt, see Kleberg and Stites, Utopia, 168–208. See also D. S. Babkin 'Russkaya potaennaya sotsialnaya utopiya XVIII veka,"Russkaya literatura, XI/4 (1968) 92–106. 18. Klibanov, NSU, 12. 19. Ibid., 22. 20. Conybeare, Russian Dissenters, 281–84. 21. Klibanov, NSU, 12. 22. Avrich, Russian Rebels, passim. 23. John T. Alexander, Emperor of the Cossacks: Pugachev and the Frontier Jacquerie of 1773-1775 (Lawrence: Coronado, 1973) 210. 24. Raeff, "Pugachev's Rebellion,"' in Robert Forster and Jack Greene, eds., Preconditions of Revolution in Early Modern Europe (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1970) 198. 25. Klibanov, NSU, 25–33. Field, Rebels. 26. Philip Longworth, "The Subversive Legend of Stenka Razin,"Rossiya/Russia, 2 (1975) 17-40. 27. Klibanov, NSU, 32. 28. Raeff, 'Pugachev's Rebellion," 198. 29. Avrich, Russian Rebels, 238. 30. Norman Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millenium (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970); David Goldfrank, "Pre-Enlightenment Utopianism in Russian History," in Kleberg and Stites, Utopia, 123–47. 31. Klibanov, NSU, 28–30. 32. Jeffrey Brooks, When Russia Learned to Read (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986). 33. Teodor Shanin, 'The Peasant Dream," in The Roots of Otherness, 2 v. (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986) II, 120–38. 34. Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison, tr. A. Sheridan (New York: Pantheon, 1977) 135–37, 195–228 (225, 221). 35. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, eds, From Max Weber (New York: Oxford University Press, 1958) 261. 36. Gustav Schmoller, Deutsches Städtewesen in älterer Zeit (Bonn: Schroeder, 1922) 417. 37. Sidney B. Fay and Klaus Epstein, The Rise of Brandenburg-Prussia to 1786 (New York: Holt, 1964) 88–100. 38. Hans Rosenberg, Bureaucracy, Aristocracy, and Autocracy: the Prussian Experience (1958; Boston: Beacon, 1966) 89. 39. Marc Raeff, The Well-Ordered Police State: Social and Institutional Change Through Law in the Germanies and Russia, 1600–1800 (Yale University Press, 1983) 87 and passim. 40. Rosenberg, Bureaucracy, 38. 41. Raeff, Well-Ordered Police State, 181–250. 42. For the introduction of the new ritual, see V. D. Sedykh, Voinskie ritualy (Moscow: Voennoe Izd., 1981) 14–18. 43. Raeff, "Home, School, and Service in the Life of the Russian Nobleman," in M. Cherniavsky, ed., The Structure of Russian History (New York: Random House, 1970) 212-223 (220); idem., Origins of the Russian Intelligentsia (New York: Harbinger, 1966) 78–79. 44. Michael Jenkins, Arakcheev (New York: Dial, 1969) 39–46; Christopher Duffy, Russia's Military Way to the West (London: Routledge, 1981) 200–201, 235. 45. Allen McConnell, Tsar Alexander I (New York: Crowell, 1970) 138–42; W. Bruce Lincoln, Nicholas I (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978) 58, 69, 192–94, and passim; Nicholas Riasanovsky, Nicholas I and Official Nationality in Russia, 1825–1855 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1959) passim. 46. Marquis de Custine, Journey for our Time, ed. P. Kohler (Chicago: Regnery, 1951) 53, 58, 79, 80. 47. See Chapter 9. 48. Albert Schmidt, "Architecture in Nineteenth Century Russia," in Theofanis Stavrou, ed., Art and Culture in Nineteenth-Century Russia (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1983) 172–93; idem, "William Hastie, Scottish Planner of Russian Cities," Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, CXIV/3 (June 1970) 226–43; idem, "The Restoration of Moscow after 1812," Slavic Review, XL/1 (Spring 1981) 38–48 (38); Hans Blumenfeld, "Russian City Planning of the 18th and Early 19th Centuries,"' Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 4/ 1-4 (Jan.-Oct. 1944) 22-33; E. Beletskaya et al., "Obraztsovye'' proekty v zhiloi zastroike russkikh gorodov XVIII-XIX vv. (Moscow: Gosstroiizdat, 1961); and Mary Matossian on the village grids in Vucinich, Peasant, 2. 49. Custine, Journey, 92, 141–42, 148. 50. Stephen Baehr, 'Fortuna Redux: the Iconography of Happiness in Eighteenth-Century Russian Courtly Spectacles," in A. G. Cross, ed., Russia and England in the Eighteenth Century (Newtonville: Oriental Research Partners, 1979) 109–21. 51. Blumenfeld, "Russian City Planning,"31. 52. Raeff, Catherine the Great: a Profile (New York: Hill and Wang, 1972) 197–246; Roger Bartlett, Human Capital (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979) 124–34 53. For a vivid description, see Gina Kaus, Catherine, tr. J. Head (New York: Literary Guild, 1935) 334–43. See George Soloveytchik, Potemkin (New York: Norton, 1947) pp. 187-193, 267– 88 and George Munro's articles in Modern Encyclopedia of Russian and Soviet History (to be cited as MERSH), XXIX, 123–28 and 134-36. The idea of the Panopticon was hatched by Jeremy Bentham while visiting his brother in the employ of Potëmkin: Vestnik Evropy (Feb. 1869) 784–819. 54. Jenkins, Arakcheev, 62-92; Russkii arkhiv, VII/7–8 (1869) 1462–84. 55. Jenkins, Arakcheev, 140–7, 171–203; McConnell, Tsar Alexander, 138–42 (139); Richard Pipes, "The Russian Military Colonies, 1810-1831," Journal of Modern History, XXII/3 (Sept. 1950) 205-19. 56. Ibid. The striking similarity between life in the Russian military colonies and in the ‘militarized'’ cantonments of eighteenth century Prussia can be seen in Otto Busch, Militärsystem and Sozialleben im älten Preussen (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1962). For a detailed history, see Alan Ferguson, The Russian Military Settlements, 1810-1866 (Ann Arbor: University Microfilms, 1966; Yale Ph.D. thesis, 1954). 57. Riasanovsky, Nicholas I. 58. The cultural outlook of Nicholas II is explored by Richard Wortman in his forthcoming volume on the Romanovs and their court. 59. This is one of the many neglected topics in Russian intellectual history. For a beginning, the reader should see: S. Baehr, "Utopian Literature (Sumarokov through Odoevsky, c. 1750-c. 1850)," Yale Handbook of Russian Literature (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1984); V. Svyatlovskii, Russkii utopicheskii roman (Petrograd: Gosizdat, 1922). For individual writers: A. A. Kizevetter, "Russkaya utopiya XVIII st. (kn. M. M. Shcherbatov),"Istoricheskie ocherki (Moscow, 1912) 29–56 (written, 1900); N. P. Vaslef, "Bulgarin and the Development of the Russian Utopian Genre," SEEJ, XII/1 (1968) 35–43; D. Čyževsky (Chizhevskii), "Die ältesten russischen technischen Utopien," Zeitschrift für slavische Philologie, XXV (1952) 322-24. For texts: Leland Fetzer, ed., Pre-Revolutionary Russian Science Fiction: an Anthology (Ann Arbor: Ardis, 1982); Vzglyad skvoz stoletiya: russkaya fantastika XVIII i pervoi poloviny XIX veka (Moscow: Molodaya Gvardiya, 1977); and Russkaya fantasticheskaya proza XIX-nachala XX veka (Moscow: Pravda, 1986). 60. Quoted in Anatole Mazour, The First Russian Revolution, 1825: the Decembrist Movement (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1937) 104; Yu. Lotman, "The Decembrist in Daily Life," in The Semiotics of Russian Cultural History, ed. A. D. and A. S. Nakhimovksy (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1985) 94-149; Marc Raeff, The Decembrist Movement (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1956) 119–56 and passim. 61. Full text and analysis in M. V. Nechkina, "Dekabristskaya 'utopiya'," in Iz istorii sotsialnopoliticheskikh idei (Moscow: ANSSSR, 1955) 376–84. Abridged text in Vzglyad, 91–99; English translation in Raeff, Decembrist, 60–66 (with a minor error: the Nevsky Lavra is confused with the Smolny). 62. Delo Petrashevtsev, III (Moscow: ANSSSR, 1951) 113. Nicholas Riasanovsky, “Fourierism in Russia," ASEER, XI/3 (1953) 289–302; I. I. Zilberfarb, Sotsialnaya filosofiya Sharlya Fure (Moscow, 1964) 330–82; J. L. Evans, The Petraševskij Circle, 1845–1849 (The Hague: Mouton, 1974); and J. H. Seddon, The Petrashevtsy: a Study of the Russian Revolutionaries of 1848 (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1985), the best study in English to date. 63. N. G. Chernyshevskii, Chto delat?; iz rasskazov o novykh lyudakh—roman (1863; Moscow, 1963) 391-411. 64. H. Lenczyc explores the glass motif in European futurist literature in "Zamjatins glassymbol i den europeiska literaturen,"Rysk Kulturrevy, IX/2 (1977) 11–15. 65. Chernyshevskii, Chto delat, 411 (italics added). 66. A. F. Britikov, "A. V. Lunacharskii ob utopicheskom romane," Russkaya literatura, 4 (1957) 52. 67. See V. Revich, 'Ne byl, no i ne vydumka,"Fantastika 71 (Moscow: Molodaya gvardiya, 1971). Two recent perspectives are: Irina Paperno, 'The Structure of What Is to Be Done? the Novel-Myth as a New Gospel' and Yoshi Imai, "N. G. Chernyshevsky: Pioneer of the Russian Cooperative Movement," both presented at the Third World Slavic Congress, Washington, D.C. 1985. 68. For introductions to the subject: Nicholas Berdyaev, The Origin of Russian Communism (London: Bles, 1937); Richard Pipes, ed., The Russian Intelligentsia (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961); James Billington, The Icon and the Axe (New York: Knopf, 1966). 69. Cited in Vechnoe solntse, 17. 70. Abbott Gleason, Young Russia: the Genesis of Russian Radicalism in the 1860s (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985) and Daniel Brower, Training the Nihilists: Education and Radicalism in Tsarist Russia (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1975). 71. Gleason, Young Russia, 43, 65, 171–72, 185, passim. 72. V. A. Fëdorov, "Trebovaniya krcstyanskogo dvizheniya v nachale revolyutionnoi sitsuatsii do 19 fevralya 1861 g.,"' Revolyutsionnaya situatsiya v Rossii, 1859–1861 gg. (Moscow: A.N.S.S.S.R., 1960) 133–48; Zakharina, '"Rev. prop. lit."'; Kropotkin's text in S. N. Valk et al., eds., Revolyutsionnoe narodnichestvo 70-kh godov XIX veka, 2 vols. (Moscow: Nauka, 1964-65) I, 55–118. Trans. in P. A. Kropotkin, Selected Writings on Anarchism and Revolution, ed. Martin Miller (Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1970) 47–116. For Lavrov: Philip Pomper, Peter Lavrov and the Russian Revolutionary Movement (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972)188-91. 73. A. V. Pribylev, Zapiski narodovoltsa (Moscow, 1930) 125–28. The subject of utopian socialism in Russia has not been adequately treated by Soviet historians. For texts, see Utopicheskii sotsializm v Rossi, ed. A. I. Volodin et al. (Moscow: Politizdat, 1985). 74. Quotation from Michael Hamm, ed., The City in Russian History (Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 1976) 198. R. E. Johnson, Peasant and Proletarian: the Working Class of Moscow in the Late Nineteenth Century (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1979); Laura Engelstein, Moscow, 1905: Working Class Organization and Political Conflict (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1982); Joseph Bradley, Muzhik and Muscovite: Urbanization in Late Imperial Russia (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982); Stites, "Prostitution and Society in Pre-Revolutionary Russia,"' Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas, 31 (1983) 348–64. 75. Soviet libraries contain dozens of editions and translations of Wells and Verne from before the Revolution. On Verne, see Jurij Striedter, "Journey through Utopia," Poetics Today, 3/ 1 (Winter, 1982) 33–60. The Chikolev work is Ne byl, no i ne vydumka—elektricheskii razskaz (S.Pb.: Babkin, 1895). Revich, "Ne byl," 294-98 and Suvin, Metamorphoses, 251-52. 76. Brooks, When Russia Learned to Read. 77. Reginald Zelnik, A Radical Worker in Tsarist Russia: the Autobiography of Semën Ivanovich Kanatchikov (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1986), xxv, 34, 67 and passim 78. On the function of "utopian pictures" among European workers, see Hendrik de Man, The Psychology of Socialism, 2 ed. (London: Allen and Unwin, 1928) 165. Kautsky, Klassovye interesy (Geneva: Kuklin, 1903) 28–29; idem, Tomas Mor i ego Utopiya trans. M. and A. Genkel (S.Pb.: Pirozhkov, 1905). The other works in translation, are: A. Bebel, Zhenshchina i sotsializm, tr. from 34th German ed. V. A. Posse (Geneva: Kuklin, 1904), one of many; idem, Budushchee obshchestvo (Moscow: Kolokol, 1905); L. Braun, Zhenskii vopros (S.Pb.: Volf, 1903); idem, Polozhenie zhenshchiny v nastoyashchem i budushchem sotsialnoi stroe (Odessa, 1905); Atlanticus [Karl Ballod], Gosudarstvo budushchago, trans. V. Desnitskii (S.Pb.: Znanie, 1906). 79. Kautsky, preface to Atlanticus. 80. Stites, 'Future of the Family" in Women's Liberation, 258–69. 81. Edward Bellamy, Looking Backward, 2000–1887 (New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1888); idem, Equality (London: Heinemann, 1897). John Thomas, Alternative America (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983) 237-61; Arthur Lipow, Authoritarian Socialism in America: Edward Bellamy and the Nationalist Movement (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982) 16–57. 82. A. N. Nikolzhukin [Nikoljukin], "A Little Known Story: Bellamy in Russia,"in Sylvia Bowen, ed., Edward Bellamy Abroad (New York: Twayne, 1967) and Svyatlovskii, Russ. utop. roman, 50. For editions and printings up to 1898 (almost 20,000), see Russkie Knigi, III (1898), 179-80. 83. For background, texts, and publication history, see Alexander Bogdanov, Red Star: the First Bolshevik Utopia, ed. L. Graham and R. Stites, tr. Charles Rougle (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1984). Its initial tirage was 6,000 copies in Russian and 3,000 in Latvian: Knizhnaya letopis, 20 (Nov. 24, 1907) 3 and 18 (May 3, 1908) 21. 84. S. D. [S. Dinamov] in PK, 3 (August 1918) 33–34. 85. A standard older work is A. S. Prugavin, O Lve Tolstom i o tolstovtsakh, 2 ed. (Moscow; Sytin, 1911). On anti-urbanism, see Chapter 9. 86. Avrich, The Russian Anarchists (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967). 87. Thc most complete bibliography is: V. Bugrov and I. Khalymbadzha, '"Fantastika v dorevolyutsionnoi russkoi literature," Poisk-83 (Sverdlovsk: Sredne-Uralskoe knizh. izd., 1983) 328— 52. I have discussed some of the novels in “"Hopes and Fears of Things to Come: the Foreshadowing of Totalitarianism in Russian Fantasy and Utopia,"’ Nordic Journal of Soviet and East European Studies, 3/1 (1986) 1–20. For the American works, see Neil Harris, "Utopian Fiction and its Discontents," in Richard Bushman et al., eds., Uprooted Americans (Boston: Little Brown, 1979) 209–44. 88. A. I. Kransnitskii, Za pripodnyatoyu zavesoi: fantasticheskaya povest o delakh budushchago (XX vek), (S.Pb.: Trei, 1900). 89. H. D. Löwe, Antisemitismus und reactionäre Utopie: russischer Konservatismus im Kampf gegen den Wandel von Staat und Gesellschaft 1890–1917 (Hamburg: Hoffman und Campe, 1978) 17–23, 30–9, 56–57, 126, and passim. 90. N. N. Shelonskii, V mire budushchego: fantasticheskii roman (Moscow: Sytin, 1892); L. B. Afanasiev, 'Puteshestvie na Mars: fantasticheskaya povest." Niva, 1 (January 1901) 275- 330 and 3 (March 1901) 483–534; S. F. Sharapov, Cherez polveka: fantasticheskii politiko-sotsialnyi roman (Moscow: Vasilev, 1902). 91. V. Ya. Bryusov, "Zemlya" in Zemnaya Os, 2 ed. (Moscow: Skorpion, 1910) 114–59 and 'Respublika Yuzhnogo Kresta," in ibid. 62–82. 92. Nikolai Fëdorov, Vecher v 2217 godu (S.Pb.: Gerold, 1906). The postface reveals the author to be a Christian anti-socialist—but little else. For Jerome, see E. Stenbok-Fermor, “A Neglected Source of Zamiatin's novel 'We',"RR, 32/2 (April 1972) 187–88. Mantegazza's book appeared in Russian as Budushchee chelovechestvo (3000-i god) (S.Pb.: Pavlenkov, 1898). Both works feature harsh, repressive, uniform, regimented societies. 93. The title of a popular Finnish book on the subject: Raoul Palmgren, Pelon ja toivon utopiat (Tampere, 1963). ## Chapter 2: Revolution: Utopias in the Air and on the Ground 1. BV, March 25, 1917. Claude Anet [pseud. of Jean Schopfer], Through the Russian Revolution (London: Hutchinson, 1918) 72–75; Mayakovsky and the Poles quoted in V. F. Shishkin, Velikii Oktyabr i proletarskaya moral (Moscow: Mysl, 1976) 20–21; Blok in Avril Pyman, The Life of Alexandr Blok, II (Oxford: the Clarendon Press, 1980) 282. ## 2. See Chapter 4. 3. Lvov quoted in Anet, Through, 82; P. N. Milyukov, The Russian Revolution, ed. R. Stites (Gulf Breeze: Academic International Press, 1978), I, xiv. 4. S. A. Smith, Spontaneity and Organization in the Petrograd Labour Movement in 1917 (Colchester: University of Essex, 1984) 7, 9, 23, 31 and Red Petrograd (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983), chapter 8. David Mandel, Petrograd Workers and the Seizure of Power, 2 Vols. (London: Macmillan, 1985), I, 230. Moscow workers before October were euphoric but non-millenarian, and their “maximalism'’was caused by fear of capitalists and by political events: Diane Koenker, Moscow Workers and the 1917 Revolution (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981). 5. Manuels, Utopian Thought, 14; A. K. Gastev, Poeziya rabochego udara (1918: Moscow: Sovetskii Pisatel, 1964) 7; Ehrenburg, First Years of Revolution, 1918–1921 (London: Mac-Gibbon and Kee, 1962) 84 (qu.) and 152–58; Panfërov, "Chto takoe kommunizm?," Oktyabr 37 (January 1960) 103. 6. Steinberg, In the Workshop of the Revolution (New York: Rinehart, 1953) 44–45. 7. Gladkov, Cement (New York: Ungar, n.d.) 98; Cargo cults: Hans Toch, The Social Psychology of Social Movements (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965) 41; Gastev, Poeziya, 234. 8. Lotman and Uspensky, 'Binary Models in the Dynamics of Russian Culture," in Semiotics of Russian Cultural History, 31–34, 52–53. 9. H. G. Wells, 'The Dreamer in the Kremlin," in Russia in the Shadows (New York: Doran, 1921) 145–68 10. D. I. Pisarev, Sochineniya, 4 vols. (Moscow: Gos. Izd. Khud. Lit., 1955–56), III, 147– 48, 149; Lenin, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii (hereafter referred to as PSS) VI, 172. I cite it from Robert C. Tucker, ed., The Lenin Anthology (New York: Norton, 1975) 106. 11. On Lenin as visionary: Tucker, "Lenin's Bolshevism as a Culture in the Making," in Abbott Gleason et al., eds., Bolshevik Culture: Experiment and Order in the Russian Revolution (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985) 25-38 and Leopold Haimson, Russian Marxists and the Origin of Bolshevism (Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1955) 98–99. Lenin's 'dream' quotation was constantly invoked in the way he meant it: 'The revolutionary must know how to dream. In order to present young laboring people with the correct ideological position, it is necessary to teach youth how to dream and to organize it to fight for the realization of its dreams." V. Dmitriev and B. Galin, Na putyakh k novomu bytu (Moscow: Novaya Moskva, 1927) 8–10. 12. Lenin, PSS, XI, 103 (Two Tactics of Social Democracy, 1905) in Tucker, Lenin Anthology, 140. 13. The first quotation is from Patrick McGuire, Red Stars:Political Aspects of Soviet Science Fiction (Ann Arbor: UMI, 1985) 122, n. 39; the second from Striedter, "Journeys," 36. Lenin's library contained Bogdanov's Engineer Menni and many of his nonfiction works, the works of Bryusev, Mayakovsky, and Klyuev (see Chapter 9); Nikolai Morozov's Star Songs, Ilya Ehrenburg's Julio Jurenito and Trust DE (two anti-capitalist political fantasies), and the monarchist utopian novel Beyond the Thistle by Peter Krasnov (see Chapter 8): Biblioteka V. I. Lenina v Kremle: katalog (Moscow: Vsesoyuznaya palata, 1961). Absent from the collection are Chernyshevsky's What Is To Be Done? and Bogdanov's Red Star (both of which he had read). Lenin must have read Wells's Time Machine just prior to the interview since he told the sculptress Clare Sheridan in 1920 that regretfully he had read none of Wells's science fiction: Russian Portraits (London: Cape, 1921) 108. 14. Wells, Russia, 157. 15. Translation in Tucker, Lenin Anthology, 311-98 (State and Revolution, 1916–1917). For its composition, see Rodney Barfield, "Lenin's Utopianism: State and Revolution," SR, XXI/I (March 1971) 45–56. Marx's communist stage discussed by Bert Ollman, in Seweryn Bialer and Sophie Sluzar, eds., Radical Visions of the Future (Boulder: Westview, 1977) 34–83. 16. Tucker, Lenin Anthology, 370–1, 374, 380. 17. François George, "Forgetting Lenin," Telos, 18 (Winter, 1973–74) 53–88 (53); Frederick Hayek, Counterrevolution of Science, 2 ed. (Indianapolis: Liberty Press, 1979) 173–74, 220– 2; Frederic Fleron, “Administrative Theory as Repressive Political Theory: the Communist Experience," Telos, 27 (Spring 1976) 79–96 (esp. 88, 93). On problems of authority in Marxism, see also Jeremy Azrael, Managerial Power and Soviet Politics (Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1966) 16–19. 18. Lenin, PSS, XXXVIII, 39–73 (quote 53-54). The work is \*Successes and Difficulties of Soviet Power"’ (1919). 19. This summary is based on a reading of all Lenin's remarks on utopia and utopian socialism in PSS. 20. Petr Yu [P. M. Solyanyi], “Gosudarstvo budushchego," Plamya, 66 (October 12, 1919) 9-10. 21. One can get a good sense of both the restraining and the visionary elements in Lenin's scheme of a Soviet democratic tutelary state in Tucker, 'Lenin's Bolshevism'’ and in Sheila Fitzpatrick's "The Civil War as a Formative Experience," both in Gleason, Bolshevik Culture, 25–38 and 57–76 respectively. 22. Silvana Malle, The Economic Organization of War Communism, 1918–1921 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985); E. G. Gimpelson, 'Voennyi Kommunizm:'' politika, praktika, ideologiya (Moscow: Mysl, 1973); Heiko Haumann, "Die russische Revolution und ihre ersten Versuche sozialistischer Wirtschaftspolitik," Das Argument, 15 (1973) 768–803; idem, Kriegskommunismus’ oder unmittelbarer Aufbau des Sozialismus?," JGO, 23 (1975) 98–104. An interesting personal perspective from the inside is Victor Serge, Memoirs of a Revolutionary, tr. P. Sedgwick (London: Oxford University Press, 1963) 115–17. L. N. Kritsman, active participant, heroizer, and mythmaker of War Communism saw it as an “"anticipation of the future"' (Malle, Economic Organization, 9) in his well known Heroic Period of the Great Russian Revolution (1924). The best analysis of it is Haumann's introduction to the recent German edition in Arkhiv sozialistischer Literatur, 24 (Frankfurt, 1971), v-lxi. 23. Harold Stearns of Dial in 1919, quoted in Peter Filene, Americans and the Soviet Experiment, 1917–1933 (Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967) 131. 24. On the relationship of the Civil War to cultural innovation, an interesting Soviet view is V. T. Ermakov, " 'Voennyi kommunizm' i kulturnoe stroitelstvo v vtoroi polovina 1918-nachale 1921 goda,"' ISSSR, 6 (Nov.–Dec. 1974) 136–49. 25. Bukharin and Preobrazhenskii, The ABC of Communism, intro. S. Heitman (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1966) 75; Pethybridge, Social Prelude, 31-33. 26. ABC of Communism, qu. 70, 74. For Bogdanov and Bukharin on systems thinking, see Ilmari Susiluoto, The Origins and Development of Systems Thinking in the Soviet Union (Helsinki: Tiedenakatemia, 1982). For Bukharin's intellectual formation, the best work is Stephen F. Cohen, Bukharin and the Bolshevik Revolution (New York: Vintage, 1971). 27. Pethybridge, Social Prelude, 35–36. 28. Byulleteni Gosudarstvennoi Komissii po Elektrifikatsii Rossii, 5 (August 15, 1920) 13. 29. Pethybridge, Social Prelude, 37, 165. 30. Wells, Russia, 135; Adam Ulam, Expansion and Coexistence, 2 ed. (New York: Praeger, 1974) 87; I. I. [Skvortsov-] Stepanov, Elektrifikatsiya R.S.F.S.R. v svyazi s perekhodnoi fazoi mirogo khozyaistva (Moscow: Gosizd., 1922), Lenin's preface; Plan elektrifikatsii R.S.F.S.R. (1920; 2 ed. Moscow: Gos. Izd. Pol. Lit., 1955) 11–14 (qu. from interview, p. 14). 31. Krzhizhanovskii: Plan, 11-15, 33; "Elektrifikatsiya selskogo khozyaistva,"'Izvestiya Narodnogo Kommissariata po Prodovolstviya, 1-2 (Jan-Feb. 1920) 30–31. B. S. Butnik-Siverskii, Sovetskii plakat epokhi grazhdanskoi voiny 1918–1921 (Moscow: Vsesoyuznaya knizh. palata, 1960) poster No. 2496 (Simakov); Mayakovsky, The Complete Plays, tr. Guy Daniels (New York: Clarion, 1971) 114. On Gerasimov see: Haumann, Beginn der Planwirtschaft: Elektrifizierung, Wirtschaftplanung, und gesellschaftliche Entwicklung Sowjetrusslands, 1917–1921 (Düsseldorf, 1974), esp. 109–17. 32. Poletaev and Punin, Protiv tsivilizatsii (S.Pb: Gos. tip., 1918), qu. 41, 42. The work was obviously inspired by the war, but it also shows strong traces of Bogdanov's prewar teaching, including the word '"Tectology." Punin, "Dnevnik, 1915–1917," N 21, Sept. 16, 1916, ms. in the Humanities Research Center, University of Texas, Austin. For background see Fitzpatrick, Commissariat of Enlightenment (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970) 121. 33. L. D. Trotsky, Problems of Everyday Life (1923; New York: Monad, 1973) 188–200, 43, 61; Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed (New York: Vintage, 1965) 500. 34. E. H. Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution, 3 vols. (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1966) II, 208– 20; Malle, Economic Organization, 466–94. 35. James Bunyan, The Origin of Forced Labor in the Soviet State, 1917–1921 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1967), 93–94, 99, 102–104. 36. Carr. loc. cit.; Bunyan, Origins, 136, 139, 146, 151–53, 255. 37. Ibid. 136. 38. Trotsky, Terrorisme et communisme (1920; Paris: 10/18, 1963) 208–26. 39. M. V. Frunze, '"Front i tyl v voine budushchego,"' (1925) in Izbrannye proizvedeniya (Moscow: Partizd., 1934) 192–201. For a modern comment by one of the U.S. Army's most influential generals, see William Odom, "The 'Militarization of Soviet Society,'" POC, XXV (Sept.-Oct., 1976) 34--51. 40. Mayakovsky quoted in E. J. Brown, Mayakovsky: Poet in the Revolution (Princeton: Princeton Univcrsity Press, 1973) 28, 88–89; Pethybridge, Social Prelude, chapter 5 on large scale thcorics''; Peter Kenez, Civil War in South Russia, 2 v. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1971–77) II, passim.; Jan Meijer, "Town and Country in the Civil War," in R. Pipes, ed., Revolutionary Russia (New York: Anchor, 1969) 331–54; Peter Albjerg Jensen, Nature as Code: the Achievement of Boris Pilnjak (Copenhagen: Gyldendal, 1979) passim. 41. John Keep, The Russian Revolution: a Study in Mass Mobilization (New York: Norton, 1976), 28–29, 31, 33, 540 n. 13, passim; Launcelot Owen, The Russian Peasant Movement, 1905–1917 (1937; New York: Russell and Russell, 1963), 151–63, 193, passim; Graeme Gill, Peasant and Government in the Russian Revolution (London: Macmillan, 1979) 10–71, passim. 42. Paul Avrich, ed., The Anarchists in the Russian Revolution (London: Thames and Hudson, 1973) 131–32; M. Gorky, O russkom krestyanstve (Berlin: Ladyzhnikov, 1922) 31–33, 36– 37, 39, passim. 43. Jensen, Nature, 147; Peter Juviler, Revolutionary Law and Order (New York: Free Press, 1976) 26 (depopulation figure); Z. Yu. Arbatov, "Ekaterinoslav, 1917-1922 gg.," ARR, XII (1923) 83-148. 44. On federalist and centrifugal tendencies in the Civil War, see R. Pipes, The Formation of the Soviet Union: Communism and Nationalism, 1917-1923, rev. ed. (New York: Atheneum, 1974). William Chamberlin, The Russian Revolution, 2 v. (1935; New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1965) I, 307; V. Povolzhskii, 'Pered Oktyabrëm i v Oktyabre (po Kazani i Kazanskoi Gubernii," PR, 10 (1922) 337–48; Donald Raleigh, Revolution on the Volga; 1917 in Saratov (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1986), passim;. idem., "Revolutionary Politics in Provincial Russia: The Tsaritsyn ‘Republic' in 1917," SR 40/2 (1981) 194–209. Ronald Gregor Suny, The Baku Commune, 1917–1918 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1972) 353–62, passim. See his very useful analysis of Lenin and the “commune state" in the appendix. 45. Voennaya mysl, 4 (June 30, 1919) 24–28, a detailed critique of the partizanshchina; D. Fedotoff White, The Growth of the Red Army (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1944), 64– 65. Alexei Tolstoy drew on familiar contexts when he cast his galactic hero as a Civil War veteran who had 'founded four republics"' in Aelita: zakat Marsa (Berlin: Ladyzhnikov, 1923), 22. 46. I. A. Konyukov, Kollektivnoe zemledelie, 3 ed. (Moscow: Novaya Derevnya, 1927) 36– 37. 47. Avrich, Russian Rebels, 57, 80, 88, 158, passim; Alan Wildman, The End of the Russian Imperial Army (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980) 55-58; Ferdinand Ossendowski, From President to Prison (London: Allen and Unwin, 1925); I. I. Smirnov, 'Markovskaya Respublika'' (Moscow: Moskovskii Rabochii, 1975) 5. 48. Avrich, Russian Anarchists, 396-404; Deutscher, Prophet Armed, 131 n. 4; Richard Ullman, Britain and the Russian Civil War (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967) 46, passim; Paul Dotsenko, The Struggle for a Democracy in Siberia (Stanford: Hoover, 1983); David Footman, "Siberian Partisans in the Civil War," SAP, 1 (1956) 24-53. On "partisan republics" in Siberia, see V. G. Yakovenko, Zapiski partizana (Moscow, 1925) 13 and Za vlast Sovetov (Novosibirsk, 1947) 210. P. D. Ouspensky, Letters from Russia, 1919 (London: Routledge, 1978), 4. 49. Avrich, Russian Anarchists, 112, 125–26 (qu.), 130, 177, 231 (qu.); idem., Anarchists in the Russian Revolution, passim; Etienne Antonelli, Bolshevik Russia, tr. C. Carroll (New York: Knopf, 1920) 237–39 (qu. 239). 50. Avrich, Kronstadt, 1921 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1970), 3, 53–54, 57– 59, 64–65, 73, 89, 93, 213, passim (qu. 59); idem., Russian Anarchists, 229; Israel Getzler, Kronstadt, 1917–1921: the Fate of a Soviet Domocracy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), vii, 240-41, 249, 251, passim; E. [Kh. A., but nicknamed '"Efim"'] Yarchuk, Kronstadt ν russkoi revolyutsii (New York: Ispol Kom. Prof. Soyuzov, 1923) 5, 21-24, 37, passim. For a penetrating analysis of shipboard radicalism, see Marcus Rediker, Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987). 51. Basic works are: Avrich: Russian Anarchists and Anarchists in the Russian Revolution; Footman, "Nestor Makhno,"' SAP, 2 (1959) 75-127; Michael Palij, The Anarchism of Nestor Makhno, 1918–1921 (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1976); Eberhard Müller, "Autonomc Bewegungen des Volkskrieges in Sowjetrussland nach der Revolution von 1917," in Gerhard Schulz ed., Partisanen und Volkskrieg (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1985) 36–56. Two basic sources: Peter Arshinov, History of the Makhnovist Movement, 1918–1921 (1923), tr. L. and F. Perlman (Detroit: Black and Red, 1974) and Makhno, Russkaya Revolyutsiya na Ukraine, 3 v. (Paris, 1929–31). For the Mexican comparison, see Dittmar Dahlmann, Land und Freiheit: Machnovščina und Zapatismo als Beispiele revolutionärer Bauernbewegung (Stuttgart: Steiner, 1986). See also Eric Wolf, Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century (New York: Harper, 1969) 95-97. 52. Documents in Avrich, Anarchists in the Russian Revolution, 128–37. 53. Seth Singleton, "The Tambov Revolt (1920–1921),"' SR, XXV/3 (September 1966) 496– 512; Oliver Radkey, The Unknown Civil War: a Study of the Green Movement in the Tambov Region, 1920–1921 (Stanford: Hoover, 1976), 2, 70, 72–76, 90, 93, passim. Two Soviet accounts of Tambov and other ‘"greens" and legendary steppe heroes are T. D. Korushin, Dni revolyutsii i Sovetskogo stroitelstva v Ishimskom i v Saratovskoi Gubernii (Saratov: Saratovskii Gos. Obl. Muzei, 1928) and E. Vasina, Banditizm v Saratovskoi Gubernii (Saratov: Gos. Obl. Muzei, 1928). That there were many green utopias, many Makhnos, and many Kronstadts (as observed by Getzler in the preface to Kronstadt) becomes clear as research begins to extend into the grass-roots history of the Civil War. 54. Boris Shiryaev, Neugasimaya lampada (New York: Chekhov, 1954) 149–225 (186); Negley Farson, Black Bread and Red Coffins (New York: Century, 1930) 193–94. ## Chapter 3: Revolutionary Iconoclasm 1. V. K. Myuller's Anglo-russkii slovar, 7th ed. (Moscow, 1960) defines "iconoclast"' (ikonoborets) as (1) one who struggles with icons, and (2) one who fights traditional beliefs and prejudices. 2. Stanley Idzerda, "Iconoclasm During the French Revolution,"’ American Historical Review, LX/1 (October 1954) 16, 25, passim. 3. Elias Canetti, Crowds and Power trans. C. Stewart (New York: Viking, 1962) 19–20; Raeff, "Pugachëv's Rebellion,"161-202. 4. Daniel Brower, “Labor Violence in Russia in the Late Nineteenth Century," SR, XLI/3 (Fall 1982) 419–31 and discussion, 432-53. 5. See Chapter 4. 6. Agrarnoe dvizhenie v Rossii v 1905–1906 gg. (Trudy Imperatorskago Volnago Ekonomicheskago Obshchestva, Number 3, 1908) St. Petersburg, 1908, 49, 52, passim; S. M. Dubrovskii and B. Grave, 1905: agrarnoe dvizhenie v 1906–1907 gg., I (Moscow, 1925) 44, 59, 74–75, 127–28, 134, 141–42, 144, 149, 151–54, 156, 166, 172, and passim; Dubrovskii, Krestyanskoe dvizhenie v revolyutsii 1905–1907 gg. (Moscow: A.N.S.S.S.R., 1956) 40, 46–49, 67–69; Raoul Labry, Autour du moujik (Paris, 1923) cited in E.J. Hobsbawm, Primitive Rebels (New York: Norton, 1959) 187. On the Cherry Orchard performance see: Gary Thurston, "The Impact of Russian Popular Theater, 1886–1915,"'JMH, 55/2 (June 1983) 236–67 (p. 264). 7. Agrarnoe dvizhenie, 49; Wildman, End, 78. 8. Raleigh, Revolution on the Volga, 184–85, 221, 259 (qu.), and passim; Keep, Russian Revolution, 210, 212, 214, (qu.). 9. I. E. Grabar, A. A. Chayanov, et al., Kooperatsiya i iskusstvo (Moscow, 1919) 1–27 (qu., 27, 17). P. N. Savitskii, Razrushayushchie svoyu rodinu (Berlin, 1937) 38. Savitsky was an émigré economist, 10. Arbatov, "Ekaterinoslav," 85–86, 97, 101; Makhno, Russ. Rev. I, 116–18, 138. Palij, Anarchism of Nestor Makhno, 69, 146; Avrich, Russian Rebels, passim. 11. Delo naroda (May 2, 1917) 4 (on Luzhenovsky); Alcxandcr Kozlov, The Poor Peasant Committees in Soviet Russia, 1918 (M.A. Thesis, Georgetown University, 1983); Anna Louise Strong, The Soviets Conquer Wheat (New York: Holt, 1931) 124. For peasant mentalities in other settings, see Edward H. Thompson, "The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the 18th Century," Past and Present, 50 (1971) 76–136 and Eric Hobsbawm and George Rudé, Captain Swing (New York: Norton, 1975). 12. Adapted from the American philosopher Charles Peirce: Firth, Symbols, 61. See Teddy Uldrichs, "The Crowd' in the Russian Revolution,"' Politics and Society, 4/3 (1974) 397–413. 13. A. N. Naumov, Iz utselëvshikh vospominanii, 1868-1917, 2 vols. (New York, 1954– 55), II, 324. A. Tarasov-Rodionov, February, 1917 (New York: Covici, 1931) 96, passim; Arbatov, ‘Ekaterinoslav," 84; Al. Khokhryakova (S. Bonner),"Iz zhizni Petrogradskogo garizona v 1917 g.," KL, 17 (1926) 32; Pravda (March 23, 1917) 11; Rabochaya gazeta (March 21, 1917) 4; Rech (March 7, 1917) 3; Jean Marabini, La vie quotidienne en Russie sous la Révolution d'Octobrè (Paris: Hachette, 1965) 74–75, 107. 14. Fitzpatrick, Commissariat, 115; V. Voinov, 'Zhivopis," in Oktyabr v iskusstve i literature, 1917–1927 (Leningrad: Krasnaya Gazeta, 1928) 64; V. D. Bonch-Bruevich, Izbrannye sochineniya, 3 vols. (Moscow: A.N.S.S.S.R., 1959–63), III, 361–62; N. A. Vinogradov, "Vospominaniya o monumentalnoi propagande v Moskve," Iskusstvo, 1 (Jan-Feb., 1939) 32-49; G. I. Ilina, Kulturnoe stroitelstvo v Petrograde: Oktyabr 1917–1920 gg. (Leningrad: Nauka, 1982) 39; Iz istorii stroitelstva Sovetskoi kultury: Moskva, 1917–1918 gg., dokumenty i vospominaniya (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1964) 15; VRNK (Paris), 8 (Dec. 1923) 23; Fueloep-Miller, Mind and Face, 91; D. L. Dowd, Pageant-Master of the Republic: Jaques-Louis David and the French Revolution (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1948) 60. 15. A. M. Selishchev, Yazyk revolyutsionnoi epokhi (Moscow: Rabotnik Prosveshcheniya, 1928) 189; Alexander, Emperor of the Cossacks, 198-99; Victor Peters, Nestor Makhno (Winnepeg: Echo, 1970) 19. 16. Krasnyi Petrograd (1919) 16–17; Lev Uspenskii, Zapiski starogo Peterburzhtsa (Leningrad: Lenizdat, 1970) 510–11; Lev Kopelev, Education of a True Believer, tr. G. Kern. (New York: Harper and Row, 1978) 82; M. Roizman, Vse, chto pomnyu o Esenine (Moscow: Sovetskaya Rossiya, 1973) 143-44. The Tauride Palace and the (Winter) Palace Square bore the murdered Uritsky's name for a while. For satire, see Ilf and Petrov, Twelve Chairs. For prerevolutionary examples, see Yu. Lotman and B. Uspensky, "Myth-Name-Culture"' in D. Lucid, ed. Soviet Semiotics (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1977) 251. 17. Wildman, End, 223–25, 242; Douglas Brown, Doomsday 1917: the Destruction of Russia's Ruling Class (London: Sidgwick, 1975) 88; Marabini, Vie, 74–75, 107; Anet, Through, 56, 64, 86; A. L. Fraiman, Forpost sotsialisticheskoi revolyutsii (Leningrad: Nauka, 1969) 351; Dlya narodnogo uchitelya (Moscow: 1917) 9, 16; Vinogradov, 'Vospomimaniya,"' 47, n. 5. 18. Tsuyoshi Hasegawa, The February Revolution: Petrograd, 1917 (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1981) 81–82, 224, 248, 284, 299, 303, passim; E. N. Burdzhalov, Vtoraya russkaya revolyutsiya: vostanie v Petrograde (Moscow: Nauka, 1967); Tarasov-Rodionov, February, 1917, passim; N. G. Morozov, "Kammennyi grob" (Shlisselburgskaya Krepost)," Argus (April 1917) 7–17; Raleigh, "Revolutionary Politics"'; I. Steinberg, Spiridonova, (1935; New York: Books for Libraries, 1971), 158; idem, In the Workshop, 66. The Decembrist quotation is from Raeff, Decembrist Movement, 163. 19. Hasegawa, February Revolution, 81-82, 224; idem., "Crime and Revolution in Petrograd," unpublished paper. Mackenzie, Russia, 274. 20. Canetti, Crowds and Power, 75–80; Billington, Icon and the Axe, 23–26 and passim; Bernice Rosenthal, "The Transmutation of the Symbolist Ethos: Mystical Anarchism and the Revolution of 1905,"SR, XXXVI/4 (Dec. 1977) 608-27. 21. Berdyaev, Origins; 45–47. Gleason, Young Russia, passim. Brower, Training the Nihilists, 15 (quoting Pisarev). 22. Vera Figner, Zapechatlënnyi trud: vospominaniya, 2 vols. (Moscow: Mysl, 1964), 1, 116-19. For background, see Stites, Women's Liberation, 133. 23. E. Pyziur, The Doctrine of Anarchism of Michael A. Bakunin (Chicago: Regncry, 1968) 101-4. 24. Lotman and Uspensky, "Myth"', 242. On the arts, see: Fueloep-Miller, Mind and Face, 96; Bowlt, '"The Old New Wave,"' New York Review of Books (Feb. 16, 1984) 27-30; Sobachii yashchik, ili Trudy tvorchestva byuro Nichevokov v techenie 1920–21 g.g., ed. S. V. Sadukov (Moscow: Khobo, 1921). On thought, see David Joravasky, Soviet Marxism and Natural Science, 1917–1932 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961) 93–94; S. A. Fedyukin, Borba s burzhuaznoi ideologiei (Moscow: Nauka, 1977) 150–51, 199; and Fitzpatrick, Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union 1921–1934, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979) 7, 9, 24, 26, 30, 94. 25. Tretyakov in Novy Lef, 10 (Oct. 1927) 3. E. J. Brown, Mayakovsky, passim; Fitzpatrick, Commissariat, 124–28, 148–49; Lef, 4 (Aug.-Dec., 1924) 16–21. The best collection of their iconoclastic rhetoric is Anna Lawton, ed., Russian Futurism through its Manifestoes (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1988). 26. Fitzpatrick, Commissariat, 124–28; Brown, Mayakovsky, 193 (qu.); Schwarz, Music and Musical Culture, 14 (quoting Ehrenburg); James Joll, Intellectuals in Politics (London: Weidenfeld, 1960) 140; Kleberg, "Om avantgardets sociologi," in B. Englund, et al., eds., Material om den Ryska avantgarde-literaturen (Stockholm: Institutionen for slaviska och baltiska sprok, 1978) 12–31; idem, Teatern som Handling (Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1980); V. Markov, Russian Futurism (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1968). 27. Lynn Mally, Blueprint for a New Culture: a Social History of the Proletkult 1917–1921 (forthcoming). McCelland, 'Utopianism", 411-18; Kate Betz, "Drommen om proletarkultur," in Englund, Material, 47–56; P. Gorsen and E. Knödler-Bunte, eds., Proletkult, 2 vols. (Stuttgart: Bad Connstatt, 1974-75), documents; Richard Lorenz, Proletarische Kulturrevolution in Sowjetrussland (1917–1921): Dokumente des '"Proletkult"' (Munich: Deutscher Taschenbuch, 1969). 28. Sovetskaya intelligentsiya (Moscow: Izd. Polit. Lit., 1977) 45; Fitzpatrick Commissariat, 92 (qu.). 29. G. S. Ignatev, Moskva v pervyi god proletarskoi diktatury (Moscow: Nauka, 1975) 333; Sanin, 'Teatr dlya rabochykh,"' Vestnik truda, 4–5 (Apr.-May 1921) 81–84; Fraiman, Forpost, 344–45; Yu. 1. Ovtsyn, Bolsheviki i kultura proshlogo (Moscow: Mysl, 1969) 86-89; ‘2-ya Tambovskaya gubernskaya konferentsiya proletkultov i kulturno-prosvetitelnykh organizatsii," December 2, 1919 (TsIGALI, 1,230–11,519). I am indebted to Bengt Jangfeldt for this document; M. Grishin, "Proletarskaya kultura," Gryadushchee, 1 (1919) 11, 20. 30. Kleinbort, 'Rukopisnye zhurnaly' 292; Fitzpatrick, Commissariat, 123, 239; B. V. Pavlovsky, V.I. Lenin i izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo (Leningrad: Khudozhnik R.S.F.S.R., 1974) 56–57; Jangfeldt, Majakovski and Futurism, 1917-1921 (Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1977) 72– 91. 31. Mally, Blueprint, passim; Bogdanov, "Religion, Art, and Marxism," The Labour Monthly, VI/8 (Aug, 1924) 489–97 and "The Workers’ Artistic Inheritance,"'ibid, VI/9 (Sept. 1924) 549– 56. A striking but typical instance of the contrast between outer form and inner reality was a concert on December 3, 1918 of Debussy's music at a Proletcult Club called 'The Red Cock." Muzykalnaya zhizn Moskvy v pervye gody posle Oktyabrya (Moscow: Sovetskii Kompositor, 1972) 113. 32. Proletarskie poety pervykh let Sovetskoi epokhi (Leningrad: Sovetskii Pisatel, 1959) 79. 33. Gorky, O russkom krestyanstve, 36–43. 34. Wildman, Making of a Worker's Revolution (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967), passim; Zelnik, "Russian Bebels,"' R.R., 35/4 (Oct. 1976) 424, 429–30, 433; Gorky, Revolyutsiya i Kultura (Berlin: n.d.) 77; J. Brooks, "The Kopeck Novels of Early Twentieth Century Russia," Journal of Popular Culture, XIII 1 (Summer 1979) 85–97; idem, When Russia Learned to Read. 35. Wortman, Crisis of Russian Populism; Gleason, Young Russia, 359 (qu.). For an interesting treatment of Nechaev, see Philip Pomper, Sergei Nechaev (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1979). 36. Gorky, O russkom krestyanstve, 43; Pyman, Blok, II, 257 n. 4, 343. 37. Jan Waclaw Machajski [pscud. A. Ch. Volskii], Umstvennyi rabochii (S.Pb.: Yakovenko, 1906), 56, 74 (quotes); R. V. Ivanov-Razumnik: Chto takoe 'makhaevshchina' (S.P.b.: Bunin, 1908) 8, 43–50. 38. Another work of Machajski is here quoted from Ivanov-Razumnik; Chto takoe, 8 and 7; the quote from Lozinsky p. 90; Buntar (Dec. 1906) quoted in I. I. Genkin, "Sredi preemnikov Bakunina," KL, 1/22 (1927) 187–88; E. Yu. Lozinskii, Chto zhe takoe, nakonets, intelligentsiya? (S.Pb.: Muller, 1907) 88–89. 39. Ivanov-Razumnik, Chto takoe, 22, 85, 90–91; Genkin, "Sredi preemnikov' 186-90; Bakunin quoted in Avrich, Russian Anarchists, 94. Two good commentaries: Avrich, "What is 'Makhaevism'?"' SS, XVII (July 1965) 66–75 and A. D'Agostino, "Intelligentsia Socialism and the Workers' Revolution: the Views of J. W. Machajski,"International Review of Social History, XIV/1 (1969) 54–89. 40. Charles Rougle, "The Intelligentsia Debate in Russia, 1917–1918," in N. A. Nilsson, ed., Art, Society, Revolution: Russia, 1917–1921 (Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1979) 54– 105 (esp. 79-80); Gorky, Fragments from My Diary (London: Allen and Unwin, 1924) 297–99; Konstantin Paustovsky, The Story of My Life (New York: Vintage, 1967) 615; Fitzpatrick, Commissariat, 70; idem., "The Soft' Line on Culture and its Enemies: Soviet Cultural Policy, 1922– 1927," SR, XXXIII/2 (June 1974) 274–-78. 41. Lunacharskii, Revolutionary Silhouettes, tr. M. Glenny (New York: Hill and Wang, 1967) 149; Gryadushchaya kultura, 1 (1918) 20; Proletarskie poety, 106, 244–45, 268–69; K.P.S.S. vo glave kulturnoi revolyutsii v S.S.S.R. (Moscow: Izd. Politlit, 1972) 46; Fedukin, Velikii Oktyabr i intelligentsiya (Moscow: Nauka, 1972) 82; Kendall Bailes, Technology and Society under Lenin and Stalin (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978), 59–60; Fitzpatrick, ‘"Civil War"; idem., Education, 114–15. 42. Quotations from Avrich, Anarchists in the Russian Revolution, 43, 48, 52–53. 43. Kathleen Berton, Moscow: an Architectural History (London: Studio Vista, 1977) 198— 201; Benois in Rech (Mar 25, 1917) 2 and in Aleksandr Benua razmyshlyaet, ed. I. S. Zilbershtein and A. N. Savinov (Moscow: Sovetskii Khudozhnik, 1968) 62-70; Rougle, 'Intelligentsia Debate,"' 59–62; Daniel Orlovsky, "The Provisional Government and its Cultural Work," Gleason, Bolshevik Culture, 39-56. 44. Fraiman, Forpost, 337–49; idem., Revolyutsionnaya zashchita Petrograda (Moscow: Nauka, 1964) 175–77; Ignatev, Moskva, 283, 318–28; Petrus, Religious Communes, 62; Ovtsyn, Bolsheviki, 64–66; Ilina, Kulturnoe stroitelstvo, 24; '"Kak dalshe stroit Moskvu," Moskva, 3 (March, 1962) 148; VOKD, 1 (Sept, 1918) 174; Marabini, Vie, 145, 177; Fitzpatrick, Commissariat, 17, 127-29. 45. I. E. Grabar, Moya zhizn (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1937) 274–76; Kooperatsiya i iskusstvo, 1-27. The prerevolutionary cooperative cultural network in the countryside still awaits an historian. 46. On Lunacharsky: Fitzpatrick, Commissariat, 13–14, passim; Novyi mir, 3 (Mar 1963) 19—Khrushchëv's version of the St. Basil incident; V. I. Lenin o literature (Moscow: Khudozhestvennaya literatura, 1976) 668-69. On Lenin (there is a mammoth literature): the last work cited above; Ovtsyn, Bolsheviki, 55; Pavlovsky, V. I. Lenin; Shklovsky, 'Lenin,"'; Ignatev, Moskva, 317–18; Bailes, Technology, 52 (qu.). 47. Moskva, 3 (March 1962); M. Yu. Braichevskii, "Sokhranit pamyatniki istorii,"' ISSSR, 2 (Mar.-Apr. 1966) 205-26; Martin Conway, Art Treasures in Soviet Russia, (London: Arnold, 1925) 23, passim; Ovtsyn, Bolsheviki, 66–67; Pavlovsky, V. 1. Lenin, 49; Iz istorii ustroitelstva, 5; K.P.S.S. vo glave, 39. 48. Stanley Mellon, "Alexandre Lenoir: the Museum verses the Revolution," Consortium on Revolutionary Europe, Proceedings, (1979) 75–88, with commentary by Emmet Kennedy, pp. 89–91; Kennedy, '"Vandalism and Conservation," in his Culture in the Crucible: France at the Time of the Revolution, ch. 9, forthcoming (I thank the author); Idzerda, "Iconoclasm" 15 (qu.); N. Pomerantsev, '"Revolyutsionnyi narod khranit pamyatniki kultury,"Iskusstvo, 5 (1960) p. 38. 49. Fitzpatrick, " 'Soft' Line"', 279; Bailes, Technology, 47–48, 52. ## Chapter 4: Festivals of the People 1. We have as yet no serious synthetic treatment of Russian religious or military ritual before the Revolution. A major study of dynastic-monarchical ritual and imagery is in progress by Richard Wortman. I thank him for sharing his knowledge and insights with me. 2. E. Hobsbawm and T. Ranger, eds., The Invention of Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983); de Man, Psychology of Socialism; P. G. Shiryaeva, “Iz istorii stanovleniya revolyutsionnykh proletarskikh traditsii," Sovetskaya etnografiya, 3 (May-June 1970) 17– 27; idem, 'Iz istorii razvitii nekotorykh revolyutionnykh traditsii,"Sov. etnografiya, 6 (1975) 63-70; S. Dreiden, Muzyka-revolyutsii (Moscow: Sovetskii kompositor, 1970); and Susanne Ament, To the Last and Decisive Battle: the Role of Songs in the Russian Revolution (M.A. Thesis, Georgetown U., 1984). 3. See Hasegawa, February Revolution 248-53, 283-92, 309; and Vozstanie 1.-gv. Volynskago Polka v fevrale 1917 g.," Byloe, 5–6/27–28 (Nov.-Dec. 1917) 5–16, for anticipations. 4. Rech, the files of March 1917, for the general pattern in many locales; Raleigh, Revolution on the Volga, 85; Rabochaya gazeta, March 14, 18, 22; BV (March 4, 1917) 3; Den (March 22 1917) 2; Dlya narodnago uchitelya, 7 (April 1917) 2-5 (eyewitness accounts by schoolchildren); Wildman, End, 224 (at the front); Getzler, Kronstadt, 28. 5. A sampling of contemporary sources: Izvestiya of the Petrograd Soviet, March 21–24; Rech, March 25; RG, March 10–11, 16, 25; Den, March 25; Delo naroda, March 25; Pravda, March 23—all 1917. 6. E. M. C. Barraclough and W. G. Crompton, Flags of the World (London: Warne, 1978) 142–47; Dreiden, Muzyka, 144, argues that the Provisional Government tried to capitalize on the mass popularity of the "Workers' Marseillaise," a doubtful proposition. Monuments: Rech (March 7, 1917) 5 and RG (March 17, 1917). 7. G. F. Kiselëv and V. A. Lyubisheva, "V. I. Lenin i rozhdenie gosudarstvennoi pechati i gerba R.S.F.S.R.," ISSSR, 5 (Sept-Oct 1966) 21; M. Yu. Lyashchenko, Rasskazy o Sovetskom gerbe (Moscow: Detgiz, 1963) 29–30. 8. Alexander Rabinowitch, The Bolsheviks Come to Power (New York: Norton, 1977) 39– 43. For pictures, see Niva, 29 (July 22, 1917). 9. For a superb study of those values, see William Rosenberg, Liberals in the Russian Revolution (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974); Milyukov, Russian Revolution, I, passim; and Orlovsky, '"Provisional Government." 10. My account is drawn from: Lunacharskii, ‘Pervoe Maya 1918 goda," (1918) in Vospominaniya i vpechatleniya (Moscow: Sovetskaya Rossiya, 1968) 208–12; idem, 'Pervyi pervomaiskii prazdnik posle pobedy," Krasnaya niva, 18 (May 12, 1926) 8; E. A. Speranskaya, ed., Agitatsionno-massovoe iskusstvo pervyikh let Oktyabrya (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1971) 32-33, 96– 97; A. I. Mazaev, Prazdnik kak sotsialno-khudozhestvennoe yavlenie (Moscow: Nauka, 1978) 245-53; G. I. Ilina, Kulturnoe stroitseltsvo, 215–17. James Von Geldern, who has made the most detailed analyses of these festivals and has generously shared his work with me, makes much of the oppositional tension in the city on May Day but concedes that the ceremonies were successful. 11. Lunacharskii, Vospom., 210–11. 12. E. I. Kamentsova and A. N. Luppol, ‘"Kak sozdavalsya sovetskii gerb," Voprosy istorii (Dec. 1962) 194–95; Mazaev, Prazdnik, 264 n. 14; Lyashchenko, Rasskazy, 82–83; Bogdanov's Red Star was republished in both capitals in 1918. A picture of the original red star design can be seen on a 1922 dinner plate in Art into Production: Soviet Textiles, Fashion, and Ceramics, 1917–1935 (Oxford: Museum of Modern Art, 1984) 37. The fairy-tale gloss on the red star is translated in full in Nina Tumarkin, Lenin Lives! (Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1983), 70–72. 13. Kamentsova and Luppol, ‘Kak,"' 195; Lyashchenko, Rasskazy, 34–35. 14. Speranskaya, Agit.-Mass. iskusstvo, 144 (illust.); Kiselëv and Lyubisheva, "V. I. Lenin," 21–23; Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo, 1 (1919) 63 (Chekhonin's design; illust.); Mazaev, Prazdnik 263–64; S. Gerasimov, “Pervoe prazdnestvo Oktyabrskoi Revolyutsii," Iskusstvo, 7 (1957) 44–45; Lyashchenko, Rasskazy, 40; P. P. fon-Vinkler (von Winckler), ed., Gerby gorodov, gubernii, oblastei i posadov Rossisskoi Imperii . . . 1649 po 1900 god (S.Pb.: Ivanov, 1899) passim. 15. Kamentsova and Luppol, 'Kak," 196; Kiselëv and Lyubisheva, 'V. I. Lenin,"' 23–26; Pavlovskii, V. I. Lenin, 33; I. S. Smirnov, Lenin i Sovetskaya kultura (Moscow: A.N.S.S.S.R., 1960) 388; BES, 2 ed., X (1952) 602–3 for pictures and variations. 16. Barraclough, Flags, 142–47; Yu. M. Steklov, Poeziya revolyutsionnago sotsializma: pevtsy trudogo tsarstva vo Frantsii (Petrograd, 1918). 17. Dreiden, Muzyka-revolyutsii, 137–44. 18. Christopher Binns, "The Changing Face of Power: Revolution and Accommodation in the Development of the Soviet Ceremonial System,"Man, 14 (Dec. 1979) 588; Mazaev, Prazdnik, 235–37; Gerald Janecek, The Look of Russian Literature (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984) 12-18. 19. Vernon Lidtke, The Alternative Culture (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985) 127. 20. Tomasso Campanella, La Città del Sole (1602) ed. D. Donno (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981); Manuels, Utopian Thought, 261–88; Nilsson, Art, 42. 21. Smirnov, Lenin, 347-72; John Bowlt, "Russian Sculpture and Lenin's Plan of Monumental Propaganda," in H. A. Millon and L. Nochlin, eds., Art and Architecture in the Service of Politics (Cambridge Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1978) 182–93; Istoriko-revolyutsionnye pamyatniki S.S.S.R. (Moscow: Politlit, 1972) 4-6; A. Mikhailov, "Programma monumentalnoi propagandy," Iskusstvo, 4 (1968) 31–34; and 5 (1968) 39–42 (illust.). 22. Iz istorii stroitelstva Sovetskoi kultury: Moskva, 1917–1918 gg.: dokumenty i vospominaniya (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1964) 38–44; Guerman, Art, 6, 7, 12–13, 6–7, 12–16, 227–78, 284–85, 299 (illust.) for both capitals. For statues in Leningrad: Ilina, Kulturnoe, 203-26; for Saratov: Speranskaya, Agit. mass. iskusstvo, 141-43. 23. For comment on the failure of the monuments: Bowlt, "Russian Sculpture"', 189, 192; Nilsson, Art, 44, 48; L. Shervud, "Vospominaniya o monumentalnoi propagande v Leningrade," Iskusstvo, 1 (Jan.-Feb., 1939) 50–53; Oktyabr v iskusstve i literature, 1917–27 (Leningrad: Krasnaya Gazeta, 1928) 64. 24. Mikhailov, 'Programma,"' 31–33; Pavlovsky, V. I. Lenin, 52–53. For two examples (of many) on what people imagined Lenin looked like before seeing him, see L. Stupochenko "V Brestskie dni," PR, 16 (1923) 102 and Robert Tucker, Stalin as Revolutionary 1879–1929 (New York: Norton, 1974) 134. 25. Ilina, Kulturnoe, 209; Istoriko-rev. pamyatniki, 15, 16, 120–21 (illust.); Lunacharskii, Ob izobrazitelnom iskusstve, 2 vols. (Moscow: Sovetskii khudozhnik, 1967) II, 29–30 26. Izvestiya, November 3 through 9, 1918; Mikhailov, 'Programma,"' 39–41; A. Strigalev, "Proizvedeniya agitatsionnogo iskusstva 20-kh godov," Iskusstvo, 5 (1968) 44; Masaev, Prazdnik, 262-70; Pavlovsky, V. I. Lenin, 14-15; Guerman, Art, 282. Wortman, "Moscow and Petersburg: the Problem of Political Center in Tsarist Russia, 1881–1914," in Sean Wilentz, ed., Rites of Power: Symbolism, Ritual, and Politics Since the Middle Ages (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1985) 244-71. 27. Lenin's speeches, PSS, XXXVII, 169–82. 28. Izvestiya (Nov. 9, 1918) 5. 29. Ibid. For musical performances see Krasnaya Moskva (1920) 543-48 and Muzykalnaya zhizn Moskvy v pervye gody posle Oktyabrya (Moscow: Sovetskii kompozitor, 1972) 104–5. 30. Izvestiya (November 9, 1918) 6. 31. For the long duel between the capitals, see: Wortman, “Moscow and Petersburg"'; S. Monas, "St. Petersburg and Moscow as Cultural Symbols,"’ in Stavrou, Art and Culture, 26-39. For notions of an "animating center of society," see Clifford Geertz, "Centers, Kings, and Charisma," in J. Ben David, et al., eds. Culture and its Creators (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977) 150–53; for the emerging cult: Tumarkin, Lenin Lives!, 66–68. For a contrasting picture of Kerensky, see Orlovsky, “Provisional Government'’ 44. 32. Christel Lane, Rites of Rulers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1981) 203; Krupskaya, Reminiscences of Lenin, 489; Fedotoff White, in Growth of the Red Army, 124, reminds us that having Moscow as their capital in the Civil Warin contrast to such "new fangled capitals'" as Omsk, Ekaterinodar, and Archangelgave the Bolsheviks great prestige. 33. Samples of Petrograd civic myth: see Krasnyi Petrograd, 11 (1919) esp. 13–19, 45–48, III (1920), and IV (1921). 34. Izvestiya (Nov. 9, 1918) 5; Strigalev, "Proizvedeniya," 44–46; Mikhailov, "Programma,"' 41–42; Masaev, Prazdnik, 270–77; Plamya, 28 (Nov. 17, 1918); Wortman, "Moscow and Petersburg"’. 35. P. Grigoriev 'Ulitsa i vneshkolnoe obrazovanie," Vneshkolnoe obrazovanie, 2-3 (Feb.- Mar. 1919) 10–24; Masaev, Prazdnik, 277-79. 36. A. I. Piotrovsky, Teatr, kino, zhizn (Leningrad: Len. Gos. Institut Teatra, Muzyki i Kinomatografii, 1969) 73–76 (by one of the organizers); N. A. Gorchakov, Istoriya Sovetskoi teatra (New York: Chekhov, 1956) 77–78, a frankly hostile account; Genkin, Mass. prazd., 37– 38; Mazaev, Prazdnik, 316–18. 37. Von Geldern, ms.; Kleberg, Teatern; Bernice Rosenthal, "Wagner and Wagnerian Ideas in Russia," in Wagnerism in European Culture and Politics, ed. D. Large and W. Weber (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1984) 199–245. A. Talanov, Bolshaya sudba (Moscow: Izd. politlit., 1967), on Andreeva; Katerina Clark, 'The Urban Intelligentsia During N.E.P.," ms. 38. Genkin, Mass. prazd., 38–40; Mazaev, Prazdnik, 318–21; Gorchakov, Istoriya, 91; Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 142-44. 39. Lotman and Uspensky, "Myth-Name-Culture," 237. 40. Mazaev, Prazdnik, 306–11. 41. Ibid., 318, 321–24; Gorchakov, Istoriya, 92; Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 145-46; Ivan Olbracht, "Puteshestvie za poznaniem,"Inostrannaya literatura, 5 (1967) 83-85 (a Czech Communist eyewitness). 42. Gorchakov, Istoriya, 92–93; Mazaev, Prazdnik, 319, 339–42; Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 147– 48. 43. I have taken Gorchakov's figure, though undocumented, as more realistic than that of Olbracht (and followed by Mazaev) of a quarter million spectators at "Toward the World-Wide Commune". 44. Binns, "Changing Face," 591–92; Gorchakov, Istoriya, 92. Julien Thierseau's Fêtes et chansons de la Révolution française was translated into Russian as Pesni i prazdnestva frantsuzskoi revolyutsii (Petrograd: Parus, 1917) and reviewed in PK, 3 (Aug. 1918) 34–35. 45. Genkin, Mass. prazd., 40; Mazaev, Prazdnik, 327; Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 135–36; Emma Goldman, My Disillusionment in Russia (1922; New York: Crowell, 1970) pp. 48–50, 176; Victor Serge, Memoirs 109–10. 46. For some interesting perspectives on revolutionary mythmaking, see Hunt, Politics, chs. 1–3 and Hobsbawm, Invention. 47. Marcuse, Marx, and Lenin are discussed in Mazaev, Prazdnik, 209–30. On 'defestivalization" in revolution, see André Découflé, Sociologie des révolutions (Paris: Presses Universitaires, 1968) 88–92. 48. Lunacharskii, Sobranie sochinenii, 8 vols. (Moscow: Khudozhestvennaya literatura, 1963– 67), III, 562–63, quoting Robespierre's report on popular festivals of May 7, 1794; Mazaev, Prazdnik, 230–34 (Lunacharsky quoted, 231-32). Sce Robert C. Williams, Artists in Revolution (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1977) 45–46 for the roots of Lunacharsky's festival vision. 49. Binns, "Changing Face," 592, 597; Massovye prazdnestva: sbornik komiteta sotsiologicheskogo izucheniya iskusstv (Leningrad: Academia, 1926) 149-61; S. Tretyakov, "Kak desyatiletit," Novyi lef, 4 (Apr. 1927) 35–37; I. T. Bobryshev, Melkoburzhuaznye vliyaniya sredi molodëzhi, 2 ed. (Moscow: Molodaya Gvardiya, 1928) 51-52. 50. Ilina, Kulturnoe, 219; Speranskaya, Agit.-mass. iskusstvo, 139; Lane, Rites, 163–73. The quotation is from Georgii Popov, Stremyashchimsya v Rossiyu (Berlin: Nashi Problemy, 1924) 14–15 (from observations made in November, 1922). 51. Lane, Rites, 156; E. E. Kish [Kisch], "Tsari, popy, Bolsheviki,"Inostrannaya literatura, 5 (1967) 94–111. 52. Mazaev, Prazdnik, 356–64; Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 91–92, 137–39; V. Ya. Propp, "The Historical Roots of Some Russian Religious Festivals," in S. and E. Dunn, eds., Introduction to Soviet Ethnography, 2 vols. (Berkeley: Highgate Road Social Science Research Station, 1974) 367-410. 53. Mikhail Bakhtin, Rabelais and his World, tr. Helene Iswolsky (Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1968) 6 (qu.), 9–10, 16, 73, 79, 200, 213, 217, passim. ## Chapter 5: Godless Religion 1. A history of Russian atheism remains to be written, but see two fine introductions in English: Berdyaev, Origins and George Kline, Religious and Antireligious Thought in Russia (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968). For specifics: B. Itenberg, 'Revolyutsionnye Narodniki i vopros religii," VIRA, XI (1963) 293–305; Bakunin, God and the State (New York: Dover, 1970), 17, 40, passim (qu. 36); Gleason, Young Russia, 336; Adam Ulam, In the Name of the People (New York: Viking, 1977), 398; Revolyutsionnoe Narodnichestvo, I, 170–71. A peasant baker of the 1870s even denied the value of any propaganda until religion had been completely wiped out:. A. I. Ivanchin-Pisarev, Khozhdenie v narod (Moscow: Molodaya Gvardiya, 1929) 14–16. 2. A. A. Kunkl, Dolgushintsy (Moscow, 1931) 206–12; Itenberg, "Rev. Narod.," 298– 301; Ulam, In the Name, 210-13, 291, 463; Zakharina, "Rev. prop. lit."; Klibanov, Istoriya religioznogo sektantstva v Rossii (60-e gody XIX v.-1917 g.), Moscow: Nauka, 1965, 22. On the religious sensibilities of women see Barbara Engel, Mothers and Daughters (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983) and Stites, Women's Liberation, 115–54. 3. Stites, Women's Liberation, 118–19; M. Frolenko, '"Chaikovskii i ego bogochelovechestvo," Katorga i ssylka, XXVI (1926) 217–23; T. Polner, '"N. V. Chaikovskii i 'Bogochelovechestvo'," in A. A. Titov, ed., Nikolai Vasilevich Chaikovskii (Paris, 1929) 97-160; A. Faresov, 'Odin iz ‘semidesyatnikov'," VE, XXXIV/V (May 1904) 245–60; idem., 'Religioznye utopisty semidesyatykh godov," Slovo, 165 (June 1, 1905) 6; Itenberg, "Rev. Narod.," 304–4. 4. Jutta Scherrer, Die petersburger religiös-philosophischen Vereinungen (Berlin: Harrassowitz, 1973); Kline, Religious; Christopher Read, Religion, Revolution, and the Russian Intelligentsia, 1900–1912 (New York: Harper, 1980), and George Putnam, Russian Alternatives to Marxism (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1977). 5. Williams, Artists 23–58; idem. "Collective Immortality: the Syndicalist Origins of Proletarian Culture," Slavic Review, 39/3 (Sept. 1980) 389–402. Scherrer, 'Culture prolétarienne et religion socialiste entre deux révolutions: les Bolschéviks de gauche," Europa, II/2 (Spring 1979) 67–90. 6. Kline, Religious, 118–20; Read, Religion, 78–85; D. Grille, Lenins Rivale (Cologne: Wissenschaft und Politik, 1966), 37; Fitpatrick, Commissariat, 3-4; M. Laskovaya, Bogoiskatelstvo i bogostroitelstvo prezhde i teper, 2 ed. (Moscow: Moskovskii Rabochii, 1976) 67 (qu.). 7. See notes 5 and 6. A. M. Gorky, Deti solntsa (Stuttgart: Dietz, 1905) 53, 99. 100, passim; Read, Religion, 85–87; Kline, Religious, 110-13. 8. Lenin: O religii (Moscow: Gosizdpolit, 1954) 43 and Sochineniya, XLVIII, 246 (cited in Read, Religion, 91–92). 9. M. M. Persits, 'Avtobiografiya rabochikh kak istochnik izucheniya ateizma v rabochem dvizhenii," VIRA, VIII (1960) 101-27 (quotes 122, n. 56); Maurice Baring, What I Saw in Russia (London: Nelson, 1927) 350-53. For examples of mockery and exposure, see: N. A. Lebedev, "Antitserkovnye i antireligioznye nastroeniya sredi krestyan nizhegorodskoi gubernii v nachale XX v.," VIRA, VII (1959) 116–27; cf. Zelnik, A Radical Worker. 10. Krasnoe Znamya: pervomaiskii sbornik (S.Pb.: Tip. Eserov, 1901) 25–27; Krasnoe Znamya: sbornik na 1 maya 1905 goda (N.d., n. p.. [1905] with an SR imprint) 14-21; A. P. Barykova, Skazka pro to kak Tsar Akhreyan khodil Bogu zhalovatsya (Geneva: Ukrainskaya tip., [c. 1900–1905]) 24. Grazhdane! segodnya Novyi God (Socialist Revolutionary flysheet). All are in the pamphlet collection of the Helsinki Slavonic Library. The Hagadah: Avrich, Anarchists, 40; the Old Believer: L. I. Emelyakh, Antiklerikalnoe dvizhenie krestyan v period pervoi russkoi revolyutsii (Moscow: Nauka, 1965) 109–11. 11. Desyat Zapovedei Sotsial-Demokrata, 2 ed. (Helsinki: Khelsingforskaya gruppa R.S.D.R.P., 1917) 7–8; commentary in V. F. Shishkin, Tak skladyvalas revolyutsionnaya moral (Moscow: Mys1, 1967) 285–86. 12. S. N. Savelev, Emelyan Yaroslavskii—-propagandist marskistskogo ateizma (Leningrad: Izd. Leningrad. U., 1976) 13–15; M. M. Sheinman, "Propagandist ateizma, Em. M. Yaroslaskii," VIRA, VI (1958) 75-103; Pervoe Maya! flysheet attached to Solsial-demokrat, 23 [1911] in the Helsinki collection. 13. Shiryaeva, "Iz istorii stanovleniya''; Emelyakh, Antiklerikalnoe, 105–15; idem. 'Iz istorii antiklerikalizma i ateizma russkikh krestyan v 1905–1907 gg.," EMIRA, III (1959) 283– 85. 14. Persits, "Avtobiografiya''; Putnam, Russian Alternatives, 98-99. 15. See also on this subject the flawed but interesting Shishkin, Tak skladyvalas. For other aspects: Stephen and Ethel Dunn, The Peasants of Great Russia (New York: Holt, 1967) 29; Ezra Mendelsohn, Class Struggle in the Pale (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970) 109, 153–55; de Man, Psychology of Socialism, 146-48. For Orthodox missionary methods that the Bolsheviks would later use, see N. A. Smirnov, 'Missionerskaya deyatelnost tserkvi (vtoraya polovina XIX v.-1917 g.)," Tserkov v istorii Rossii (Moscow: Nauka, 1967) 279-97. 16. E. S. Osipova "Vremennoe Pravitelstvo i tserkov," Tserkov ν istorii Rossii, 315-22 (qu., 322); D. A. Garkavenko, 'Rost ateistskikh i antiklerikalnykh nastroenii v armii i flote v 1917 godu,"' VIRA, VIII (1960) 206–7. 17. V. Bonch-Bruevich, 'Rol dukhovenstva v pervye dni Oktyabrya'', Deyateli Oktyabrya o religii i tserkvi (Moscow: Mysl, 1958) 14–24; Krasnyi Petrograd (1920) 8 (photo). In the Civil War, church bells were feared by the Bolsheviks as signals to the Whites; ringing them was in some places punishable by death: Arbatov, 'Ekaterinoslav"', 90. 18. A good, though outdated, introduction is J. S. Curtiss, The Russian Church and the Soviet State, 1917–1950 (Boston: Little Brown, 1950). A newer treatment is Dimitry Pospielovsky, The Russian Church under the Soviet Regime, 1917–1982, 2 v. (Crestwood: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 1984). 19. O religii i tserkvi (Moscow, 1965) 59. 20. BSE, 2 ed., XLIX (1957) 652–53; Savelev, Emelyan Yaroslavskii; idem., “Em. Yaroslavskii v prepodlenie anarkistskikh vliyanii v antireligioznoi rabote v S.S.S.R.," EMIRA, VII (1964) 36–50. One of the fullest collections of his early writings is Protiv religii i tserkvi, 3 vols. (Moscow: OGIZ, 1932-35). The word "militant" was added later. 21. Curtiss, Russian Church, 206–46; Yaroslavskii, Religiya i R.K.P. (Moscow: Bezbozhnik, 1925) 41–44; Bobryshev, Melkoburzhuaznye vliyaniya 54. For local styles, see Tseli i zadachi Soyuza Bezbozhnikov (Ulyanovsk: Ulyanovskii Gorod. Sov. Soyuz Bezbozhnikov, 1928); and Merle Fainsod, Smolensk under Soviet Rule (New York: Vintagc, 1963) 430–45. 22. Savelev, "Em. Yaroslavskii," 38–39; Yaroslavskii, Protiv religii, III, 102–21; Bezbozhnik u stanka Nos. 5–10 (1923); S. G. Rutenburg, "D. Moor—khudozhnik-ateist," EMIRA, V (1961) 168–87. 23. N. A. Krylov, "Iz istorii propagandy ateizma v S.S.S.R. (1923–1925 gg.)," VIRA, VIII (1960) 166-92; M. Gorev (a former priest), Protiv antisemitov (Moscow: Gosizd., 1928); A. Loginov, Bezbozhnik: luchshii drug muzhika (Moscow: Bezbozhnik, 1923) 11. See also N. Lukin, Revolyutsiya i tserkov (Moscow: Krasnaya Nov, 1923). For weakness of the atheist press, see Bezbozhnyi knizhnik (The Godless Bibliophile), "Ob antireligioznoi literature," Knigonosha, 29/ 110 (Aug. 31, 1925) 8–9 and Brooks, in Gleason, Bolshevik Culture, 156. 24. Krylov, "Iz istorii," 177, 181; M. Hindus, Broken Earth (New York: International Press, 1926) 30; idem, Red Bread (New York: Cape, 1931) 169 (qu.), 273–76; Fainsod, Smolensk, 433; Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 189-90. 25. Curtiss, Russian Church, 209–10, 239–55; K.P.S.S. vo glave kulturnoi revolyutsii v S.S.S.R. (Moscow: Izdpolit, 1972) 121; Fitzpatrick, Education, 18, 22–23. 26. David Powell, Antireligious Propaganda in the Soviet Union (Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1975) 37, describing the Virgin Mary cartoon. For a sampling of the art: Bezbozhnik u stanka, covers and cartoons Nos. 5-10 (1923). For contrasting views of Apsit, see Rutenburg, "D. Moor'', 173-74 and Stephen White, "The Political Poster in Bolshevik Russia," Sbornik, 8 (Leeds, 1982) 24–37. 27. Krylov, 'Iz istorii," 181–82; Zvi Gitelman, Jewish Nationalism and Soviet Politics: the Jewish Sections of the C.P.S.U., 1917–1930 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1972) 301; Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 186, 197; VRNK (Paris), 7 (Dec. 1923) 21. 28. Arbatov, "Ekaterinoslav," 130–31; Curtiss, Russian Church, 85; Fueloep-Miller, Mind 186-87; M. Sheinman, Bog sluzhit bogatym (Moscow: Molodaya Gvardiya, 1925) 11–15; Yu. A. Polyakov, Perekhod k NEPu i Sovetskoe krestyanstvo (Moscow: Nauka, 1967) 191–92; Tumarkin, Lenin Lives! 174–89, on the embalming; Gorky, O russkom krestyanstve 30–31; M. I. Shakhnovich, "Dvadtsatpyatiletie muzeya istorii religii i ateizma Akademii Nauk S.S.S.R.," VIRA, V (1958) 410-24. 29. Hindus, Broken Earth, 227 (qu.); Curtiss, Russian Church, 212; I. V. Stepanov, Kak vesti antireligioznuyu progagandu v derevne, 2 ed. (Leningrad: Priboi, 1930); I. D. Strashun, Borba za zdorove—borba s religiei (Moscow: Bezbozhnik, 1925). 30. M. Reisner, Nuzhna li vera v boga? 3 ed. (Moscow: Krasnaya nov, 1923) 128; Leontiev cited in Kline, Religious, 46; F. Ph. Ingold, Literatur und Aviatik: europäische Flugdichtung, 1909–27 (Basel, 1978) 58; Walter Kolarz, Religion in the Soviet Union (London: Macmillan, 1962) 19–21. 31. Skvortsov-Stepanov, Osnovye techeniya v antireligioznoi propagande (Moscow: Bezbozhnik, 1925) 8–9; S. Gorodetskii, Komsomolskoe Rozhdestvo (Moscow: Izd. M.K.R.K.S.M., 1923); "Komsomolskoe Rozhdestvo'', Nov (Paris) 4 (Feb. 1923) 23–24; F. A. Mackenzie, Russia Before Dawn (London: Adelphi, 1923) 262; P. Scheffer, Seven Years in Soviet Russia (London: Putnam, 1932) 33. Odessa: U.S. National Archives Record Group 38, O.N.I., C-10-N, 1680S, Box 661, pp. 2-3; Tsaritsyn: Curtiss, Russian Church, 203. Krylov, "Iz istorii," 183- 84; B. N. Konovalov, K massovomu ateizmu (Moscow: Nauk, 1974) 74; Binns, "Changing Face," 594; and Jennifer McDowell, "Soviet Civil Ceremonies," Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, XIII/3 (1974) 265–79. 32. M. K. [M.I. Kalinin], "Novyi byt,"' Krasnyi pakhar, 1 (1919) 13–15; Deyateli Oktyabrya, 6-7; V. [P.M.] Kerzhentsev, "Teatr kak vneshkolnoe obrazovanie," Vneshkolnoe obrazovanie, 2-3 (Feb.-Mar. 1919) 23-28; Trotsky, Problems of Everyday Life; Yaroslavskii, Protiv religii, III, 220–24; V. V. Veresaev, Ob obryadakh starykh i novykh (Moscow: Novaya Moskva, 1926) 5–8; Binns, “Changing Face," 594–95. 33. Ibid., 595; Yaroslavskii, Religiya, 47; idem., Protiv religii, III, 61–63; Komsomolskaya Paskha (Moscow: Novaya Moskva, 1924); Ya. Rezvushkin, Sud na bogom (Moscow: Gosizd., 1924); Scheffer, Seven Years, 34–39; F. Kovalëv, Kalendar religioznykh prazdnikov (Kharkov: Proletarii, 1930). 34. V. E. Khazanova, ed., Iz istorii Sovetskoi arkhitektury, 2 vols. (Moscow: A.N.S.S.R., 1963-70), 1, 134-35. 35. Ibid. I, 134–43, 150–55, and II, 7 (illust.); Berton, Moscow, 211–12; Vittorio de Feo, U.R.S.S.: architettura, 1917–1936 (Rome: Reuniti, 1963) 112; S. F. Starr, Melnikov (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978) 107-47. 36. M. Danilevskii, Prazdniki obschestvennogo byta (Moscow: Doloi Negramatnost, 1927) 3-13. 37. Ibid,; F. F. Korolëv, et al., Ocherki po istorii Sovetskoi shkoly i pedagogiki, 1921–1931 (Moscow: Izd. Ak. Ped. Nauk R.S.F.S.R., 1961) 294. 38. Trotsky, Problems, 45–47; Ivan Sukhoplyuev, Oktyabriny (Kharkov: Gosizd. Ukrainy, 1925); Selishchev, Yazyk, 179–80; McDowell, "Soviet Civil'', 267–68 for examples of obscure places where these rituals were performed. 39. Veresaev, Ob obryadakh, 22–26; Danilevskii, Prazdniki, 4. 40. Comrie, Russ. Lang., 187–89; Selishcehv, Yazyk, 190; M. E. Koltsov, Izbrannye proizvedeniya, 3 vols. (Moscow: Khud. Lit., 1957), I, 574; Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 193–94; Sukhoplyuev, Oktyabriny, 20–30; M. K. '"Novyi Byt''; personal information. For comparisons, see de Man, Psychology of Socialism, 156–64 and Thompson, Making of the English Working Class, 407. 41. B. A. Uspensky, "Name Changes in Russia from a Historical and Semiotic Point of View," translated in Soviet Anthropology and Archaeology, XVII/4 (Spring, 1979) 26. 42. Veresaev, Ob obryadakh; Vadim Bayan [VI. Sidorov], Kumachevye gulyanki: khorovodnye igry (Moscow: Mol. Gvardiya, 1927) 16–25; G. B. Zhirnova, "Nekotorye problemy i itogi izucheniya svadebnogo rituala v russkom gorode serediny XIX-nachala XX v.," in K. V. Chistov and T. A. Bernshtam, eds., Russkii narodnyi svadebnyi obryad (Leningrad, 1978) 32–47; Hindus, Red Bread, 197; Trotsky, Problems, 46; Pethybridge, Social Prelude, 55 (wedding figures). Fouché cited in Henderson, Symbol and Satire in the French Revolution (New York: Putnam, 1912), 409. 43. VKVD, 2 (Sept 1918) 64–71 (Uritsky's funeral, illust.). See also Plamya, 67 (Oct 19, 1979) 1-2 for the funeral of General A. P. Nikolaev, who was hanged by the Whites. The motifs of his and Uritsky's funerals are similar to those of a funeral of the 1860s depicted in Sergei Vasilevich Gerasimov (Moscow, 1951) 11. For another Bolshevik martyr-funeral (that of Volodarsky), see Lunacharskii, Revolutionary Silhouettes, tr. M. Glenny (New York: Hill and Wang, 1967) 117. 44. Avrich, Kronstadt, 173; M. K. "Novyi byt''; Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 196; Veresaev, Ob obryadakh, 9. 45. Khazanova, Iz istorii, I, 214–15; Trotsky, Problems, 46; Starr, Melnikov, 35; Gvido Bartel, "Istoriya i statistika Moskovskogo Krematoriya," Zdravookhranenie, (1929) 106–8. B. G. Kaplun, 'Sozhiganie chelovecheskikh trunov,"' Plamya, July 13, 1919, pp. 7–9. 46. Quoted in Vasily Komar and Alexander Melamid, "In Search of Religion," Artforum, XVIII/9 (May 1980) no pagination 47. Tseli i zadachi, 41–42; Vit. Zhemchuzhnii, "Protiv obryadov," Novyi Lef, 1 (Jan 1927) 43–47; Yaroslavsky, Protiv religii, III, 223. 48. For European parallels, see Hobsbawm, Invention of Tradition. 49. For some general treatments: Herbert Marcuse, Soviet Marxism, (New York: Columbia University Press, 1958), pt. II; Marksistkaya etika—khrestomatiya, ed. A. F. Shishkin (Moscow: Inst: Mezhdu. Otnosh., 1961); Richard de George, Soviet Ethics and Morality (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1969). For a sampling from the 1920s: Lenin, O morale (Moscow: Gosizd., 1926); Bukharin, Leninizm i problemy kulturnoi revolyutsii (Moscow: Gosizd., 1928); Lunacharskii, Kultura na zapade i u nas (Moscow: Gosizd., 1928); idem., 'Moral i svoboda," Krasnaya Nov, 7 (Dec. 1923) 130-36; Trotsky, Problems; Kerzhentsev, "Chelovek novoi epokhi,"' Revolyutsiya i kultura, 2 (Dec. 5, 1927) 17–20. 50. As a small sample, see: Tovarishchi, ne izmenyai! Rostov-na-Donu [pre-1914]), Helsinki Collection; Shishkin, Velikii Oktyabr; Komsomol: sbornik statei (Munich: Izd. Tsentr. Obed. Polit, Emig. iz S.S.S.R., 1960) 33–43 and passim; Tovarishch Komsomol: dokumenty sezdov, konferentsii, i TsK V.L.K.S.M., 1918–1969, 2 vols. (Moscow: Molodaya Gvardiya, 1969), I, 96-97. 51. N. Kanin, O druzhbe i tovarishchestve v Komsomole (Leningrad: Krasnaya Gvardiya, 1927). Aristotle cited in the Manuels, Utopian Thought, 288. 52. L. Kleinbort, "Rukopisnye zhurnaly rabochikh," VE, 7-8 (Jul.-Aug., 1917) 288; B. Weinryb, "Antisemitism in Soviet Russia," in L. Kochan, ed., The Jews in Soviet Russia Since 1917 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978) 300–332. 53. The smychka still awaits a cultural historian. See Krasnaya zvezda (Moscow, 1918), a pamphlet in the Helsinki Collection, for the symbolic beginnings of it. See Meijer, "Town and Country," 347 and Osinsky, Amerikanskii avtomobil ili rossiiskaya telega? (Moscow, 1930) 14— 24. 54. I. Trifonov, Ocherki istorii klassovoi borby v S.S.S.R. v gody N.E.P. (1921-1927) Moscow: Politlit, 1960, 46-48 (must be used with care); Marcuse, Soviet Marxism, 228–67; Ralph Fischer, Pattern for Soviet Youth (New York: Columbia University Press, 1959) 99–100, 161. 55. This issue has received much recent attention. B. Clements, Bolshevik Feminist (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1979); B. Farnsworth, Aleksandra Kollontai (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1980); Stites, Women's Liberation, 346–91. Also the older work, Wilhelm Reich, The Mass Psychology of Fascism (New York: Farrar; reprint, 1970) 285–309. 56. G. Grigorov and S. Shkotov, Staryi i novyi byt (Moscow, 1927) 144–45; Fitzpatrick, Education, 26; Stites, Women's Liberation, 358–76; Keith Thomas, '"Work and Leisure in Pre-Industrial Society," Past and Present, 29 (1964) 54; Trotsky, Problems, 49–56; Zhizn bez kontrolya (Moscow, 1929); Jennie Stevens, "Children of the Revolution," Russian History, 9/2–3 (1982) 242–64. The novels of N. Ognëv and P. S. Romanov are especially apropos. 57. Grigorov, Staryi, 134 (qu.); Krasnye zori (Kazan) 1 (1919) 18 (a cartoon identifying alcoholism with Tsar Nicholas II); M. K. Mikhailov, Vodku pit—vse gubit (Moscow: Doloi Negramotnost, 1927); I. M. Vavushkin, Pochemu vreden tabak (Moscow: Gosizd., 1926). 58. Griogorov, Staryi, 103–6; Trotsky, Problems, 35; Byt i molodëzh (Leningrad: Izd. Len. Obl. Sov. Prof., 1928) 21–28. 59. Goldman, My Disillusionment, 232; Fischer, Patterns, 69; Grigorov, Staryi, 44–46; Obyvatelshchina na pritseli (Leningrad: Krasnaya Gvardiya, 1928); S. Frederick Starr, Red and Hot: the Fate of Jazz in the Soviet Union (Oxford: New York: Oxford University Press, 1982), 54– 106. 60. Lunacharskii, O byte (Moscow: Gosizd., 1927) 41–45 and Grigorov, Staryi, 50, 110–14. 61. Ibid., 139–40. Vera Dunham, In Stalin's Time (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976) 19–23 and passim 62. Trotsky, Problems, 70, 76; M. N. Lyadov, Voprosy byta (Moscow: Kom. Akademiya, 1925) 120–26; Grigorov, Staryi, 23–25, 120–26. 63. For a sense of the richness and scope of this debate, see, among numerous other publications: Komsololskii byt and A. Milchakov, Komsomol v borbe za kulturnyi byt, both published in Moscow by Molodaya Gvardiya, 1927; B. Dmitriev, et al., Na putkyakh k novomu bytu (Moscow: Novaya Moskva, 1927); V. Slepkov, Na bytovye temy (Leningrad: Krasnaya Gazeta, 1927); and A. Oborin, Protiv grubost i samodurstva (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1928). A good brief analysis of the Leningrad Komsomol on this issue is Peter Gooderham's paper, "The Komsomol and Worker Youth" (1981). Isabel Tirado is completing a book on the Komsomol in the Revolution. 64. Tumarkin, Lenin Lives!; idem., 'Religion, Bolshevism, and the Origins of the Lenin Cult," Russian Review, 40/1 (Jan. 1981) 35–46; Komar and Melamid, 'In Search"; Williams, Artists, 124–25, 180; Starr, Melnikov, 79–84; Khazanova, Iz istorii, I, 224–29. 65. Fainsod, Smolensk, 430-31; Ya. A. Yakovlev, Derevnya kak ona est (Moscow: Krasnaya Nov, 1923) 89–94; Korolëv, Ocherki, 286; F. Oleshchuk, Shkola i vospitanie aktivnykh ateistov (Moscow: Moskovskii Rabochii, 1928) 58 ff. 66. Bobryshev, Melkoburzhuaznye vliyaniya, 45; Hindus, Red Bread, 186–87; idem., The Great Offensive (New York: Harrison Smith, 1933) 169–81; Fitzpatrick, Education, 174, 303n. 67. For examples of folk 'understanding," see "In Search"; Comrie, Russian Language, 137; and Selishchev, Yazyk, 215. Anon. (\*Sovetskii starozhil''), "V derevne," VKR (Prague) 1/13 (June 1928) 22–25; Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 71-89. 68. Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 72; Ellul, 'The Technological Order," in C. Stover, ed., The Technological Order (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1963) 38; Hindus, Great Offensive, 182–89; Humanity Uprooted, 41; Berdyaev, Origin, 158–78. Mao is quoted in W. Rosenberg and M. Young, Transforming Russia and China (New York: Oxford University Press, 1982) 82. 69. V. G. Korolenko, Korolenko's Siberia, tr. R. F. Christian (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1954) 31–74; Andrei Platonov, Chevengur, ed. M. Geller (Paris: Y.M.C.A. Press, 1972) 14–15. 70. Fedotoff White, Growth of the Red Army, 124–25; Nikolai Lunev, "Blind Faith in a Bright Future," Soviet Youth: Twelve Komsomol Histories (Munich: Institute for the Study of the U.S.S.R., 1959) 31, 34. ## Chapter 6: The Republic of Equals 1. Moshe Lewin, The Making of the Soviet System (New York: Pantheon, 1985) 72-87; Teodor Shanin, The Awkward Class (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972) 29, 34–37, 41; H. D. Löwe, "Traditionelle and neue Rollen der Frau in Zeitalten sozialer Umbruche: Russland, 1860– 1917," unpublished paper, 1984; John Maynard, Russia in Flux (New York: Macmillan, 1959) 127-28; Brooks, When Russia, 285–86. 2. F. Terner, O rabochem klasse (S.Pb., 1860) 302–18; Yu. I. Kipryanov, Zhiznennyi uroven rabochikh Rossii (konets XIX-nachalo XX v.), Moscow, Nauka, 1979, pp. 161-64; Koenker, Moscow Workers, 55–56; Andrei Lobanov-Rostovsky, The Grinding Mill: Reminiscences of War and Revolution in Russia, 1913–1920 (New York: Macmillan, 1935) 274; Zelnik, Radical Worker, 7–13. See chapter 10 for artel communes. 3. Quoted in Gleason, Young Russia, 328. See Zakharina, 'Rev. prop., 91–92. 4. Linda Edmundson, "Civil Rights in Russia: the 1905 Revolution," unpublished paper; Brooks, "Vekhi'', 28; Lenin cited in Marksistskaya etika, 290–93; Mikhail Gernet, Ravenstvo (Petrograd, 1917). 5. Hill, The World Turned Upside Down (New York: Viking, 1972); Keep, Russian Revolution, 215, 400, passim; Goldman, My Disillusionment, 149; Gill, Peasants and Government; Shanin, Awkward Class, 150–60; Atkinson, End of the Russian Village Commune. 6. P.R., 10 (Oct. 1922) 357; Mehnert, Youth, 220; Koenker, Moscow Workers, passim; Krasnikova, My novyi mir, 43–44; VOMU, 1 (Dec. 27, 1918) 14; Potekhin, Pervyi Soviet, 161– 72; Robien, Diary, 218; Marabini, Vie, 169; Arbatov, "Ekaterinoslav," 117 (qu.). 7. Kopp, Changer, 122 (quoting Bukharin); Raleigh, Revolution, 161; Avrich, Kronstadt, 73; Anet, Through, 108; Arbatov, "Ekaterinoslav,'"' 86; Fisher, Famine, 81; Keep, Russian Revolution, 427 (Shefter's proposal). 8. Hamm, "The Breakdown of Urban Modernization: a Prelude to the Revolution of 1917', in Hamm, City in Russian History, 182–200; idem., "Kharkov's Progressive Duma, 1910–1914: a Study in Russian Municipal Reform," SR, 40/1 (Spring 1981) 422-36; Daniel Brower, 'Urban Russia on the Eve of World War One: a Social Profile," Journal of Social History, 13/3 (Spring, 1980) 422–36; Bradley, Muzhik; Engelstein, Moscow, 1905, 41; Lenin in Potekhin, Pervyi Sovet, 168; Koenker, Moscow Workers, 54–57; Farson, Black Bread, 3. For comparison, see John Gillis, The Development of European Society (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1977) 179. 9. Avrich, Anarchists, 80, 48 (qu.); Hasegawa, "Crime and Revolution'; Yarchuk, Kronshtadt, 22–23, 38–39. 10. Krasnaya Moskva, 1917-1920 gg. (Moscow: Izd. Mosk. Sov., 1920) 334–50; Ignatiev, Moskva, 280–85; Kulyshev, Partiinaya organizatsiya, 261–63; Potekhin, Pervyi Sovet, 169–71; Robien, Diary, 220; Khan-Magomedov, Pionere, 342. 11. For a full sense of the impact of this drama, one must see it also from the perspective of the dispossessed: N.A.R.S./ Record Group 20, Red Cross Records, Box 866, folder 948 (diary of Royal Kelly); L.C., Babine Papers, Section 1 (1917–1919), box 1; Igor Schwezoff [Shvetsov], Russian Somersault (New York: Harper, 1936) 80–83, passim; N. Wrangel, From Serfdom to Bolshevism (London: Benn, 1927) 293–307; Brown, Doomsday, 95. See also Conway, Art Treasures, 135-39; Kopp, Town and Revolution, 102; Nemerknushchie gody: ocherki vospominaniya o Krasnom Petrograde, 1917–1919 (Leningrad: Sov. Pisatel, 1957) 289; Shklovsky, 'Lenin," 56; and Mackenzie, Russia Before Dawn, 179. 12. Avrich, Anarchists, 71; Potekhin, Pervyi Sovet, 161–65; Ignatev, Moskva, 297–98; Robien, Diary, 186, 218; Fedotoff White, Growth of the Red Army, 107–8. 13. Olbracht, 'Puteshestvie," 74–75; A. Khokhryakov, ‘Iz zhizni petrogradskogo garizona v 1917 g,"KL, 17 (1926) 30; Brown, Doomsday, 155; Marabini, Vie, 52–53; Makhno, Russ. Rev., I, 127 (the incarceration of Makhno's jailer in his own former cell); Robien, Diary, 186; Keep, Russian Revolution, passim; Krasnikova, My novyi mir, 105–6; VOKVD, 1 (Sept. 1918) 178. 14. Soviet historians make no secret of Bolshevik punitive policies in the Revolution. On some of these, see Fraiman, Forpost, 351 and idem., Revolyutsionnaya zashchita, 178. PVRK, I, 205. 15. John Wheeler-Bennett, Brest-Litovsk: the Forgotten Peace, March 1918 (London: Macmillan, 1939) 84–88. 16. Edward Shils, "Deference," in J. A. Jackson, ed., Social Stratification (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968) 104–32; Wright Miller, The Russians as People (New York: Dutton, 1960) 116-21; Trotsky, My Life (New York: Scribners, 1930) 105 17. For photographic sources, see Harrison Salisbury, Russia in Revolution, 1900–1930 (New York: Holt, Rinehart, Winston, 1978); Chloe Obolensky, The Russian Empire: a Portrait in Photographs (New York: Random House, 1979); Marvin Lyons, Russia in Original Photographs ed. Andrew Wheatcroft (New York: Scribner's, 1977). See also Brooks, When Russia, 279, on dress. 18. Marabini, Vie, 63–64; Brown, Doomsday, 103. Uldricks, "The Crowd,"' 405; Mackenzie, Russia Before Dawn, 176; Babine Papers, Sect. 1 (1917–1919), Box 1, Jan. 22, 1918. 19. Lunacharsky believed that Sverdlov dressed from head to toe in black glistening leather partly to lend '"stature, gravity, and solidity'to his small unprepossessing figure: Revolutionary Silhouettes, 106-7. On the resonance of the leather jacket, see Yury Trifonov, The Old Man (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1984). 20. The photo is in Salisbury, Russia in Revolution, 176–77. Kustodiev's designs in Art into Production, 2–3; Tatyana Strizhenova, Iz istorii sovetskogo kostyuma (Moscow: Sov. Khudozhnik, 1972) 24–26. See also Ivan Yakovlevich Bilibin (Leningrad: Khudozhnik R.S.F.S.R., 1970). 21. Ehrenburg, First Years, 143; Lef, 2 (April–May, 1923) 65–68 (illustr.); Bowlt, "Constructivism and Early Soviet Fashion Design'in Gleason, Bolshevik Culture, 203–19 (qu. 206, 203); Strizhenova, Iz istorii, 81-110; Christina Lodder, Russian Constructivism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983) 145–53. 22. Bowlt, ‘Constructivism''; Roizman, Vse, 16–19, 123, 136; personal conversations. 23. Dekrety Sovetskoi vlasti, 3 vols. (Moscow: Gosizdpolit, 1957–64), I, 71–72; Keep, ed., The Debate on Soviet Power (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979), 187–88, 319 (the vote for this decree was unanimous); Comrie, Russian Language, 142, 193–97; Selishchev, Yazyk, 74, 193; Barrington Moore, Soviet Politics—the Dilemma of Power (New York: Harper, 1965) 160 (quoting Trotsky). 24. Comrie, Russian Language, 173–74; Gleason, Young Russia, 260; Persits, '"Avtobiografiya," 121; Engelstein, Moscow, 74; Soldatskaya mysl, 4 (April 1907) 4, quote. 25. Wildman, End, 28, 35, 49, 233; Anet, Through the Russian Revolution, 107. Brown, Doomsday, 66. Trotsky, Problems, 77–78 (qu., 78). 26. For prerevolutionary use, see Shishkin, Tak skladyvalas, 270–71; Hindus, Broken Earth, 31–32; Comrie, Russian Language, 195–97; Brown, Doomsday, 132, 154; Selishchev, Yazyk, 214. 27. Comrie, Russian Language, 156; Serge, Memoirs, 120; Fitzpatrick, Commissariat, 23; La Ondo de Esperanto (Moscow, 1908–17) a monthly, passim and 4/52 (April 1913) 62-63; V. G. Sutkovoi, Esperanto-Russkii slovar (Moscow: Ts.K.S.E.S.R., 1927) 4-8. 28. Ehrenburg, First Years, 9–10; Peter Forster, The Esperanto Movement (The Hague: Mouton, 1982) 188–203. Ivo Lapenna, ed., Esperanto en perspektivo (London: Universala Esperanto-Asocio, 1974); Kopelev, Education, 96–124. 29. For an introduction to these matters, see: B. Schwarz, Music, 11-37; K. Kuznetsov, "Betkhoven i Sen-Simon,"'Muzyka i revolyutsiya, 3 (1927) 12–16; Dreiden, Muzyka-revolyutsii; V pervye gody sovetskogo muzykalnogo stroitelstva (Leningrad, 1959); Dreiden, 'Lenin znakomitsya s terminovoksom,"' Muzykalnaya zhizn, 7/489 (April 1978) 2–3; A. A. Ivanov, Sovetskii elektricheskii muzykalnyi instrument Emiriton (Melodin) Moscow, 1953; V. D. Kirpichnikov, "Elektrifikatsiya muzykalnykh instrumentov," Persimfans, (program for 9–16, May, 1927). Kenez, Birth. 30. Arnold Tsukker, Pyat let Persimfansa (Moscow: Izd; Pervogo Simfonicheskogo Ansmblya Mossoveta, 1927). Persimfans: zhurnal pervogo simfonicheskogo ansamblya (Moscow, 1926 ff.); Persimfans programs, irregular, 1922 ff; S. S. Prokoviev: materialy, dokumenty, vospominaniya, 2 ed. (Moscow, 1961) 179; Muzykalnoe obrazovanie, 4–5 (1925) 109; S. Ponyatovsky, "Persimfans,"' Muzykalnaya zhizn, 23/481 (Dec. 1977) 15–16; Schwarz, Music, 33; M. S. Blok, "O Lve Moiseeviche Tseitline," in Vospominaniya o Moskovskoi Konservatorii (Moscow, 1966) 329–55; I. Yampolskii, 'K 66-letniya L. M. Tseitlina," Sovetskaya muzyka, 5 (1941) 71– 72. Moses Smith, Koussevitzky (New York: Allen, Town, and Heath, 1947) 73–86, 102. Muzykalnaya zhizn Moskvy, 201. 31. Persimfans was under the authority of the Moscow Soviet. For information on many of its players, see Vosp. o Mosk. Konserv., passim and assorted programs of Persimfans, 1922–27. Persimfans: zhurnal, 1 (1927-28) 3-4, 6-7, 9–12; 2 (1927–28) 3-7; 7 (1928-29) 3-5, plus supplement. 32. Tsukker, O simfonicheskom ansamble, (Moscow: Obshchestvo druzei Simfonicheskoi Ansmablya, 1924) 1–30; idem, Pyat let persimfansa, 180–200. 33. Persimfans: zhurnal, 2 (1927–28) 15–16 and 7 (1928–29) 56. Szigeti, With Strings Attached, 2 ed. (New York: Knopf, 1967) 233–34. Tsukker, O simfonicheskom ansamble, 26. 34. For a sampling, see: Muzykalnuya nov, 5 (Feb. 29, 1924); Rabochii i teatr, 6/229 (Feb. 3, 1929). Muzyka i revolyutsiya, 1 (127) 4,7, 28–29; 2 (1927) 30; and 3 (1927) 31; Krasnaya niva, 9 (1927); S. S. Prokoviev, 179 on his first meeting with Persimfans. A slightly different account is given in ibid., 426–31. Persimfans: zhurnal, 7 (1928–29) on Klemperer's remark. 35. Ponyatovskii, 'Persimfans," 15–16; Yu. V. Keldysh, 100 let Moskovskoi Konservatorii (Moscow, 1966) 116; Yampolskii, 'K 66-letniya"', 72; Proletarskii muzykant, 4 (1929) 41; "Unconducted Symphonies," Musical America (November 10, 1928) 135. 36. Persimfans: zhurnal, 7 (1928-29) 8; Tsukker, O simfonicheskom ansamble, 8; Shwarz, Music, 46-47. Starr's sources are mostly from Moscow, mine from Leningrad. Ponyatovskii, “Persimfans," 15-16. Blok gives the year of dissolution as 1934 (‘O Lve"'). 37. For two examples, see: L. Slonimsky, Music of Our Day, new ed. (Freeport: 1970) 329– 30; Percy Scholes, Oxford Companion to Music, 10th ed. (London: Oxford University Press, 1970) 243, 903. 38. Gogol: Lincoln, Nicholas I, 246. Marx quoted by Ollman in Bialer and Sluzar, eds., Radical Visions of the Future, 67; Lenin, PSS, VII, 22. 39. Canetti, Crowds and Power, 394–96. V. Bogdanov-Berëzovsky, Dorogi iskusstva: kniga pervaya (1903–1945), Leningrad: Muzyka, 1971, pp. 184–86. Quotation from Istoriya russkoi sovetskoi muzyki, 4 vols in 5 (Moscow: Gos. muz. izd., 1956-1963), 1, 46, n. 1. For a good treatment of a "traditional" Soviet conductor of the time—and a pupil of Nikisch—see: G. G. Tigranov, ed., K. S. Saradzhev (Moscow: Sovetskii kompositor, 1962) 7–55. 40. Persimfans: zhurnal, 2 (1927–28) 3. 41. Basic works on these matters are: Robert V. Daniels, Consience of the Revolution (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1960); Leonard Schapiro, The Origin of the Communist Autocracy (New York: Praeger, 1965): Avrich, Russian Anarchists; idem., "Bolshevik Opposition to Lenin: G. T. Miasnikov and the Workers' Group," Russian Review, XLIII (1984) 1–29. 42. Fitzpatrick, Commissariat; Clements, Bolshevik Feminist; and Farnsworth, Aleksandra Kollontai. See Carl Boggs, "Marxism, Prefigurative Communism, and the Problem of Workers Control,"'Radical America, 4–6 (November, 1977) 99-122. 43. The rotation of jobs has been a frequent feature of utopian literature since Thomas More. See also Fitzpatrick, "The Civil War as a Formative Experience," 69. Susiluoto, Origins and Development, 61–62. 44. Richard Lowenthal, "Beyond Totalitarianism?" in Irving Howe, 1984 Revisited, (New York: Harper, 1983) 218-19; Abram Bergson, The Structure of Soviet Wages (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1944, passim (p. 187 for Tomsky); Moore, Soviet Politics, 183–86; Smith, Red Petrograd, ch. 8. For vivid examples of early wage stratification, see BVSNTMP, 2–3 (Nov. 23, 1918) 11–28 and 4 (Nov. 30, 1918) 9–12. 45. Mervyn Matthews, Privilege in the Soviet Union (London: Allen and Unwin, 1978) 60- 70; Stephen Sternheimer, "Administration for Development: the Emerging Bureaucratic Elite, 1920–1930," in W. Pintner and D. K. Rowney, eds., Russian Officialdom (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1980) 316–54; Fitzpatrick, Education, 79–83; Bailes, Technology, 46, 51; Alexander Barmine, One Who Survived (New York: Putnam, 1945) 58. 46. Baratov (no first name), Kommunisty-otpuskniki: nakaz (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1921), 13 (Helsinki Collection): Robert McNeale, The Bolshevik Tradition (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1963) 46–47; Turmarkin, Lenin Lives!, 130, 179–81. 47. Chamberlin, Russian Revolution, I, 360; Szigeti, With Strings Attached, 221; Olbracht, "Puteshestvie," 72, 78–79; Goldman, My Disillusionment, 10; VRNK (Paris) 8 (Feb. 1, 1924) 50; W. Reswick, I Dreamt Revolution (Chicago: Regnery, 1952) 75–76. 48. Grabar, Moya zhizn, 273; Joravsky, "Cultural Revolution and the Fortress Mentality," in Gleason, Bolshevik Culture, 102; Fitzpatrick, Education, 80; Matthews, Privilege, 75–78; Goldman, My Disillusionment, 174. 49. Krasnyi offitser, 1 (Oct. 1918) 4; Matthews, Privilege, 85–90; Balabanova, My Life, 248; Goldman, My Disillusionment, 15-21, 176; Alfred Rosmer, Lenin's Moscow (1953; London: Pluto, 1971) 167–68; Gorky, Revolyutsiya i kultura, 16–17. 50. Matthews, Privilege, 80–82; Farson, Black Bread, 10–11. 51. Max Nomad, '"The Saga of Waclaw Machajski," in his Aspects of Revolt (New York: Bookman, 1959) 96-117 (quote 115). Bogdanov in Kendall Bailes, “Alexei Gastev and the Soviet Controversy over Taylorism," SS, 29/3 (July 1977) 380 and in Trudy NOT, 6; Balabanova, My Life, 200–203. ## Chapter 7: Man the Machine 1. See Chapter 1. 2. Samuel Haber, Efficiency and Uplift: Scientific Management in the Progressive Era, 1890– 1920 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964); Daniel Bell, The End of Ideology, rev. ed. (New York: Free Press, 1965) 227–72; H. Aitken, Taylorism at Watertown Arsenal (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1960). 3. Haber, Efficiency, passim; Harrison Emerson, "Principles of Efficient Organization,"' Emerson Engineers Efficiency Organization, Staff Bulletin, 53 (1919); Robert Hoxic, Scientific Management and Labor (New York: Appleton, 1921); Chales Maier, "Between Taylorism and Technocracy: European Ideology and the Vision of Industrial Production in the 1920s," Journal of Contemporary History, 5/2 (1970) 27–61; Jules Amar, Le moteur humain (Paris, 1914). Lenin owned the Russian translation of this book: Chelovecheskaya mashina (Moscow, 1922). 4. L. Pamilla and V. Chukovich, NOT—velenie vremeni (Minsk: Belarus, 1973); Steve Smith, "Taylorism Rules OK? Bolshevism, Taylorism and the Technical Intelligentsia in the Soviet Union 1917-41," Radical Science Journal, 13 (1983) 3-27; N. Sukhanov, ‘"O 'sisteme' Teilora,"'Russkoe bogatstvo, 11 (Nov. 1913) 132–54; Zenovia Sochor, "Soviet Taylorism Revisited," SS, XXXIII/2 (Apr. 1981) 246–64 and Bailes, "Alexei Gastev," 373–94. 5. Frank and Struve: Victor Terras, "Mayakovsky and Time," SEEJ, XIII/2 (1969) 155 and Jeffrey Brooks, "Vekhi," 21–50; Bailes, Technology, 49–50 (Lenin quote, 49); Fleron, "Administrative Theory." On Lenin's "American style' of work see: L. Fotieva, Iz zhizni Lenina (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1959) 46; P. M. Kerzhentsev, Zhizn Lenina (Moscow, 1937) 251–8; and V. Klyukin, “Komsomol i NOT v dvadtsatye gody,"' Pozyvnye istorii, I (1969) 236–62. 6. Vestnik professionalnykh soyuzov, 2 (June 15, 1918) 4-6; Organizatsiya truda, 1 (Mar 1921) 87-88; O. Ermansky, Nauchnaya Organizatsiya Truda i Proizvodstva i sistema Teilora (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1923); Vestnik truda, 6 (June 1921) 36–40. On Kronstadt: Pravda o Kronshtadte (Prague: Volya Rossii, 1921) 173 and Avrich, Kronstadt, 245. 7. Allan Nevins, Ford, 2 vols. (New York: 1954–57), I, 20 and II, 514–25 591–93; Henry Ford and Samuel Crowther, Today and Tomorrow (New York: Doubleday, 1926) 108–19; Ford, My Philosophy of Industry (New York: Coward-McCann, 1929) 37. 8. Maier, "Between Taylorism and Technocracy," 54; Nevins, Ford, II, 255, 673–84. The Ford biography, Moya zhizn, 3d ed. was issued by the journal Time (Vremya), see below, in 1924. For a rhapsodic appreciation of Fordism, see: I. M. Burdyanskii, Nauchnaya Organizatsiya Truda (Leningrad: Priboi, 1925) 23–27, On 'fordism"' in language: Selishchev, Yazyk, passim; and N. A. Milyutin, Sotsgorod: the Problem of Building Socialist Cities (1930), trans. A. Sprague (Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1974) 21. Edward Phillips, American Technical Assistance to the Nizhni-Novgorod Automobile Plant, 1929–1932 (M. A. Thesis, Georgetown University, 1981). 9. Hindus, '"Henry Ford Conquers Russia," The Outlook, 146/9 (June 29, 1927) 280–83 (illus.); Peter Filene, Americans and the Soviet Experiment, 1917–33 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967) 120–24; Bailes, "The American Connection: Ideology and the Transfer of Technology to the Soviet Union," CSSH, 23/3 (July 1981) 421–48. 10. Hans Rogger, "Amerikanizm and the Economic Development of Russia," CSSH, 23/3 (July 1981) 382–420; Hindus, Broken Earth (New York: International, 1926) 41, 182; Osinsky, Amerikanskii avtomobil; Fuelop-Miller, Mind, 22; and Charles Rougle, Three Russians Look at America (Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1976). The best study of Russian-Soviet popular attitudes toward America is J. Brooks, "Russia's American Dream," paper, N.E.P. conference, November, 1986. My thanks to the author. 11. There is no exhaustive study of Gastev. Kurt Johansson, Aleksej Gastev: Proletarian Bard of the Machine Age (Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1983) is an analysis of his poetry. Gastev's son, Yuri Alekseevich, is currently completing a major study. I thank him deeply for his lengthy conversations with me about his father. 12. For earlier European currents of machinism in literature, see Elliott Grant, French Poetry and Modern Industry, 1830–1870 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1927). Gastev's poetry is in Poeziya rabochego udara (Moscow: Sovetskii Pisatel, 1964). See also: Proletarskie poety. Gladkov, Cement (New York: Ungar, n.d.) 115. 13. Gastev, Poeziya, 135-52. Analysis by Rougle, “" ‘Express': the Future According to Gastev," in Kleberg and Stites, Utopia, 258–68. 14. See Proletarskaya Kultura, 3 (Aug 1918) 1–18; Gastev's poetry was issued in six Russian editions and translated into four languages (including Esperanto). 'Novaya Industriya" in Vestnik metallista, 2 (Jan 1918) 5–27 (qu., 26–27). 15. Proletarskaya kultura, 9/10 (1919) 35–45. This quotation is translated from Lorenz, Proletarische Kulturrevolution, 62–63. 16. For particulars, see Lewis and Weber, "Zamyatin's We." Bogdanov's critique: Bailes, “Alexei Gastev," 379–82. 17. Gastev, Industrialnyi mir (Kharkov, 1919). 18. Gastev, Poeziya, 1–20; Trudy NOT, I, 120–24; Samuel Lieberstein, '"Technology, Work, and Sociology in the U.S.S.R.: the N.O.T. Movement," Technology and Culture, 16/1 (Jan. 1975) 52–53. 19. Aside from Poeziya, Gastev's major statements can be found in the pages of his journal, Organizatsiya truda and in two later collections: Kak nado rabotat (1966) and Trudovye ustanovki (1973), both republished by Ekonomika in Moscow. 20. J. O. de la Mettrie (De-la Metri), Chelovek-mashina (S.Pb.: Obshchaya polza, 1911). The term zhivaya mashina (living machine) was in currency among Taylorists: Burdyansky, N.O.T., 36. Canetti, Crowds and Power, 315–16. 21. S. N. Nikolskii, Karel Chapek: fantast i satirik (Moscow: Nauka, 1973) 35–55; Karel Čapek, R.U.R. (Prague: Československý Spisovatel, 1966), 105. 22. See the memoir by E. A. Petrov in Gastev, Trudovye, 339–42. Yury Alexeevich Gastev: personal reminiscences about his father. 23. No history of the Central Institute of Labor has ever been written. See the previously cited works of Sochor, Bailes, Smith, Lieberstein, the files of Org. truda, the works of Gastev, and Ernest Toller, Which World—Which Way? tr. M. Ould (London: Sampson Low, 1931) 114– 16. 24. Bailes, "American Connection'', 25; Gastev, Kak nado rabotat, 262. 286. 309; Michael Hagemeister's introduction to Valerian Muraviëv, Ovladenie vremenem (1924; Munich: Sagner, 1983)1-27. 25. Patricia Carden, "The Case for the Future: the Life and Work of Aleksei Gastev,"ms. 26. V. Kerzhentsev was his principal pseudonym. He has attracted even less attention than Gastev. Biographical data in ES (Granat) XI/1, 185-86; additional fragments in Fitzpatrick, Commissariat, 96, 146–47, 153 and from the bibliographer of the State Public Library in Leningrad. 27. Modern editions of the major collections are Borba za vremya (1965) and Printsipy organizatsii (1968), both published by Ekonomika in Moscow and both containing the title works. See also Kak vesti sorbraniya (Petrograd, 1919), apparently Kerzhentsev's first word on the subject. 28. Kerzhentsev, Borba, 61–73, 81, 91–94, passim and his other works of the period 29. Kerzhentsev, Printsipy, 272–332 (quotes, 275, 302); Pamyatka organizatora (Ekaterinburg: Uralkniga, 1925). 30. Two documentary collections are: Nauchnaya organizatsiya truda dvadtsatykh godov: sbornik dokumentov i materialov (Kazan, 1965)--see 192 (photo), 256-72, 191–92, 405-19 for some examples of its work (and passim), and Nauchnaya Organizatsiya Truda, Proizvodstva i Upravleniya: sbornik dokumentov i materialov, 1918–1930 gg. (Moscow: Ekonomika, 1969) 224–26 and passim. Klyukin, "Komsomol i N.O.T.", and Pamilla and Chukovich, N.O.T., have sketchy information on the League. Sochor, "Soviet Taylorism' is useful. On clocks and watches: Promyshlennost S.S.S.R.: statisticheskii sbornik (Moscow, 1957) 362, kindly supplied by Sheila Fitzpatrick. 31. Kerzhentsev, Borba, 84–85, 134 (quote, 85); N.O.T. Sbornik (1969), 226–34; Burdyanskii, N.O.T. 33-35 (diagram of Kazan Station); Pravda, 287 (Dec. 17, 1924) 7; Klyukin, "Komsomol"', 259. 32. Ibid., 248–52; V. Byaltseva, '"Nachinaniya kruzhka po N.O.T.," Krasnaya molodëzh, 3–4 (7–8) Mar.-Apr., 1925, p. 156-7; M. Yankovsky, Kommuna sta tridtsati trëkh (Leningrad: Priboi, 1929) 43–46; Klaus Mehnert, Youth in Soviet Russia (New York: Harcourt, 1933) 183. 33. Yunyi pioner (posobie dlya instruktora), Moscow: Novaya Moskva, 1924, passim, see p. 145 for the League of Time" game. 34. Mark von Hagen, School of the Revolution: Bolsheviks and Peasants in the Red Army (forthcoming). 35. For various perspectives on the fall of the League: Klyukin, "Komsomol," 247-48, 254; Sochor, '"Soviet Taylorism," n. 53; Melanie Tatur, '"Wissenschaftliche Arbeitsorganisation'': Arbeitswissenschaft und Arbeits-organization in der Sowjetunion, 1921–33 (Berlin: Harassowitz, 1979) 63–70. A nice piece of satire of Gastev and Kerzhentsev can be found in a popular ‘red detective'’ novel of the period, in which a character teaches drill to people on stilts to increase the efficient use of space and time: Jim Dollar [Marietta Shaginian], Mess-Mend, ili Yanki v Petrograde (1923: Moscow: Gosiz., 1952) 160–61. 36. The literature on production art in the Russian Revolution is huge. For some good recent examples, see: Lodder, Russian Constructivism; John Bowlt, ed. Russian Art of the Avant-garde (New York: Viking, 1976); Art into Production; Starr, Melnikov; Guerman, Art of the October Revolution; Soviet Union, 111/2 (1976), a special issue on Constructivism; Williams, Artist; John Milner, Vladimir Tatlin and the Russian Avant-Garde (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983); and Mazaev, Kontseptsiya 'proizvodstvennogo iskusstva' 20-kh godov (Moscow: Nauka, 1975). 37. Brik discussed in Organizatsiya truda, 1 (Mar 1921) 130; Fevralsky in Ya. S. Tubin, Lunacharskii i stanovlenie sovetskogo muzykalnogo teatra (Moscow: Muzyka, 1975) 35; Janecek, The Look, passim. 38. Russolo and Pratella translated in Maski, 7-8 (1912–13) 39–48. The Proletcult article is in Gryaduschchee, 5–6 (1919) 28. Ermansky, Nauchnaya, 282. For the Italian background and the Russian reception, respectively, see: James Joll, Three Intellectuals in Politics (London: Weidenfeld, 1960) 147–48 and Brown, Mayakovsky, 90. 39. Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 183-84. 40. Ibid., 182–83; V. Kashnitskii, “Umnaya muzyka,"' Novyi Lef, 10 (Oct. 1928) 36–39. 41. Schwartz, Music, 53, 85–86; A. Mosolov, Zavod: muzyka mashiny dlya orkestra (partitura) Moscow: Gos. Muz. Izd. R.S.F.S.R., 1934). Soviet music critics and historians are almost universally hostile or ironic to this kind of music: see, e.g. Istoriya russkoi Sovetskoi muzyki, I, 37, 41, 254–55, 287. 42. Margarie Hoover, Meyerhold: the Art of Conscious Theater (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1974); V. E. Meyerhold, Meyerhold on Theater, ed. Edward Braun (New York: Hill and Wang, 1969); K. L. Rudnitskii, Regissër Meierkhold (Moscow: Nauka, 1969). See also Williams, Artists, 81–100; Lodder, Constructivism, 170 and passim (for the construction of sets); and Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 122. 43. Hoover, Meyerhold, 91–92, 311–15 for the training program; Meyerhold, Meyerhold, 197–202 for his Biomechanical manifesto, with comment by Braun, pp. 183–204, 193–94. 44. Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 126. 45. Rudnitskii, Regissër, 265–66. 46. See Alex Inkeles and David H. Smith, Becoming Modern (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1974), esp. 22, 160–62; Pitirim Sorokin and Robert Merton, "Social Time," American Journal of Sociology, XIII/5 (Mar 1937) 615–29; A. L. Kroeber, Anthropology (New York, 1948) 91-92, 156. 47. E. P. Thompson, "Time, Work-Discipline and Industrial Capitalism," Past and Present, 38 (1967) 56–97 (quotes, 75, 78); Sorokin and Merton, 'Social Time"', 620–21. 48. Pipes, Russia, 142, 157 (citing Klyuchevsky); Preobrazhensky cited in Sochor, Soviet Taylorism," 257; Hindus, Broken, 123; For comparisons, see: Thompson, 'Time," 56–75; Keith Thomas, "Work and Leisure in Pre-Industrial Society," Past and Present, 29 (1964) 50–66; Eugene Genovese, Roll, Jordan, Roll! the World the Slaves Made (New York: Vintage, 1976) 385-94. 49. Lewin, Russian Peasants, 29–32; Maynard, Russia, 27; Hindus, "Henry Ford"'; Elisha Friedman, Russia in Transition: a Businessman's Appraisal (New York: Viking, 1932) 51–53, 172, 214–16. 50. Vakar, Taproot, 115 and passim; Selishchev, Yazyk, 214–17 (on concreteness of language); Sorokin, A Systematic Source Book in Rural Sociology, 3 vols. (Minncapolis: Minnesota University Press, 1930–32,), I, 186–259, III, 338–39, 345–46 (cspecially interesting are Georg Simmel's “Great Cities and Spiritual Life" and Arnošt Blaha's comment on the scythe gesture). 51. Kerzhentsev, Pamyatka, 15. ## Chapter 8: Utopia in Time: Futurology and Science Fiction 1. Svyatlovsky cited in Tamarchenko, '"Nauchnaya fantastika i model revolyutsii,' in Suvin, ed., Twentieth-Century Science Fiction in Warsaw Pact Countries, special issue of Canadian-American Slavic Studies, 18/1-2 (Spring-Summer, 1984) 43. B. I. Gorev, Ot Tomasa Mora do Lenina, 1516–1917 (Moscow: Frenkel, 1922), a long but rather thin work. Publication data on the translations from Helsinki and Leningrad libraries; some are cited in Khazanova, Sov. arkh., 135, n. 26 and pp. 20-42. Academician V. P. Volgin was the most active scholar of classic utopias: see his editions of: Tomas Mor [Thomas More], Zolotaya kniga . . . utopiya (Moscow: Academia, 1935); Foma Kampanella [Tomasso Campanella}, Gorod solntsa (Moscow, 1934), 2nd ed., 1947, an earlier ed. of which is Tomas Kampanella, Gosudarstvo solntsa, 2 ed. (Petrograd, 1918); Robert Ouen [Owen], Izbrannye sochineniya, I (Moscow, 1950). Volgin's major work of the 1920s was Sen-Simon i Sen-Simonizm (1924; 2 ed. Moscow: Kommunisticheskaya Akademiya, 1925). 2. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution (New York: Russell and Russell, n.d.) 252–53, 256. 3. 30 dnei, (1927) 76–92 (esp. 76–77, 80, 82–84). 4. Zhizn i teknhika budushchego (sotsialnye i nauchno-tekhnicheskie utopii), ed. Ar A—n [pseud. for Arkadii Arkan] and E. Kolman (Moscow: Moskovskii Rabochii, 1928). 5. Stephen Lukashevich, N. F. Fedorov (1828–1903): a Study in Russian Eupsychian and Utopian Thought (Newark, Del: University of Delaware Press, 1977); N. Berdyaev, '"N. F. Fë- dorov," RR, 9/2 (April 1950) 124-30; V. V. Zenkovsky, History of Russian Philosophy, 2v., trans. by George Kline (London: Routledge, 1953) II, 588–604. 6. Muraviëv, Ovladenie vremenem; Michael Hagemeister, "Valerian Nikolaevič Muraviev (1883–1931) und das Prometheische Denken' der frühen Sowjetzeit,"in the German reissue (in Russian) of the above (Munich: Sagner, 1983) 1-27; idem., "Die 'Biokosmisten'—Anarchismus and Maximalismus in der frühen Sowjetzeit," in G. Freidhof et al., eds., Studia slavica in Honorem viri doctissimi Olexa Horbatsch (Munich: Sagner, 1983), pt. i, pp. 61–76. Peter Scheibert, "Der Ubermensch in den russischen Revolution," in Ernst Benz, ed., Der Ubermensh (Stuttgart: Rhein, 1961) 179–96; idem., "Revolution und Utopie: die Gestalt der Zukunft in Denken der russischen revolutionären Intelligenz," in H. Barion et al., eds., Epirrhosis: Festgabe fur Carl Schmitt, 2 v. (Berlin: Dunker und Humblat, 1968) 633-49. For the application of Fëdorovism to science fiction, see Konstantin Tsiolkovskii, Vne zemli: nauchno-fantasticheskaya povest (1896; revised, 1917; Moscow, A.N.S.S.S.R., 1958). English tr. in The Science Fiction of Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, ed. Adam Starchild (Seattle: University Press of the Pacific, 1979) 161–332; A. B. Yaroslavskii, Argonauts of the Universe (Argonavty veselennoi, 1926), discussed in Hagemeister, " 'Biokosmisten'," 76; and Leonid Geller, Vselennaya za predelom dogmy: Sovetskaya nauchnaya fantastika (London: Overseas, 1985) 63. The Biocosmists were interested in burial rites for revolutionary heroes, climate control, electrification, and citizen armies. 7. Ingold, Literatur und Aviatik, with fascinating insights on Russian culture (passim); Elizabeth Beaujour, "Architectural Discourse and Early Soviet Literature," JHI (July 1983) 477–95; Bowlt, "The Old New Wave;" Nicholas Daniloff, The Kremlin and the Cosmos (New York: Knopf, 1972) 14, 40 (qu.). Kibalchich's drawings were locked in the police archives until 1918, when they were published by Rynin. 8. Robin Higham and Jacob Kipp, eds., Soviet Aviation and Air Power (London: Brassey's, 1977); A. Boyd, The Soviet Air Force since 1918 (New York: Stein and Day, 1977) 13–14. 9. N. A. Rynin, Mechty, legendy, i pervye fantasii (Leningrad: Pechatnaya, 1928); idem., Luchistaya energiya v fantaziyakh romanistov i v proektakh uchënykh (Leningrad: Profintern, 1930). Both volumes are from his encyclopedic and vividly illustrated Mezhduplanetnye soobshcheniya. When these volumes appeared, Bogdanov's name was already taboo, explaining the otherwise unimaginable absence of any discussion of his novels. The entire set of Rynin's volumes was translated on contract from the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the National Science Foundation in 1970: Interplanetary Flight and Communication, 9 v. (Jerusalem: Israel Program of Scientific Translation). See also Daniloff, Kremlin, 1-65 and Suvin, Metamorphoses, 260. 10. A. F. Britikov, Russkii Sovetskii nauchno-fantasticheskii roman (Leningrad: Nauka, 1970), the standard work, lists only 87 titles, mostly full-length novels, for 1917–1931 (see its bibliography). For the higher count, see Suvin "The Utopian Tradition of Russian Science Fiction," Literaturnaya ucheba, 7/8 (1935) 122-47 and 2 (1936) 118-32; P. Yershov [Ershov], Science Fiction and Utopian Fantasy in Soviet Literature (New York 1954), Research Program on the U.S.S.R. Mimeographed Series, 62; R. Nudelman, "Fantastika, rozhdënnaya revolyutsiei,"'Fantastika 1966 (Moscow, 1967) III, 330–69; Berdt Rullkötter, Die wissenschaftliche Phantastik der Sowietunion (Frankfurt, 1974); McGuire, Red Stars; Suvin, ed., Twentieth-Century Science Fiction]; Stites, 'Fantasy and Revolution: Alexander Bogdanov and the Origins of Bolshevik Science Fiction,"' in Bogdanov, Red Star, 1–16; and Geller, Vselennaya, 49–84. 11. Prospectus to '"Mindscapes: the Geographies of Imagined Worlds," a conference at the University of California, Riverside, 1987. 12. Suvin, "Utopian''; Brooks, "Studies of the Reader in the 1920s"' in Stites, ed., N.E.P. 187-202; idem., "Breakdown in Production and Distribution;" Gooderham, "Komsomol''. For Western science fiction, see Graff Conklin, The Golden Age of Science Fiction (New York: Bonanza, 1946/1980); Nicholls, Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. 13. Suvin, Metamorphoses, 253. 14. Brooks, When Russia. 15. V. A. Itin, Strana Gonguri (Kansk: Gos. izd., 1922). Reprinted in his Strana Gonguri: sbornik povestei (Novosibirsk: Zapadno-Sibirskoe knizhnoe izd., 1983) 20–84. For Itin's life, see ibid., introduction, pp. 3-14; KLE, III; Britikov, Russ. Sov., 98–101; and the introduction to Itin, Kaan Kered (Novosibirsk, 1961) 5-28. On his aviation tales, see Aviatsiya i Khimiya, 1 (1928) 39. 16. Ya. M. Okunev, Gryadushchii mir: utopicheskii roman, 1923–2123 (Petrograd: Priboi, 1923). The printing was 10,000 copies. See also the author's Kommunizm i religiya: sbornik po voprosam antireligioznoi propagandy (Moscow: Moskovskii Rabochii, 1922) 252–54. 17. Okunev, Gryadushchii, 50, 44 (quotes). 18. I. Zhukov, Puteshestvie zvena 'Krasnoi Zvezdy' v stranu chudes: povest (Kharkov: Izd. Vseukr. O-va. Sodeistviya Yunomu Lenintsu, 1924). 19. V. D. Nikolskii, Cherez tysyachu let: nauchno-fantasticheskii roman (Leningrad: Soikin, 1927). It appeared in 15,000 copies as a supplement to Vestnik znaniya. 20. Ibid., 3, 106 (quotes). 21. KLE, IV. 22. Ya. L. Larri, Strana schastlivykh (publitsistskaya povest) Leningrad: Leningrad. Obl. izd., 1931). 23. Ibid., 1–14. I have not identified the editor, Glebov-Putilovskii, apparently a Leningrad worker (judging from the factory that forms part of his name). 24. Eliot Goodman, Soviet Design for a World State (New York: Columbia University Press, 1960) is an example. 25. A convincing exposition of this position, to which I adhere, is Stephen F. Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet Experience: Politics and History Since 1917 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985) 38–70 and passim. 26. See the treatment and quotations in Goodman, Soviet Design, 28–29. 27. Ibid., 31, 37, quotations and discussion. 28. The Soviet Image of Utopia (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1975) 31. 29. Preobrazhensky, From New Economic Policy to Socialism: A Glance into the future of Russia and Europe, tr. Brian Pearce (London: New Park, 1962) 98–116. 30. Okunev, Zavtrashnii den: fantasticheskii roman (Moscow: Novaya Moskva, 1924); A. R. Palei, Golfshtrem (Moscow: Ogonek, 1928); A. R. Belyaev, Borba v efire (Moscow: Molodaya Gvardiya, 1928). On the film Iron Heel, co-authored by Lunacharsky, see McGuire, Red Virgin Soil, 28 and Suvin "Utopian" 151. 31. For the Russian mixture of cosmopolitanism and xenophobia, see Brooks, When Russia, 238-39. 32. On Bukharin's vision, see Goodman, Soviet Design, 427, 429 for examples of non-contextual citation. For more illuminating analyses, see Cohen, Bukharin and Susiluoto, Origins. 33. Struggle in Space, 60 (see next note). 34. Belyaev, Borba. Belyaev (1884–1942), who died during the blockade of Leningrad—and thus lived to see his fantasy nightmares come true--had training in science and technology. His novel also contains a scenario of combat resembling what is now called "star wars." The English translation is Struggle in Space: Red Dream—Soviet American War (Washington: Arfor, 1965) Arfor Classics in Astronautics, III. The preface by the translator Albert Parry is a classic of misinformed Cold War rhetoric. 35. For the images, theories, and realities of women's equality in the 1920s, see Stites, Women's Liberation and Lapidus, Women in Soviet Society. Soviet female characters in science fiction reflected both the image and the reality. They are never the main characters, but play a far more dignified and active role than do those of Western science fiction at that time: see Marlene Barr, ed., Future Females (Bowling Green: Bowling Green University Press, 1981). 36. See the intelligent comments in Gilison, Soviet Image, 24–41, passim. 37. Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 182–84; Gryadushchee, 5–6 (1919) 28; OT, 1 (March 1921), 129; V. Kashnitskii, "Umnaya muzyka''; Efim Zozulya, Grammofon vekov (1919; Moscow: Avrora, 1923) 13–14. Komfut quoted in Lodder, Russian Constructivism, 247. 38. Walter C. Clemens, "Globalistika: The Soviet Union and Global Issues"’(Kennan Institute for Advanced Russian Studies Meeting Report, May 8, 1985). 39. Apollon Karelin, Rossiya v 1930 godu (Moscow: Vserossiskaya Federatsiya Anarkhistov, 1921). Although Anarchists were being arrested at this time, Karelin's book was legally printed in 5,000 copies. For more on Karelin, see Avrich, Russian Anarchists, 113–15, 154-55, 165, 174–76, 201–2, 230, 236; Serge, Memoirs, 120. 40. Voron, raven; vorona crow-the blackest of birds. 41. Karelin, Rossiya, 15, 19 (quotes). 42. For background, see Naum Jasny, Soviet Economists of the 1920s: Names to be Remembered (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972) 200 ff.; Boris Smirenskii, Pero i maska (Moscow: Moskovskii Rabochii, 1967) 66-68; O. Losunskii, “Chayanovskie izdaniya,"'Podëm, 3 (May-June 1968) 135–39. For commentary on the novel: Katerina Clark, "The City versus the Countryside in Soviet Peasant Literature of the Twenties: a Duel of Utopias," in Gleason, Bolshevik Culture, 175–89; and Nonna Shaw, 'The Only Soviet Literary Peasant Utopia," SEEJ, VII/3 (1963) 279–83. 43. Iv. Kremnev [A. V. Chayanov], Puteshestvie moego brata Alekseya v stranu krestyanskoi utopii, pt. I (and only), Moscow: Gos. Izd., 1920. Pref. by V. Orlovskii [V. V. Vorovskii]. Reprinted in Russian (New York: Silver Age, 1981) with preface by Gleb Struve, 5-13. English trans. in R. E. F. Smith, ed., The Russian Peasant in 1920 and 1984 (London: Frank Cass, 1977) 63-107. The 1984 dating of the action had no connection to Orwell, who chose the title for his 1984 by reversing 1948 (Struve's preface to Chayanov). 44. On this important episode in East European history, see John Bell, Peasants in Power: Alexander Stamboliiski and the Bulgarian Agrarian National Union, 1899–1923 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977). 45. Chayanov, Puteshestvie, 45 (qu.). Yu. A. Polyakov, Perekhod k NEPu i Sovetskoe krestyanstvo (Moscow: Nauka, 1967) 346. The rehabilitation occurred in August, 1987. 46. P. N. Krasnov, Za chertopolokhom: fantasticheskii roman (Berlin: Dyakov, 1922). 47. Evgenii Zamyatin, My (1920; New York: Interlanguage Literary Associates, 1967). English trans.: by G. Zilborg (1924: New York: Dutton, 1952); by B. G. Guerney (London: Cape, 1970); and by Mirra Ginsburg (New York: Bantam, 1972). Important related works by Zamyatin: Ostrovityane (1918; Berlin: Grzhebin, 1923), written in England in 1917; Gerbert Uells (Petersburg: Epokha, 1922); Litsa (New York: Inter-Language Literary Associates, 1967, esp. 139–46 and 173–74; A Soviet Heretic: Essays by Yevgeny Zamyatin, ed. Mirra Ginsburg (Chicago: University of Chicago Press). Among the more useful of the endless commentaries on Zamyatin and his novel, see: E. J. Brown, Brave New World, 1984, and We: an Essay on Anti-Utopia (Zamyatin and English Literature), Ann Arbor: Ardis, 1976, qu., 34; idem., '"Zamyatin's We and Nineteen Eighty Four," in P. Stansky, ed., On Nineteen Eighty Four (Stanford: Stanford Alumni Association, 1983) 159– 69; Suvin, 'Utopian," 147, 150; Lewis and Weber, 'Zamyatin, We''; D. Richards, "Four Utopias," SEER, XL (1961–62) 220–28; Patrick Parrinder, 'Imagining the Future: Zamyatin and Wells," Science-Fiction Studies, I/1 (Spring 1973) 17-26; Josephine Woll, "Mixed Media, Mixed Messages: Evgenii Zamiatin, We, and Fritz Lang's Metropolis," ms. 1984 (I thank the author for access to it); William Hutchins, "Structure and Design in a Soviet Utopia: H. G. Wells, Constructivism, and Yevgenii Zamyatin's We,"Journal of Modern Literature, IX/1 (1981–82) 81– 102; Ingold, Literatur und Aviatik, 159; Lenczyc, "Zamjatins glassymbol", On the dystopian background in Russia, see chapter 1. For Europe and America, see Eugen Weber, "The Anti-Utopia of the Twentieth Century," South Atlantic Quarterly, LVIII/3 (Summer 1959) 440-47. 48. The first quotation is from Zamyatin, My, 5; the second from Soviet Heretic, 261 (I have changed the translation slightly). 49. A. K. Voronskii, "Evgenii Zamyatin," (1922), reprinted in his Na styke (Moscow: Gosizd., 1923) 49–75. English trans. by P. Mitchell in RLT, 3 (May 1972) 152–74. For rare references to We, see Yu. Ryurikov, Cherez 100 i 1000 let (Moscow, 1961) 92-93 and Britikov, Russ. Sov., 94-95, 141 (where he compares Zamyatin's with Larri's novel). 50. The above novels certainly do not exhaust the anti-utopian and counter-utopian works of the period. See, for example: L. N. Lunz, [Lunts], The City of Truth (1924) trans J. Silver (London: O'Dempsey, 1929); Andrei Platonov, Chevengur (Paris: Y.M.C.A., 1972), with an interesting preface by Mikhail Geller; and Rossiya i Inoniya (Berlin: Skify, 1920), with works by Esenin, Bely, and Ivanov-Razumnik. 51. Lunacharsky, Sob. soch., II, 452. ## Chapter 9: Utopia in Space: City and Building 1. Starr, Melnikov, 149. 2. See Hamm, City; Bater, St. Petersburg; Bradley, Muzhik. For an interesting parallel, see Andrew Lees, "Critics of Urban Society in Germany, 1854–1914," JHL, XL/1 (January–March 1979) 61–83. 3. Engels, Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science (Anti-Dühring) (Chicago: Kerr, 1935), p. 311; Wells, Russia, 158. Lenin's words came out under prodding and seem terse and perhaps unreflecting. Leo Marx, The Marching in the Garden (New York: Oxford University Press, 1964) 156, 169, 248, passim; Morton and Lucia White, The Intellectual versus the City (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1962) 12, 30, 32, passim. 4. Blackwell, The Beginnings of Russian Industrialization, 1800–1860 (Princeton: Princcton University Press, 1968) 99–119; Walter Pintner, Russian Economic Policy Under Nicholas 1 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1967) 101–2; Zelnik, Labor and Society in Tsarist Russia (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1971) 23-30 (qu. 24). 5. Ibid. 6. See Chapter 1. For the German case, see Lees, "Critics," and Fritz Stern, The Politics of Cultural Despair (New York: Anchor, 1965). 7. Radishchev, Journey, passim: Perovskaya quoted in Engel, Mothers, 113; Zlatovratsky in Wortman, Crisis, 109. B. P. Kozmin, '"Sotsialno-politicheskie i filosofskie vzglyady V. I. Taneeva," in Iz istorii sotsialno-polit. idei, 664-73. On anti-urbanism as an important part of "Provincialism' in the nineteenth century, see Starr, Decentralization and Self-Government in Russia, 1830–1870 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1972) 90–106. 8. Documentation on the sexual question in Stites, Women's Liberation, 178–90. On songs, see Rothstein, "The Quiet Rehabilitation of the Brick Factory," SR, 39/3 (September 1980) 373– 88. 9. On these currents, see Clark, "The City;" Stefani Hoffman, "Scythian Theory and Literature, 1917–1924," in Nilsson, ed., Art, 138-64; Jensen, Nature as Code, passim; Trotsky, "The Rustic or Peasant-Singing Writers," in Literature and Revolution, 90–104, a scornfully dismissive but brilliant essay on the Revolution. The Esenin quotation is from Brown, Mayakovsky, 312. 10. Robert Fishman, Urban Utopias in the Twentieth Century: Ebenezer Howerd, Frank Lloyd Wright, and Le Corbusier (New York: Basic Books, 1977) 21–88; Gordon Cherry, Town Planning in its Social Context (Ayleberry: Leonard Hill, 1973) 1--36; Starr, '"Writings from the 1960s on the Modern Movement in Russia," Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, XXX/2 (May 1971) 170–78; Vegetarianskoe obozrenie (SPb., monthly, 1914-). 11. Starr, "Visionary Town Planning During the Cultural Revolution," in Sheila Fitzpatrick, Cultural Revolution, 207–40 (qu., 208). 12. General information on the Society (Obshchestvo Sovremennykh Arkhitektorov or O.S.A.) and the Disurbanists is drawn from: Starr, "Visionary;" idem., Melnikov; Anatole Kopp, Town and Revolution: Soviet Architechture and Town Planning, 1917–1935, trans. T. Burton (New York: Braziller, 1970); idem., Changer la vie; idem., L'architecture de la periode stalinienne (Grenoble: Presses universitaires, 1978), especially the interviews with surviving architects of the 1920s, pp. 367–405; Hugh Hudson, Jr., " ‘The Social Condenser of Our Epoch': the Association of Contemporary Architects and the Creation of a New Way of Life in Revolutionary Russia," JGO (forthcoming). 13. M. Okhitovich, 'Zametki po teorii rasseleniya," SA, 1–2 (1930) 7–16 and another piece in SA, 4 (1929). Discussion in Starr, 'Visionary"' 212–17 and Kopp, Town, 171–79. 14. Okhitovich, "Zametki,"13–15 (qu., 13). 15. M. O. Barshch and M. Ya. Ginzburg, ‘Zelënyi gorod," SA, 1-2 (1930) 19–36. See also N. A. Milyutin, Sotsgorod: the Problem of Building Socialist Cities (1930), trans. A. Sprague (Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1974). 16. Barshch interview in Kopp, Architecture, 372-78 (qu., 374) 17. Fishman, Urban Utopias, 89–160. 18. Lenin, PSS, XXII, 34; Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, 92; Kruglikov, "Borba sotsializma i kapitalizma v derevne," Bolshevik, 23–24 (December 31, 1927) 55. 19. Lev Kopelev, Education, 90; Brown, Mayakovsky, 88–89; Fueloep-Miller, Mind, 148– 49, 108; Rougle, " 'Express'"; idem., Three Russians, passim; Beaujour, "Architectural Discourse'"'; Clark, "City"'; Dmitrii Maznin, "Gorod budushchego," Yunii Proletarii, 18–19 (September 29, 1919) 10–11, a fantasy tale; Boris Arvatov, "Oveshchestvlennaya utopiya," Lef, 1 (March 1923) 61–64; N. Aseev, "Zavtra," (1923) in Sobranie sochinenii, V (Moscow, 1964) 75-84, which features "the first moving city in the history of mankind"’ called "Aeroplane I' and composed of 6,000 glass buildings with portable apartment modules that fit into them; Avrich, Anarchists, 61–66. 20. Selim Chan-Magomedow [Khan-Magomedov], Pionere der sowjetischen Architecture (Vienna: Locker, 1983). This huge, magnificently illustrated translation of a Soviet work is indispensable for the projects of the 1920s and early 1930s dealing with cities and homes; Kopp, Town, 861; Claes Caldenby, The Vision of a Rational Architechture," in Kleberg and Stites, eds., Utopia, 269–82 (quote from Ginzburg, 272), illustrated; Moisei Ginzburg, Style and Epoch (1924; Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1982) 96–97; Lodder, Russian Constructivism, 169; Berton. Moscow (Kirov qu., 205); Khazanova, ed., Iz istorii Sovetskoi arkhitektury, 1917–1925: dokumenty i materialy (Moscow: A.N.S.S.S.R., 1963) 67–76, richly illustrated projects for workers settlements. 21. Hudson, " ‘Social Condenser'," 3–5 (qu., 3). 22. Ibid., 15-–16; Fishman, Urban Utopias, 161–256; Kenneth Frampton, "Notes on Soviet Urbanism, 1917–1932," Architects' Yearbook, XII (London, 1968) 242-45; Khazanova, Iz istorii Sovetskoi arkhitektury, 1926-1932 gg.: dokumenty i materialy; tvorcheskie obedineniya (Moscow: Nauka, 1970), 128, 132, 140-43. 23. L. Sabsovitch [L. M. Sabsovich], L'U.R.S.S. dans dix ans: plan général de la construction du socialisme: hypothèse (Paris: Bureau d'Editions, 1930), 116–34, 158–62, passim, (qu., 159, 116, 121), all subsequent qu. from this source. Commentary and discussion on this and other works in Starr, "Visionary," 210–11, 231, 233; Khazanova, Sovetskaya arkhitektura pervoi pyatiletki: problema goroda budushchego (Moscow: Nauka, 1980). See also M. Ilin, New Russia's Primer: the Story of the Five Year Plan, trans. G. Counts and N. Lodge (Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1932) which contains a version of Sabsovich for children. 24. Khazanova, Iz istorii (1963), passim; idem., Sovetskaya arkhitektura pervykh let Oktyabrya, 1917–1925 gg. (Moscow: Nauka, 1970); Caldenby and Asa Walden, Kollektivhus: Sovjet och Sverige omkring 1930 (Stockholm: Almquist & Wiksell, 1979) 44, 42–44. See also Kopp, Town, 39. 25. Caldenby, '"Vision," 276 (illustr.); idem, Kollektivhus, 44; Khazanova, Iz istorii (1963) 51–52, 54, 56–57, 60–61, 81–83; Milyutin, Sotsgorod, 5; Kopp, Town, 144; on the Vesnin brothers, see Arkkitehtuurin vallankumous: Naytelly/Revolution in Architecture: Exhibition (Helsinki: Museum of Finnish Architecture, 1985). 26. Hudson, " 'Social Condenser',"8, 13; Caldenby, "Vision," 280 (illustr.); Khazanova, Iz istorii (1970) 98, 126; Milyutin, Sotsgorod, 63 ff. 27. For the debates and the literature, see Stites, Women's Liberation, 346-76. 28. V. Kuzmin, "Problema nauchnoi organizatsii byta," S.A., 1–3 (1930) 14–17. Schedule trans. in Kopp, Town, 153–55. Discussion in Caldenby, Kollektivhus, 85–88. 29. Hudson, " 'Social Condenser'," 10–12; S.A., 4 (1926) 109 (questionnaire, whose replies have not been recorded); Khan-Magomedov, Pionere, 343–98 (illustr.); Kopp, Town, 106– 9, 141–42, 172, 184–86, 198; Caldenby, Kollektivhus, 118–19, a chart showing how major projects divided (about 50/50) on individual kitchens. 30. Ivan Leonidov (New York: Rizzoli, 1981) 52–55, passim. For further products of his fertile architectural imaginatioon: Kopp, Town, 123–26. 31. Starr, Melnikov, 172–83. See also David Joravsky in Fitzpatrick, Cultural Revolution, 114, on therapeutic phalansteries." 32. Starr, "Visionary," 227–34. # Chapter 10: Utopia in Life: The Communal Movement 1. A. Naishtat, et al., Kommuny molodëzhi (Moscow: Molodaya Gvardiya, 1931), 60. 2. The best study of the mir in the revolution is Atkinson, End. 3. M. I. Tugan-Baranovskii, V poiskakh novago mira: sotsialisticheskiya obshchiny nashego vremeni (S.Pb.: Nash Vek, 1913) 96–97; idem., 'Russkaya revolyutsiya, sotsializm, i kooperatwiya," Vestnik kooperatsii, 2-3 (February-March, 1917) 3-15. 4. Wortman, Crisis, 52–53; Tugan-Baranovskii, V poiskakh, 85–99. 5. For the European background of revolutionary communes, see Billington, Fire, 389–402. For the 1860s in Russia see Chapter 1; Brower, Training; Gleason, Young Russia; Stites, Women's Liberation, 105–11; Miller, "Ideology''; Zelnik, "Populists"', 261–63. For prison camp communes, see A. V. Pribylev, V dinamitnoi masterskoi i Kariiskaya politicheskaya tyurma (Leningrad: Gosizdat, 1924) 42–78; Engel, Mothers, 139; Lunacharskii, Revol. Silhouettes, 123. For art communes, N. N. Punina, Peterburgskaya artel khudozhikov (Leningrad: Khudozhnik, 1966) 20-34. 6. Wesson, Soviet Communes, 46-47; Alexander, Emperor, 31; Zelnik, '"Russian Bebels," RR, 35–43 (July 1976) 259–60 ; idem., Radical Worker, 7–13; Bradley, Muzhik, 27, 196–211. 7. L. A. Anokhina and M. N. Smheleva, Byt gorodskogo naseleniya srednei polosy R.S.F.S.R. v proshlom i nastoyashcem (Moscow: Nauka, 1977). Lunacharsky quoted in Peter Juviler, "Contradictions of Revolution: Juvenile Crime and Rehabilitation," in Gleason, Bolshevik Culture, 267. 8. See a brief treatment of this point in Stites, "Kommuunikokeilut ja niiden loppu Venäjän vallankummouksessa (1917–1934)," Tiede ja edistys, 10/1 (1985) 7-21. 9. Basile Kerblay, 'Les utopies communautaires: au banc de la Russie des années vingt," RES, 56/1 (1984) 97–103; Wesson, Soviet Communes, 110–13; Atkinson, End, 219–21; V. P. Danilov, Sovetskaya dokolkhoznaya derevnya (Moscow: Nauka, 1967) 106–53; A. F. Chmyga, Kolkhoznoe dvizhenie na Ukraine (1917–1929 gg.): ocherki istorii (Moscow: Izd. Mosk. U., 1974) 76–79, 90. 10. Cited in Wesson, Soviet Communes, 209–10. 11. Confino, "Russian Customary," 42–43. 12. T. Zelënov, "K istorii vozniknoveniya selsko-khozyaistvennykh kommun i arteli v S.S.S.R. (1918 g.),"KA, 101 (1940) 122–47; Moshe Lewin, Russian Peasants and Soviet Power (New York: Norton, 1975) 107-10. 13. V. N. Meshcheryakov in VOKZ, 4 (December 15, 1918) 121–24; idem., O selskokhozyaistvennykh kommunakh (Moscow: Izd. VTsIK, 1918); Kii [P. V. Pyatnitskii], Selskaya kommuna (Petrograd, 1918); Ya. Zhigur, Organizatsiya kommunisticheskikh khozyaistv v zemledelii (Moscow: VTsIK, 1918); S. S. Kislyanskii, Komu vygodna kommuna i kto eë boitsya (Moscow: Gosizd., 1921). 14. M. Sumatokhin, Davaite zhit Kommunoi! (Moscow: VTsIK, 1918). 15. Wesson, Soviet Communes, 85, 100, 105, 108–9, 126–27; Meshcheryakov, Derevenskaya bednota i put k sotsializmu, 2 ed. (Petrograd: Petro. Sov., 1918); VOKZ, 10–11 (February 9, 1919) 305; Bukharin, ABC, 306, Chmyga, Kolkhoznoe, 80, 96, 98. 16. Wesson, Soviet Communes, 115, 119–21; I. A. Konyukov, Kollektivnoe zemledelie, 3 ed. (Moscow: Novaya Derevnya, 1927) 65, 68, 72, 76; KA, 89–90 (1938) document from October 5, 1918, p. 95–97. 17. Konyukov, Kollektivnoe, 76–79, contains a brief discussion of motives, as do most of the other sources cited here 18. Wesson, Soviet Communes, 142-45; VOKVD, 2 (September 1918) 171–72 (account of a landless peasants' commune in a manor house); KA, 89-90 (1938) 95-97. 19. Wesson, Soviet Communes, 142; V. Tselliarius, Kooperatisiya i borba za sotsializm, 2 ed. (Kharkov: Knigospilka, 1925) 53–54 (qu.); Konyukov, Kollektivnoe, 190. 20. Wesson, Soviet Communes, 148–53; Farson, Black Bread, 175–80. 21. I. P. Yarkov, "Pervye kolkhozy Sibiri (1918–1926 gg.)," Trudy Novosibirskogo Instituta Inzhenerov Vodnogo Transporta, 8 (Novosibirsk: Min. Rechnogo Flota R.S.F.S.R., 1960) 37- 79 (qu. 52); Fëdor Panfërov, '"Chto takoe kommunizm," Oktyabr, XXXVII/1 (January 1960) 103–22 (esp. 104–5). 22. For a few examples, see A. A. Bitsenko, Selsko-khozyaistvennaya kommuna imeni Zinovieva (Moscow: Novaya Derevnya 1924) 3–6, 8-13, passim; Kerblay, "Les utopies"'; Scheffer, Seven, 80. 23. Anthony Sutton, Western Technology and Soviet Economic Development, 3 vols., (Stanford: Hoover, 1968–700) I, 26 ff; Serge, Memoirs, 148–49. 24. Robert Waite, Vanguard of Nazism: The Free Corps Movement in Postwar Germany, 1918–123 (New York: Norton, 1969) 138; Wesson, Soviet Communes, 192–93; Stites, Women's Liberation, 407, 409. 25. V. L. Shveitser and S. M. Shabalova, eds., Besprizornye v trudovykh kommunakh (Moscow: Glavstosvos, 1926); E. Batova, 'Bolshevskaya Trudovaya Kommuna i eë organizator," Yunost, 3 (March 1966) 91-93; G. Belykh and L. Pantaleev, Respublika Shk.I.D. (Moscow: Molodaya Gvardiya, 1932); Stevens, “Children"'; Juviler, "Contradictions." The literature on children's colonies is enormous but has never received a satisfactory synthesis. 26. Petrus, Religious Communes, passim; Wesson, Soviet Communes, 208; Klibanov, Relig. sekt., 219–47; Dunn, Peasants; Christel Lane, The Christian Religion in the Soviet Union (Albany: SUNY, 1970). 27. Naishtat, Kommuny, 14, 17, 21, 80. 28. Khan-Magomedov, Pionere, 342–43; Kulyshev, Part. org., 258; Fisher, Famine, 75. 29. M. Yankovskii, Kommuna sta tridtsati trëkh (Leningrad: Priboi, 1929) 31–32, 177, passim. 30. Ibid., 65–68. 31. Ibid., 70–82. 32. Ibid., 43–50, 11, 125. 33. Ibid., 32, 132–38. 34. Ibid., 84–85, 182, passim; review of Yankovskii in RK, 23–34 (December 31, 1929) 58-62. 35. Mehnert, Youth, 163–86 (quotes, 175, 177, 170). 36. Gooderham, "Komsomol''; Naishtat, Kommuny, 18–19, 52–53, 65; M. Buchel, 'O kollektivakh,"' KM, 3–4 (March-April 1925) 132-34. 37. Dmitriev and Galin, Na putyakh, 14–25; Naishtat, Kommuny, 39, 43, 70. 38. See for example A. Kagan, 45 dnei sredi molodëzhi (Leningrad: Priboi, 1929), the summer diary of a physician. 39. Naishtat, Kommuny, 17–18, 40, 54; A. Grigorovich, Zhivëm (bytovye kommuny), Moscow: Izd. VTsSPS, 1930, 3–12, 29; Kopp, Changer, 164–73. 40. Naishtat, Kommuny, 54. 41. Kopp, Changer, 164. 42. Kopp, Town and Revolution, 109; Grigorovich, Zhivëm, 20; Kopp, Changer, 184; Mehnert, Youth, 182–83 (quote). 43. Grigorovich, Zhivëm, 33; V. Yu. Krupyanskaya, et al., Kultura i byt gornyakov i metallurgov Nizhnego Tagila (1917–1970), Moscow: Nauka, 1974, 113–14. 44. This account is drawn almost wholly from the excellent article by Lewis Siegelbaum, "Production Collectives and Communes and the Imperatives' of Soviet Industrialization, 1929— 1931,"' SR, 45/1 (Spring 1986) 65–84 (qu., 68). 45. Grigorovich, Zhivëm, 3, 18, 23, 25; Mehnert, Youth, 179; Kopp, Changer, 176; A. L. Strong, The Soviets Conquer Wheat (New York: Holt, 1931) 150–53 (qu., 153); Naishtat, Kommuny, 3–8; Kerzhentsev, Bolshevism, 50–52; Wesson, Soviet Communes, 205. 46. Siegelbaum, 'Production Collectives," quotes, 65, 73. Hiroaki Kuromiya of Cambridge University has written a fascinating study of the artel in this period: "The Artel and Social Relations in Soviet Industry in the 1920s." ms. 47. Grigorovich, Zhivëm, 12. 48. Naishtat, Kommuny, 26. 49. Ibid., 83, 58 and Grigorovich, Zhivëm, 13 (quotes). 50. Quoted by Nicholas Riasanovsky in "The Problem of the Peasant"' in Vucinich, Peasant, 272. 51. Grigorovich, Zhivëm, 21. 52. Naishtat, Kommuny, 69–75; Siegelbaum, 'Productive Collectives." 53. Naishtat, Kommuny, 88. ## Chapter 11: War on the Dreamers 1. Berton, Moscow, 202; Savitskii, Razrushayushchie svoyu rodinu; Bezbozhnik u stanka, 24 (1929) 8; Kopelev, Education, 114. 2. See the informed discussion in Fitzpatrick, Education, 140–45; Mehnert, Youth, 25; L. Syrkin, Makhaevshchina (Moscow: Gos. sots.-ek. izd., 1931) 69–76; Avrich, "What is 'Makhaevism?'," 66. 3. For the details, I have looked at party and government press coverage of the November 7 celebrations, 1930–1945, supplemented by research on the same events by Mary Jo Brooks in the London Times, the New York Times, Time Magazine, and Literary Digest. 4. Lane, Rites, 173-80; Pravda (November 9, 1938) 4–6. See Raymond Robbins's comment of May 13, 1935 contrasting May Day 1918 with that of 1932: Stalin, Soch., XIII, 261. 5. Mazaev, Prazdnik, 365; Binns, "Changing Face," 602. 6. Cited in Conrad Donakowski, Muse for the Masses: Ritual and Music in an Age of Democratic Revolution, 1770–1870, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977) 2. 7. Pravda (November 9, 1938) 1–3. Lane, Rites, 173–74. 8. Pospielovsky, Russian Church, I, 163–91; Curtiss, Russian Church, 239–55; Fainsod, Smolensk, 436. 9. Skvortsov-Stepanov, Izbrannye, 26 (quote), 28; Deyateli, 8–9; Petrus, Religious Communes, 58; Yaroslavsky, Protiv religii, II, 449-50; Lunacharskii, Lichnost Khrista v sovremennoi nauke i literature (Moscow: Bezbozhnik, 1928) 18. 10. Curtiss, Russian Church, 239–55, Fainsod, Smolensk, 436; Fitzpatrick, Education, 152; Binns, "Changing Face," 601–2; Kopp, Changer la ville, 86; W. Chamberlin, Russia's Iron Age (Boston: Little Brown, 1934) 316; VKR (Prague) 5/17 (May 1930) 9–12. 11. Curtiss, Russian Church, 252; Gooderham "Komsomol;" Tovarishch Komsomol, I, 425– 28. 12. Ann Rassweiler, "Party and Worker: Dneprostroi Experience, 1927–32," paper given at A.A.A.S.S. meeting, 1980. See also Siegelbaum, Stakhanovism, ch. 6. 13. Dallin, "The Return of Inequality," in Robert V. Daniels, ed., The Stalin Revolution, 2nd ed. (Lexington, Mass.: Heath, 1972) 109; Chamberlin, Russia's Iron Age, 267–73. 14. Walter Connor, Socialism, Politics, and Equality, 71 (qu.). See also Yanowitch, Social and Economic Inequality, 23–24 and Matthews, Privilege, 91–130. 15. I. V. Stalin, Sochineniya, 13 v. (Moscow: OGIZ, 1946–51) and 3 v., ed. R. McNeal (Stanford: Hoover, 1967), VII, 375–76; XII, 108–11. 16. Ibid., XIII, 51–80 (qu., 57), 118–19. 17. Ibid., XIII, 350–56 (qu., 350, 351, 354). 18. Syrkin, Makaevshchina; Mehnert, Youth, 234–34 (qu., 254). 19. Maurice Dobb, Soviet Economic Development, 426; Fitzpatrick, Education, 216, 316 n.; Lewin in Fitzpatrick, Cultural Revolution, 73; Rassweiler, "Party and Worker," 15–18. 20. Simon, Moscow, passim; Matthews, Privilege, 93–99, 113–26; Kopp, Changer, 47; Juviler, Revolutionary Law and Order, 41; Yvon [sic], L.U.R.S.S. telle qu'elle est (Paris: Gallimard, 1938) 162–72, 199–205; Alcan Hirsch, Industrialized Russia (New York: Chemical Catalog, 1934) 40–41, 47–48, 50, 54, 180-81. 21. Mathews, Privilege, 126; Timasheff, Great Retreat, 317–19; Albert Seaton, The Russo-German War, 1941-45 (New York: Praeger, 1971) 88; Bowlt, "Constructivism," 218. 22. Vakar, Taproot, 80. Although the Esperanto movement meant much more than linguistic egalitarianism, it is characteristic of the anti-utopian war that it liquidated the Esperantists: Ulrich Lins, 'Lingvo de cionistoj kaj kosmopolitoj," in Lapenna, Esperanto, 720–47. 23. Fitzpatrick, Education, passim; Lapidus, Women; Sites, Women's Liberation, chs. 11– 12. 24. See the interesting comments on this in Nicholas Lampert, The Technical Intelligentsia and the Soviet State (London: Macmillan, 1979) 135–48; Bailes, Technology and Society; and Dunham, In Stalin's Time. 25. Krzhizhanovskii in Pioner, 20 (October, 1929) 7–9; Nudelman, 'Fantastika,"’ 357–58; Lunacharskii, Sob. soch., II, 444–47, 448–52; Britikov, \*A. V. Lunacharskii,"' 46–51; A. P. Palei, 'Sovetskaya nauchno-fantasticheskaya literatura,"RK, 23–24 (December 31, 1929) 63–68. 26. Ershov, "Science Fiction," 35–43; McGuire, Red Stars, 12–15; Suvin, Metamorphoses, 264; KLE, VII (‘Utopiya''); Brooks, "Breakdown;" Suvin, Twentieth Century, 39 (Tamarchenko) and 43–44 (Heuser). 27. Nudelman, 'Fantastika," 358. 28. Cohen, Bukharin, 31, 100, 362, 364. 29. Geller, Vselennaya, 68-69, 71, 77; Zamyatin, We, 31; ESF, 512. Some writers were able to lament openly the narrow scope of science fiction in the 1930s: Detskaya literatura, 4 (April, 1940), but this had no visible effect. For Nazi science fiction, see: Manfred Nagel, "Nazistika myter,"' Science Fiction nytt (Stockholm), 67 (February, 1982) 8-30 and the exchange of letters on the subject in S-F Studies, VI/I (March, 1979) 114–17. 30. Anna Louise Strong, The Soviets Conquer Wheat (New York: Holt, 1931) 119–44; Wesson, Soviet Communes, 204-5; Edward Phillips, American Technical Assistance, 74–84, 152, based on research in the Ford Company archives 31. Kopp, "Housing and Revolution," unpublished paper, Kennan Institute, May, 1981; Hudson, " 'Social Condenser',"; Star, "Visionary." 32. Ibid.; Hudson, “ 'Social Condenser'." For an account of Social Democratic housing in Vienna at the time, see Traum und Wirklichkeit: Wien, 1870-1930, 2 ed. (Vienna: Historical Museum, 1985) 640–57. 33. Kopp, Architecture, 376, 380, 401–4. 34. Ibid., 403; Berton, Moscow, 219–30; Mazaev, Prazdnik, 375; Beaujour, "Architectural Discourse," 494. 35. Kopp, "Housing". 36. Stalin, Soch., XIII, 352–57. 37. For various kinds of hostility to communes, see: Konyukov, Kollektivnoe, 35–37, 70- 71; Mehnert, Youth, 152; Wesson, Soviet Communes. 38. Klibanov, Religioznoe sektantsvo i sovremennost (Moscow: Nauka, 1969) 219–59. Robert Conquest tells of a group of Old Believers who found undisturbed isolation in a remote settlement until discovered in 1950: Harvest of Sorrow: Soviet Collectivization and the Terror-Famine (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), 141-42. 39. Naishtat, Kommuny, 22–23; Mehnert, Youth, 66, 249–57. 40. Kopp, Town, 111, 155, 184, 207; Naishtat, Kommuny, 86; Kerzhentsev, Bolshevism for Beginners. trans. I. Low (Moscow: Tsentrizdat, 1931) 81-82; Grigorov, Stary, 77. El Lissitzsky [L. M. Lisitskii], Russia: an Architecture for World Revolution, tr. E. Dluhosch (1930; Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1970) 184–87. 41. Interviews in Kopp, Architecture, 375 (Barshch), 380-82 (Rozenfeld), and 398, 399 (Blumenfeld). 42. Simon, Moscow, 143–72. 43. Siegelbaum, "Production''; Kaganovich in Stalin and Kaganovich, Otchët tsentralnogo komiteta XVI sezda VKP (b) (Moscow: Gos. izd., 1930), 107. Kaganovich, a practitioner of harsh irony, evoked laughter from his audience at the congress by telling of a factory manager joining a production commune. See also Kuromiya, '"Artel." 44. J. A. C. Brown, The Social Psychology of Industry (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1954) passim. 45. Mehnert, Youth, 253; Grigorov, Stary, 83–84; Stalin, Soch., XIII, 352–53; Nikolai Pogodin, 'Derzost,"' Sobranie dramaticheskikh proizvedenii, 5 vols. (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1960- 61), 1, 105–198 (117). 46. Zamyatin, We, 109. ## Chapter 12: Conclusion 1. Jasny, Soviet Economists, 135; Moshe Lewin, Political Undercurrents in Soviet Economic Debates (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974) 97–124. 2. Ibid. and 357-65; Tucker, "Stalinism as Revolution from Above,"' in Tucker, ed., Stalinism, (New York: Norton, 1977) 91–92; Mehnert, Youth, 67, 191; Fitzpatrick, Education, 161– 62. 3. Stalin, Problems of Leninism (Peking: Foreign Languages Press, 1976) 849, 851. 4. Lewin, "Society, State, and Ideology," 62, 64, 74. 5. Roy Medvedev, All Stalin's Men, trans. H. Shukman (New York: Anchor, 1985) 113, 118, 120, 124 (qu.). 6. Lieberstein, "Technology," 53–55; Richard Vidmer, “Soviet Studies of Organization and Management,"' SR 40/3 (Fall, 1981) 404–22; Bailes, "American Connection'' 7. Tatur, Wissenschaft. Arbeitsorg., 34–51; Lieberstein, "Technology," 56-58; William Chase and Lewis Siegelbaum, "Worktime and Industrialization in the U.S.S.R., 1917–1941," ms.; John Littlepage, In Search of Soviet Gold (New York: Harcourt, 1937) 238-52—one of the most vivid accounts of Stakhanovism as a social frenzy in 1935; Maurice Dobb, Soviet Economic Development Since 1917 (New York: International Publishers, 1948) 429–32; Simon, Moscow, 179–90; and Gastev, Kak nado rabotat, 316-471. The complexities and nuances of Stakhanovism are exposed with great clarity by Siegelbaum in Stakhanovism and the Politics of Productivity in the USSR, 1935–41 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988). 8. Smith "Taylorism," 20-21; Susiluoto, Origins, 147; and information from Yuri Gastev. 9. Lewin, "Society, State, and Ideology," 44, 54; Fitzpatrick, Education, 8, 59, 158, 249– 52, passim; idem, '"Cultural Revolution as Class War," in Cultural Revolution, 3–4, 33, 35, 39. 10. Lewin, "Society, State, and Ideology,"' 54–59, 72; Vakar, Taproot; A. R. Tullock, "The 'Man vs. Machine' Theme in Pilnyak's Machines and Wolves,"' RLT, 8 (1974) 329–39. 11. Fitzpatrick, Cultural Revolution, passim. 12. See the works of Fitzpatrick cited above and her Russian Revolution, 1917-1932 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1982). 13. Tucker, "Does Big Brother Really Exist?," in Irving Howe, ed., 1984 Revisited: Totalitarianism in Our Century (New York: Harper, 1983) 102. 14. Timasheff, Great Retreat, passim; Hindus, Great Offensive, 272–73; Starr, Red and Hot; Medvedev, All Stalin's Men, 12 15. Hough in Fitzpatrick, Cultural Revolution, 248; H. Stein, "Russian Nationality," Ethos (Winter 1976); Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind (New York: Norton, 1971), 41, 49, 63, 67. 16. Stalin, Problems of Leninism, 783, 820. 17. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, ed. Hans Gerth and C. Wright Mills (New York: Oxford University Press, 1958), 249; Gorchakov, Istoriya, 88 (the mock trials); Fueloep-Miller, Mind and Face, 140. For the purge trials as ritual see: The Great Purge Trial, ed. Robert Tucker and Stephen Cohen (New York: Universal, 1965); Cohen, Bukharin; Robert Conquest, The Great Terror (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1968); and Nathan Leites and Elsa Bernaut, Ritual of Liquidation (Glencoe: Free Press, 1954). 18. A. F. Zhuravlëv, "Okhranitelnye obryady, svyazannye s padezhom skota, i ikh geograficheskoe rasprostranenie," Slavyanskii i Balkanskii folklor (Moscow: Nauka, 1978), 71–94. On the function of "transparency'' in revolution, see Lynn Hunt, Politics, Culture, and Class in the French Revolution (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984) 44-46 19. Timasheff, Great Retreat, 173: Istoriko-revolyutsionyi kalendar, 1939 ed. A. V. Shestakov (Moscow, 1939) 631-49; A. Belyakov, Iz Moskvy v Ameriku cherez Severnyi Polyus (Moscow, 1938), 14-15; L. Savelev, Shturm Zimnego (Moscow: Shkolnaya Biblioteka, 1939). Komar and Melamid, in "In Search of Religion,"’ relate that reporductions of Ilya Repin's painting of Ivan the Terrible and his son and of Nikolai Ge's Peter the Great and son were used in the 1930s to illustrate boxes of chocolates. Further documentation in Stites, 'Stalin: Utopian or Antiutopian' in J. Held, ed., The Cult of Power: Dictators in the Twentieth Century (Boulder: East European Monographs, 1983), 77–94. 20. Kopelev, Education, 244. 21. For Stalin as father, see Katerina Clark, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980), 114–35. Vakar, Taproot, 79, 81, 86; Stites, "Stalin,"87– 88. And for Stalin-as-tsar-batyushka among prison inmates: Mandelstam, Hope against Hope, 263 and Evgeniya Ginzburg, Journey into the Whirlwind (New York: Harvest, 1967), 20, 22, 214, 283. 22. Tvorchestvo narodov S.S.S.R., ed. A. M. Gorky et al. (Moscow: Pravda, 1938), 115, 124, and passim (see illustrations); Dzhambul, Kolybelnaya pesnya (Moscow: Detskaya Literatura, 1938); New York Times, November 10, 1942. 23. N. S. Khrushchëv, The Crimes of the Stalin Era, ed. Boris Nicolaevsky (New York: New Leader, 1956), p. s-7; Aleksei Stakhanov, Rasskaz o moei zhizni (Moscow: Ogiz., 1937), 44– 47. 24. Engels, 'On Authority,"' (1872) in Tucker, ed., The Marx-Engels Reader, 2 ed. (New York: Norton, 1978), 733; A. M. Arzamastsev, Kazarmennyi 'Kommunizm' (Moscow: Mezhdunarodnye otnosheniya, 1974), 19–25; A. I. Volodin, Utopiya i istoriya (Moscow: Izd. polit. lit., 1976), passim. 25. The samizdat publication Feniks quoted in Grani, 27/52 (1962) 126. See also Petr Vail and Aleksandr Genis, '"Stroiteltsvo utopii," Grani, 137 (1985), 157–90. Nekrich and Heller, Utopia in Power; and the comic dystopia by Vladimir Voinovich, Moscow, 2040 (New York: Harcourt-Brace, 1986). 26. For a sharp example of anti-utopianism, see Adam Ulam, 'Socialism and Utopia," in Frank Manuel's collection, Utopias and Utopian Thought (Boston: Beacon, 1966), 116-34; cf. the Manuels’ intelligent speculation about the future of utopia in the concluding chapter of Utopian Thought in the Western World. 27. Kopelev, Education, ix-xi (qu., ix); Tucker, Soviet Political Mind, 133. 28. Bogdanov, "Engineer Menni" in Red Star, 204. 29. Boris Kagarlitsky, "The Intelligentsia and the Changes,"New Left Review, 164 (1987) 5-26.