# CONCLUSION

## Software, hardware, and social media

In 1977 Alan Kay and Adele Goldberg imagined that a computer would become a “metamedium” that would contain “a wide range of already-existing and not-yet-invented media.” Exactly as they predicted, computers have been used to invent a number of new types of media that are not simulations of prior physical media. The examples include navigable three-dimensional spaces constructed with computer graphics, media databases, or “sim” video games such as SimCity, The Sims, and Civilization. And, of course, the Internet in particular has been a very productive host for inventing new types of communication and collaboration: email, forums, blogs, microbloging (e.g. Twitter), wiki, RSS, social networks, etc.

At the same time, the computer metamedium was also evolving in a second direction. While it indeed came to contain “a wide range of already-existing” media, I have argued that once each of these media was simulated in a computer their identities changed. Sutherland, Engelbart, Nelson, Kay, and other inventors of computer metamediums understood that the simulations of previously existing physical or electronic media could add many new properties to these media. As Kay and Goldberg wrote in their article, a simulated medium can become a “new medium with new properties.”

A computer “breathes new life” into the physical and electronic media it simulates. Media can become “dynamic” (to use another of Kay’s terms which he preferred to “interactive”). They can also be “intelligent”: think of Sketchpad, which could automatically “clean up” the sketches made by designers by satisfying constraints such as parallelism. Further, they can become collectively sharable and collectively “editable”—think of large-scale social software projects such as Wikipedia and OpenStreetMap. Media objects such as pictures, sound, video, text, and code can leap from machine to machine in a truly magical fashion: from a mobile phone to a media player, then to a memory card, a laptop, a netbook, the Web, and so on and so on. Imagine that you live in the sixteenth century and you are told that you can order an image in a painting to travel by itself and appear in another painting in another country, or that a text in one book can lift itself and replace a text in another book? And yet this is exactly what many of us are doing every day without even thinking how magical this is.

I think that the scale, diversity and radicalism of these “additions”—those already invented and many more yet to be invented in the future—is of such magnitude that exploring what can be created with them will occupy us for a long time. And this is one of the reasons why the “digital revolution” is di!erent from all previous techno-cultural revolutions. The ability to simulate not simply one or two, but most media in a computer—combined with computer abilities to control processes in real-time, calculate, transform inputs, test what/if scenarios, and send information over networks—opens a practically unbounded space of creative possibilities.

As we followed the evolution of the computer medium from the first stage of invention and experimentation (1960s–1970s) to the second stage of commercialization and wide adoption (1980s–1990s), we discovered the third direction of the computer metamedium evolution—hybridization. Translated into software, di!erent types of media started acting like species within a common ecology—in this case, a shared software environment. Once they were “released” into this environment they begin interacting, mutating, and making hybrids. Both the simulated and new media types—text, hypertext, still photographs, vector graphics, digital video, 2D animation, 3D models and animation, navigable 3D spaces, maps, location information, messages and scripts—became building blocks for many new media combinations. As my examples illustrate, such hybrids can be found at di!erent scales—from largescale software systems such as Google Earth to the single images and short motion graphics created by individual designers.

The rise of social media and social networking on the web in the middle of the 2000s, their expansion to mobile platforms in the next few years, and the development of apps markets for these platforms lead to new types of hybrids. The functional elements of social and mobile media—search, rating, wall posting, subscription, text messaging, instant messaging, email, voice calling, video calling, etc.—form their own media ecosystem. Like the ecosystem of techniques for media creating, editing and navigation realized in professional media software during the 1990s, this new ecosystem enables further interactions of its elements. These elements are combined in a variety of ways on di!erent platforms and in di!erent social media apps. New “features” of social and mobile software enter this ecosystem, and expand the pool of its elements.

The technologies behind these elements, such as multi-tier web applications and server-side scripting, make creating new combinations and new elements particularly easy in comparison to desktop applications.<sup>1</sup> While new versions of desktop applications such as Photoshop, InDesign or Maya that may contain new techniques are released infrequently, online applications such as Facebook, YouTube or Google Search can be updated by their companies very frequently (both Google and Facebook update their code daily) and new features can be added at any time.

The competition between leading social network services has been one engine of new elements as well as variations on existing elements. To give two examples from 2011, Google+ introduced the “Circles” feature to enable users to organize other people using the service into groups and to control what they post and share with each group;<sup>2</sup> Facebook introduced a Subscribe button to allow its users to follow public updates from particular users they like.<sup>3</sup> In the same year, the new social photo sharing service Pinterest rose meteorically, due to its new features such as a flexible layout of photos in contrast to the fixed grid layout of Facebook and Google+.

While this book focused on the evolution of software for media creation and editing, this evolution is intrinsically connected with the parallel development of hardware, including desktops, and later laptops and mobile platforms, networks, servers, render farms, video cards, displays, and so on. More high resolution displays, larger and cheaper storage, faster networks, easier connectivity between devices for media capture, storage, editing, distribution, and playback—all these developments automatically extend the capacities of computational media, changing what can be imagined and designed. For example, a computer display with 35,840 x 8,000 pixel resolution (e.g. the HIPerSpace super-visualization computer that my lab has been fortunate to use since 2008) is not only quantitatively but also qualitatively di!erent from a display which only has 1024 x 768 pixels (the desktop standard in the 1990s).<sup>4</sup> Similarly, the experience of using the Internet via broadband connection is qualitatively di!erent from a modem to dial-in via analog telephone line (also the standard in the 1990s).

When Kay’s colleagues implemented various media editors on their “interim Dynabook” in the first part of the 1970s, most of this software could not compete with their physical and electronic equivalent tools. I remember my experience working on a first generation Macintosh in 1984; it could only show sixteen levels of grey on a 512 x 384 pixel screen measuring 9 inches. Obviously this was not su"cient for me to immediately drop my oil brushes and paints and switch to computers. So, in some sense, the first period of media computerization—between the completion of Sketchpad in 1963 and the release of PageMaker in 1985—was theoretical. During this period, the conceptual principles and the key algorithms necessary for detailed simulation of physical media were developed, before the su"ciently cheap hardware was available. For instance, during the 1960s many computer scientists learned about Sketchpad by reading Sutherland’s PhD thesis since the machine on which it run—the TX-2 computer—existed only at MIT. (This is another interesting characteristic of computer media revolution—it was theorized in detail before it occurred in practice.)

But during the second part of the 1990s PC hardware become advanced enough to run simulations of most media at a su"cient fidelity that was comparable with the professional standards already in place. This included software for graphic design, CAD, 3D modeling, 2D and 3D animation, print layout, digital photo manipulation, and audio and video non-linear editing. In many cases, these applications were now responding to users’ actions su"ciently fast to approach the level of interactivity conceptualized by Kay and Goldberg in 1977 (although 3D animation and video compositing even today may require long rendering times). As a result, simulated media became truly useful, and also accessible, to large numbers of people outside of computer laboratories and large media companies. Within half a decade, most culture professionals abandoned physical media for their simulated equivalents.

When I visited well-known electronic musician, writer and artist DJ Spooky in his Tribeca apartment in New York in January 2005, I did not find any musical instruments, traditional or electronic. The only “instrument” Paul Miller (aka DJ Spooky That Subliminal Kid) owned was his 15-inch PowerBook laptop, made by Apple. This was his “Dynabook”: a “self-contained knowledge manipulator in a portable package the size and shape of an ordinary notebook.”<sup>5</sup> Although this “Dynabook” did not have Smalltalk, it ran another programming environment which was powerful, fast and allowed for visual programming—MAX, the language of choice worldwide for tens of thousands of electronic musicians, VJs, dancers, theatre performers and others working with di!erent forms of real-time performance.

While the evolution of hardware enabled dissemination of media software to professional communities in the 1990s, in the 2000s this evolution also enabled the new stage in software design and use—social media (2004–). The few companies which dominated the field of professional media applications (Adobe, Apple, Autodesk) were joined by a multitude of new companies and countless start-ups focused on developing tools and services for the Web and mobile platforms.

The new software categories include social networking (e.g. Facebook), micro-content services (e.g. Twitter), media sharing websites (YouTube, Vimeo, Picasa, Flickr, etc.); consumer-level software for media organization and light editing (e.g., iPhoto); blog editors (Blogger, WordPress); and many others. Keep in mind that software—especially web and mobile applications and services designed for consumers—continuously evolves, so some of the categories above, their popularity, and the features of particular applications and social network services may change by the time you are are reading this. One graphic example is the shift in the identity of Facebook. During 2007, it moved from being yet another social media application that was competing with MySpace to a “social OS” that aimed to combine the functionality of previously di!erent applications in one place—replacing, for instance, stand-alone email software for many users.)

None of the software apps and websites of the “social media era” function in isolation. Instead, they participate in the larger ecology, which includes search engines, recommendation engines, blogging systems, RSS feeds, and other web technologies; inexpensive consumer electronic devices for capturing and accessing media (digital cameras, mobile phones, music players, video players, digital photo frames, internet enabled TVs); and technologies that enable transfer of media between devices, people, and the web (storage devices, wireless technologies such as Wi-Fi and WiMax, and communication standards such as USB and 4G). Without this ecology most web services and mobile apps would not be possible. Therefore, this ecology needs to be taken into account in any discussion of social networks and their software—as well as consumer-level content access and media development software designed to work with web-based media sharing sites. And while the particular elements and their relationship in this ecology are likely to change over time—for instance, almost all media content may eventually be available over computer networks; communication between devices may similarly become fully transparent; and the very rigid physical separation between people, devices they control, and “non-smart” passive space may become blurred—the very idea of a technological ecology consisting of a number of interacting parts which include software is not unlikely to go away any time soon. Thus, if one day I were to write a detailed account of social media, I would need to discuss consumer electronics, network architectures and protocols and other elements of this ecology as much as the social software itself.