# Corporate Identity and the Future

alliances that exist between the various members of the European aerospace industry exemplifies this.

Here, consistency of attitude and performance is paramount for any kind of lasting success. A company that is an unsatisfactory supplier must not expect to be favourably regarded as a potential partner. Mud sticks.

There are also the opinion-formers. Groups who may not have day-to-day contact with the organization but who see it in comparison with its peers from some distance: journalists, financial analysts, bankers, and so on.

Nobody lives in a vacuum. It is a mistake to believe that each of these audiences lives tidily in its own little box. People buy things, so a financial analyst may also be a customer. People hold opinions that affect their judgment. A journalist might also be an environmentalist. Individuals are influenced - often unfairly – by personal experience. I know a powerful journalist on a responsible newspaper who persists in abusing London Regional Transport whenever he sees an opportunity, simply because his family constantly complain about the inadequacy of public transport in the metropolis. He personally uses a car.

Schools, universities and other educational institutions, trade bodies of various kinds: all represent different external audiences. These may well have conflicting attitudes towards an organization. A university may like a local chemical company as an employer but dislike it as a polluter. The attitudes of the university can be ameliorated in the long term if the company engages itself in a proper dialogue over a wide range of issues, but this isn't simply a matter of patronage, of giving money away; it's a matter of showing where mutual interest lies and of projecting a consistent idea.

Then there is central and local government, whose attitudes may at crucial moments become critical even for the survival of the enterprise. The natural relationship between government and industry is for the most part characterized by mutual indifference, punctuated by bouts of ambivalence and hostility. This is unsatisfactory for all parties. The thoughtful corporation cultivates its political contacts over years.

The British government of the 1980s did a deal to sell most of its nationalized ailing truck industry to GM -a course that would have been sensible for both parties. British public opinion, however, rejected it as a sell-out to foreign interests. The government caved in, and both sides suffered. Of course, the weakness of the government was to blame, but so was GM, who had operated in Britain for threequarters of a century, whose trucks had powered the British army for generations and who had brought considerable prosperity to a number of Britain's communities. Too late, it recently ran an intelligent corporate advertising campaign in the British media, focusing on the benefits – economic, technical and social – that it has certainly brought to the country. But the major opportunity in the truck business has gone. The lesson from this cautionary tale is not just that you have to be consistent in communications over the long term; it is that audiences overlap. For instance, legislators sit in parliament as representatives oflocal communities and as members of a political party. The sad fact is that most people are often ignorant and misinformed, which means that they can sometimes be misled. And in turn this means that unless the corporation is really consistent in projecting its identity it will probably become a victim of rumour, gossip and unsubstantiated myth.

There is only so much that each of us as individuals is able, or prepared to absorb. Most people are only vitally interested in and knowledgeable about the few things that directly concern them. Our prime concerns are a jumble of social, business and personal matters. Some of us have immense knowledge about matters of special interest to us – football, popular music, model railways, Napoleon. But although there is a plethora of information available from every conceivable source, although the information technology by which we are surrounded grows more sophisticated daily, our poor old brains stay much the same.

We only take in the very few things that we have to, or that really absorb us. This inevitably means that we sometimes express opinions or advance arguments about serious and complex matters based on the flimsiest knowledge. The fact that most of us don't know what we are talking about most of the time doesn't seem to inhibit us from expressing powerful prejudices.

As the corporation is absorbed into the mainstream of society, it will inevitably become a major topic for discussion. Unless the corporation takes active steps to change things, the discussion surrounding it will for the most part be ill-informed, partial and distorted. It will be based on halfdigested, inaccurate, third-hand information mixed up with comment, gossip and myth - taxi-driver talk. We all do it. We all listen to, are influenced by and spread unreliable gossip. We extravagantly praise or blame organizations often on the basis of a single encounter or even on hearsay. TWA is dreadful’, ‘The police àre thugs’, Bloomingdales has awful service': these are typical of the kind of illconsidered remarks that influence us, and that we make ourselves.

As society becomes more aware of corporate behaviour, the corporation will have more cause to maintain and project its corporate identity. Everything that the corporation does in every way communicates. It will have to demonstrate what it is and what it stands for through consistency of behaviour and performance to its own staff, its customers and all its other audiences – the very sources from whom we, the general public, derive our opinions. If the corporation does this successfully, it means that rumour, myth, gossip and hearsay will for the most part be consistent and favourable - and that, in an imperfect world, isas much as anyone can expect.

Inevitably, corporate identity and its management have a crucial role in all this. It is only the most powerful, ubiquitous, well-organized, heavily backed, visually appealing, effectively communicated corporate identity programmes that will break through into people's consciousness.

Where a corporate identity programme is truly integrated, where it involves every element, where it is communicated with consistency and commitment, it has a chance. Where there is hesitation, lack of coordination, disagreement, there will be perpetual confusion in the minds of the audiences, and myths of a destructive kind will reign unbridled.

So the corporation has problems of both identity and communication. The realization that these problems exist is growing, although it is still partial and uneven. Nevertheless, the corporation is looking for help. It will not be able fully to diagnose its own ailments. It may believe that it has a whole series of problems in the field ofidentity, behaviour and communication, only some of which are linked. In any event, although it may, and increasingly it does, turn to corporate identity consultants for help, it may also turn to more traditional and long-standing advisers for assistance.

If you didn't know what corporate identity was, but you vaguely felt, as a CEO, that you had a problem with communication, you might turn to your traditional communications adviser– the advertising agency. Advertising agencies are the biggest, richest, most prominent players in the communications trade. They have been around for a long time; some of them have world-famous names and they are deemed to have practically legendary powers to communicate and persuade practically anybody about practically anything. That's why some corporations assume that their natural partner in any activity involving image and communication is the advertising agency.

Anybody who has had intimate dealings with an advertising agency knows that this portrait of the advertising company as ubiquitous and expert communicator is nonsense. Advertising agencies make their money out of creating advertising for massmarket products and services. They have therefore developed considerable expertise around one of the corporation's target audiences – the final consumer. But they have never needed to learn much about other target groups, let alone matters to do with design or behaviour. They are inflexible, inappropriate and expensive when used outside their normal area of activity. If you push them a little it's possible to persuade advertising agencies to direct their activities at the trade, the financial community and other opinion-formers, and even recruits. But they have no interest or experience in dealing with internal audiences, and have only a superficial understanding of the corporate identity process.

Some people who work in the advertising. world are, of course, gifted communications consultants. These individuals have the ability to counsel their