# INTRODUCTION ne of our theories as publishers is to bring out the kind of books we would want to read—even if we did not publish them. So, when the manuscript of Designing for People came to the office, it became evident after reading the first ten pages that this was one of those one-out-of-a-hundred occasions: to have the first reading of a book I would buy if it were published elsewhere—even in a foreign language. I had known the author casually, and had realized that he had made my life comfortable and pleasant by having designed a number of things I had enjoyed: my R.C.A. radio, for instance, the Twentieth Century Limited, which so often carried me to Chicago, the Lockheed airplane which, when I was in a hurry, carried me comfortably across continents and oceans, the Ingraham alarm clock, which each morning performed the disgusting job of waking me up with à minimum of aggravation. Here, in this manuscript, I could read at first-hand how and why the author had made those plane rides so comfortable, or why my wife actually enjoyed vacuuming the living room with a Hoover. And it was especially fascinating to realize what my friend, H.D., had done at the Bell Telephone Laboratories to help keep their millions of subscribers happy as well as their telephone operators so uniformly cheerful and tolerant. As the publisher, I would like to share my all too scant knowledge of the author with the reader of this book. How, for instance, can one man know all those things about engineering, human anatomy, the psychological effect of color and aesthetics on the human soul, advertising, cost accounting and that vague concept of merchandising called “consumer preference"? There is one general answer to that question: genius. Genius, at least in accordance with my private definition of that much-misused word. A genius, it seems to me, is a man or woman who combines an enormous amount of “knowhow" with the purity of outlook of a child. Somehow, somewhere, Dreyfuss acquired a formidable accumulation of technical information in such diverse fields as plastics, theater, industrial production, floor coverings, sound, psychiatry, double-entry bookkeeping, painting and farm machinery. Yet, he has always harnessed this formidable knowledge to a youthful—almost childlike—-approach to what makes all these things tick. A shorter equivalent of the preceding sentence can be found in that wonderful word, empathy. For empathy Dreyfuss most notably has—-with an engineer in a factory in Dayton, with a housewife on a budget where a dime is far more important than its use as a piker's tip, with a grandmother who is plain scared of going up in one of those newfangled airplanes, with our General Staff in Washington when it became the nerve center of an apparatus charged with fighting World War II. His biography is relatively simple. He was born in 19o4 in New York City and (except for two years at the Ethical Culture School) attended the New York City Schools. By the time he had reached his mid-twenties he had become one of Broadway's most successful stage designers, and was pioneering in the then fledgling profession of industrial design. When Dreyfuss opened his frst office, he bought a 25- cent philodendron plant. Over the course of the next twenty-five years, this plant has grown to fantastic proportions, but it still breathes its air in the otherwise dignified and sumptuous surroundings of the present Dreyfuss ofice. Henry is sentimental about it and is therefore very happy when clients and friends who know about the plant's history come in and pay even greater attention to it than to the latest blueprints or mock-ups of new industrial designs he is working on. These, then, are some of the simple facts of Dreyfuss' beginnings. Like most biographies, they omit many far more interesting things that lie beneath the surface. Many of these will be found in the chapters of Designing for People. As a background, a report of a few personal characteristics of the author might be in order. H.D. flies about 1oo,ooo miles each year—mostly in planes he designed himself. His West Coast office is in South Pasadena, about a hundred yards from his home; his East Coast office is within a stone's throw of the Plaza Hotel in New York. He wears only brown suits, and nothing will make him change. He loves shopping for strange articles in strange stores. He insists on sharing credit for his success not only with his wife and associates, but also with every engineer, executive and advertising man with whom he works on a product. He drinks little. He doesn't smoke, but always has every brand of cigarette available for his friends. There is no obvious evidence in his life of any hobbies except that of an abiding and intensive interest in the daily lives of his fellow Americans. Thus, he enjoys walking through department and nickel and dime stores to see what people are buying, and reading books—even unpopular ones. He is forever making mental notes of what people like, and sends an endless series of very special, and often very amusing, gifts to friends—unusual flowers, books on out-ofthe-way subjects, paintings and prints, phonograph records, special kinds of coffee, menus from out-of-the-way places in Europe with special inscriptions and drawings of his own. He has developed a technique of drawing upside down so that his companion can see what he is designing or explaining from the other side of the table.\* He loves the theater, and sees many shows several times. But, most of all, Dreyfuss wanders over the world being empathic with service station men, ceramic designers, children, animals, proprietors of snack bars, ships' officers, owners of houses, renters of apartments. Perhaps this is why his career, as well as this book, is so aptly called Designing for People. RICHarD L. SIMoN \*Dreyfuss made the marginal sketches that appear in this book right side up.