# Romanticism to Realism In the last decade of the eighteenth century and the first of the nineteenth, attitudes to the arts, as to life in general, underwent a profound change which has influenced Western thought to the present day. Out of the turbulence of the revolutionary epoch there emerged ideas which soon became basic assumptions for artists, architects, writers, musicians and the public for whom they worked - ideas about the artist's individual creativity, the uniqueness of his work and his relationship to the rest of society, about artistic sincerity and integrity, about the relative importance of expression and representation and, above all, about the power of the artist to transcend logical processes of thought and break through to states of mind beyond or below conscious control. An art based on the optimism of the Enlightenment and of its faith in reason and human perfectibility could not long survive the French Revolution. The insufficiency of reason, the power of fanaticism and the role of chance in human affairs, the bewildering internal contradictions which make such rational concepts as those of liberty and equality irreconcilable, had all been made painfully apparent by the course the Revolution took. Initial, eminently reasonable reforms installing a constitutional monarchy had led to republicanism and thence, uncontrollably, to the Terror and the 'despotism of Liberty', followed by the autocracy of Napoleon's imperial rule. These political events coincided with almost equally revolutionary changes in philosophy. Science now seemed to make the universe more, rather than less, mysterious. Isaac Newton's mechanistic conception of creation - an ## THE VISUAL'ARTS 8oo Benoist, Portrait of a Black Woman (15.6) 1814 Goya, The Third of May 1808 (15.8) 1814-15 Constable, Stour Valley and Dedham Church (15,21) c.1817-18 Friedrich, The Wanderer (15.19) 1819 Géricault, The Raft of the 'Medusa' (15.12) 1824-5 Constable, The Leaping Horse (15, 22) 1830 Delacroix, Liberty (15.17) 1834 Corot, Volterra (15,28) 1839-52 Barry andPugin, Houses of Parliament (15.34) 1840 Turner, The Slave Ship (15.24) 1841-52 Upjohn, Trinity Church (15.35) 1845Bingham, Fur Traders (15.48) 1849-50 Courbet, A Burial at Ornans (15.38) 1852-62 Millet. The Man withthe Hoe (15.39) 1859-63Ingres, Turkish Bath (15.14) 1863Manet, Luncheon on the Grass (15,40). O'Sullivan, Gettysburg (15.57) 1867Manet, The Execution of Emperor Maximilian (15.41) 1875 Eakins, The Gross Clinic (15.54) 1878Muybridge, Galloping Horse (15.58) 648 ## HISTORICAL LANDMARKS 1798 Wordsworth and Coleridge, Lyrical Ballads 180z Peace of Amiens 8o4 Napoleon crowned Emperor by Pope. Beethoven, Eroica Symphony 812 Napoleon enters and retreats from Moscow 814 First effective steam locomotive 1815 Battle of Waterloo 1818 Byron, Don Juan 1826 Fenimore Cooper, Last of the Mohicans 830 July Revolution. Louis Philippe king of the French 1831 Faraday discovers electromagnetism 1834 British abolition of slavery 1837 Victoria queen of England 1839 Invention of photography 1840 Proudhon -'Property is theft 1845 Wagner, Tannhaüser 848 Revolutions in France etc. Fourth Republic. Marx and Engels, Communist Manifesto 1849 Ruskin, Seven Lamps of Architecture 1852 H. Beecher Stowe, Uncle Tom's Cabin 1857Flaubert, Mme Bovary. Baudelaire, Fleurs du mal 1859Darwin, Origin of Species 1861American Civil War begins. Women gain vote in Australia 1865Lincoln assassinated 1870 France declares war on Prussia.Napoleon Ill capitulates orderly system set in motion by‘a divine clock-maker' – gave way to one that was dynamic and organic. The classification of natural species by Linnaeus (Carl von Linn, 1707-78) and others led to the dawning realization that they had not been created in definitive form but were the products of a long evolutionary process. Speculative theories of evolution were put forward in France by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744-1829) and in England by Erasmus Darwin (1731-1802), grandfather of Charles Darwin (see p. 677). At the same time philosophy was given a new direction by Immanuel Kant (1724-1804), who shifted its focus away from problems amenable to empirical investigation and rational deduction from self-evident axioms to an analysis of the most general concepts and categories. He brought to an end the heroic attempt to make philosophy a branch of natural science, breaking completely with traditions of both rationalism and empiricism. The distinctions he made between types of statement, according to the evidence they require and the interconnection between the concepts they presuppose, provided a new basis for the discussion of religious beliefs, morals and also aesthetics, which, for the first time in Western thought, moved from the periphery to the centre of philosophical systems. Goethe, in an essay of 1799 on Winckelmann (see p. 641), remarked that no educated man could with impunity reject or oppose the philosophical movement initiated by Kant – a tribute from the greatest creative writer to the greatest thinker of the time. The movement led, nevertheless, to a Romantic philosophy which Goethe lived to deplore. Unlike previous revolutions, the French Revolution had ecumenical claims: its armies set out to revolutionize the world and its ideas spread beyond Europe to South America, the Near East and India. It began a period of constant political and social unrest. In France it had effected the transfer of power from the old aristocracy to the bourgeoisie. Subsequent French governments, irrespective of their ostensible political color and the upheavals which brought them to power, all depended for survival on their ability to protect bourgeois society from the twin dangers of Jacobin republicanism and a return to the privileges and restrictions of the ancien régime – the Directory (1794-9); the rule of Napoleon as first consul from 1799 and as emperor from 1804; the restored Bourbon monarchy (1815-3o); the constitutional monarchy of Louis-Philippe (1830-48); the Second Republic (1848–51) and the Second Empire of Napoleon III (1851–70), followed by the Third Republic. Outside France, reaction triumphed after 1815, though there were revolutions in many different places in 183o and 1848 simultaneous with those in Paris, all led by members of the middle classes who demanded participation in government. In countries under foreign rule (Belgium until 1830, parts of northern Italy until 1866) they were also fired by ideals of nationalism. Everywhere there was conflict between forces of continuity (monarchy, landed aristocracy and Church) and forces of change. A rapid rise in the population, the spread of industrial production and the Digitized by Google enrichment of its entrepreneurs, a drift from the country to the cities and the consequent emergence of an urban proletariat occasioned the growth of new social structures which could not be regulated by the old systems of government based on the notion of a static order and immutable values. The Industrial Revolution began in England in the 178os with the mass production in mechanized factories of goods for mass consumption. Here industry was unhampered by the guild restrictions, trade unhindered by the local customs barriers, which had survived on the Continent. Expansion was made possible by the exploitation of overseas markets, especially in the still growing colonial empire (the annexation of India amply compensating for the loss of the United States). Classes enriched by industry were placated by parliamentary reforms. But the cost in human suffering at a lower social level was appalling.From this foul drain the greatest stream of human industry flows out to fertilize the whole world', the French political analyst Alexis de Tocqueville wrote of Manchester in 1835.From this filthy sewer pure gold flows. Here humanity attains its most complete development and its most brutish, here civilization works its miracles and civilized man is turned almost into a savage.' Just over a decade later conditions in Manchester convinced Karl Marx (1818–83) that the system of industrial production provided the key to the problem of historical change. Assisted by his friend Friedrich Engels (182o-95) – the representative in Manchester of a German cotton firm – he wrote The Communist Manifesto (London, 1848) which called for the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions'. Although it had little immediate effect, this pamphlet acquired within two decades the status of a holy text and came to be accepted by about half of the human race. It differs from previous political declarations in that its prime concern is not with the rights of man or systems of government but with theoretical certainties. The dialectical process of history would, Marx believed, inevitably lead to the triumph of the proletariat. Artists were as much affected as everyone else by the political and social conflicts of the early nineteenth century. And since these upheavals lend themselves to interpretation as conflicts between progressives and reactionaries, a similar structure has been superimposed upon the history of art during this period. However, the parallel is not exact. Painters and sculptors and architects who were artistically innovatory did not always hold advanced political views. Even the most politically engaged artists were usually more concerned with artistic freedom' than with political liberty They worked mainly for a middle class to which they themselves, or most of them, belonged – the bourgeoisie against which Marx directed his invective. And this public demanded an escapist art: evocations of distant times, distant lands, happy country folk and the beauties of nature. Similarly, urban designers and architects, employed by the expanding middle-class, supplied buildings that gave illusions of grandeur with classicizing or medievalizing façades and correspondingly evocative interiors. Original from UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA