# Chapter 1 # Introduction Computers are everywhere. The versatile silicon chip has found a place in our homes, our schools, our work, and our leisure. We must cope with a flood of new devices, bringing with them both benefits and dangers. Popular books and magazines proclaim that we are witnessing a‘computer revolution,' entering a ‘micro-millennium'in which computers will completely transform our lives. We search for images that can help us anticipate computer impacts and direct further development. Are computers merely giant adding machines or are they electronic brains? Can they only do ‘programmed’rote tasks or can we expect them to learn and create? The popular discourse about these questions draws heavily on the analogy between computation and human thought: While many areas of human endeavor have currently seemed to flounder—such as understanding and dealing with economic systems or correcting social injustices—research and technical developments in the scientific field of artificial intelligence have exploded.... As a result, artificial-intelligence researchers are developing computers that can listen to spoken sentences and grasp their meaning; that can read news stories and write succinct, accurate, grammatical summaries; that employ robots, who never get bored, to work on assembly lines; that assemble data about a sick person—and suggest a diagnosis.— Stockton, “Creating computers to think like humans"(1980), p. 41, In five or six years—by 1988 or thereabouts—portable, quasihuman brains, made of silicon or gallium arsenide, will be commonplace.'They will be an intelligent electronic race, working as partners with the human race. We will carry these small creatures around with us everywhere. Just pick them up, tuck them under your arm, and go off to attend to your business. They will be Artoo-Deetoos without wheels: brilliant, but nice personalities, never sarcastic, always giving you a straight answer—little electronic friends that can solve all your problems. — Jastrow, “The thinking computer" (1982), p. 107. We are about to embark on a massive programme to develop highly intelligent machines, a process by which we will lead computers by the hand until they reach our own intellectual level, after which they will proceed to surpass us.... But what will we do with the Ultra-Intelligent Machines when they arrive? Clearly, the first thing would be to put them to work on some of the numerous problems facing society. These could be economic, medical or educational matters, and also, perhaps, strategic modelling to forecast trends and produce early warnings of difficulties or crises.... It is unlikely that there will be any serious objections to this apart from those of an emotional or doctrinaire nature. — Evans, The Micro Millennium (1979), pp. 195-196, 229. But focussing on the image of‘computer as brain'can lead us away from the important questions. The concern with giving computers humanlike (or god-like) intelligence rests on a more fundamental discourse about the nature of technology and of human thinking, language, and being. This discourse has unfolded within a tradition—a way of understanding—that is deeply rooted in modern technological society. In examining this tradition, we came to realize that although it provides a fertile background for developing new technology, it does not support an adequate understanding of what computer devices do in a context of human practice. We were led to a broad critique of what has been said about computers, and what has been done in disciplines such as linguistics, psychology, and management science. We developed a new orientation that provides an alternative basis for understanding computer technology. ## 1.1 The question of design In order to understand the phenomena surrounding a new technology, we must open the question of design—the interaction between understanding and creation. In speaking here of design, we are not restricting our concern to the methodology of conscious design. We address the broader question of how a society engenders inventions whose existence in turn alters that society. We need to establish a theoretical basis for looking at what the devices do, not just how they operate. In order to develop such a theoretical basis we must step back and examine the implicit understanding of design that guides technological development within our existing tradition of thought. Only by unconcealing that tradition and making explicit its assumptions can we open ourselves to alternatives and to the new design possibilities that flow from them. The remainder of this introduction provides a guide to how we have undertaken that task in this book. We can illustrate the kind of questioning we have in mind by seriously asking “What is a word processor?" The first thing to recognize is that different answers grow from the concerns of different individuals. For the manager of a factory that builds word processors, they are assemblies of electronic and mechanical devices, to be constructed, tested, and shipped. For the person who programs the word processor, it is a particular collection of software, dealing with the input, storage, and output of bytes of information. It operates through some kind of interface to a user who generates and modifies that information. These are both perfectly valid answers, arising in particular domains to which the theories of computation and electronics are relevant. If we want to understand a breakdown of the hardware or software, we operate in their terms and turn to them for predictions. But these answers do not deal with what a word processor does—with the fact that it is a medium for the creation and modification of linguistic structures that play a role in human communication. For the purchaser of a word processor, this is the relevant domain. The word processor exists as a collection of hardware or programs only when it breaks down.¹ In its use, one is concerned with the actions of creating and modifying documents and producing physical presentations of them on a screen or printed page. The relevant domain is not a computational one, but one that emerged long ago with the first writing instruments. It brings with it concerns of visual presentation issues of layout, type fonts, and integration of text with illustrations. Many current computer products are designed with a primary concern for this domain. They deal at length with formats and typography, focussing on the document as the thing being produced. But still with this, we have not reached a full understanding of the word processor. We cannot take the activity of writing as an independent phenomenon. Writing is an instrument—a tool we use in our interactions with other people. The computer, like any other medium, must be understood in the context of communication and the larger network of equipment and practices in which it is situated. A person who sits down at a word processor is not just creating a document, but is writing a letter or a memo or a book. There is a complex social network in which these activities make sense. It includes institutions (such as post offices and publishing companies), equipment (including word processors and computer networks, but also all of the older technologies with which they coexist), practices (such as buying books and reading the daily mail), and conventions (such as the legal status of written documents). The significance of a new invention lies in how it fits into and changes this network. Many innovations are minorthey simply improve some aspect of the network without altering its structure. The automatic transmission made automobiles easier to use, but did not change their role. Other inventions, such as the computer, are radical innovations that cannot be understood in terms of the previously existing network. The printing press, the automobile, and television are all examples of radical innovations that opened up whole new domains of possibilities for the network of human interactions. Just as the automobile had impacts on our society far beyond speeding up what had been done with horses, the use of computers will lead to changes far beyond those of a fancy typewriter. The nature of publishing, the structure of communication within organizations, and the social organization of knowledge will all be altered, as they were with the emergence of other technologies for language, such as the printing press. One might think that the questioning can stop at this point. It is clear (and has been widely recognized) that one cannot understand a technology without having a functional understanding of how it is used. Furthermore, that understanding must incorporate a holistic view of the network of technologies and activities into which it fits, rather than treating the technological devices in isolation. But this is still not enough. We can say that the word processor must be understood by virtue of the role it plays in communication, the distribution of information, and the accumulation of knowledge. But in doing so we take for granted the use of words likecommunication,’‘information,’and 'knowledge,’which themselves require closer examination. In this examination, we find ourselves being drawn into inquiries about basic human phenomena that have been called things like ‘intelligence,''language,’and ‘rationality.' As the use of a new technology changes human practices, our ways of speaking about that technology change our language and our understanding. This new way of speaking in turn creates changes in the world we construct. As an example of how new language creates new possibilities for action, consider Freud's introduction of terms such as ‘ego,’‘subconscious,'and ‘repression.’ At one level we might say that he recognized and labelled phenomena that had always existed. But the innovation in his language had a major impact on human society, in everything from the way we treat deviants (such as prisoners and the mentally ill) to the way we teach our children. Looking at computers we find the same process at work. The development of the technology has led to new uses of terms such as ‘information, ‘input,’‘output,’‘language,’ and ‘communication,’while work in areas such as artificial intelligence is bringing new meanings to words like ‘intelligence,’‘decision,'and knowledge.’ The technical jargon gives shape to our commonsense understanding in a way that changes our lives. In order to become aware of the effects that computers have on society we must reveal the implicit understanding of human language, thought, and work that serves as a background for developments in computer technology. In this endeavor we are doubly concerned with language. First, we are studying a technology that operates in a domain of language. The computer is a device for creating, manipulating, and transmitting symbolic (hence linguistic) objects. Second, in looking at the impact of the computer, we find ourselves thrown back into questions of language—how practice shapes our language and language in turn generates the space of possibilities for action. This book, then, is permeated by a concern for language. Much of our theory is a theory of language, and our understanding of the computer centers on the role it will play in mediating and facilitating linguistic action as the essential human activity. In asking what computers can do, we are drawn into asking what people do with them, and in the end into addressing the fundamental question of what it means to be human. ## 1.2 The role of tradition One cannot approach questions like those raised in the previous section from a neutral or objective standpoint. Every questioning grows out of a tradition——a pre-understanding that opens the space of possible answers. We use the word‘tradition' here in a broad sense, without the connotation that it belongs to a cohesive social or cultural group, or that it consists of particular customs or practices. It is a more pervasive, fundamental phenomenon that might be called a‘way of being.’In trying to understand a tradition, the first thing we must become aware of is how it is concealed by its obviousness. It is not a set of rules or sayings, or something we will find catalogued in an encyclopedia. It is a way of understanding, a background, within which we interpret and act. We use the word ‘tradition' because it emphasizes the historicity of our ways of thinking—the fact that we always exist within a pre-understanding determined by the history of our interactions with others who share the tradition. When we encounter people who live in a substantially different tradition, we are struck by the impression that they have a strange and apparently arbitrary‘world view.’It takes a careful self-awareness to turn the same gaze on our own lives and ‘unconceal’ our own tradition—to bring into conscious observation that which invisibly gives shape to our thought. In examining how people have thought about and talked about computers, we become aware of the pervasive effect of a powerful tradition that emphasizes ‘information,’‘representation,’and ‘decision making.’ This tradition has been the basis for a great deal of technological progress and it has also led to many of the problems created by the use of computers. Even in discussions of what computers can and cannot do, the questions that are posed reflect a particular blindness about the nature of human thought and language—a blindness that can lead to a broad misunderstanding of the role that will be played by computers. We have labelled this tradition the ‘rationalistic tradition’ because of its emphasis on particular styles of consciously rationalized thought and action. In calling it ‘rationalistic'we are not equating it with ‘rational.' We are not interested in a defense of irrationality or a mystic appeal to nonrational intuition. The rationalistic tradition is distinguished by its narrow focus on certain aspects of rationality, which (as we will show throughout the book) often leads to attitudes and activities that are not rational when viewed in a broader perspective. Our commitment is to developing a new ground for rationality—one that is as rigorous as the rationalistic tradition in its aspirations but that does not share the presuppositions behind it. The task we have undertaken in this book is to challenge the rationalistic tradition, introducing an alternative orientation that can lead to asking new questions. In developing this new orientation, we were led to a critique of the current mythology of artificial intelligence and its related cognitive theories, drawing conclusions that contradict the naive optimism apparent in the quotations at the beginning of the chapter. Our ultimate goal, however, is not a debunking but a redirection. The alternative we pose is not a position in a debate about whether or not computers will be intelligent, but an attempt to create a new understanding of how to design computer tools suited to human use and human purposes. ## 1.3 Our path Our intention is to provide an opportunity for the reader to develop a new orientation. No book can embody the result of such a process, but through entering a dialog with the reader we can help make it possible. We have attempted to do this in three steps. First we present some previous work that challenges the theoretical assumptions of the rationalistic tradition, calling into question much of what is normally taken for granted in our tradition. Next we carefully examine, from the orientation developed in the first part, the phenomena that have emerged in the practice of computer technology. Finally, we suggest some alternative directions for the design of computer-based tools. Part I of the book (Chapters 1-6) describes the rationalistic tradition and presents three distinct bodies of work, each of which stands in contrast to that tradition and each of which has deeply influenced our own understanding. We do not attempt to provide a philosophical exposition and critique in which arguments for and against each position are enumerated and weighed. We find it more fruitful to present the central points, listening for their relevance to our own concerns. Our discourse is theoretical in that it deals with fundamental questions, but it is not directed towards postulating formal theories that can be systematically used to make predictions. As will become clear, one of the most prominent illusions of the rationalistic tradition is the belief that knowledge consists of explicit theories of that sort. Chapter 2 describes the rationalistic tradition in some detail, showing how it serves as a basis for our culture's commonsense understanding of language, thought, and rationality. Our goal is to reveal biases and assumptions that are concealed by their embodiment in the background of our language. Chapter 3 deals with a tradition that includes hermeneutics (the study of interpretation) and phenomenology (the philosophical examination of the foundations of experience and action). This tradition has emerged from humanistic studies, and is concerned with the relation of the individual to the context—especially the social context——in which he or she lives. It emphasizes those areas of human experience where individual interpretation and intuitive understanding (as opposed to logical deduction and conscious reflection) play a central role. Its exponents challenge the belief that a formal analytical understanding of these phenomena is possible at all. We concentrate on the work of Hans-Georg Gadamer and Martin Heidegger. Many other philosophers have explored related ideas, including phenomenologists such as Husserl, Ricoeur, and Merleau-Ponty, existentialists such as Sartre, pragmatists such as Mead and Dewey, current political philosophers such as Habermas and Apel, and even some with a more analytic background, such as Wittgenstein. We have selected Heidegger and Gadamer, partly because of the role their writings played in our own learning, and partly because of their intrinsic importance within the tradition they represent. Heidegger stands out as the modern philosopher who has done the most thorough, penetrating, and radical analysis of everyday experience. His ideas lie at the root of much of what other philosophers have said, and at the root of our own orientation. Gadamer has been most articulate in applying this orientation to the problem of language, a problem that we see as central. Since it was not our intention to produce a work of philosophical scholarship, we do not attempt to draw connections between the discourse developed by these two philosophers and the many others that preceded and followed them. Our aim is to bring out the relevant distinctions in the clearest possible way, by focussing on their central insights. Chapter 4 presents the work of Humberto R. Maturana, a Chilean neurobiologist most widely known for his work on the neurophysiology of vision. His background is that of a biologist, not a philosopher, and he deals first and foremost with the nature of biological organisms as mechanistic structure-determined systems. His work was critical in the development of our understanding of cognition and of our perspective on the rationalistic tradition. Writers like Heidegger challenge the dominant view of mind, declaring that cognition is not based on the systematic manipulation of representations. This perspective has been the basis for several critiques of artificial intelligence² that initially have a kind of mystical feel to those within the scientific community. In questioning the common understanding of the relationship among perception, representation, and thought, these accounts seem at first sight to deny the physical basis of human action. Maturana provides two useful insights that let us escape from this limited pre-understanding: the role of the observer in creating phenomenal domains; and the concept of structural coupling, which allows us to understand behavior that is mechanically generated but not programmed. As a biologist, Maturana sets out a conceptual framework in which phenomena of interpretation arise as a necessary consequence of the structure of biological beings. At the same time, he compels us to acquire a new understanding of the way we talk about physical nature and to apply this understanding to ourselves. As we pointed out earlier, questions concerning cognition are intertwined with questions about the nature of language. Chapter 5 begins by showing how the insights of hermeneutics are relevant to the issues that have traditionally been addressed by linguists and analytic philosophers of language. It emphasizes the role of the listener in the active generation of meaning, showing how the idealization of 'literal meaning'breaks down in looking at ordinary language. We then introduce speech act theory, as developed by Austin and Searle and later adapted by social philosophers such as Habermas. Although this work grew out of the analytic school of philosophy, its view of language as speech acts challenges the rationalistic tradition by suggesting that language, and therefore thought, is ultimately based on social interaction. Speech act theory is a starting point for an understanding of language as an act of social creation. In the last part of the chapter we present our own synthesis of speech act theory and the hermeneutic understanding of language developed in Chapter 3. This synthesis is central to our interpretation of computer technology in the second part of the book. It leads us to the conclusion that we create our world through language, an observation that has important consequences for design. Chapter 6, which acts as a transition to the remainder of the book, draws out and summarizes some common points from the preceding three chapters. The rejection of cognition as the manipulation of knowledge of an objective world, the primacy of action and its central role in language, and the impossibility of completely articulating background assumptions all play a major role in the critique of current computer technology presented in Part II and in the new design orientation elaborated in Part III. Part II (Chapters 7-10) addresses concrete questions about what computers do. Our goal is to understand and reinterpret what is currently being done and to anticipate future developments. Chapter 7 describes what people do when they program computers. It focusses on the relationship between the intentions of programmers and the behavior of devices that run the programs they create. Programming is a process of creating symbolic representations that are to be interpreted at some level within a hierarchy of constructs of varying degrees of abstractness. The interactions between levels of representation can be complex, since each is implemented in terms of the lower ones. This description lays the groundwork for the discussion of computer intelligence in the following chapters. Chapter 8 examines the computational techniques that have been proposed as a basis for artificial intelligence. Drawing on the ideas outlined in Part I, we argue—contrary to widespread current belief—that one cannot construct machines that either exhibit or successfully model intelligent behavior. We begin by asking why mind-like properties are attributed to computers but not to other types of machines that can equally be said to provide or process information. We continue with a more thorough exposition of work in artificial intelligence and an analysis of its limitations. Many of the difficulties with current research derive from a fundamental orientation that equates intelligence with rationalistic problem solving based on heuristic procedures. Chapter 9 takes up the theme of the preceding chapter within the context of computer programs that process natural language. We look at why the many programs developed during the 1970s do not approach the human ability to interpret meaning. In spite of a wide variety of ingenious techniques for making analysis and recognition more flexible, the scope of comprehension remains severely limited. There may be practical applications for computer processing of natural-language-like formalisms and for limited processing of natural language, but computers will remain incapable of using language in the way human beings do, both in interpretation and in the generation of commitment that is central to language. Chapter 10 takes a critical look at some major current research directions in areas such as knowledge engineering, expert systems, and the so-called ‘ffth generation’computers. It describes the overall shift from the general goal of creating programs that can understand language and thought to that of designing software for specialized task domains, and evaluates the projections being made for the coming years. Part III (Chapters 11 and 12) presents an alternative orientation to design, based on the theoretical background we have developed. The relevant questions are not those comparing computers to people, but those opening up a potential for computers that play a meaningful role in human life and work. Once we move away from the blindness generated by the old questions, we can take a broader perspective on what computers can do. Chapter 11 addresses the task of designing computer tools for use in organizational contexts. We focus on the activity of people called ‘managers,' but the same concerns arise in all situations involving social interaction and collaborative effort. Drawing on Heidegger's discussion of 'thrownness' and ‘breakdown,' we conclude that models of rationalistic problem solving do not reflect how actions are really determined, and that programs based on such models are unlikely to prove successful. Nevertheless, there is a role for computer technology in support of managers and as aids in coping with the complex conversational structures generated within an organization. Much of the work that managers do is concerned with initiating, monitoring, and above all coordinating the networks of speech acts that constitute social action. Chapter 12 returns to the fundamental questions of design and looks at possibilities for computer technology opened up by the understanding developed in the preceding chapters. After briefly reviewing the relevant theoretical ideas outlined earlier, we examine some of the phenomena to which design must address itself, illustrating our approach with a concrete example. We also consider design in relation to systematic domains of human activity, where the objects of concern are formal structures and the rules for manipulating them. The challenge posed here for design is not simply to create tools that accurately reflect existing domains, but to provide for the creation of new domains. Design serves simultaneously to bring forth and to transform the objects, relations, and regularities of the world of our concerns. ## 1.3. OUR PATH In one sense, then, this is a book about computers. But it reaches beyond the specific issues of what computers can do. Our larger goal is to clarify the background of understanding in which the discourse about computers and technology takes place, and to grasp its broader implications. Ultimately we are seeking a better understanding of what it means to be human. In this quest, progress is not made by finding the ‘right answers,’ but by asking meaningful questions—ones that evoke an openness to new ways of being. We invite the readers to create with us an openness that can alter our collective vision of how computer technology will develop in the coming decades.