# The rationalistic tradition Current thinking about computers and their impact on society has been shaped by a rationalistic tradition that needs to be re-examined and challenged as a source of understanding. As a first step we will characterize the tradition of rationalism and logical empiricism that can be traced back at least to Plato. This tradition has been the mainspring of Western science and technology, and has demonstrated its effectiveness most clearly in the ‘hard sciences'—those that explain the operation of deterministic mechanisms whose principles can be captured in formal systems. The tradition finds its highest expression in mathematics and logic, and has greatly influenced the development of linguistics and cognitive psychology. We will make no attempt to provide a full historical account of this tradition, or to situate it on some kind of intellectual map. Instead, we have chosen to concentrate on understanding its effects on current discourse and practice, especially in relation to the development and impact of computers. The purpose of this chapter is to outline its major points and illustrate their embodiment in current theories of language, mind, and action. ## 2.1 The rationalistic orientation We can begin to reveal the rationalistic tradition by considering the question“What do you do when faced with some problem whose solution you care about?" The rationalistic orientation can be depicted in a series of steps: 1. Characterize the situation in terms of identifiable objects with welldefined properties. 2. Find general rules that apply to situations in terms of those objects and properties. 3. Apply the rules logically to the situation of concern, drawing conclusions about what should be done. There are obvious questions about how we set situations into correspondence with systematic ‘representations' of objects and properties, and with how we can come to know general rules. In much of the rationalistic tradition, however, these are deferred in favor of emphasizing the formulation of systematic rules that can be used to draw logical conclusions. Much of Western philosophy—from classical rhetoric to modern symbolic logic—can be seen as a drive to come up with more systematic and precise formulations of just what constitutes valid reasoning. Questions of correspondence and knowledge still exercise philosophers, but in the everyday discourse about thinking and reasoning they are taken as unproblematic. In fact when they are raised, the discussion is often characterized as being too philosophical. Even within philosophy, there are schools (such as analytic philosophy) in which the problems raised by the first two items are pushed aside, not because they are uninteresting, but because they are too difficult and open-ended. By concentrating on formalisms and logical rules, the philosopher can develop clear technical results whose validity can be judged in terms of internal coherence and consistency. There is a close correlation between the rationalistic tradition and the approach of organized science. In a broad sense, we can view any organized form of inquiry as a science, but in ordinary usage more is implied. There must be some degree of adherence to the scientific method. This method consists of a series of basic steps (that can be repeated in successive refinements of the science): [The scientific method] can be described as involving the following operations: (a) observation of a phenomenon that, henceforth, is taken as a problem to be explained; (b) proposition of an explanatory hypothesis in the form of a deterministic system that can generate a phenomenon isomorphic with the one observed; (c) proposition of a computed state or process in the system specified by the hypothesis as a predicted phenomenon to be observed; and (d) observation of the predicted phenomenon.— Maturana, “Biology of language: The epistemology of reality" (1978), p. 28. The scientist first notes some regularity in the phenomena of interest— some recurring pattern of observations. He or she proposes a conceptual or concrete system that can be set into correspondence with the observations and that can be manipulated to make predictions about other potential observations. Conditions are created in which these observations can be expected and the results used to modify the theory. Scientific research consists of setting up situations in which observable activity will be determined in a clear way by a small number of variables that can be systematically manipulated. This simplicity is necessary if the modelling system is to make predictions that can be checked. The rationalistic orientation not only underlies both pure and applied science but is also regarded, perhaps because of the prestige and success that modern science enjoys, as the very paradigm of what it means to think and be intelligent. In studies of thought, emphasis is placed on the form of the rules and on the nature of the processes by which they are logically applied. Areas of mathematics, such as symbolic logic and automata theory, are taken as the basis for formalizing what goes on when a person perceives, thinks, and acts. For someone trained in science and technology it may seem self-evident that this is the right (or even the only) approach to serious thinking. Indeed, this is why many workers in artificial intelligence find critiques like that of Dreyfus (What Computers Can't Do, 1979) obviously wrong, since they challenge this deep-seated preunderstanding. In defense, they argue that the only conceivable alternative is some kind of mysticism, religion, or fuzzy thinking that is a throwback to earlier stages of civilization. It is scarcely surprising, then, that the rationalistic orientation pervades not only artificial intelligence and the rest of computer science, but also much of linguistics, management theory, and cognitive science—three areas with which artificial intelligence has been closely associated. In the next three sections we will examine each of these areas in turn, seeing how rationalistic styles of discourse and thinking have determined the questions that have been asked and the theories, methodologies, and assumptions that have been adopted. First, however, a caveat is in order. In presenting these elements as part of an overall rationalistic tradition, we are aware that they are not uniformly accepted in carefully reasoned work of analytic philosophers.1 However it would be a mistake to therefore not take this tradition seriously. It pervades the work of those same philosophers and of researchers in computer science and psychology as well. In moments of careful reflection they acknowledge the importance of phenomena that are not subject to the rationalistic style of analysis, but in their day-to-day work they proceed as though everything were. In generating theories and in building programs, they operate in a style that is fully consistent with the naive tradition and avoid areas in which it breaks down. In the end, we are really concerned not with the philosophical arguments, but with a broader phenomenon— the role of a tradition in giving orientation to people who do not consider themselves philosophers, but whose ways of thinking nevertheless embody a philosophical orientation. ## 2.2 Language, truth, and the world Much of our book is an attempt to show the non-obviousness of the rationalistic orientation and to reveal the blindness that it generates. In pursuing this, we found ourselves deeply concerned with the question of language. The rationalistic tradition regards language as a system of symbols that are composed into patterns that stand for things in the world. Sentences can represent the world truly or falsely, coherently or incoherently, but their ultimate grounding is in their correspondence with the states of affairs they represent. This concept of correspondence can be summarized as: 1. Sentences say things about the world, and can be either true or false. 2. What a sentence says about the world is a function of the words it contains and the structures into which these are combined. 3. The content words of a sentence (such as its nouns, verbs, and adjectives) can be taken as denoting (in the world) objects, properties, relationships, or sets of these. Of course most people will not be able to formulate these assumptions directly. For example, they may not be aware of the distinction between 'content words'(like“dog" and“disappear") and ‘function words'(like “of" and “the"). But they would find none of these statements surprising or unintuitive. The relation of these assumptions to more formal studies of semantics is more complex. During this century a large body of work has been produced that systematically examines meaning from a formal analytical perspective.2 Its goal is to explain the regularities in the correspondence between what we say and what we mean. There are two levels at which to define the problem. First, there is the problem of ‘semantic correspondence.' Just what is the relationship between a sentence (or a word) and the objects, properties, and relations we observe in the world? Few philosophers adhere to the naive view that one can assume the presence of an objective reality in which objects and their properties are ‘simply there.' They recognize deep ontological problems in deciding just what constitutes a distinct object or in what sense a relation or event ‘exists.’ Some limited aspects (such as the reference of proper names) have been studied within the philosophy of language, but it is typically assumed that no formal answers can be given to the general problem of semantic correspondence. The second, more tractable level at which to study meaning is to take for granted that some kind of correspondence exists, without making a commitment to its ontological grounding. Having done this, one can look at the relations among the meanings of different words, phrases, and sentences, without having to answer the difficult question of just what those meanings are.3 There are many different styles in which this study can be carried out. The approach called ‘structural semantics' or ‘linguistic semantics'4 deals only with the linguistic objects (words, phrases, and sentences) themselves. The fact that “Sincerity admires John" is anomalous or that “male parent" and “father" are synonymous can be encompassed within a theory relating words (and posited features of words) to their occurrences in certain kinds of phrases and sentences. Within such a theory there need be no reference either to the act of uttering the words or to the states of affairs they describe. This approach is limited, however, because of its dependence on specific words and structures as the basis for stating general rules. Most theories of semantics make use of a formalized language in which deeper regularities can be expressed. It is assumed that each sentence in a natural language (such as English) can be set into correspondence with one or more possible interpretations in a formal language (such as the firstorder predicate calculus) for which the rules of reasoning are well defined. The study of meaning then includes both the translation of sentences into the corresponding formal structures and the logical rules associated with these structures. Thus the sentences “Every dog has a tail," “All dogs have tails," and “A dog has a tail" are all translated into the same form, while “I walked to the bank" will have two possible translations (corresponding to the two meanings of “bank"), as will “Visiting relatives can be boring" (corresponding to different interpretations of who is doing the visiting). Most current work in this direction adopts some form of ‘truth theoretic' characterization of meaning. We can summarize its underlying assumptions as follows: 1. There is a system of rules (which may include pragmatic’ and contextual considerations) by which sentences of a natural language can be translated into formulas of a formal language, such that the essence of their meaning is preserved. 2. There is another system of rules by which the meanings of formulas in this formal language are determined in a systematic way by the meanings of their parts and the structures by which those parts are combined. 3. There are systematic rules of logic that account for the interrelation of the truth conditions for different formulas. 4. The fundamental kind of sentence is the indicative, which can be taken as stating that a certain proposition is true. Its meaning can be characterized in terms of the conditions in the world under which it would be true. In addition to these assumptions, there is a general understanding that in order for the compositional rules to be of interest, the meanings of the items being composed should be fixed without reference to the context in which they appear. If the meaning of each item could vary arbitrarily with each use, the rules for composing meanings would be vacuous. There would be no systematic notion of a meaning of the item which applied to all of its uses. Of course, this context-independence cannot be taken as an absolute; there are obvious recognized exceptions.⁵ But the central theory of meaning (semantics) deals with words and sentences in terms of their literal meaning, which is treated as not context-dependent. We will discuss the consequences of this assumption in Chapter 5. The correspondence theory of language is one cornerstone on which other aspects of the rationalistic tradition rest. Rationalistic theories of mind all adopt some form of a ‘representation hypothesis,' in which it is assumed that thought is the manipulation of representation structures in the mind. Although these representations are not specifically linguistic (that is, not the sentences of an ordinary human language), they are treated as sentences in an‘internal language,'whose connection to the world of the thinker follows the principles outlined above. ## 2.3 Decision making and problem solving Another modern embodiment of the rationalistic tradition is in the discipline of management science, a field concerned with mathematical analyses of decision making and with behavioral analyses of human conduct. In this discipline, decision making is regarded as the central task of management and is characterized as a process of information gathering and processing. Rational behavior is seen as a consequence of choosing among alternatives according to an evaluation of outcomes. Simon characterizes the basic assumption of decision-making theory as follows: At each moment the behaving subject, or the organization composed of numbers of such individuals, is confronted with a large number of alternative behaviors, some of which are present in consciousness and some of which are not. Decision, or choice, as the term is used here, is the process by which one of these alternatives for each moment's behavior is selected to be carried out. The series of such decisions which determines behavior over some stretch of time may be called a strategy.... If any one of the possible strategies is chosen and followed out, certain consequences will result. The task of rational decision is to select that one of the strategies which is followed by the preferred set of consequences. — Simon, Administrative Behavior (1976), p. 67. Simon asserts that rational decision making is a process of choosing among alternatives, and that it involves a series of steps: 1. Listing all the alternative strategies. 2. Determining all the consequences that follow upon each of these strategies. 3. Comparatively evaluating these sets of consequences. In the literature on computers and decision making, a wide range of human activities and concerns are subjected to this kind of analysis. Researchers in simulation, operations research, and game theory (all within what Boguslaw, in The New Utopians (1965), calls the formalist approach') apply sophisticated mathematical methods to decisions as varied as the routing of telephone calls, the choice of advertising media for a new product, and the selection of targets for bombing. These techniques are based on the development of a formal model for the system that will be affected, a set of rules that describe the behavior of the modelled system, and an objective means of assigning valuations to the resulting effects. When calculations based on the model, rules, and valuations are performed, alternatives can be compared and the most highly valued (optimal) one selected. There have been critiques of this idealization, often from people within management science who object to the narrow assumptions of the formalist approach. Simon, for example, continues his description of the assumptions given above, noting that: ...The word ‘all’ is used advisedly. It is obviously impossible for the individual to know ‘all' his alternatives or‘all' their consequences, and this impossibility is a very important departure of actual behavior from the model of objective rationality. Simon, Administrative Behavior, p. 67. This caveat is the major contribution of Simon. He treats objective rationality as an idealization, rarely (if ever) achieved in a real situation. Practical decision making only roughly approximates this ideal: It is impossible for the behavior of a single, isolated individual to reach any high degree of rationality. The number of alternatives he must explore is so great, the information he would need to evaluate them so vast that even an approximation of objective rationality is hard to conceive.... Actual behavior falls short, in at least three ways, of objective rationality as defined in the last chapter: 1. Rationality requires a complete knowledge and anticipation of the consequences that will follow on each choice. In fact, knowledge of consequences is always fragmentary. 2. Since these consequences lie in the future, imagination must supply the lack of experienced feeling in attaching value to them. But values can be only imperfectly anticipated. 3. Rationality requires a choice among all possible alternative behaviors. In actual behavior, only a very few of all these possible alternatives ever come to mind. — Simon, Administrative Behavior, pp. 79ff. It is important to note, however, that this critique is not an objection to the rationalistic approach, but to the assumption of full knowledge and rationality in applying optimization techniques. Simon argues that systematic reasoning rules can be applied for effective decision making, and can be programmed into computers. Rather than computing all of the consequences, the computer must operate with‘bounded rationality.' Simon's decision-making theories developed into more general theories of ‘problem solving’as he and others made the first attempts to build intelligent computer programs. Rather than concentrating on the kinds of decisions that managers make, researchers studied tasks (such as proving logic theorems and solving simple puzzles) that could be viewed as problems of search in a space of alternatives. The task is characterized in terms of a ‘problem space.’ Each ‘node’of the space is reached by some sequence of actions, and has some consequences relevant to structure of the task. The computer program searches for a solution in this potentially huge space of possibilities, using ‘heuristics’to guide the search and to provide valuations. In this search it will explore only some of the possible alternatives, and will apply its valuation heuristics in the absence of full knowledge. Programs of this sort are described more fully in Chapter 8, and are the textbook examples of artificial intelligence. There is a widely accepted definition of what constitutes ‘general problem-solving behavior:' A person is confronted with a problem when he wants something and does not know immediately what series of actions he can perform to get it.... To have a problem implies (at least) that certain information is given to the problem solver: information about what is desired, under what conditions, by means of what tools and operations, starting with what initial information, and with access to what resources. The problem solver has an interpretation of this information—exactly that interpretation which lets us label some part of it as goal, another part as side conditions, and so on. Consequently, if we provide a representation for this information (in symbol structures), and assume that the interpretation of these structures is implicit in the program of the problem solving IPS [Information Processing System], then we have defined a problem. — Newell and Simon, Human Problem Solving (1972), pp. 72-73. There are several key elements to this view of problem solving, which is generally taken for granted in artificial intelligence research: 1. Task environment. First, we characterize the problem in terms of a‘task environment' in which there are different potential ‘states' of affairs, ‘actions’ available to the problem solver to change the state, and ‘goals' from which rational actions can be derived. 2. Internal representation. Second, the problem solver has some kind of ‘representation' of the task environment. This representation is a collection of ‘symbol structures’ that are part of the constitution of the problem solver. They correspond in a systematic way to the task environment. 3. Search. The problem solver goes through an information process that can be analyzed as a search among alternative courses of action, in order to find those that will lead to a desired goal. 4. Choice. Finally, a rational agent will select the course of action among those found that best achieves the desired goals. Newell, in “The knowledge level" (1982, p. 102), calls this the principle of rationality': “If an agent has knowledge that one of its actions will lead to one of its goals, then the agent will select that action." Of course we must allow for the case in which more than one action may lead to one of the goals, so we cannot predict the specific action, but just that “The action that occurs at any instant is a member of the selected set of actions." More formally, we can describe the operation of the problem solver in terms of a search in a problem space determined by the task environment and internal representation. Although there is much to be said about just how this can be applied to different cases (for example, the role played by having multiple representations, as discussed by Bobrow in “Dimensions of representation," 1975), the differences are not germane to answering our larger questions about what computers can do. There is a shared background that cuts across the detailed schools of artificial intelligence and that is in general accord with the rationalistic tradition. We will explore some of these topics more fully in Chapter 11. ## 2.4 Cognitive science In recent years there have been efforts to unify theories of human thought and language from within the rationalistic tradition under a new discipline known as ‘cognitive science.’ Initially, several books were put forth as volumes in cognitive science.6 The journal Cognitive Science began publication in 1977, and the Cognitive Science Society held its first annual meeting in 1979.7 A number of other conferences, journals, and research funding programs have followed. Of course cognitive science is not really new. It deals with phenomena of thought and language that have occupied philosophers and scientists for thousands of years. Its boundaries are vague, but it is clear that much of linguistics, psychology, artificial intelligence, and the philosophy of mind fall within its scope. In declaring that it exists as a science, people are marking the emergence of what Lakatos calls a ‘research programme.'8 Lakatos chooses this term in preference to Kuhn's paradigm'(The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 1962) to emphasize the active role that a research programme plays in guiding the activity of scientists. He sees the history of science not as a cyclic pattern of revolution and normal science, but as a history of competing research programmes. He distinguishes between ‘mature science,'consisting of research programmes, and ‘immature science,'consisting of “a mere patched up pattern of trial and error." A research programme is more than a set of specific plans for carrying out scientific activities. The observable details of the programme reflect a deeper coherence which is not routinely examined. In the day-to-day business of research, writing, and teaching, scientists operate within a background of belief about how things are. This background invisibly shapes what they choose to do and how they choose to do it. A research programme grows up within a tradition of thought. It is the result of many influences, some recognized explicitly and others concealed in the social structure and language of the community. Efforts to understand and modify the research programme are made within that same context, and can never escape it to produce an‘objective' or ‘correct' approach. The research programme of cognitive science encompasses work that has been done under different disciplinary labels, but is all closely related through its roots in the rationalistic tradition. Cognitive science needs to be distinguished from ‘cognitive psychology,’ which is the branch of traditional (experimental) psychology dealing with cognition. Although cognitive psychology constitutes a substantial part of what is seen as cognitive science, it follows specific methodological principles that limit its scope. In particular, it is based on an experimental approach in which progress is made by performing experiments that can directly judge between competing scientific hypotheses about the nature of cognitive mechanisms. In most experiments, situations are created in which the variety of action is strictly controlled and only a very limited aspect of the situation is considered relevant to the patterns of recurrence (typical examples are experiments with rats in mazes, nonsense-syllable memorization, and the matching of geometrical figures to simple descriptions). The assumption underlying this empirical research is that general laws can be found in these restricted cases that will apply (albeit in a more complex way) to a much broader spectrum of cognitive activity. It is also implicitly assumed that these laws will have the same general form as those of sciences like physics, and can be subjected to rigid experimental test. In the last few decades, simple forms of cognitive psychology have been challenged by advocates of information-processing psychology,' who assert that cognitive systems can be best understood by analogy to programmed computers. The assumptions behind this approach can be summarized as follows: 1. All cognitive systems are symbol systems. They achieve their intelligence by symbolizing external and internal situations and events, and by manipulating those symbols. 2. All cognitive systems share a basic underlying set of symbol manipulating processes. 3. A theory of cognition can be couched as a program in an appropriate symbolic formalism such that the program when run in the appropriate environment will produce the observed behavior. This approach is not incompatible with the earlier non-computational models. In general the rules postulated as governing recurrences could be embedded in appropriate programs. In this sense, a program is a formal system that has some number of variables and that can be manipulated (run) to generate predictions about the behavior (outputs) of some naturally occurring system that it is intended to model. To the extent that the predicted behavior corresponds to that observed, the theory is supported. The role of the computer is to enable the scientist to deal with more complex theories than those whose consequences could be determined by examination or by manual computation. This makes it feasible for cognitive theories to be more intricate and complicated than their predecessors and still remain under empirical control. In trying to deal with phenomena that do not have the obvious limitations of the sparse experimental situations of cognitive psychology, researchers have turned to artificial intelligence—the design and testing of computer programs that carry out activities patterned after human thought and language. These programs are then taken as theories of the corresponding human behavior. As Simon says in “Cognitive science: The newest science of the artificial" (1981, p. 24): “Most of our knowledge [of intelligence] will have to come from...observation of the vast variety of intelligent systems...and from formal theories—mainly in the form of computer programs—induced from that body of observation." Many difficult issues are raised by the attempt to relate programs to theory and to cognitive mechanisms. Within the cognitive science community, there is much debate about just what role computer programs have in developing and testing theories. We will not present the details of that debate, however. It is more important to understand how the discourse is determined by a taken-for-granted background shaped by the underlying assumptions of the rationalistic tradition, as we have outlined in this chapter. In the rest of this book we pose challenges to those assumptions, and in the end argue that we need to replace the rationalistic orientation if we want to understand human thought, language, and action, or to design effective computer tools. Implicit in our critique is a statement about the cognitive science research programmenot that it is vacuous or useless, but that it will have important limitations in its scope and in its power to explain what we are and what we do.9 ## Chapter 3 ## Understanding and Being In this chapter we introduce Heidegger's analysis of understanding and Being. Heidegger's writings are both important and difficult, and we will make no attempt to give a thorough or authoritative exposition. Our intention is to bring out those aspects relevant to our examination of language and thought and to our understanding of technology. Before turning to Heidegger, however, it will be useful to look briefly at issues that arise in interpreting texts. In addition to the obvious relevance of this material to our discussion of language, we have found that it is easier to grasp the more radical phenomenological statements about interpretation if we first consider interpretive activity in a more obvious setting. When someone speaks of ‘interpretation,’the most likely association is with artistic or literary works. The musician, the literary critic, and the ordinary reader of a poem or novel are all in some immediate sense ‘interpreting'a collection of marks on a page. One of the fundamental insights of phenomenology is that this activity of interpretation is not limited to such situations, but pervades our everyday life. In coming to an understanding of what it means to think, understand, and act, we need to recognize the role of interpretation. ## 3.1 Hermeneutics Hermeneutics1 began as the theory of the interpretation of texts, particularly mythical and sacred texts. Its practitioners struggled with the problem of characterizing how people find meaning in a text that exists over many centuries and is understood differently in different epochs. A mythical or religious text continues to be spoken or read and to serve as a source of deep meaning, in spite of changes in the underlying culture and even in the language. There are obvious questions to be raised. Is the meaning definable in some absolute sense, independent of the context in which the text was written? Is it definable only in terms of that original context? If so, is it possible or desirable for a reader to transcend his or her own culture and the intervening history in order to recover the correct interpretation? If we reject the notion that the meaning is in the text, are we reduced to saying only that a particular person at a particular moment had a particular interpretation? If so, have we given up a naive but solid-seeming view of the reality of the meaning of the text in favor of a relativistic appeal to individual subjective reaction? Within hermeneutics there has been an ongoing debate between those who place the meaning within the text and those who see meaning as grounded in a process of understanding in which the text, its production, and its interpretation all play a vital part. As we will show in Chapter 5, this debate has close parallels with current issues in linguistic and semantic theory. For the objectivist school of hermeneutics,² the text must have a meaning that exists independently of the act of interpretation. The goal of a hermeneutic theory (a theory of interpretation) is to develop methods by which we rid ourselves of all prejudices and produce an objective analysis of what is really there. The ideal is to completely ‘decontextualize'the text. The opposing approach, most clearly formulated by Gadamer,³ takes the act of interpretation as primary, understanding it as an interaction between the horizon4 provided by the text and the horizon that the interpreter brings to it. Gadamer insists that every reading or hearing of a text constitutes an act of giving meaning to it through interpretation. Gadamer devotes extensive discussion to the relation of the individual to tradition, clarifying how tradition and interpretation interact. Any individual, in understanding his or her world, is continually involved in activities of interpretation. That interpretation is based on prejudice (or pre-understanding), which includes assumptions implicit in the language that the person uses.⁵ That language in turn is learned through activities of interpretation. The individual is changed through the use of language, and the language changes through its use by individuals. This process is of the first importance, since it constitutes the background of the beliefs and assumptions that determine the nature of our being.6 We are social creatures: In fact history does not belong to us, but we belong to it. Long before we understand ourselves through the process of self-examination, we understand ourselves in a self-evident way in the family, society and state in which we live. The focus of subjectivity is a distorting mirror. The self-awareness of the individual is only a flickering in the closed circuits of historical life. That is why the prejudices of the individual, far more than his judgments, constitute the historical reality of his being. — Gadamer, Truth and Method (1975), p. 245. Gadamer sees in this essential historicity of our being the cause of our inability to achieve full explicit understanding of ourselves. The nature of our being is determined by our cultural background, and since it is formed in our very way of experiencing and living in language, it cannot be made fully explicit in that language: To acquire an awareness of a situation is, however, always a task of particular difficulty. The very idea of a situation means that we are not standing outside it and hence are unable to have any objective knowledge of it. We are always within the situation, and to throw light on it is a task that is never entirely completed. This is true also of the hermeneutic situation, i.e., the situation in which we find ourselves with regard to the tradition that we are trying to understand. The illumination of this situation—effective-historical reflection—can never be completely achieved, but this is not due to a lack in the reflection, but lies in the essence of the historical being which is ours. To exist historically means that knowledge of oneself can never be complete. — Gadamer, Truth and Method (1975), pp. 268-269. We can become aware of some of our prejudices, and in that way emancipate ourselves from some of the limits they place on our thinking. But we commit a fallacy in believing we can ever be free of all prejudice. Instead of striving for a means of getting away from our own pre-understanding, a theory of interpretation should aim at revealing the ways in which that pre-understanding interacts with the text. Gadamer's approach accepts the inevitability of the hermeneutic circle. The meaning of an individual text is contextual, depending on the moment of interpretation and the horizon brought to it by the interpreter. But that horizon is itself the product of a history of interactions in language, interactions which themselves represent texts that had to be understood in the light of pre-understanding. What we understand is based on what we already know, and what we already know comes from being able to understand. Gadamer's discourse on language and tradition is based on a rather broad analysis of interpretation and understanding. If we observe the hermeneutic circle only at the coarse-grained level offered by texts and societies, we remain blind to its operation at the much finer-grained level of daily life. If we look only at language, we fail to relate it to the interpretation that constitutes non-linguistic experience as well. It is therefore necessary to adopt a deeper approach in which interpretation is taken as relevant to ontology—to our understanding of what it means for something or someone to exist. ## 3.2 Understanding and ontology Gadamer, and before him Heidegger, took the hermeneutic idea of interpretation beyond the domain of textual analysis, placing it at the very foundation of human cognition. Just as we can ask how interpretation plays a part in a person's interaction with a text, we can examine its role in our understanding of the world as a whole. Heidegger and Gadamer reject the commonsense philosophy of our culture in a deep and fundamental way. The prevalent understanding is based on the metaphysical revolution of Galileo and Descartes, which grew out of a tradition going back to Plato and Aristotle. This understanding, which goes hand in hand with what we have called the ‘rationalistic orientation,' includes a kind of mind-body dualism that accepts the existence of two separate domains of phenomena, the objective world of physical reality, and the subjective mental world of an individual's thoughts and feelings. Simply put, it rests on several taken-for-granted assumptions: 1. We are inhabitants of a real world' made up of objects bearing properties. Our actions take place in that world. 2. There are‘objective facts’ about that world that do not depend on the interpretation (or even the presence) of any person. 3. Perception is a process by which facts about the world are (sometimes inaccurately) registered in our thoughts and feelings. 4. Thoughts and intentions about action can somehow cause physical (hence real-world) motion of our bodies. Much of philosophy has been an attempt to understand how the mental and physical domains are related—how our perceptions and thoughts relate to the world toward which they are directed. Some schools have denied the existence of one or the other. Some argue that we cannot coherently talk about the mental domain, but must understand all behavior in terms of the physical world, which includes the physical structure of our bodies. Others espouse solipsism, denying that we can establish the existence of an objective world at all, since our own mental world is the only thing of which we have immediate knowledge. Kant called it “a scandal of philosophy and of human reason in general" that over the thousands of years of Western culture, no philosopher had been able to provide a sound argument refuting psychological idealism—to answer the question “How can I know whether anything outside of my subjective consciousness exists?" Heidegger argues that “the ‘scandal of philosophy' is not that this proof has yet to be given, but that such proofs are expected and attempted again and again."7 He says of Kant's “Refutation of Idealism" that it shows“...how intricate these questions are and how what one wants to prove gets muddled with what one does prove and with the means whereby the proof is carried out."8 Heidegger's work grew out of the questions of phenomenology posed by his teacher Husserl, and developed into a quest for an understanding of Being. He argues that the separation of subject and object denies the more fundamental unity of being-in-the-world (Dasein). By drawing a distinction that I (the subject) am perceiving something else (the object), I have stepped back from the primacy of experience and understanding that operates without reflection. Heidegger rejects both the simple objective stance (the objective physical world is the primary reality) and the simple subjective stance (my thoughts and feelings are the primary reality), arguing instead that it is impossible for one to exist without the other. The interpreted and the interpreter do not exist independently: existence is interpretation, and interpretation is existence. Prejudice is not a condition in which the subject is led to interpret the world falsely, but is the necessary condition of having a background for interpretation (hence Being). This is clearly expressed in the later writings of Gadamer: It is not so much our judgments as it is our prejudices that constitute our being.... the historicity of our existence entails that prejudices, in the literal sense of the word, constitute the initial directedness of our whole ability to experience. Prejudices are biases of our openness to the world. They are simply conditions whereby we experience something—whereby what we encounter says something to us. — Gadamer, Philosophical Hermeneutics (1976), p. 9. We cannot present here a thorough discussion of Heidegger's philosophy, but will outline some points that are relevant to our later discussion:9 Our implicit beliefs and assumptions cannot all be made explicit. Heidegger argues that the practices in terms of which we render the world and our own lives intelligible cannot be made exhaustively explicit. There is no neutral viewpoint from which we can see our beliefs as things, since we always operate within the framework they provide. This is the essential insight of the hermeneutic circle, applied to understanding as a whole. The inevitability of this circularity does not negate the importance of trying to gain greater understanding of our own assumptions so that we can expand our horizon. But it does preclude the possibility that such understanding will ever be objective or complete. As Heidegger says in Being and Time (1962, p. 194), “But if we see this circle as a vicious one and look out for ways of avoiding it, even if we just sense it as an inevitable imperfection, then the art of understanding has been misunderstood from the ground up." Practical understanding is more fundamental than detached theoretical understanding. The Western philosophical tradition is based on the assumption that the detached theoretical point of view is superior to the involved practical viewpoint. The scientist or philosopher who devises theories is discovering how things really are, while in everyday life we have only a clouded idea. Heidegger reverses this, insisting that we have primary access to the world through practical involvement with the readyto-handthe world in which we are always acting unreflectively. Detached contemplation can be illuminating, but it also obscures the phenomena themselves by isolating and categorizing them. Much of the current study of logic, language, and thought gives primacy to activities of detached contemplation. Heidegger does not disregard this kind of thinking, but puts it into a context of cognition as praxis—as concernful acting in the world. He is concerned with our condition of thrownnessthe condition of understanding in which our actions find some resonance or effectiveness in the world. We do not relate to things primarily through having representations of them. Connected to both of the preceding points is Heidegger's rejection of mental representations. The common sense of our tradition is that in order to perceive and relate to things, we must have some content in our minds that corresponds to our knowledge of them. If we focus on concernful activity instead of on detached contemplation, the status of this representation is called into question. In driving a nail with a hammer (as opposed to thinking about a hammer), I need not make use of any explicit representation of the hammer. My ability to act comes from my familiarity with hammering, not my knowledge of a hammer. This skepticism concerning mental representations is in strong opposition to current approaches in cognitive psychology, linguistics, artificial intelligence, and the foundation of cognitive science, as described in Chapter 2. Representation is so taken for granted that it is hard to imagine what would be left if it were abandoned. One of the major issues discussed in later chapters is the connection between representation and mechanism; this discussion will aid our understanding of what it means to take seriously Heidegger's questioning of mental representation. Meaning is fundamentally social and cannot be reduced to the meaning-giving activity of individual subjects. The rationalistic view of cognition is individual-centered. We look at language by studying the characteristics of an individual language learner or language user, and at reasoning by describing the activity of an individual's deduction process. Heidegger argues that this is an inappropriate starting point—that we must take social activity as the ultimate foundation of intelligibility, and even of existence. A person is not an individual subject or ego, but a manifestation of Dasein within a space of possibilities, situated within a world and within a tradition. ## 3.3 An illustration of thrownness Many people encountering the work of Heidegger for the first time find it very difficult to comprehend. Abstract terms like‘Dasein' and 'thrownness,' for instance, are hard to relate to reality. This is the opposite of what Heidegger intends. His philosophy is based on a deep awareness of everyday life. He argues that the issues he discusses are difficult not because they are abstruse, but because they are concealed by their ordinary everydayness. In order to give more of a sense of the importance of thrownness (which will play a large role in the second half of the book), it may be useful to consider a simple example that evokes experiences of thrownness for many readers. Imagine that you are chairing a meeting of fifteen or so people, at which some important and controversial issue is to be decided: say, the decision to bring a new computer system into the organization. As the meeting goes on you must keep things going in a productive direction, deciding whom to call on, when to cut a speaker off, when to call for an end of discussion or a vote, and so forth. There are forcefully expressed differences of opinion, and if you don't take a strong role the discussion will quickly deteriorate into a shouting match dominated by the loudest, who will keep repeating their own fixed positions in hopes of wearing everyone else down. We can make a number of observations about your situation: You cannot avoid acting. At every moment, you are in a position of authority, and your actions affect the situation. If you just sit there for a time, letting things go on in the direction they are going, that in itself constitutes an action, with effects that you may or may not want. You are 'thrown' into action independent of your will. You cannot step back and reflect on your actions. Anyone who has been in this kind of situation has afterwards felt “I should have said..." or “I shouldn't have let Joe get away with..." In the need to respond immediately to what people say and do, it is impossible to take time to analyze things explicitly and choose the best course of action. In fact, if you stop to do so you will miss some of what is going on, and implicitly choose to let it go on without interruption. You are thrown on what people loosely call your ‘instincts,’ dealing with whatever comes up. The effects of actions cannot be predicted. Even if you had time to reflect, it is impossible to know how your actions will affect other people. If you decide to cut someone off in order to get to another topic, the group may object to your heavy-handedness, that in itself becoming a topic of discussion. If you avoid calling on someone whose opinion you don't like, you may find that he shouts it out, or that a friend feels compelled to take up his point of view. Of course this doesn't imply that things are total chaos, but simply that you cannot count on careful rational planning to find steps that will achieve your goals. You must, as the idiom goes, ‘flow with the situation.' You do not have a stable representation of the situation. In the post-mortem analysis, you will observe that there were significant patterns. “There were two factions, with the Smith group trying to oppose the computer via the strategy of keeping the discussion on costs and away from an analysis of what we are doing now, and the Wilson group trying to be sure that whether or not we got the computer, they would remain in control of the scheduling policies. Evans was the key, since he could go either way, and they brought up the training issue because that is his bailiwick and they knew he wouldn't want the extra headaches." In a sense you have a representation of the situation, with objects (e.g., the two factions) and properties (their goals, Evans's lack of prior loyalty, etc.), but this was not the understanding you had to work with as it was developing. Pieces of it may have emerged as the meeting went on, but they were fragmentary, possibly contradictory, and may have been rejected for others as things continued. Every representation is an interpretation. Even in the post-mortem, your description of what was going on is hardly an objective analysis of the kind that could be subjected to proof. Two people at the same meeting could well come away with very different interpretations. Evans might say “Smith is competing with me for that promotion, and he wanted to bring up the training issue to point out that we've been having difficulty in our group lately." There is no ultimate way to determine that any one interpretation is really right or wrong, and even the people whose behavior is in question may well not be in touch with their own deep motivations. Language is action. Each time you speak you are doing something quite different from simply ‘stating a fact.’ If you say “First we have to address the issue of system development" or “Let's have somebody on the other side talk," you are not describing the situation but creating it. The existence of “the issue of system development" or “the other side" is an interpretation, and in mentioning it you bring your interpretation into the group discourse. Of course others can object “That isn't really an issue—you're confusing two things" or “We aren't taking sides, everyone has his own opinion." But whether or not your characterization is taken for granted or taken as the basis for argument, you have created the objects and properties it describes by virtue of making the utterance. Heidegger recognized that ordinary everyday life is like the situation we have been describing. Our interactions with other people and with the inanimate world we inhabit put us into a situation of thrownness, for which the metaphor of the meeting is much more apt than the metaphor of the objective detached scientist who makes observations, forms hypotheses, and consciously chooses a rational course of action. ## 3.4 Breaking down and readiness-to-hand Another aspect of Heidegger's thought that is difficult for many people to assimilate to their previous understanding is his insistence that objects and properties are not inherent in the world, but arise only in an event of breaking down in which they become present-at-hand. One simple example he gives is that of a hammer being used by someone engaged in driving a nail. To the person doing the hammering, the hammer as such does not exist. It is a part of the background of readiness-to-hand that is taken for granted without explicit recognition or identification as an object. It is part of the hammerer's world, but is not present any more than are the tendons of the hammerer's arm. The hammer presents itself as a hammer only when there is some kind of breaking down or unreadiness-to-hand. Its ‘hammerness' emerges if it breaks or slips from grasp or mars the wood, or if there is a nail to be driven and the hammer cannot be found. The point is a subtle one, closely related to the distinction between thrownness and reflection on one's actions, as discussed above. As observers, we may talk about the hammer and reflect on its properties, but for the person engaged in the thrownness of unhampered hammering, it does not exist as an entity. Some other examples may help convey the importance of this distinction. As I watch my year-old baby learn to walk and pick up objects, I may be tempted to say that she is learning about gravity.’ But if I really want to deal with her ontology—with the world as it exists for her—there is no such thing as gravity. It would be inappropriate to view her learning as having anything to do with a concept or representation of gravity and its effects, even though she is clearly learning the skills that are necessary for acting in a physical world that we (as adult observers) characterize in terms of abstractions like ‘gravity.’ For the designer of space vehicles, on the other hand, it is clear that gravity exists. In anticipating the forms of breaking down that will occur when the normal background of gravity is altered, the designer must deal with gravity as a phenomenon to be considered, represented, and manipulated. If we turn to computer systems, we see that for different people, engaged in different activities, the existence of objects and properties emerges in different kinds of breaking down. As I sit here typing a draft on a word processor, I am in the same situation as the hammerer. I think of words and they appear on my screen. There is a network of equipment that includes my arms and hands, a keyboard, and many complex devices that mediate between it and a screen. None of this equipment is present for me except when there is a breaking down. If a letter fails to appear on the screen, the keyboard may emerge with properties such as ‘stuck keys.' Or I may discover that the program was in fact constructed from separate components such as a ‘screen manager' and akeyboard handler,’ and that certain kinds of ‘bugs’can be attributed to the keyboard handler. If the problem is serious, I may be called upon to bring forth a complex network of properties reflecting the design of the system and the details of computer software and hardware. For me, the writer, this network of objects and properties did not exist previously. The typing was part of my world, but not the structure that emerges as I try to cope with the breakdown. But of course it did exist for someone else—for the people who created the device by a process of conscious design. They too, though, took for granted a background of equipment which, in the face of breaking down, they could have further brought to light. In sum, Heidegger insists that it is meaningless to talk about the existence of objects and their properties in the absence of concernful activity, with its potential for breaking down. What really is is not defined by an objective omniscient observer, nor is it defined by an individual—the writer or computer designer—but rather by a space of potential for human concern and action. In the second part of the book we will show how shifting from a rationalistic to a Heideggerian perspective can radically alter our conception of computers and our approach to computer design.