## 1PREFACE ## BY HILLA REBAY Wassily Kandinsky was born in Moscow, December 5, 1866. As a child, he loved to paint. The effects of colours on him were deeply felt. The beauty of the sunset over the cupolas of Moscow and the intensity of colour in peasant art, contrasting with the grey vastness of his native country, enlightened his vision. After terminating his law studies at the age of thirty, he was offered a professorship. In refusing it, at this turning point of his life, he made the decision to abandon a safe career and to leave for Munich to study painting. He later recalled this decision as “putting a final period to long studies of preceding years.” After two years of painting in Munich, he was admitted to the Royal Academy where he studied under Franz von Stuck. This instruction, however, did not satisfy him and in 1902 he opened his own art school, which closed two years later when he undertook a four-year series of travels to France, Italy, Tunisia, Belgium, and Holland. Upon his return to Munich, one evening there occurred at dusk the magical incident of his seeing merely the form and tone values in one of his paintings. While not recognizing its subject, he was not only struck by its increased beauty but also by the superfluity of the object in painting, in order to feel its spell. It took him fully two years to crystallize this miraculous discovery. Nevertheless, he still used objective inspiration in the paintings of this period, but only as a structural element, while the organization of form and colour values, used for the sake of composition, already dominated these abstractions. In 1910, Kandinsky wrote his famous book “On the Spiritual in Art,” a theoretical treatise, in which he established the philosophical basis of non-objective painting. The following year he finished and exhibited his first entirely non-objective canvases, which attracted world-wide attention and excited controversies of tremendous import. Between 1914 and 1921 Kandinsky lived in Russia where he acted in several official artistic capacities. In 1919 he became the director of the Museum of Pictorial Culture in Moscow and, as such, founded the Institute of Artistic Culture for which he wrote the recently published Culture Plan. In 1920, he was named professor of art at the University of Moscow. In 1920, also in Moscow, he created the Academy of Artistic Science, of which he became vice-president. Later that year, Kandinsky returned to Berlin where, at the Wallerstein Gallery, he exhibited his first open-spaced canvases, in which one sees his turning from lyrical organizations of effervescent colour expressions to a more dramatic clarification of definite form and space precision. With infinite care he studied the dimension of open-space in contrast to colour value and form extension, as well as line direction and the intensity of the point. After 1923 he perfected, with scientific precision, his marvelous presentation of colour technique. He also taught at the well-known Bauhaus, first established in Weimar, later in Dessau, until 1933, when prejudiced authorities ordered its closing. Kandinsky then left for Berlin, but finally, the next year, settled in Paris, where he continued his work until his death, December 13, 1944. As his last paintings prove, with intense concentration, Kandinsky increasingly refined the precision of balance in the given space of the painting, as the innermost powerful essence of its rhythmic tension. Like every creative painter of our day, he ceased to be satisfied with representation, however artistic, but felt more and more the desire to express his inner life in a cosmic organization. He was, however, the first to proclaim this principle; and when he realized that the musician’s incorporeal freedom from earthly inspiration for his art was also the privilege of the painter, he became one of the most violently attacked pioneers. He courageously maintained this conviction, in spite of the all-powerful objective tradition and mass belief. With his God-given freedom in the artistic, esthetic creation of rhythm, he invented the first painting for painting’s sake, and not for the sake of informative make-believe, as had been the ideal of the past. He found that a non-objective painting’s rhythmic life, expressing creative invention, can be profound if done by a visionary master. It can also have a strong ordering influence on the observer. This, he found, was denied to representative painting, through its imitative, lifeless limitation. Yet this is equally denied to those schematic, mediocre, condensed patterns by most so-called abstract painters, whose decorations are as far removed from being art as the organgrinder is from musicianship, or as the scale is from the sonata. The rhythmic law of constructive counterpoint, contained in a creative masterpiece, sets into motion life itself, through a rhythm displayed between harmonies and the contrasts of colour and form, with which the given space is beautified. In order to clarify, for the serious student of painting, the existing counterpoint in the law of correlation, Kandinsky, through intense concentration on these esthetic problems, undertook profound studies, outlined by him in his treatises, as well as in his culture programs. He wrote extensively about the theoretical and technical elements of this art. These writings offer valuable tools to those who are endowed and eager to express their creative urge. At the same time, such knowledge of counterpoint and technical elements is not at all needed by the layman in order to enjoy this art. Without professional knowledge, all he is expected to do is either to like or dislike the painting, as he would a melody or a flower, which, like all other God-given creations, are equally beyond understanding and which, like art, are simply there to be enjoyed. Because the non-objective painter reacts intuitively to a superior influence and realization of the universal law, thus enabling him to give his message, this sensitive and prophetic artist of our day has refined his senses to receivership of those invisible, spiritual forces which he intuitively expresses. He then derives with subtle sensibility his visionary inspiration from the spiritual domain which is indestructible and his very own, in the same degree in which he has developed his faculty to receive. Thereafter, his creations develop with a wealth of variation those visions of beauty, which, controlled by laws of counterpoint, make his artistic message as endlessly alive and original as nature itself. The artistic expression of our day no longer responds to materialistic objectives; it has advanced to become spiritually creative. No longer must the painter display a lemon to paint the beauty of an intense yellow; or search the sky to contrast it with a lovely blue; nor must he anywhere at all hunt for earthly motives before he is permitted to paint. At will, he can now organize forms and colours into the virgin-white, esthetic purity of a given space, which is his canvas; so as to enrich its beauty without disturbing its loveliness, he is now free to follow a higher evolution beyond the pretense of make-believe. Unknown to some painters who miss their epoch and are still shackled by the caveman’s out-dated urge for reproduction, the freedom of art has become infinite, through the painter’s vision of new possibilities and esthetic expressions which are spiritually conceived and of superior value. The eyes of the painter have been liberated to vision, freed from the bonds of imitation and the pretense of a perspective make-believe, of a faked third dimension, to a visionary reality. The non-objective artist is a practical educator, the bearer of joy and a creator who deals with eternity. His painting gradually elevates the onlooker, through pleasurable realization of esthetic refinement, to harmony containing order, which proves satisfying to the soul’s need for perfect peace. The prophetic, immaterialistic ideal of the modern painter proclaims the coming era of spirituality. His reaching into the absolute emphasized the subconscious desire of all men to such advance. The increase in material ease of life, which man has accomplished by harnessing invisible forces of electrical waves, rays, or atoms, has freed him now and has given him time with which to direct his aims, to increase his cultural and esthetic expression, and to contact the eternal realities of permanence, so close to all and yet so utterly ignored by most. Non-objective painting helps to free the human soul from materialistic contemplation and brings joy through the perfection of esthetic enlightenment. Therefore, Kandinsky was not only a painter and scientist, but also a prophet of almost religious significance. The ideal of his art was conceived even before the utter illusion of the density of matter had been proved by science, and before the reality of frequencies and invisible forces had opened the imagination of man to unlimited expectations. The profound truth of Kandinsky’s theories at once impressed those who were equally capable of feeling esthetic enjoyment through his paintings and of realizing the importance of Kandinsky’s mission at its advent. Since photography and motion pictures today record all events, situations, or persons for practical or sentimental need, the skill of modern man has been freed from reproduction by hand, thus enabling him to cultivate a higher stage in art expression by following his creative esthetic urge. His eyes have become sensitized to realize the rhythmic life in the span of the in-between the life that is the essence of a non-objective masterpiece. Such a masterpiece, due to those spiritual qualities, becomes everlastingly appealing in its endless combinations of colours, forms, and contrasts, in their relations to each other or to space. It can be easily observed that each colour and design motive is organized in itself, while constantly reacting and playing with its form or colour opponent. Thus it brings restful enjoyment, which is as peacefully uplifting as the observance of the infinity of the starlit sky. Out of such pleasures emerges the realization of the rhythm which lies in the in-between, realized by following the motives and discovering the meeting points of lines and forms, in contrast to a calm, harmonious unit. Contrary to the static form-ideal of painting which prevailed in the past millennium, where the subjective object was immediately perceived as a whole and graphically recorded by the intellect, always directed objectively earthward, the moving form-ideal of today sets into motion the eye in any desired direction of the rhythmic non-objective creation. This cannot be mentally recorded or memorized like objective impressions because it points heavenward, as an expression of infinity. If to some the harmony of order and beauty of these non-objective creative paintings is not immediately obvious or appealing, it gradually becomes evident to anyone permanently exposed to their increasingly realized influence. Through this, the onlooker subconsciously enfolds his personal advance towards exactitude and sense for esthetic beauty, finding it immensely enjoyable and useful. Because the objective painting contacts earthly matter only, it cannot cause such spiritual evolution. To unfold the human soul and lead it into receptivity of cosmic power and joy is the tremendous benefit derived from the non-objective masterpiece, so intensely useful and conceived from the primary essence of creation. In loving Kandinsky’s paintings, we assimilate ourselves with expressions of beauty with which he links us to a higher world. Kandinsky’s message of nonobjectivity is the message of Eternity.