# INTRODUCTION ## The Outer and the Inner Every phenomenon can be experienced in two ways. These two ways are not arbitrary, but are bound up with the phenomenon—developing out of its nature and characteristics: Externally—or—inwardly. The street can be observed through the windowpane, which diminishes its sounds so that its movements become phantom-like. The street itself, as seen through the transparent (yet hard and firm) pane seems set apart, existing and pulsating as if “beyond.” As soon as we open the door, step out of the seclusion and plunge into the outside reality, we become an active part of this reality and experience its pulsation with all our senses. The constantly changing grades of tonality and tempo of the sounds wind themselves about us, rise spirally and, suddenly, collapse. Likewise, the movements envelop us by a play of horizontal and vertical lines bending in different directions, as colour-patches pile up and dissolve into high or low tonalities. The work of Art mirrors itself upon the surface of our consciousness. However, its image extends beyond, to vanish from the surface without a trace when the sensation has subsided. A certain transparent, but definite glass-like partition, abolishing direct contact from within, seems to exist here as well. Here, too, exists the possibility of entering art’s message, to participate actively, and to experience its pulsating-life with all one’s senses. ## Analysis Aside from its scientific value, which depends upon an exact examination of the individual art elements, the analysis of the art elements forms a bridge to the inner pulsation of a work of art. The general viewpoint of our day, that it would be dangerous to “dissect” art since such dissection would inevitably lead to art’s abolition, originated in an ignorant under-evaluation of these elements thus laid bare in their primary strength. In reference to analytical examinations, the art of painting, strangely enough, assumes a special position among the various forms of art expression. Architecture, for example, by its nature closely bound up with utility, consequently requires from its very start a certain degree of scientific capacities. Music, which serves no practical use (with the exception of march and dance music) and which has until now remained abstract, has long developed its theory; perhaps so far it is only one-sided but, nevertheless, it is constantly being developed. Thus these two diametrically opposite forms of art expression have a scientific basis about which no one seems to feel offended. If in this respect the other art expressions have remained more or less backward, it is always in the degree of development relative to the artistic development. ## Theory Painting, especially, has advanced with almost fantastic strides during the last decades, and it has only recently been freed from practical meaning and liberated from the necessity of responding to the many purposes it had earlier been forced to serve. It has attained a level which imperiously demands that an exact scientific examination be made about the pictorial means and purposes of painting. Without such an investigation, further advance is impossible—either for the artist or the general public. ## In Earlier Times It can be assumed with complete certainty that painting was not always lacking in theory as it is today. The beginner was taught that certain scientific knowledge formerly existed, not merely covering purely technical matters, but certain principles of composition as well, and that to some extent, facts concerning the elements, their nature and application were general knowledge to the artists.<sup>2</sup> With the exception of the purely technical recipes (printing, binding media, etc.) of which many have been found only within the last twenty years<sup>3</sup> and which, in Germany especially, have played a certain role in the development of colours, very little has been transferred to our time of this earlier knowledge—which may even have represented a highly developed science of art. It is a strange fact that although the impressionists destroyed the last remnants of painting theory in their fight against “academicism,” they immediately—though unconsciously—laid the first foundation stone of a new science of art, despite their contention that nature is the only theory for art.<sup>4</sup> ## Art History One of the most important tasks which the new science of art could set for itself would be a thorough analysis of the history of art; to determine the elements, construction and composition in various periods—among different people on the one hand and, on the other, to ascertain the growth within the scope of these three questions: the direction, the rate of speed, and the necessity underlying the enrichment and the apparently impulsive development—which possibly pursues a definite evolution such as, perhaps, a wave line. While the first part of this task—the analysis—borders on the problems of the “positive” sciences, the second part—the nature of the development—touches the problems of philosophy. This creates a focal point of lawful measure of the human development in general. ## “Dissection” It should be noted in passing that the revealing of the forgotten knowledge of earlier art epochs can be accomplished only with great effort, but this should decisively eliminate the fear of the “dissection” of art. For, if “dead” precepts lie so deeply buried in living works that they only with great difficulty can be brought to light, then their “injurious” effects are nothing other than the fear which arises from ignorance. ## Two Goals The researches which must become the cornerstone of the new science—the science of art—have two goals and proceed out of two necessities: 1. the need for science in general which grows spontaneously out of a non- or extra-utilitarian urge to know: the “pure” science, and 2. the need of balance in the creative powers which can be grouped under two schematic heads —intuition and calculation: the “practical” science. Standing at present at the very beginning of this research, it appears to us today as a labyrinth going off to all sides and disappearing into a distant fog. Since we are absolutely unable to predict its further development, it must be started very systematically, for which a clear plan is necessary. ## Elements The first unavoidable question is, naturally, the question of the art elements, which are the building materials of works of art and which, as such, must be different in every art. We must at the outset distinguish basic elements from other elements, viz.—elements without which a work in any particular art cannot even come into existence. The other type of elements must be termed secondary elements. In both cases it is necessary to carry through an organic gradation of the elements. This book will deal with two basic elements which are the very beginning of every work of painting, and without which this beginning is not possible. At the same time, they constitute the conclusive material for an independent kind of painting—graphic. ## The Course of the Research We must, therefore, start here with the proto-element of painting—the Point. The ideal of all research is: 1. precise investigation of each individual phenomenon—in isolation, 2. the reciprocal effect of phenomena upon each other—in combinations, 3. general conclusions which are to be drawn from the above two divisions. My objective in this book extends only to the first two parts. The material in this book does not suffice to cover the third part which, in any case, cannot be rushed. The investigation should proceed in a meticulously exact and pedantically precise manner. Step by step, this “tedious” road must be traversed—not the smallest alteration in the nature, in the characteristics, in the effects of the individual elements should escape the watchful eye. Only by means of a microscopic analysis can the science of art lead to a comprehensive synthesis, which will extend far beyond the confines of art into the realm of the “oneness” of the “human” and the “divine.” This, after all, is the perceptible goal, though it nevertheless lies far in the future. ## Purpose of this Book Concerning this special task, I not only lack the strength to carry the initial work through with sufficient exactitude, but lack space, as well. The aim of this small book is merely to point out, in a general and fundamental way, the “graphic” basic elements viewed: 1. “abstractly,” i.e. isolated from the objective environment of the material form of the material plane, and 2. on the material plane—the effect of the fundamental characteristics of this plane. But even this must be restricted to a rather superficial investigation—as an attempt to find a standard method in this scientific research of art and to test it in its use.