Above Abstract Art Abstract Form Analysis Angles Acute Free Obtuse Right Architecture Art, History of Art, Science of Below Cold Collision Colour Black Blue Green Grey Orange Red Violet White Yellow Composition Theory Contrast Dance Dramatic Elements Graphic Expression Graphics Etching Lithography Material Tools Woodcut Left Line Angular Boundary Combined Complex Curved Diagonal Free Horizontal Straight Temperature Vertical Wave-like Lyric Method Music Nature Numerical Express Painting Parallel Plane Basic Circle Square Triangle Poetry Point and Line Conception Form Geometric on Plane Size Purpose (Goal) Repetition Right Sculpture Sound Double (Two) Multi-One Proto-Three Structure Acentric Centric Eccentric Synthesis Technique Tension Texture Time Translation Warm Weight 1 This article on Kandinsky by Hilla Rebay, Director of the Museum of Non-Objective Painting, New York City, was originally published in Pittsburgh in the May 1946 issue of the “Carnegie Magazine” under the title of “Pioneer in Non-Objective Painting.” 2 For instance: the use in composition of the three primary planes as the basis for the construction of a picture. The remnants of these principles were used until quite recently in the art academies, and possibly still are in use today. 3 See, for example, the valuable work by Ernst Berger—“Beitrage zur Entwicklungsgeschichte der Maltechnik,” 5 parts, Georg D. W. Callwey Verlag, Munich. In the meantime, a voluminous literature dealing with these questions has sprung up. Recently there appeared that extensive work by Dr. Alexander Eibner—“Entwicklung und Werkstoffe der Wandmalerei vom Altertum bis zur Neuzeit,” Verlag B. Heller, Munich. 4 Very soon after this, appeared P. Signac’s book: “De Delacroix au Neo-Impression-isme” (published in Germany by Axel Juncker, Charlottenburg, 1910). 5 For the relationship between colour and form elements consult my article “Die Grundelemente der Form” in “Staatl. Bauhaus 1919-1923,” Bauhaus-Verlag, Weimar-Munich, p. 26 and colour plate V. 6 There is a geometric designation of the point by means of an “0” meaning “origo,” that is, “beginning” or “origin.” The geometric and the pictorial views coincide. The point, when looked upon as a symbol, is also termed the “proto-element.” (“Dos Zeichenbuch” by Rudolph Koch, II Edition, Verlag W. Gerstung, Offenbach a. M., 1926.) 7 See Heinrich Jacoby, “Jenseits von ‘musikalisch’ und ‘unmusikalisch’,” Stuttgart, Verlag F. Enke, 1925. Difference between “matter” and “sound-energy” (p. 48). 8 The reason for this division is an external one and it would be more logical, if a more exact definition is necessary, to divide painting into hand-painting and print-painting, which would quite correctly point to the technical origin of art works. The term “graphic” has lost its clarity— it is not uncommon for watercolour to be classified with the graphics which is sufficient proof of the confusion in our thoughtless, habitual use of conceptions. A watercolour painted by hand is a work of painting or, to designate it more exactly, of hand-painting. This same watercolour, reproduced exactly by means of lithography, still is a work of painting but, to be precise, of print-painting. To make a real distinction, one could add the terms “black-and-white” or “colour” painting. 2 The “All-Russian Academy of the Science of Art” in Moscow, for example, took some steps in this direction in the year 1920. 9 When I finally became converted to abstract art, the time element in painting became incontestably clear to me and since then I have used it in practice. 10 This observation will be clarified more fully in the section of the book which deals with the basic plane. 11 Bound up with this question is a special “modern” question “Can a work be created by purely mechanical means?” In cases of the most primitive numerical problems, this must be answered in the affirmative. 12 It is clearly evident that certain musicians also have been more or less consciously attracted by the magnetic power of the point, which can be distinctly recognized through its inner tension as demonstrated by the so-called subconscious “hallucination” of Bruckner, whose meaning had been detected and described: “How could this (his interest in the effect of points after signatures or on doorplates) have been a derangement of his spirit, when it seems that it was no wandering mind which investigated these points—especially if one understands Bruckner’s nature and the manner in which he searched for knowledge as indicated in his studies of the theory of music? It becomes apparent that psychological significance resides in the fact that he was attracted to the reclining proto-unit of all spatial expansion’s origin. He sought everywhere for the ultimate inner points, to reach this final analysis out of which, in his opinion, originates the infinity of vast dimensions, impossible without its originating extension point.” “Bruckner” by Dr. Ernst Kurth, vol. I, p. 110, footnote. Max Hesses Verlag, Berlin. 13 In making these translations, I received the valuable aid of Music Superintendent Franz v. Hoesslin and for this I extend to him my heartfelt gratitude. 14 This question cannot be discussed more at length here. 15 A quite different case is the division of a surface into points which is dictated by technical necessity as, for example, in zincography, where the division of the surface into points by the screen is unavoidable—the point is not intended here to play an independent role and, to the extent that the technique permits this, it is deliberately repressed. 16 See, for example, the characterization of yellow and blue in my book “Uber das Geistige in der Kunst,” R. Piper & Co., Verlag, Munich, 3rd Edition, 1912, pp. 73, 76, 77 and Plates I and II. [This book has recently been translated into English and reissued under the title “On the Spiritual in Art” by the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, New York City, and this particular reference will be found on pages 60 to 64, incl.] A cautious use of these concepts is especially important in the analysis of “form in drawing,” since it is right here that direction plays a definite role. It is to be observed with regret that painting is least well provided with an exact terminology which renders scientific work exceedingly difficult and sometimes quite impossible. One must start here from the beginning and a dictionary of terminology is a necessary preliminary. An attempt at this was made in Moscow about 1919 but has achieved no results. Perhaps the time was not then ripe. 17 See “On the Spiritual in Art,” where I call black the symbol of death and white, of birth. The same thing can with complete justification be said about the horizontal and the vertical—low and high. The former is lying; the latter is standing, walking, moving about, finally climbing upward. Supporting—growing. Passive—active. Relatively: feminine—masculine. 18 A strong reaction is to be expected to this exclusiveness, but it will not be in the form of seeking refuge in the past as is, to some extent, the case today. The flight into the past has been frequently in evidence during the last decades—Greek “Classic,” Italian Quattrocento, the later Rome, “primitive” art (including “wild beasts”); now, in Germany—German “old masters,” in Runia—the icons, etc., in France—discreet looking backward from “today” to “yesterday,” in contrast to the attitude of certain Germans and Russians who descend into the profound depths. The future seems empty to the “modern” human being. 19 Red, grey and green, in certain relationships, can be placed on a parallel with each other: red and green—transition from yellow to blue; grey—from black to white, etc. This belongs in the field of colour theory. Suggestions concerning this are to be found in “On the Spiritual in Art.” 20 See “On the Spiritual in Art,” pp. 69 and 70. 21 Aside from intuitive translations, systematic laboratory experiments should be made in this direction. It would be advisable to investigate first the lyric or dramatic content of every phenomenon chosen for translation, and then to seek in the corresponding linear realm, a form suitable to the given case. Furthermore, an analysis of the already existing “translated works” would throw a strong light on this question. There are numerous examples of such translations in music: musical “pictures” derived from natural phenomena, musical form for works of other arts, etc. The Russian composer, A. A. Schenschin, has made extremely valuable experiments in this direction—“Années de Pélérinage” by Liszt which relates to Michael Angelo’s “Pensieroso” and Raphael’s “Sposalizio.” 22 See “On the Spiritual in Art,” p. 67, Figure 11. Also, Table V in “Basic Elements” in the Bauhaus Book, Bauhaus Verlag, 1923. ## 23 Ibidem. 24 In chemistry, the equality sign is not used in such cases, but rather, a , which points to relationships. My task is to point out “organic” relationships between the elements of painting. Even in cases where it is impossible to establish identities, that is, to prove them conclusively, I will indicate their inner relationship by the use of two arrows . Furthermore, one must not in such cases be deterred by possible mistakes: the truth is not infrequently reached by way of error. 25 The origin of the circle will be described in the analysis of curved lines—attack and yielding resistance. The circle is, at all events, a special case among the three primary forms—straight lines are unable to create it. 26 Those differences which require exact examination, not alone in reference to “nation” but also to race, will surely be determined with no particular difficulty if the investigation is carried on exactly and systematically. Nevertheless, in matters of detail, which not infrequently acquire unexpected importance, it will often be impossible to remove insuperable obstacles—influences which often, in the beginning of a culture, affect details and lead in some cases to superficial imitations and thereby becloud further development. On the other hand, purely external phenomena receive little attention in a systematic work and can in this kind of theoretic work be neglected which, naturally, would not be possible in the case of an exclusively “positivistic” approach. Even in these “simple” cases, a one-sided approach can lead only to one-sided conclusions. It would be short-sighted to assume that a people is “accidentally” placed in a definite geographic position which determines its further development. It would also be quite as insufficient to assert that the political and economic conditions which, in the final analysis, flow out of this people itself, guide and shape its creative power. The goal of a creative power is an inner one—this inner cannot be shelled out of the external alone. 27 See “On the Spiritual in Art,” p. 68. 28 A form diverging in a regular manner from the circle is the spiral (Fig. 37); the force acting from within exceeds the outer in a uniform measure. The spiral is, therefore, a circle going off its track in a uniform manner. Besides this difference, another can be observed which, for painting, is much more significant: the spiral is a line, while the circle is a plane. Geometry does not make this distinction which is exceedingly important for painting; aside from the circle, it designates the ellipse, the figure eight and similar plane forms as lines (curves). The term used here, the “curved line,” is not the equivalent of the more exact geometric terminology (parabola, hyperbola, etc.) for geometry, from its standpoint on the basis of formulae, must inevitably make classifications which in this connection are out of the question for painting. 29 The identity of the basic elements in sculpture and architecture explains in part the victorious subjugation of sculpture by architecture today. 30 The nomenclature used here for the basic elements of the various arts must be looked upon as provisional. Even the commonly-held concepts are hazy. 31 This is a clear example of the necessary simultaneous use of intuition and calculation. 32 See clear suggestions of this in “On the Spiritual in Art” and in my article “Über Bühnenkomposition” in “Der Blaue Reiter,” Piper Verlag, Munich, 1912. 33 Further discussion of the sound “right,” “left,” and its tensions will be found in the section “Basic Plane.” The effects of right and left can be investigated by holding the book in front of the mirror; above and below, by turning the book upside-down. The “reflection” and the “upside-down” are still rather mysterious facts which are of great importance to the theory of composition. 34 several full page diagrams in this book are clear examples of this. (See Appendix.) 35 The means to this “approaching-of-the-boundary” extends far beyond the limits of the problem of line-plane and into all the elements of painting and their application; e.g., colour uses this means to a still greater extent, thereby possessing countless possibilities. The basic plane, too, works with this medium which, together with the other means of expression, belongs among the rules and laws of the theory of composition. 36 See “On the Spiritual in Art,” p. 90. 37 Repetition by other instruments of the same pitch must be viewed as a coloured-qualitative one. 38 The line grows organically out of points. 39 In measuring tonal pitch in physics, special apparatus is used which projects the vibrating tone mechanically on a surface and which thereby gives the musical tone a precise graphic form. Similar things are also done with colour. In many important cases, the science of art already makes use of exact graphic translations as material for the synthetic method. 40 The relationships of the pictorial means to the means of other art expressions and, finally, to the phenomena of other “worlds,” can be indicated only very superficially here. “Translations,” especially, and their possibitities—in general, the transcription of various phenomena into their respective linear (“graphic”) and colour (“pictorial”) forms—require a thorough study of linear and colour expression. There is no question that, in principle, every phenomenon of every world admits of such expression—the expression of its inner nature—regardtess of whether it be Raphael, J. S. Bach, a storm, fear, a cosmic process, tooth-ache, a “high” or a “low” phenomenon, a “high” or a “low” experience. The only danger would be to remain bound to the external form and to neglect the content. 41 A special and very important case in technics is the use of line as the graphic expression of number. The automatic drawing of lines (like that also used in meteorological observations) is a precise graphic representation of an increasing or decreasing force. This representation makes possible the reduction of the use of number to a minimum—the line partially replaces the number. The resulting diagrams are clear and also comprehensible to the layman (Fig. 66). 42 A special technical construction—masts, which are erected for distant transmission of electrical power, affords an instructive example of this (Fig. 69). One gets the impression here of a “technical forest,” which looks similar to a “natural forest” of palms or fir trees, pressed flat. In the graphic construction of such a mast, the two basic graphic elements—line and point—are used exclusively. 43 The attachment of the leaves around the shoot takes place in the most exact manner, which can be expressed with a mathematic formula—numerical expression—and science has represented this with a spiral-like diagram (Fig. 72). Compare this with the geometric spiral on p. 81, Fig. 37. 44 There are two reasons for the fact that in recent years exact geometric construction in painting has seemed so very important to painters: 1, the necessary and natural use of abstract colour in the “suddenly” awakened architecture, where the colour plays a role subordinated to the whole and for which “pure” painting prepared itself unconsciously in “horizontal-vertical” and 2, the necessity which sprang up naturally, dragging painting along with it, to reach back to the elementary, and to seek this elementary not alone in itself, but in its structure as well. This tendency can be observed in the whole attitude of the “new” individual, not only in art but more or less in all fields, as a transition from the primary to the complex, which will sooner or later definitely be accomplished. Abstract art, which has gained its freedom, is also subject here to the “laws of nature” and is forced to proceed as nature did formerly; from a modest beginning with protoplasm and cells, it very gradually advanced to more complex organisms. Abstract art today is also creating primary, or more or less primary, art organisms, whose further development the present day painter can only surmise in its indefinite outlines; these lure him, excite him, but also quiet him when he looks into the perspective of the future which lies before him. It may, for example, be remarked here that those who question the future of abstract art, reckon with the evolutionary state of the amphibians, which are very considerably removed from developed vertebrates, and do not represent the end result of creation but, rather, the “beginning.” 45 These exceedingly important questions can only be briefly touched upon within the limited confines of this book: they are part of the theory of composition. It must only be emphasized here that the elements are the same in different creative fields and that the differences first reveal themselves in the structure. Furthermore, the examples used here should be looked upon only in this light. 46 An example of the fruitful influence of painting on the other forms of art expression. An elaboration of this subject would surely lead to surprising discoveries in the history of the development of all the art forms. 47 E.g., the exclusion of colour or, at least, its reduction to the minimum sound in any number of cubist works. 48 It remains to be mentioned that the three techniques have a social value and are related to social forms. The etching is certainly of an aristocratic nature: a plate can produce only a few good prints and they, furthermore, turn out differently each time so that every print is unique. The woodcut is more abundant and uniform, but it can be used for colour only with difficulty. The lithograph, on the other hand, is able to yield an almost limitless number of prints with the greatest rapidity in a purely mechanical way and, through the ever more developing use of colour, approaches the hand. painted picture. At any rate, it produces a certain substitute for the picture. The democratic nature of lithography is hereby clearly indicated. 49 Ideas like “movement,” “climbing,” “falling,” etc. are derived from the material world. On the pictorial BP they are to be understood as the tensions living within the elements, which are modified by the tensions of the BP. 50 This reaction apparently is later transferred to the finished work, not alone for the artist but for the objective observer as well—in which class the artist, too, must in a way be considered: when, for instance, he takes the position of an objective observer in respect to other artists works. The view, that that which lies on my right is the “right” may, perhaps, explain the real impossibility of maintaining a completely objective attitude toward the work and of entirely eliminating the subjective. 51 Not without reason is the relationship of the square to red so evident: square red. 52 See “On the Spiritual in Art.” 53 The human figure required, naturally, an especially elongated vertical format. 54 Compare Fig. 79—the axis deflected toward the angle at the upper right. 55 It would be an important task to investigate various works of art having a clear diagonal structure to determine the nature of their diagonals and their inner connection with the pictorial content of these works. I have, for instance, more than once used the diagonal structure without becoming conscious of this until later. On the basis of the formula given above, my “Composition 1” (1910), for example, can be defined in the following manner: structure cb and da with forcible emphasis on cb—this is the backbone of the picture. 56 In I, the forms run in the direction of the normal tension of the square; in II, the forms run in the direction of the harmonious diagonal. 57 This “today” is made up of two basically different parts—blind alley and threshold—with a great preponderance of the first. The predominance of the blind alley theme excludes the use of the term “culture”—the time is altogether without culture, although a few seeds of a future culture can be discovered here and there—threshold theme. This thematic disharmony is the “sign” of “today” which continually forces itself upon our attention. 58 In such experiments it is advisable to rely upon the first impression because the power of perception tires rapidly and lets the imagination run rife. 59 This increased tension and the adherence of the line to the upper edge make it appear longer in case 2 than in case I. 60 The compositional diagrams included here illustrate such cases. (See appendix.) 61 It is clear that the transformation of the material plane and the general character of the elements combined with it are certain to have very important consequences in many respects. One of the most important of these is the change in the feeling for time: space is identical with depth; also, with the elements receding into depth. It is not without reason that I have called the space resulting from dematerialization “indefinable” —its depth is, after all, illusory and, therefore, not exactly measurable. Thus, time cannot in these cases be expressed in figures, and so it cooperates only relatively. On the other hand, the illusory depth is an actual one from the pictorial point of view and consequently a certain, even though immeasurable, time is required to follow the form elements receding into depth. Therefore: the transformation of the material BP into indefinable space offers the opportunity of increasing the span of time.