# ABC DEF GHK LMO RVX YZE abcde x&o La Plus Grande Romaine. Letters cast in sand from wooden pattern letters cut in 1565 by Hendryck van den Keere. In 1740, Gessner described the sand-casting process: "The ingredients of casting sand are fine sand, to which is added calcinated baking-oven glue, the redder the glue the better. This mixture is finely pulverized and passed through a fine meshed sieve. Thereupon the mixture is placed upon a level board. The center is hollowed out and good beer is poured into the cavity-much or little according to the amount of sand used. This (the sand and beer) is well stirred with a wooden spatula. When, through the pouring of this beer, the mixture begins to steam, the mass must be well mixed in order that every single particle of sand is moistened. Then the sand is formed into a heap. Gradually and very carefully a little of it is taken up with the wooden spatula, making sure to separate the wet globules which stick together. When it is too dry it breaks easily in the casting operation; if it is too wet, it does not cave in when casting but cakes and falls out of the casting tray. By moistening it with spirits of ammonia it produces a clean cast. The type is placed on the flat sand or form-board. When a letter cut in wood or type high is to be reproduced, then straight boards or furniture must be placed around the form board and the letter placed so that it protrudes high enough to give the thickness of the cast desired. Then the face of the type is cleaned with a brush and the casting tray is placed over it, held down firmly with the left hand, to avoid shifting. "Thereupon the type is dusted by means of a dauber filled with coal dust; then the moist sand is loosely poured upon it until the casting tray is filled up. At first it is gently pressed down and afterward harder pressure is exerted until the casting tray is firmly packed full. Thereupon the casting tray is evenly and gently raised. Should the type adhere to the sand, a tap on the tray with a knife will cause it to separate. The overflow of the sand is pared off at both sides of the tray with a knife so that this excess sand does not drop from the cast in the tray onto the type. The sand is delicately cut out so that the type metal may flow without difficulty. By permitting the form to dry somewhat it flows much more easily. The form or figure is blackened with a candle having a good flame and is then placed on a level tray itself in such a manner that the side of the figure is situated below. In order that the flow of the type metal may pass over the board and well over the figure, place two boards in a hand vise and then pour the type metal in. When the metal is melted, roll a piece of paper together and stick it into the metal. If the paper chars, the metal is satisfactory; if a flame appears, the metal is too hot."\* Essentially the sand-casting process used by Thomas Cottrell in England during the early 1860's was the one described by Gessner. Cottrell, whose large letters ranged up to 12 lines, is said to have been the first to cast letters of such bulk. At the same time, Caslon was casting letters no larger than 5 lines. After Cottrell's specimens, Isaac Moore (manager for Fry and Pine) cast 10-line letters in 1770, Fry & Wilson cast some 12 line in 1785-86, Caslon some 19 line in 1785 and Thorne, successor to Cottrell, showed 19 line in 1794. Mention is made that after Cottrell produced his first large specimens, Caslon began to make the large types with "beautifully finished" brass patterns (Caslon Circular, Vol. III, No. 10, July 1877). However, it is thought that the use of brass matrices may \*Christian Friedrich Gessner, Die so noethig als nuetzliche Buchdruckerkunst, Leipzig, 1740.