CRAFTS # AMERICAN WOODTYPE 1828-1900 Notes on the Evolution of Decorated and Large Types by Rob Roy Kelly "This extraordinarily beautiful book demonstrates the broad range of ingenuity and elegance in 19th-century American type-design....Lavishly produced with full historical and technical summaries, the subject is covered with a complete satisfactory thoroughness; it is also a superb picture book, exciting, amusing, rewarding. —Lincoln Kirstein, The Nation “Rob Roy Kelly should be very proud of this fine book." —Fridolf Johnson, American Artist "For designers, artists, typographers, painters, and bibliophiles the book is a well-written and illustrated typographical feast. —William R. Holman, Library Journal The result of more than eleven years of painstaking research and collecting, this is a handsome, remarkably complete history of wood type, its creatior, and its use. We are led from the earliest uses of wood as a printing material through the development of decorated letters and display type, to the invention by Darius Wells of a router machine for the mass production of wood letters. Rob Roy Kelly covers the nineteenth-century heyday of wood type in the greatest detail. He explains all aspects of design; manufacture, and marketing, traces the evolution of styles, particularly in the United States, and discusses wood type production in relation to other trades—lithography, letterpress, metalplate and wood engraving, sign painting and calligraphy, poster printing and typefounding. Rare photographs and engravings illuminate the textual material. The author has also prepared a long-needed consistent classification of wood type. More than 600 styles of wood type are classified and annotated, as are more than 100 specimens of complete or partial fonts which are reproduced just as proofed, with all the imperfections to be expected from years of use. Each specimen is identified by name, degree of completeness, and date of marketing. Wood type collectors will find these specimens invaluable in identifying their own type.