small 14-page catalogue, which was the first issued by J. E. Hamilton in 1881, is interesting from the standpoint of seeing the first styles of this company. The quarterly issues of William Page's Wood Type Album from 1879–81 have value in that they show new styles as they were introduced to the market. Perhaps the finest German types cut in wood were all included in his 1870 specimens of exclusively German types. The catalogue put out by the National Printers' Materials Company in 1887 probably contained its most extensive showing of styles. One catalogue important both for its historical and aesthetic considerations is the Chromatic Wood Types printed by William Page in 1874. It is perhaps the most expensive specimen book printed by a wood type manufacturer—\$10,000 for 1000 copies. The catalogue consists of approximately 175 pages, is 133/ by 18 inches, and is printed in several colors. The catalogue card file in Special Collections, Columbia University, describes this catalogue as being the most beautiful wood type catalogue ever printed. Another exceedingly handsome specimen book which has not had proper attention is the Large Wood Types published by Hamilton Mfg. Co. in 1892. Measuring 14½/4 by 20 inches, it is easily the largest wood type specimen of the century. It was printed in a number of colors and showed types up to 120 lines, and it was hard-bound. Perhaps the most unusual and notable specimen book was printed in 1906 by the Hamilton Company. Its preface explains, "It has long been our aim to compile a wood type catalogue embracing all the type and border designs which we have in our possession. These patterns comprise not only all the regular and special patterns made by us during the twenty-five years we have been in business, but also embrace the complete wood type patterns of the William H. Page Wood Type Company, Morgans and Wilcox Manufacturing Company, and Vanderburgh, Wells & Company (later Heber Wells). It has been almost an endless task to arrange this reference catalogue, comprising all of the above mentioned material, and the specimens shown in this catalogue comprise everything of value that has been turned out in the way of wood type designs during the past fifty years. Necessarily, owing to the great bulk of material, we are only able to show a single size of each design, and these are shown in a uniform size, so that a comparison of the different patterns will be an easy matter. It is often difficult in matching up wood type to tell from just what particular pattern the original type was cut; but with the aid of these specimen lines, each showing a considerable number of characters, identification will be easily accomplished, and errors and misunderstandings avoided. "It is not our intention to publish this catalogue for general distribution, but merely for reference purposes; therefore only a very limited number are published, and it is not our intention to have any of these books leave our hands permanently." As one would expect, this specimen book is invaluable for the identification of wood types. The tragic sequel to this special publication was that later, in keeping with a company policy of clearing out any equipment not being used to make room for new machinery or manufacturing operations, Hamilton destroyed all patterns dating back to Darius Wells. Now the only means for collecting the old designs in complete fonts is to locate actual types and to proof them. IHENTI-POT N AND IWENPY LINES CONDENBED GOTIUC # HIO OUR rose Debow, c. 1837. J G COOLET ± COS SPECIMENS OF WOOD TYPE NO LUPRUCE STREET. NEW TORE ANTIQUE TUSCAN EX CJND NO FIVE Twenty-fonr LinI SEND MEN GOTHIC ROUND Terentt Litrs CURBD LIGHT FACE TeeuI LI Cooley, 1859.