# RRRRRR RRRRRRRR RRRRRRR As a design became popular, the number of variations on it increased. By the 184O's, all primary and many secondary faces were cut in a"series."By the 1880's, this series included almost all the variations shown above. First Row: Roman XXX Condensed, XX Condensed, X Condensed, Condensed, Roman, and Extended. Second Row: Antique XXX Condensed, XX Condensed, XX Condensed No.1, X Condensed, Condensed, Antique, Special, and Extended. Third Row: Gothic XXX Condensed, XX Condensed, X Condensed, Condensed, Gothic, Expanded, and Extended. this same reasoning to Roman and Antique, one can account for the lineage of the majority of display designs from the period. Tuscans, especially the European models, have to be handled as a separate category, because many of these designs do represent independent inventions. These can be considered according to design characteristics such as serifs, notches, bulges, etc. Display types from the period are generally broken down into the following categories: Ornamented, Semi-Ornamented, Plain Faces, Texts, Scripts, and Ornaments and Borders. Occasionally there are problems separating the Semi-Ornamented from the Plain Faces, and an arbitrary judgment will have to be made. A third category of grouping would be the "series"(as it pertains to wood types). This refers to the various degrees of Extending and Condensing or changing the weight of a single design. By the 1840's, all primary faces of Antique, Roman, and Gothic were cut in additional styles of Condensed, X Condensed, XX Condensed, Extended, and some were cut as Light Face. The condensing and expanding of type designs has been attributed to Americans more than to Europeans, and there is strong evidence that many of these variations sprang from the wood type producers. In most wood type specimens after the middle of the century, particularly in the 1870's and afterwards, all of the primary, and several of the secondary faces, were cut in a series of six to eight weights or styles. No specimen book of the founders during these same ycars ever showed an equal number of variations on a single style. # EE DQ A serif on the middle arm of the E and hanging tail on the Q are characteristic of the older designs. Examples on the right show the modifications which were most commonly used after 1850. ## VI. CHRONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF WOOD TYPE STYLES ## 1828 Through 1849 This period in American printing history was the beginning of the rapid expansion of printing and all its related trades into an industry which reached immense proportions by the end of the century. At this time foreign machinery and workmen trained abroad were essential to the American industry, for Americans were just beginning to advance their own ideas and inventions. The first presses, such as those of Ramage, Wells, Treadwell, Smith, and Adams, were the most common printing machinery found in the American printing shops. Bruce, Starr, Lothian, and a few other men were designing and cutting the first type styles to originate in this country. While there were a tremendous number of inventions in the printing trades during this period, there were a few key improvements in the development of typographic styles. The introduction of the gelatin rollers greatly facilitated the printing of elaborate ornamental types; the improved presses later in the period, especially those of Hoe, Taylor, Gordon, and others, not only increased production but resulted in a higher quality of work. Also important were the pump-injection devices used in casting type (the invention of David Bruce, Jr.). The electrotype matrix by Thomas Starr in the forties lead to the proliferation of all type designs; and there were corresponding refinements in the making of ink and paper. In 1850, Joel Munsell of upstate New York was to describe the trades as then being divided into three categories: newspaper, card and jobbing, and book publishing -the latter being dominant. New York was the largest printing center of the time. Philadelphia and Boston were also primary centers for the printing trades, and small shops were profusely scattered throughout the countryside. Many of the foreign craftsmen located in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia constituted a sizable element of the skilled labor required for the practice of the trade. Competent workmen could make \$9 to \$15 a week, and almost all work was piece work. In the printing centers, workmen were scaled into three groups: two thirders (apprentices after 2 years), country printers, and city printers, who received the highest wages for their labor. In these years, "subbers" constituted a large part of the work force. As most of the composition was done on a piece-work basis, employers would hire these part-time compositors according to the work load demanded. Early each morning the subbers would gather outside the newspaper and publishing houses to compete for work with other "subbers." If the price of composition became too high, the printers could practice the simple expedient of placing advertisements under a ficticious name or the name of a competitor to announce great amounts of work or high wages then being paid in the city. The rush of compositors into the city would immediately drive prices down, since competition increased according to the number of men seeking work. It is small wonder that the strike of typographers in the succeeding period did not take place at this time! During the 1840's the first poster houses were established in Boston and New York City for the printing of broadsides. The fact that specialized printers like this could successfully operate reflects the general growth of printing during these years. Men working on improved or automatic equipment (power presses or paper-making machinery) were forced to work in absolute secrecy to prevent the tradesmen who feared being replaced by machinery from destroying the new inventions. In several instances, equipment was actually destroyed by fire at the hands of the workers. The great era of printing expansion began at about the same time that the first wood type specimen book was printed-the one issued by Darius Wells in March of 1828, in New York City. There were 10 years between the first Wells' publication and the next surviving specimen book, which was that of Allen's types brought out by George F. Nesbitt in 1838. What developments took place in this 10-year interim can only be surmised, but when Wells formed Wells & Company in 1835, he undoubtedly gained additional capital from his new partners which permitted him to expand his operations. Leavenworth began manufacturing wood type circa 1834; Allen began to manufacture his types in 1836. Between 1835 and 1849 the competition between the three wood type manufacturers must have been a spur to the production of new styles. The main design emphasis in this period was on Fat Face versions of the primary families and Ornamental styles. Secondary styles or first modifications of primary faces were first shown. The styling for the most part was heavy and boxy. Tooled Antiques, which were an extension of the Tooled Romans dating back into the previous century, were popular. Specimen books of both metal and wood type manufacturers included the large Roman and Antique Open Shades of the English founders. The same ornamental treatment as previously applied to the Roman and Antiques was extended to the heavy Gothics shortly after they were first introduced in the thirties. Backslopes in the large display sizes were restricted to the wood type producers, and were in greatest evidence in this period. Romans, the basic letterform for Ornamental designs, were extensively applied in these years although they gradually disappeared from specimen books afterwards. The large Inside-Shaded Ornamentals of French, German, and English origin, with floral or other decorative motifs, plus a few of the European Tuscans, were shown regularly in all specimen books. During the entire century, but particularly during this first period, the refinement of letters cut in wood was considerably greater than that found in the same designs produced by the typefounders. The ease of shaping wood was undoubtedly a factor governing the superior manner in which the plain faces-both capitals and lowercasewere executed by wood type manufacturers. At the beginning, the design sources were almost all European, and the use of Shades was a dominating treatment of the letterform. Open, Ray, Half, Line, Meridian, and combinations or variations of these Shades prevailed in quantities not duplicated in any other period. During the second half of the era the American wood type manufacturers marketed in advance of the founders designs based on the older devices of Shade, Outline, etc., and the new letter styles as they became fashionable (e.g., the Clarendons, American Tuscans). ## The Antiques Wood type Antique is a slab-serif letter, unbracketed and, in most instances, with a serif that is nearly equal in weight to the stem. The serif is heavier than the stem in French Antique, Egyptian Antique, and some of the Specials; it is lighter than in Antique, Antique Light Face, and Extended Antique. Mowry Antique, cut by William