8 LINE PICA ANTIQUE MENTAL manifest MENTAL MENTAL Wells, 1828. 10 LINE PICA ANTIQUE # BDE abcd 12 LINE PICA ANTIQUE CONDENSED # HAN hast 24 LINE PICA ANTIQUE EXTRA CONDENSED ## HED Nesbitt, 1838. Page, has a heavy bottom serif and a light top serif. The principal derivative faces of Antique are Clarendon, Antique Tuscan, Grecian, Latin, French Egyptian Antique, Aldine, Columbian, Ionic, and French Clarendon. Antique and its secondary designs, as well as Ornamental Antiques and its secondary face, constitute a major portion of the nineteenth-century typographic styles. The first Antiques shown by Darius Wells included an Antique Backslope that may have originated with him. Nicolette Gray has shown no such style on her design charts for English founders, and American typefounders demonstrated very little partiality for the Backslope styles. To the author's knowledge, the only Backslopes produced by American founders were a few sizes of Roman cut by Richard Starr for Johnson of Philadelphia, the Bulletin scripts originating with David Bruce, Jr., Italian by Connor, some European perspectives which were imported, and an occasional Backslope Gothic later in the century. In contrast to the typefounders, wood type manufacturers marketed a great number of Backslope designs up until 1850, and only occasionally after that date. Darius Wells also showed an Antique Italic without lowercase, and an Antique with lowercase and figures. Italic Antique was shown by Nesbitt in his 1838 specimens. Wells' Antique was considerably heavier with more pronounced shading than the original Antique by Figgins in 1815. Ten years after Darius Wells' first specimen book, George Nesbitt dispayed an amazing variety of Antiques. His specimens included Antique Condensed with lowercase and Antique Extra Condensed without lowcrcase-the latter was shown 2 years later by Wells and Webb; Antique No. 2 which was a sightly expanded design was introduced with a lowercase; Antique Italic had a lowercase; Ornamental styles of Double Outlined Antique with vertical interior shading; Antique Condensed with Ray Shade, Antique Outlined Shade; and an Antique Italic Line Shade-each had a lowercase. Both Antique and Condensed were exhibited as Outlined, but neither had a lowercase; Antique Condensed 'Tooled was a new showing and did not include a lowercase. The Clarendon-like Outlined Antiques originating with Figgins in 1821 and produced by American typefounders as early as 1828 at the Boston foundry did not show up in the specimens of wood type manufacturers. It is difficult to understand the reason for this omission. Perhaps the most significant innovation in the Antiques during these years was Antique Expanded, complete with lowercase and figures as shown by Nesbitt in 1838. Nicolette Gray credits the design to the Americans around 1841. Elihu White of New York City showed a metal version of Egyptian Expanded Outline Shade in 1839, but this design looked more Roman than Antique, largely because of the extremely thin serifs. It certainly lacked the authority of the Nesbitt specimens! The wood type version of Antique Expanded did not show up in the founders' specimens regularly for another 10 or 12 years. In 1851 the first specimens issued by the founders were those of the Boston Type Foundry, which had no lowercase. Hagar expanded the series in 1854 to four sizes with a lowercase. There had been an Antique Expanded Tooled first shown by White in 1849. More like the wood letter version, this design was to turn up regularly for the next 15 years. The sequence of Antique Expanded in this country followed the initial showing by Nesbitt in wood in 1838 and