York City in 1859, and his plant there in 1863. William H. Page in partnership with James Bassett succeeded to the equipment of the Bill Brothers in 1856, after which they laid the ground for what was to become the largest wood type manufacturing plant in the United States during the 1870's. In 1854, E. R. Webb bought out the interests of Darius Wells and was to operate the firm first with partners, and later under his own name until his death in 1864. The splintering of the Day Company brought on by a laborers' strike in 1855 led to the brief operations of D. Knox and Company circa 1857, in Fredricksburg, Ohio. The Day brothers moved their equipment and offices to Columbus, Ohio, where convict labor produced their types. During this time the proliferation of styles increased dramatically through expanding the concept of "series" of sizes with the typefounder, and "series" of styles by wood type manufacturers. Letterforms tended to be lighter and taller-particularly the Romans, Gothics, and Antiques, which were carried to the extreme compression of XXX Condensed. The use of the Light Faces which had begun in the 1840's reached full bloom in the 1850's and 1860's, and the idea was applied to old as well as to new designs as they came into being. Gothics found a particular refinement as well as variety during the period, particularly the condensed and lighter full face styles. Many of the secondary faces had a lowercase for the first time. The European Ornamentals in the larger sizes slowly began to disappear, especially those based on a Roman letterform, and the ornamentation of large display letters produced as wood type began to demonstrate some sort of equation between cost and embellishment. Also, many decorative devices reflected the machinery used to make type as well as an appreciation for originality in the ornamentation of letters. There was a marked individuality in the interpretation of styles between the various wood type manufacturers, who put a number of original designs on the market— most notably the Semi-Ornamented faces. The bulk of American Tuscans first gained an identity as a distinct classification during these years. The typefounder who continued to copy the European Ornamented designs in great quantity and mostly in the small sizes began to transfer some wood type designs into metal: e.g., Antique Tuscans, Gothic Tuscans, Antique Expanded, and a number of ornamental treatments of conventional letters which had been exploited in wood. At the end of the period, the new French styles were apparent in the works of the typefounder, as well as the results of competition with lithographic letter styles which appeared in delicately outlined or filigreed type faces, many of which were patented. ## The Antiques Antique XX Condensed in styles of No. 1 and 2 were shown by Wells & Webb in 1854, and similar designs were shown by Page in 1859. Both showed lowercase for Antique XX Condensed No. 1, but only Page showed a lowercase for the more condensed style. Antique XXX Condensed was also shown by Page in 1866 without lowercase, but with lowercase in his 1872 catalogue. Antique Light Face with lowercase was among the specimens shown by Wells and Webb in 1854, and the same design in an Extended style with lowercase was shown by Page in 1859. Consistent with the lighter styles was a Condensed Light Face Antique listed on the 1865 price page by William Page and 16 LINE PICA ANTIQUE DOUBLE EXTRA CONDENSED NO. 1 CHANTER dangerous 12 AND 20 LINE PICA ANTIQUE DOUBLE EXTRA CONDENSED NO. 2 # WELLS & WEBB. 1854. CHAIRSTORE 6 LINE PICA ANTIQUE LIGHT FACE CHAIRMENfor sale here8 LINE PICA ANTIQUE LIGHT FACE MONTHS Wells & Webb,1854. 15 LINE ANTIQUE EXTRA CONDENSED NO. 1 # SERMONS wound 18 Page, 1859.