Light Face Extended without a lowercase. Clarendon Italian (first listed in 1865 on the price page of the Page catalogue) , along with the French Antique and other Claręndons, was to dominate most posters in the last 20 years of the century. Today these type faces are often lumped under the single designation of Playbill, even though they are dissimilar. Also, while the styles issued by typefounders as French Antique, Egyptian and French Clarendon were patterned closely after the European models, for some unexplained reason, French Antique and Clarendon were shown only in the very condensed styles by wood type manufacturers. French Antique as cut in wood approximated a XX Condensed Antique. Grecian X Condensed was among the specimens of Wells and Webb in 1849, and did have a lowercase in the 1854 catalogue of the same company. In the preceding year, Bill, Stark and Company had shown Grecian Condensed with lowercase. In 1858 Knox had a large showing devoted to Grecians, among which were a Light Face with lowercase and a Grecian No. 2 modified by notched serifs to create a decorative effect. Additionally, there was a Grecian X Condensed Outlined, an uncommon showing of this design. Nesbitt had shown a Grecian Light Face in 1850, but it was without a lowercase, and the Knox design did approximate this cutting. All of the Grecian Light Face designs were cut in a full face width as compared to the normally condensed styles. The first Full Face Grecian was shown circa 1859 by Cooley without a lowercase. It was intermediate in weight between earlier Condensed styles and the heavier styles that followed. The Full Faced Grecian which was to be the pattern during the balance of the century was the one listed by Page in 1859, 1865, and probably the same as the one shown in 1872. Page cut a lowercase for this design later in the century. Wood type manufacturers were marketing a lowercase for the several styles of Condensed Grecian many years before typefounders showed similar designs. 50 LINE CLARENDON DOUBLE EXTRA CONDENSED LIGHT FACE 18 LINE PICA EXTRA CONDENSED CLARENDON # TONESeuhon Bill, Stark & Co., 1853. 8 LINE PICA CLARENDON TUESDAY December Wells & Webb, 1854. 7 LINE CLARENDON, LIGHT FACE WONDERED abundant 25 24 LINE CLARENDON EXTRA CONDENSED, LIGHT FACE # HIME NEDDE 一 tailors!