!O LINE PICA EXTRA CONDENSED GOTHIC NOBLE Wells & Webb.1854. 8 LINE PICA GOTHIC EXTRA CONDENSED # WINDHAM CT Bill. Stark & Co., 1853. 30 LINE GOTHIC DOUBLE EXTRA CONDENSED # COURTING Page, 1859. 24 LINE GOTHIC EXTRA CONDENSED # Hondane 1S LINE GOTHIC EXTRA CONDENSED Cooley.c.1859. ## The Gothies As with the Romans during these same years, the Gothic Italic and Backslope disappeared from the specimen books with the exception of one Gothic Condensed Italic shown by Bill, Stark and Company in 1853. The 1854 Wells & Webb specimen of Gothic Extra Condensed was the same as shown for 1849, but the same style shown by Bill, Stark and Company was a much lighter style. The deemphasis of the bolder styles resulted in an increased number of medium and light styles of Gothic during this period by wood type manufacturers. The typefounders had begun showing the lighter Gothics regularly in the early 1840's. Page in 1859 illustrated a Gothic XX Condensed without lowercase, and a Gothic X Condensed Light Face, again without lowercase. A Gothic XXX Condensed is listed by Page for 1865. The Gothic X Condensed Light Face exhibited a good color, and differed from other Gothics, especially those of the typefounders, in the design of the round letters, which were very angular. Several varieties of Gothic Round Condensed were common to all specimen books in these years-Gothic Round Condensed Outlined or Tooled, which were popular with typefounders during the 1860's, as were the solid faced styles. Knox presented a deviation of Gothic Round which may be identified by odd bulging serifs on the S and spur of the G, and the balance of the alphabet appears to be designed along conventional lines. Knox also showed a rather clumsily drawn Gothic Light Face without lowercase. The first showing of the lowercase for the Gothic X Condensed was by Cooley, and the entire alphabet reflected a highly refined drawing of the letterforms, which would compare favorably if not surpass many similar designs from this century. Cooley also showed a Gothic Extended which was complete with lowercase and figures. The wood type manufacturers never carried the Gothics to the same degree of lightness as the founders. One of the more extreme designs by a founder was that of L. Johnson in 1849 with a Gothic called Hairline, which certainly was! In 1859 Page showed the first Runics, without a lowercase, in a wood type specimen book; however, in the 1872 specimens, lowercase was present and was to become common throughout the balance of the century. In 1860 the Boston Type Foundry presented Runic in a series of eight sizes of metal type. Although Runics had few variations, the design was in common use for a number of years. The source of the design is unknown, and according to the descriptions given by Nicolette Gray, the style does not seem to be the one called by that name in England. Another new design from the Page catalogue was Antique or Gothic Tuscan-a design representing one of tħose examples of overlap where the parent letterform cannot be definitely established. It was shown with lowercase and it was to be used extensively as a poster type, but was not cast by the typefounders until late in the century. Several Gothic Italians came into the market during the 1850's. Bill, Stark and Company in 1853 showed the first one, which was essentially the same as the one shown by Marr, the English typefounders in the same year. A related design shown by Page and Cooley at the end of the decade was called Gothic Tuscan No. 4 by Cooley, and was essentially the same design that was labeled Gothic Tuscan No. 2 by Page. The designs were the same but the cuttings differed; also, Cooley's had a lowercase while Page's did