# ACK NOWLEDGEMENTS

This book could not have been written without all the support and stimulation I received over eighteen years spent teaching on the joint Royal College of Art/ Victoria and Albert Museum History of Design Programme. My thanks go to all the staff I worked with there, among them Dr Gillian Naylor, Professor Jeremy Aynsley, Professor Christopher Breward, John Styles, Marta Ajmar and Helen Clifford. Special thanks go to the many visiting scholars — too numerous to list here – who presented seminars over the years and opened my eyes to new ideas emanating from a number of disciplines hitherto unfamiliar to me and which changed the way I thought about design. Above all it is to the students - at both MA and PhD levels (especially, in the latter category, Quintin Colville, Trevor Keeble, Susie McKellar, Nik Maffei and Viviana Narotzky ) – that I owe the greatest thanks, as it is they who are pushing the boundaries forward through their research, continually challenging my assumptions. I continue to be challenged by the PhD students I am supervising at Kingston University, as well as by the staff who teach Design History at that institution. My contact with design tutors and students across a range of disciplines, both at the Royal College of Art and subseguently at Kingston University, has also ensured that I understand not only where design is coming from but also, I hope, where it is going.

At Routledge I would like to thank Rebecca Barden, Julene Knox (for energetic picture research) and Helen Faulkner. Above all I must thank John, Molly, Nancy and Celia for putting up with my spending too many holidays and weekends working on my laptop.