# VII Uvedale Price In the preceding paper much has been said about Uvedale Price. This paper is no more than an annotated anthology from his magnum opus. Moreover the choice of passages was largely dictated by my conviction—as firmnow as it was then—that Price has a great deal to teach the planner today. Sir Uvedale Price was born in 1747, three years before Knight, and educated at Eton and Christ Church. At the death of his father in 1761 he came into a considerable fortune. With his school friend Charles James Fox he went on the Grand Tour to France and Italy in 1767. In August, 1768, the two visited Voltaire at Ferney (He did not ask us to dine with him, but conversed a short time, walking backwards and forwards in his garden, gave us chocolate and dismissed us'—not without the present of his own books, with the remark: Voilà des livres dont il faut se munir’). Then Price went oñ alone to see Switzerland and the Rhine. Most of his life—he was knighted in 1828 and died in 1829—he spent on his family estate Foxley, west of Hereford, busy on improvements, the social amenities of the squire, and some writing. He calls himselfan indolent writer, who can little depend on any constant and regular exertions' (III, 399), but should not therefore be pictured as weak and delicate. On the contrary, at eighty he is still described as all life and spirits, ranging about his woods as a setter-dog.' It is this extreme alertness that has kept his writings alive, and made them convert his age to his views,' as Sir Walter Scott put it. His Essay on the Picturesque came out in 1 794, the same year as Knight's The Landscape and Humphry Repton's Sketches and Hints. Controversies arising from the contents of the three publications made Price refine his theses and add corroboration.\* In the final form they appeared as Three Essays on the Picturesque in 181o. It is from this edition that quotations are given in the following pages. THE TERM PiCTURESQUE was suggested by Uvedale Price to indicate certain aesthetic qualities not comprised in the then fashionable aesthetic terms Sublime and Beautiful. Burke in his Inquiry into the Origin of our ideas of the Sublime and the Beautiful of 1757 had been responsible for their definition and popularization. The Sublime, Burke said, is caused by terrible objects, by obscurity, solitude and vastness, while the Beautiful is connected with smoothness, gentle curves, polish and delicacy. Price accepted and praised this division, but denied that it is sufficient. There is visual delight neither caused by sombre grandeur nor by light elegance. Take a beautiful building in an advanced state of decay: Gradually, he says, PICTURESQUE-SUBLIME-BEAUTIFUL the embellishments that belong to architecture, the polish of its columns, the highly finished execution of its capitals and mouldings, its urns and statues, are changed for what may be called the embellishments of ruins, for incrustations and weather stains, and for the various plants that spring from, or climb over the walls . . . ; and at length, perhaps, all smoothness, all symmetry, all trace of design are totally gone. But there may still remain an object which attracts notice. Has it then no character when that of beauty is departed? is it ugly? is it insipid? is it merely curious? Ask the painter, or the picturesque traveller; they never abandon a ruin to the mere antiquary, till none but an antiquary would observe it. Whatever then has strong attractions as à visible object, must have a character; and that which has strong attractions for the painter, and yet is neither grand nor beautiful, is justly called picturesque. (II, 259–260). Price's contrast between the antiquary and the picturesque traveller is worth noting. It is to-day the contrast between the Office of Works attitude and the John Piper attitude. Of picturesque travellers there were more in Price's time than in ours, when archaeology has robbed people of their visual innocence. The king of the picturesque travellers was of course William Gilpin.\* His eight books appeared from 1782 to 18o9. Five of the eight were out before Price wrote his Essay. But to Gilpin picturesque is simply what is ‘agreeable in a picture.' Now such a loose definition did not satisfy Price. Here are his comments: “There are few words, whose meaning has been less accurately determined than that of the word picturesque. In general, I believe, it is applied to every object, and every kind of scenery, which has been, or might be represented with good effect in painting; just as the word beautiful (when we speak of visible nature) is applied to every object, and every kind of scenery, that in any way ways; these are the stores whence their greater compositions are afterwards give pleasure to the eye. . . . Mr. Gilpin, from whose very ingenious and extensive observations on this subject I have received great pleasure and instruction, appears to have adopted this common acceptation, not merely as such, but as giving an exact and determinate idea of the word; for he defines picturesque objects to be those “which please from some quality capable of being illustrated in painting," or, as he again defines it in his Letter to Sir Joshua Reynolds such objects as are proper subjects for painting.” Both these definitions seem to me (what may perhaps appear a contradiction) at once too vague, and too confined; for though we are not to expect any definition to be so accurate and comprehensive, as both to supply the place, and stand the test of investigation, yet if it do not in some degree separate the thing defined from all others, it differs little from any general truth on the same subject. For instance, it is very true that picturesque objects do please from some quality capable of being illustrated in painting; but so also does every object that is represented in painting if it please at all, otherwise it would not have been painted: and hence we ought to conclude, what certainly is not meant, that all objects which please in pictures are therefore picturesque; for no distinction or exclusion is made.Were any other person to define picturesque objects to be those which please from some striking effect of form, colour, or light and shadow—such a definition would indeed give but a very indistinct idea of the thing defined: but it would be hardly more vague, and at the same time much less confined than the others, for it would not have an exclusive reference to a particular art. I hope to shew in the course of this work, that the picturesque has a character not less separate and distinct than either the sublime or the beautiful, nor less independent of the art of painting.’ (I, 37–40). So this is Price's promise. How then does he define the character of the Picturesque? The chief qualities of the Picturesque had already been well brought out by Sir Joshua Reónolds eight years before Price began to publish his Éssay. In Reynold's thirteenth Discourse delivered to the students of the Royal Academy on December 11, 1786, there are some paragraphs onarchitecture which afford a spectacular proof of his flair for new and significant ideas. It may not be amiss for the architect to take advantage sometimes of that to which I am sure the painter ought always to have his eyes open, I mean the use of accidents; to follow where they lead, and to improve them, rather than always to trust to a regular plan. It often happens that additions have been made to houses, at various times, for use or pleasure. As such buildings depart from regularity, they now and then acquire something of scenery by this accident, which I should think might not unsuccessfully be adopted by an architect, in an original plan, if it does not too much interfere with convenience, Variety and intricacy is a beauty and excellence in every other of the arts which address the imagination; and why not in architecture? The forms and turnings of the streets of London, and other old towns, are produced by accident, without any original plan or design; but they are not always the less pleasant to the walker or spectator, on that account. On the contrary, if the city had been built on the regular plan of Sir Christopher Wren, the effect might have been, as we know it is in some new parts of the town, rather unpleasing; the uniformity might have produced weariness, and a slight degree of disgust. I can pretend to no skill in the details of architecture. I judge now of the art, merely as a painter. When I speak of Vanbrugh, I mean to speak of him in the language of our art. To speak then of Vanbrugh in the language of a painter, he had originality of invention, he understood light and shadow, and had great skill in composition. To support his principal object he produced his second and third groups or masses; he perfectly understood in his art what is the most difficult in ours, the conduct of the background, by which the design and invention is set off to the greatest advantage. What the background is in painting, in architecture is the real ground on which the building is erected; and no architect took greater care than he that his work should not appear crude and hard: that is, it did not abruptly start out of the ground without expectation or preparation. This is a tribute which a painter owes to an architect who composed like a painter; and was defrauded of the due reward of his merit by the wits of his time, who did not understand the principles of composition in poetry better than he; and who knew little or nothing of what he understood perfectly, the general ruling principles of architecture and painting. His fate was that of the great Perrault; both were the objects of the petulant sarcasms of factious men ofletters; and both have left some of the fairest ornaments which to this day decorate their several countries; the façade of the Louvre, Blenheim and Castle Howard.' These are remarkable words indeed, and they must have impressed Price just as much as anything he had read in Gilpin. The only thing Reynolds did not do was to connect the qualities which he praises with the term Picturesque. It was left to Price to connect Gilpin's landscape characteristics with Reynolds's remarks on architecture. Here is the result: The two opposite qualities of roughness and of sudden variation, joined to that of irregularity, are the most efficient causes of the picturesque.' (I, so). ‘Roughness conveys the idea of.. . irritation, but at the same time of animation, spirit and variety.' (I, 115). Irritation is . . . the source of our most active and lively pleasures: its nature . . . is eager and hurrying, and such are the pleasures which spring from it.’ (I, 127). In twentieth century terms Price's rough would be abrupt, and for irritation one would probably say stimulus. So Price wishes to stress the stimulating power and the piquancy of sudden contrasts. Yes—the piquancy too, for he says in another place that piquant is a word . . . that in many points answers very exactly to the picturesque’. (I, 73). Now for variety: Price blames the modern improvers’ of Capability Brown's school—against him chiefly the Essay was written—for neglecting two of the most fruitful sources of human pleasure: the first, that great and universal source of pleasure, variety—the power of which isindependent of beauty, but without which even beauty itself soon ceases to please; the second intricacy—a quality which, though distinct fromvariety, is so connected and blended with it, that the one can hardly exist without the other. According to the idea I have formed of it, intricacy in landscape might be defined as that disposition of objects, which, by a partial and uncertain concealment, excites and nourishes curiosity—the most active principle of pleasure.' (I, 21-22 and 24). To visual stimulus by piquant contrasts we have thus to add variety, intricacy and the raising of curiosity—in short, the unexpected, unforeseeable in all its aspects. How shrewdly Reynolds had observed that to achieve such effects of happy surprise the architect should sometimes entrust himself to accident. Price enlarges on that motif: Every man will allow that painters and improvers ought to study nature, and nature in contradistinction to art. Are then all parts of nature to be studied indiscriminately? No one will make such an assertion. But whence do these various combinations arise, of trees so happily grouped and connected with ground, buildings, and water; of open lawns, of closer glades, and skirtings, in planting and forming which no art has been employed? As it cannot be from design, it must be from accident. Of these lucky accidents painters have made the greatest use; wherever they meetwith them they eagerly trace them in their sketch-book; these they study, arrange, and combine in a thousand different formed. But of these accidents (if we may judge from their works) improvers have as yet made but little use. Again, wherever art interferes, the effect of these beautiful and striking accidents is generally spoiled to the painter's eye; for the prevailing taste for clearing either indiscriminately, or in distinct clumps and patches, destroys their connection, their playful variety, and intricacy. Neglect, therefore, as well as accident, is necessary to furnish these examples of nature in her most picturesque state; that is (according to the common use of the word) the state in which painters do, and improvers ought to study and imitate her; but in the latter case particularly, with such modifications as the character of the scenery may require. Accident and neglect are therefore two principal causes of those beauties (and they often deserve that name in its strictest sense) which painters, lovers of painting, and many whose natural judgment has not been vitiated by false ideas of refinement, admire: and whoever means to study nature, must principally attend to the effects of neglect and accident.’ (III, 38–41). Price's constant reference to painters is important. More of its meaning and topical applications will be said later. Here it is sufficient to recall that it was in point of fact a painter who first drew attention to the thrills of accident: Leonardo da Vinci in the famous passage of his Treatise in which he advises the painter to study the rough textures of walls for finding patterns in them that might suggest motifs and compositions. Price's chief definitions of the Picturesque are contained in the foregoing paragraphs. It may, however, be helpful to supplement them by some passages on the relations between the Picturesque and the Beautiful, and the Picturesque and the Ugly. Price deals with gardens and grounds, not with towns and cities. Hence he is right in saying that Of the three characters (the sublime, the beautiful, and the picturesque), two only are in any degree subject to the improver; to create the sublime is above our contracted powers, though we may sometimes heighten, and at all times lower its effects by art. It is, therefore, on a proper attention to the beautiful and the picturesque, that the art of improving real landscapes must depend.' (l, 1o2). In a few passages Price suggests that the two should be blended. ‘The great point . · . is to mix according to circumstances, what is striking, with what is simply pleasing.' (II, 131). More often he contrasts them—no wonder, as the differences between beauty and picturesqueness are the principal theme of his Essays. Just two examples out of many, the first a straightforward statement, the second a warning against exaggerations, and at the same time an excellent comparison between pleasures of the eye and the palate. ‘Although smoothness be the ground-work of beauty, yet .. . roughness is its fringe and ornament, and that which preserves it from insipidity . .. One principal charm of smoothness, whether in a literal or a metaphorical sense, is, that it conveys the idea of repose; roughness, on the contrary, conveys that of irritation.’ (I, 115). If the improver, as it usually happens attends solely to verdure, smoothness, undulation of ground and flowing lines, the whole will be insipid. If the opposite, and much rarer taste should prevail; should an improver, by way of being picturesque, make broken ground, pits, and quarries all about his place; encourage nothing but furze, briars, and thistles; heap quantities of rude stones on his banks, or, to crown all, like Mr. Kent, plant dead trees—the deformity of such a place would, I believe, be very generally allowed, though the insipidity of the other might not be so readily confessed. . . . It can hardly be doubted, that what answers to the beautiful in the sense of tasting, has smoothness and sweetness for its basis, with such a degree of stimulus, as in the most delicious fruits and liquors. Take away the stimulus they become insipid; increase it so as to overbalance those qualities, they then gain a peculiarity of flavour, are eagerly sought after by those who have acquired a relish for them, but are less adapted to the general palate. This corresponds exactly with the picturesque; but if the stimulus be increased beyond that point, none but depraved and vitiated palates will endure, what would be so justly termed deformity in objects of sight.' (1, 207–9). Deformity in objects of sight? But Price does by no means exclude deformity from the saving grace of the Picturesque. Here is an example of time's redemption of deformity: The side of a smooth green hill, torn by floods, may at first very properly be called deformed; and on the same principle, though not with the same impression, as a gash on a living animal. When a rawness of such a gash in the ground is softened, and in part concealed and ornamented by the effects of time, and the progress of vegetation, deformity, by this usual process, is converted into picturesqueness; and this is the case with quarries, gravel-pits, etc., which at first are deformities, and which in their most picturesque state, are often considered as such by a levelling improver. . . . This connection between picturesqueness and deformity cannot be too much studied by improvers.' (I, 195). The parallelism between such mellowing action of time on a hillside and on a building need hardly be pointed out. It is, of course, the chief visual explanation of the picturesque improver’s delight in ruins. So deformity can be mellowed into picturesqueness. Only what Price calls unmixed ugliness' cannot. It seems to me, that mere unmixed ugliness does not arise from sharp angles, or from any sudden variation; but rather from that want of form, that unshapen lumpish appearance, which perhaps, no one word exactly expresses.' (I, 188). Hence the ugliest buildings to Uvedale Price are those which have no feature, no character; those, in short, which most nearly approach to the shape, “if shape it may be called," of a clamp of brick, the ugliness of which no one will dispute.' (I, 197). Poor Queen Anne, poor William and Mary, poor Christopher Wren. With Price and his generation the violent reaction against the quiet restraint of their well-proportioned, symmetrical, serviceable, sensible, medium-sized or small country houses begins. It did not in London prevent Bloomsbury from growing in that sober brick style just when Price wrote. But it defeated sobriety in the end, and Gothic, Tudor and Italianate palaces and villas sprouted forth all over the countryside. With regard to colour, this is what Price condemns: What may be termed muddiness, is the most general and efficient cause of ugliness. A colour, for instance, may be harsh, glaring, tawdry, yet please many eyes, and by some be called beautiful: but a muddy colour, no one ever was pleased with.' (I, 200). So tawdry colours—and perhaps also tawdry objects—may please the eye. It is one of Price's most important discoveries to have recognised the claims of the aesthetically questionable for a place in a picturesque composition. He must have felt strongly about it, or he would not have repeated the same concept three times in three different wordings. If I were obliged to determine between insipid congruity, and incongruity which produces grand and striking effects, I should not hesitate in preferring the latter.’ (II, 231). 'Who would not prefer an absurd, but laughable farce, to a flat insipid piece of five acts?’ (II, 40). I would rather wish that some improprieties should be risked for the sake of effect (where the mischief, if such, could be repaired) than that improvements should be confined to the present timid monotony.’ (II, 157). But how can the improver, or the playwright, or the architect, or the artist afford the presence of absurdity? The answer is that he allots to the incongruous its proper place within a larger composition. Here is how, addressing the garden artist and the improver, Price justifies it: Connection is the leading principle of your art.' (III, 107). ‘The greatest of all [defects], and the most opposite to the principles of painting, is want of connection, a passion for making everything distinctand separate.’ (I, 238). ‘Twilight does, what an improver ought to do: it connects what was before scattered; it fills up staring, meagre vacancies [and] destroys edginess.’ (I, 153). Every person of the least observation must have remarked how broad the lights and shadows are on a fine evening in nature, or (what is almost the same thing), in a picture of Claude.' (I, 148). A picture of Claude—another of Price’s references to painters and painting, and a particularly appropriate one. Connecting objects in nature into coherent compositions is indeed the painter'sjob. Ifit is also a principle of picturesque planning —no wonder that the two words píctor, the painter, and picturesque are etymologically related. Price emphasizes the significance of this relation. If we suppose a person of natural sensibility and discernment, but who had never seen a picture, to have been shewn when they were first painted, the Aurora of Guido, the Nymphs and Cupids of Albano, or the Leda of Correggio, pictures in which nothing but what is youthful and lovely is exhibited, he must readily have acknowledged the whole, and every part to be beautiful; because if he were to see such objects in nature, he would call them so, and view them with delight. The same thing must have happened had he been shewn a picture of Claude, where richly ornamented temples and palaces, were accompanied by trees of elegant forms, and luxuriant foliage, the whole set off by the mild glow of a fine evening; for every thing he saw there, he would wish to see and to dwell upon in reality. But should he have been shewn a set of pictures, in whicha number of the principal objects were rough, rugged and broken, with various marks of age and decay, yet without any thing of grandeur or dignity, he must certainly have thought it strange, that the artists should choose to pertpetuate on their canvas such figures, animals, trees, buildings, &c. as he should wish, if he saw them in nature, to remove from his sight. He might afterwards, however, begin to observe, that among objects which to him appeared void of every kind of attraction, the painters had decided reasons of preference; whether from their strongly marked peculiarity of character, from the variety produced by sudden and irregular deviation, from the manner in which the rugged and broken parts caught the light, and from those lights being often opposed to some deep shadow, or from the rich and mellow tints produced by various stages of decay; all of which he had passed by without noticing, or had merely thought them ugly, but now began to look at with some interest: he would find at the same time, that there were quite a sufficient number of objects, which the painter would perfectly agree with him in calling ugly, without any addition or qualification. Such observations as I have just supposed to be made by a single person, must have gradually occurred to a variety of observers during the progress of the art : many of them may have seen the artists at work, and remarked the pleasure they seemed to take in imitating by spirited strokes of the pencil, any rough and broken objects, any strongly marked peculiarity of character, or of light and shadow. They might thence be led to conclude, that a number of objects, neither grand, nor beautiful, nor ugly, are in a manner the peculiar property of the painter and his art, being by them first illustrated, and brought into notice and general observation. When such an idea had once begun to prevail, it was very natural that a word should be invented, and soon be commonly made use of, which discriminated the character of such objects, by their relation to the artist himself, or to his work.’ (I, 214–219). Price's is a good case here. The painter as the vísual type, physiologically and psychologically speaking, reacts more intensely than other types to impressions of sight. Hence he is the one to tell us how a stretch of scenery, rural or urban, can be converted into a landscape, that is a piece of three-dimensional art, planned to give visual pleasure. Price indeed goes further. He tries to prove, and does it neatly, that the landscape gardener, whether he knows it or not, works like a painter. He comments on this identity of procedure in his letter of 1795, the reply to young Humphry Repton's defence of Capability Brown. ‘Though your principal aim (writes Price) throughout the whole of your Letter has been to counteract my endeavours, and to weaken as much as possible the connection between painting and landscape gardening, yet your own mode of proceeding affords the strongest proof of the closeness of that connection. Consider only what your process is, when you are consulted about the improvements of a place. One of the first things you do is to make representations of the principal points, in the state in which you find them; and other representations of the state in which you hope they will be hereafter. In reality, you make the best pictures you can, with the materials you find there; and also with those fresh ones you mean to employ, and to which time must give effect.' (III, 46–47). And as the gardener works with the painter's technique, so the improver should look to the pictures of great landscape painters for forming his taste and establishing standards. Is there ‘any standard, to which in point of grouping and of general composition, works of this sort can be referred; any authority higher than that of the persons who have gained the most general and popular reputation by those works, and whose method of conducting them has had the most extensive influence on the general taste? I think there is à standard; there are authorities of an infinitely higher kind; the authorities of those great artists who have most diligently studied the beauties of nature, both in their grandest and most general effects, and in their minutest detail; who have observed every variety of form and of colour; have been able to select and combine, and then, by the magic of their art, to fix upon the canvas all those various beauties.’ (I, 2–3). Price in fact believes that by studying the achievements of landscape painters, the amateur might develop his judgment and discrimination sufficiently to do without professionals. That may have been true of him and of friends like Payne Knight or Horace Walpole. But would it still be true today? Have we still got amateurs in the Georgian sense? Who, not a painter, would see views as intensely as Price does in the following passage from the Dialogue of Messrs. Hamilton, Howard, and Seymour (18or)? Mr Hamilton, as we have seen, represents Price, Mr Howard, Payne Knight. It is Mr Hamilton who speaks the following words: You cannot imagine, what a loss there is in that group of trees, of which my old friend the clergyman was speaking. I can shew you very nearly where it stood: you see where there is a sinking in those hills to the left; from about this point where we stand, the trees just intersected that part: and as they rose a great deal above the horizon, and spread very much at top, you may imagine how well they must have divided this long continued view. You will immediately perceive too, that the noble reach of the river in the second distance, with the bridge, the town, and the hills beyond, came in to the right of the group; and being separated by it from the general view, formed quite a picture.' (III, 351–2). Such susceptibility to visual effects the layman, in our century, has lost. And how many architects have still got it? Few : and fewer still when it comes to the pictorial approach to urban scenery. As long as it is only à matter of seeing landscape, the open-eyed may still be found in all ways of lífe. But the visualapproach to nature in relation to buildings, to the richness of water effects, and to the garden (as against the grounds) has become rare indeed. Some comments of Price's on these topics may, in conclusion, be useful. Price's principles in their application to the many parts that make up the urban pattern are of the highest topical value, although proffered with a view to conditions on a country estate only. They were developed just like Knight's in opposition to Capability Brown and his followers, to the gentleness of their designs and smoothness of their effects. ‘All water of which the surface is broken, and the motion abrupt and irregular . . . accords with our idea of the picturesque.’ (I, 57). The smallest appearance of water, a mere light in the landscape, may answer a very essential purpose—that of leading the attention to those parts which are most worthy of notice.’ (II, 53). In the pictures of Claude, the character of which is beauty and cheerfulness, detached architecture, as far as I have observed, is seldom unaccompanied with trees.' (II, 185). How many buildings have I seen, which, with their trees, attract and please every eye! But deprive one of them of those accompaniments, what a solitary deserted object would remain!’ (II, 195). ‘The accompaniments of beautiful pieces of architecture, may in some respects, be compared to the dress of beautiful women. The addition of what is no less foreign to them than trees are to architecture, varies and adorns the charms even of those who, like Phryne, might throw off every concealment, and challenge the critic eyes of all Athens assembled.' (II, 194). But the number of trees which an inhabitant of Holland, without fear of inconvenience, plants close to his house, is by no means necessary to picturesque composition: a very few, even a single tree, may make such a break, such a division in the general view as may answer that end.' (II, 188). Trees, whether single or in groups, whether young or old, are obviously of the greatest use in accompanying buildings of every kind; but there seems to be a much closer union between them and low buildings. Cottages appear to repose under their shade, to be protected, sometimes supported by them; and they, on the other hand, hang over and embrace the cottage with their branches: it seems as if they could never have been separated from each other; and there would be a sort of cruelty in dividing them. If trees thus adorn the cottage, that, in return, by the contrast of its form and colour no less enhances the peculiar beauties of vegetation, and often fixes the attention on trees which in other situations would be unnoticed. No wonder, then, if we are particularly struck with any of the beautiful exotics when so placed; with an acacia, a pine, a cedar, that shade part of a village-house; with an arbutus, or a cluster of lilacs, over-topping the wall, or the pales of its garden.’ (II, 351). Though trees and shrubs of every kind have a peculiar and distinguished effect, in consequence of accompanying, and being accompanied by the houses of a village, there is another tribe of plants which gains still more by such a situation, and which indeed no other can shew to such advantage; I mean the various sorts of climbing plants.’ (II, 352). The truth of these sentences for housing estates today need not be specially emphasized. With regard to the garden, that is the part of the estate most closely adjacent to the house, Price preaches the same freedom. But here he turns in a most illuminating way against the dogmas almost universally accepted by his generation. Here he founds a new school which became the leading school of the later nineteenth century, and is still ours. Brown had brought the informal pattern of the grounds right to the front of the house. Price wants a zone of formality in between, laid out with a frank display of art. He even defends the old garden art of the seventeenth century. It appears to me, that in the old gardens art was meant to be apparent, and to challenge admiration on its own account, not under the disguise of nature; that richness, effect, and agreement with the surrounding artificial objects, were what the planners and decorators of those gardens aimed at.' (II, 156). In forming a general comparison of the two styles of gardening, it seems to me that what constitutes the chief excellence of the old garden, is richness of decoration and of effect, and an agreement, with the same qualities in architecture; its defects, stiffness, and formality. The excellences of the modern garden, are verdure, undulation of ground, diversity of plants, and a more varied and natural disposition of them than had hitherto been practised: its defects, when considered as accompanying architecture—a uniformityof character too nearly approaching to common nature.' (II, 158–159). A garden must not look like common nature. There must be something 'to mark the difference between what is close to the house, and what is at a distance from it; between the habitation of man, and that of sheep.' (II, 126). The curious thing, and the thing that proves once more Price's originality of approach, is that for him the seventeenth century garden does not stand for stiffness as it did for nearly all the other picturesque improvers; it stands for picturesqueness. The following statement must have sounded very perverse to readers used to regarding Brown's softly undulating gardens as the acme of picturesqueness. 'In many old places, there are almost as many walled compartments without, as apartments within doors; and though there is no defending the beauty of brick walls, yet still that appearance of seclusion and safety, when itcan be so contrived as not to interfere with general beauty, is a point well worth obtaining; and no man is more ready than myself to allow that the comfortable, is a principle which should never be neglected. On that account all walled gardens and compartments near a house; all warm, sheltered, sunny walks under walls planted with fruit-trees, are greatly to be wished for: and should be preserved, if possible, when once established. I, therefore, regret extremely, not only the compartment I just mentioned, but another garden immediately beyond it: and I cannot forget the sort of curiosity and surprize that was excited after à short absence, even in me, to whom it was familiar, by the simple and common circumstance of a door that led from the first compartment to the second, and the pleasure I always experienced on entering the inner, and more secluded garden. There was nothing, however, in the garden itself to excite any extraordinary sensations: the middle part was merely planted with the lesser fruits, and dwarf trees, but on the opening of the door, the lofty trees of a fine grove appeared immediately over the opposite wall; the trees are still there, they are more distinctly and openly seen, but the striking impression is gone. On the right was another raised terrace, level with the top of the wall that supported it; and over-hung with shrubs, which from age had lost their formality. A flight of steps of a plainer kind, with a mere parapet on the sides, led up to this upper terrace underneath the shrubs and exotics. All this gave me emotions in my youth, which I long imagined were merely those of early habit; but I am now convinced that was not all: they also arose from a quick succession of varied objects, of varied forms, tints, lights and shadows; they arose from the various degrees of intricacy and suspense that were produced by the no less various degrees and kinds of concealment, all exciting and nourishment curiosity, and all distinct in their character from the surrounding landscapes.' (II, 121–123). In such passages Price is perhaps at his greatest. They show how far he had left behind the accepted dogmas and fashions of his generation. The man who could defend the compartmented Dutch' garden and Handel's music in 179o, without fear of being branded a reactionary, should be more to us than a representative of a style of the past. Such latitude of aesthetic sensibility raises him out of the eighteenth century to an undated position in the history of aesthetic theory. Incidentally, Price was open to the delights and sensitive to the subtleties of all arts. So he compares gardens of the kind just described with Handel's music, as against other lighter and less formal eighteenth century music. ‘The same aversion to symmetry shewed itself nearly at the same period, in other arts as well as in gardening: fugues and imitations in music began to grow out of fashion, about the time that terraces and avenues were demolished; but the improvements in modern music have a very different character from those in modern gardening, for no one can accuse Haydn or Paesiello of tameness or monotony. The passion for strict fugues in music, and for exact symmetry in gardens, had been carried to excess, and when totally undisguised and unvaried, it created in both arts a dryness and pedantry of style: but the principle on which that passion is founded should never be totally neglected. Some of the greatest masters of music in later times, among whom Handel claims the highest place, have done what improvers might well have done; they have not abandoned symmetry, but have mixed it (particularly in accompaniments) with what is more wild and irregular.' (II, 378). However, Price is not consistent in his interpretation of the formally designed garden near the house. He was so anxious to defend it against Brown that he praised its intricacy and concealment in some passages such as that just quoted, while in others he allowed ‘convenience, neatness and a dressed appearance.' (III, 168). Did he realize that neatness could be picturesque? Near the house picturesque beauty . . . must often be sacrificed to neatness; but that is a sacrifice, and one which should not wantonly be made.' (III, 169). The point was that close to the house utility was evidently required just as much as display. It is doubtful if Price ever made up his mind whether utility and ‘picturesque beauty' were allies or adversaries. He propounded both views. 'It is an acknowledged maxim, that what is ornamental, should, if possible, appear to answer some purpose of utility.' (II, 279). That could be by Pugin or by a functionalist of 193o. The following passage could not: In all this, convenience and propriety are not the objects of consideration : not that either of them is to be neglected, but that they are objects of another kind; objects of good sense, and good judgment, rather than of that more refined and delicate sense and judgment, called taste.' (III, 49). However, the relation of function to aesthetic appeal is only a side issue in our context. What matters is Price's apology of the terraced garden with balustrades and statuary, or the fruit garden with walled-in compartments as a source of picturesque pleasure. The application of these passages to problems of urban planning is evident.