1 THE COUNTER-REFORMATION AND MANNERISM pages 10–33 t L'Inghilterra e il Manierismo', Bollettino del Centro Internazionale di Studi di Architettura Andrea Palladio, IX, Vicenza 1967. Some xeroxed copies of the lecture in English are available for libraries. 2 E. Gothein: 'Staat und Gesellschaft des Zeitalters der Gegenreformation', in Die Kultur der Gegenwart, Leipzig 1908. He accepts the chronological divisions used in my essay but ignores them as soon as he turns to art, erroneously referring to a whole series of seventeenth-century phenomena under the heading of Counter-Reformation. 3. Cf. Zeitschrift für bildende Kunst, Leipzig 1919. 4 "Greco und der Manierismus’, published in Kunstgeschichte als Geistgeschichte, Munich 1924. 5 The work of definition and categorization continued, as is shown by the writings of Troeltsch, Burdach, Strich and others. 6 Cf. Ludwig Pastor: Geschichte der Papste, Book V, Freiburg im Breisgau 19o1 etc.; English ed., The Histery of the Popes, London 1894 etc. 7 As for contemporary philosophy, Gothein says: By the middle of the sixteenth century the return to scholasticism was complete everywhere.’ Panofsky (Idea, p. so) emphasizes the acceptance of scholastic ways of thought' apropos the Idea of Federigo Zuccari. 8 In the very year in which Charles V gave up his empire and retired into the monastery of San Yuste. 9 He nevertheless took a keen scholarly interest in Antiquity. His achievements as director of the Vatican Library are well known; as was often the case, a reaction against the ideals of the Renaissance did not preclude an interest in archaeology. On the contrary, the Antique plays a very prominent role in the architectural treatise of the Mannerists, and, at precisely this time, a marked increase in the activities of collectors and editors of classical works is to be noted. However, Huelsen (Römische Antikengärten. Heidelberg 1917) draws attention to the fact that the collection of Ippolito Gonzaga, which was not started until after 155o, was formed primarily with a view to incorporation in architectural or garden designs' and not with reference to the antiquarian value of the monuments, the erudizione, which set the tone of the Carpi collection in particular’. The Carpi collection dated from the 1530s and 1 540s. 1o Report dated 23 October 1557. 11 The Casino is exactly contemporary with the last buildings of Michelangelo. 12 Cf. Monumenta Ignat., Series L, nos too, 103, 136, 257. Dvořák refers to this: Geschichte der Italienischen Kunst, Vol. II, Munich 1928, p. 85. 13 Austerity as well as a rationalistic practical sense are qualities shared by St Ignatius and his fellow student in Paris. Jean Calvin. 14 Weisbach– ('Der Manierismus'. in– Zeitschrift für bildende Kunst, Leipzig 1919, p- 170) stresses this himself. 15 As when he refers to the Madonna as la mamma, smacks his lips with pleasure when consuming the Host, advises a visionary to spit out hís visions to make them disappear, or boxes the ears of a passer-by whose peevísh expression displeases him. 16 He wore knotted chains under his habit. 17 Cf. the important hearing at which Veronese appeared before the Inquisition, printed in Guhl and Rosenberg: Künstlerbriefe, Vol. II, p. 363: and in R. Friedenthal, Letters of the Great Artists, London 1963. Pp 113.ff. 18 Die Entstehung der Barockkunst in Rom, Vienna 1908, pp. 153ff. 19 The paper then proceeded to run through Weisbach's categories of art of the Counter-Reformation and to prove that they are entirely or essentially categories not of sixteenth-century Mannerism but of seventeenth-century Baroque. 20 In his picture-book Die Kunst des Barock, Berlin t924, he begins his sequence of illustrations with Caravaggio. Carracci and Bernini, and this would suggest that he had come to share the point of view which I put forward in this paper. However, the detailed introduction to the plates still maintains the parallel between Counter-Reformation and Baroque which I am trying to invalidate. 21 Cf. Weisbach: Der Barock als Kunst der Gegenreformation, Berlin 1921, p. 12. 22 Julius von Schlosser points out in his book Die Kunstliteratur, Vienna 1924, p. 282, that this period saw the first appearance of prudery and of its symbol, still à potent one in our own environment: the figleaf.' One can go further. With certain engravings by Marcantonio Raimondi after drawings by Giulio Romano, kept in the poison cupboards of printrooms, and with Aretino's Ragionamenti, pornography appears on the # Notes scene. Aretino indeed wrote sonnets to go with the engravings. The subject of engravings and sonnets is the positions in copulation. As the sonnets, according to C. G. von Murr, date from 1524. the drawings are probably of c. 1520 or thereabouts. There is a tradition that Marcantonio was gaoled fór doing the engravings. The details here summarized are repeated from miscellaneous papers kept at the British Museum with the engravings. 23 Cf. here the extremely valuable notes on the German sculpture of the same period in Bruhns:Würzburger Bildhauer., Munich 1923, p. 223. 24 They belonged, almost without exception, to the first generation. The work of the second generation, that of the artists active during the period of greatest austerity, is virtually devoid of exhibited sensuality. This distinction applies e.g. to the differences between Parmigianino and Bedolo. 25 An instance is the comparison, proposed by Weisbach himself, between the austerity of Tasso and the sensual luxuriance of Marino. 26 Weisbach invalidates his own argument, when he says (op. cit., p. 135) that in Lanfranco's St Margaret there is no reference to the transcendental'. How then can there be mysticism? 27 The star witness for the truth of my interpretation is once more Weisbach himself, who writes of Ribera (op. cit., p. 125): 'This materialistic illusionism is almost entirely devoid of the spiritualistic mysticism which is so characteristic of El Greco and other Spanish artists. 28 Gilio's Trattato. de la emulatione che il Demonio a fatto a Dio ne l'adorazione . . . , Venice 1563, which Weisbach naturally instances in support of his thesis, is in fact an isolated case. 29 Cf. for Germany Wackernagel, in F. Burger and A. E. Brinckmann: Handbuch der Kunstwissenschaft, Berlin 1915 etc., pp. 12–13. 3o When this paper was originally published, I wrote in a footnote: I can, in any case, do no more than this without anticipating a contribution by Wilhelm Pinder which is due to appear in this journal in the near future. My own paper is considerably mndebted to the ideas which Pinder is to develop in his article; I myself participated in their elaboration in the course of a series of lectures andseminar papers. W. Friedländer's paper on the beginnings of the anti-classical style, on the other hand, which appeared in the second issue of this year, did not come to my attention until my own work waş completed. It was gratifying to find that, on fundamental issues such as the homogeneity and independence of Mannerism as a stylistic epoch and its initial date of c. t20. Friedländer is in agreement with the conclusions set out here.' What has happened to the term Mannerism and its uses since, is outlined in the Foreword. After the original version of this paper had been published, in 1928, the volume of the Handbuch der Kunstwissenschaft came out in which 1 discussed in about roo pages the Italian painters of Mannerism. The volume had come out originally in instalments, beginning in 1925, if 1 remember rightly. A paper I wrote on Mannerism in Italian architecture was included in The Mint, II, 1936, and is going to be reprinted shortly in the United States. ## Il EArLY ANd HiGH BaROQUe pages 34-55 1 Monatshefe für Kunstwissenschaft, Leipzig 1922, Pp. 241f. 2 Der entwicklungsgeschichtliche Pantheismus', in Gesammelte Schriften, Vol. II. Turning to our narrower field of enquiry, it was Herman Voss (Die Malerei der Spātrenaissance in Rom und Florenz, Berlin 1920, pp. 14ff.) who pointed most clearly to the necessity of recognizing 16oo as the historical watershed. Some of his analogies are drawn from the history of music. 3 Martin Luther: Tischreden, Vol. II, p. 419. 4 Laurentius Valla: De Voluptate ac vero bono . , Paris 1512, I, 13. 5 Ludwig von Pastor: Geschichte der Papste, Book XII, Freiburg im Breisgau 1927. 6 Weisbach draws attention to this in his Der Barock als Kunst der Gegenreformation, Berlin 1921, p. 28, a study highly illuminative for the spirit of the Baroque. 7 Geschichte der Päpste, Book VII, chapter 3. 8 Ernst Bergmann: Katechismus der Jesuitenmoral, Leipzig 1913. 9 I Gesuiti che dovrebbero essere come altre vołte defensori della Santa Sede piu degli altri la pongono in compromesso’ (The Jesuits, who ought to be, as they formerly were, defenders of the Holy See, are now more actively compromising its position than anyone'). From a report sent by the Papal Nuncio Scotti, in April 1641, quoted by Leopold von Ranke: Französische Geschichte.. ., Tübingen 1852 etc., Vol. II; English ed. Civil Wars and Monarchy in France..., London 1852 to Benedetto Croce: Saggi sulla litteratura italiana del Seicento, Bari 1921. 11 Looked at in another way, these constituted a method by which the Church might combat the new religions. 12 J. J. I. Döllinger and F. H. Reusch: Geschichte der Moralstreitigkeiten in der römischkatholischen Kirche, Vol. 1, Nördlingen 1889; Honigsheim: Die Staats- und Soziallehren der französischen Jansenisten im v7- Jahrhundert, Diss. Heidelberg 1914; Cornelius Jansenius: Augustinus, Louvain 1640 etc., Vol. II, Book 5, chapter 3. 13 Carl Vossler: Frankreichs Kultur im Spiegel seiner Sprachentwicklung, 3rd ed. Heidelberg 1921, p. 354. 14 The Ursulines established themselves in France in 1 s96, the purely contemplative reformed Carmelites in 1604. In 1606 the community of Jeanne Lestonnec was founded in Bordeaux, in 16o9 Mary Ward founded her Institute of Mary in Flanders, in 1612 the Ursulines transformed themselves into a regular order, in 1615 the Sisters of the Christian Doctrine was formed in Nancy. See Pastor, loc. cit., and Max Heimbucher: Die Orden und Kongregationen der katholischen Kirche, Paderborn 1896, 3td ed. Paderborn 1933-4. 15 Cf. Max Weber: Die protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus', in Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, XX, XXI, Heidelberg 1888 etc.; English ed., The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, London 193o; and Ernst Troeltsch: 'Die Soziallehren der christhichen Kirchen', in Gesammelte Schriften, Tübingen 1912–25; English ed., The Social Teaching of the Christian Churches, London and New York 1931. 16 Revue de métaphysique et de morale, Paris 1896, p. 529. 17 Cf. above all Dilthey: Weltanschauung und Analyse des Menschen seit Renaissance und Reformation', in Gesammelte Schriften, Leipzig and Berlin 1923. Vol. Il. 18 August Schmarsow: Barock uud Rokoko, Leipzig 1897, p. 27. 19 An entertaining sidelight on this sense of superiority' is afforded by the appearance. about 1625, of the wig, introduced by Louis XIll, the expression of the general desire for expansion of the individual personality. 20 Cinma, Act V, Scene 3 21 Bacon, Novum Organum, Book 1, London 1620. 22 Cf. Dilthey: Das natürliche System der Geisteswissenschaften im 17. Jahrhundert', in Gesammelte Schriften, Berlin and Leipzig 1923. Vol. II. 23 The French Protestants who suffered forcible 'conversion during Louis XIV's nototious dragonnades fell victim ‘not to the zeal of the Catholic world in general but to the idea of a Gallican church and of the unity of France' (Ranke: Französische Geschichte, Tübingen 1852 etc., Vol. XIII, chapter 5); in other words they were persecuted in the name of the ideal of the state. The situation had been the same under Richelieu. 24 Cf. Pinder in Burger: Handbuch der Kunstwissenschaft, pp. 246–54. 25 It might be said that Corneille's line in Horace (Áct Il, Scene 3), 'Rome a choisi mon bras, je n’examine rien', is in fact characteristic of the 'man of will' of both the Mannerist and Baroque periods, if one understands by 'Rome' in one case the Roman church, in the other the Roman state. The idea of absolute monarchy first took shape in the age of Mannerism in the Papal States. 26 \* . . . ed il Caravaggio disse che tanta manifattura gli era a fare un quadro buono di forì come di figure . . .' (Caravaggio said that it cost him as much labour to paint a picture of flowers as of figures’). Reported by Vincente Giustiniani, see G. Ġ. Bottari and S. Ticozzi: Raccolta di Lettere sulla Pittura, Milan 1822–5, Vol. VI, pp. 247 sqq. 27 Carl Vossler:–Italienische Literaturgeschichte, Sammlung Göschen, 4th ed. 28 Saggi sulla litteratura italiana del Seicento, Bari 1921. 29 There is a correspondence between the perspective trompe-l'oeil effects of Bernini and Borromini and the literary technique of Marinism: profuse imagery, the accumulation of decorative epithets, antitheses, plays on words. Marino's couplet: 'È del poeta il fin la maraviglia. Chi non sa far stupir vada alla striglia' (The poet's end is wonderment; a poet who knows not how to amaze deserves no reward but blows'), could equally well have been intended to refer to the painters, sculptors and architects of the Baroque. 30 In his Saggi . . . (see Note to) Croce quotes the Poesie sacre e morali of B. Morando (1662), who complains as follows: Pare che oggidi non si trovino spiriti piu vivaci al comporre di quellí che dai sospiri degli amori profani e dal fato delle trombe guérriere sogliono derivare' (‘It seems that there are today no spirits more lively in [literary] composition than those derived from the sighs of profane love or the breath of martial trumpets') Croce goes on to instance, among many other examples, three lyric poets, Giovanetti, Maria-Materdona and Brignole-Sale, who handled the dubious theme of La Cortigiana frustata, (The Courtesan whipped'). Marino himself made the unabashed statement that 'Spesso l'orror va col diletto' (often horror accompanies delight’). 31 Pietro da Cortona: Trattato della Pittura e della Scultura, Fłorence 1652. 32 Paul Fréart de Chantelou: Journal du voyage en Franc du Cavalier Bernin . .. , Paris 1930. 33 Rose: Spātbarock, Munich 1922. 34 Willy Andreas: Richelieu’, in Meister der Politik, Vol. II, 1923. 35 All these quotations are from the second volume of Ranke's Französische Geschichte (see Note 9). 36 Gustave Lanson: Corneille, 3rd ed., Paris 1909; and Klemperer: 'Vom Cid zu Polyeucte', in Neuere Sprachen, Marburg 1920. 37 Loc. cit. (Note 36), and Zur französischen Klassik', in Vom Geiste neuer Literaturforschung. Festschrift für Oskar Walzel, ed. J. Wahle and V. Klemperer, Potsdam 1924. 38 Fréart de Chantelou, op. cit 39 In Corneille's hands, even the Christian martyr Polyeucte becomes an activist. See Klemperer, loc. cit. (Note 36). 40 Carl Vossler: op. cit. (Note 13), pp. 355–6. 41 He can be seen putting this into practice in one of the letters (5 March 1712) of his German sister-in-law, the second Madame, Liselotte of the Palatinate, written after the death of Louis XIV's son and grandson, the Dauphin and the Due de Bourgogne: Der Kōnig jammert mich von Hertzen: er zwingt sich um gute Mienen zu machen undt man sicht doch dass er innerlich leidt' ('the king makes my heart bleed; he forces himself to look cheerful, and yet one can see that he is suffering within'). 42 The volume of the Handbuch der Kunstwíssenschaft to which reference was made at the end of the preceding essay (Note 3o) has, as its second part, about too pages on Early and High Baroque in Italian painting. II THE CRISIS OF 1650 IN ITALIAN PAINTING pages 56–76 1 A much broader treatment of the subject of this paper and of Italian painting between 1650 and 175o altogether, can be found in my Habilitationsschrift in the Göttingen University Library. It was meant to be Part Three of my volume of the Handbuch der Kunstwissenschaft which is supposed to deal with Italian painting from the end of the Renaissance to the end of the Rococo. However, I was bound by my contract not to exceed à certain length of text, and so of Part Three only a summary was printed. 2 Since this was written much more literature has of course come out. The second edition of V. Golzio:Seicento e Settecento, Turin n.d. (196o), has a very full bibliography. More recent still is the second edition of R. Wittkower: Art and Architecture in Italy, 16o0–1750 (Pelican History of Art), Harmondsworth 1967. These two books save me more detailed bibliographical annotation. 3 Cf., above all, Roberto Longhi, in an article in La Voce, V, Florence 1913. Here, in Longhi's characteristically succinct manner, Preti is described as the saviour of Neapolitan painting, and therefore, in the context of that period, the saviour of Italian painting'. 4 The documentary sources for the dating of the picture are all in V. Mariani: Mattia Preti a Malta, Rome 1928. 5 Brera No. s99 (illustration in Chimirri and Frangipane's biography, Milan 1914); Dresden No. 467 (Gallery Catalogue); Rome, Palazzo Corsini No. 1566 (catalogued as L. Spada); Rome, Palazzo Doria No. 40o. The Genoa Raising of Lazarus was given to Caravaggio in the Catalogue of 1912. 6 The fresco, mentioned in contemporary documents published by V. Ruffo in Bolletino d’arte, X, Rome 1916, and in Longhi's review in Arte, XIX, 1916, p. 370, long remained unphotographed. I owed the opportunity to publish the first reproduction of it to the kindness of Federigo Hermanin. 7 Preti's frescoes in San Biagio, at Modena, had previously been reproduced only in a rare work by Bertoni and Crescimbeni, Il patrimonio artistico della Congregazione della Carità, Modena n.d. On external evidence one would be inclined to suppose the frescoes of San Biagio to stem from the master's early Emilian period; but the style of these magnificently free, expansive and richly-coloured scenes is much closer to that of Valmontone than to that of Sant' Andrea della Valle, so that it would be hard to justify a dating before the mid-165os. 8 Valerio Marianí: Matteo Preti a Malta, Rome 1928. 9 Monographs: E. Petraccone, Naples 1919; Posse, in Thieme-Becker’s Künstlerlexikon ; De Rinaldis, in the Piccola Collezione d' Arte, Florence 1922. No monograph has since been published. to It is probable that the type of Giordano's Banquets also dates back to these early years. Supporting evidence is provided by Preti's Banquets, painted in Naples, i.e. before 1661 —if one accepts the hypothesis that this theme, which became popular among Neapolitan artists so suddenly, was taken from Giordano by Preti and not the other way round. We gather from De Dominici, who is particularly well informed on the subject of Preti and the artistic cliques of the period, that for all Preti's natural dislike of Giordano's affectations he was influenced in spite of himself by the other artist's maniera vaga ed ideale'. 11 Illustrated in Art in America, I. 12 Cf. Desjardins: La Méthode des classiques français, Paris 1904. 13 The most recent monograph is by N. Ivanhoff, Padua 1942. 14 Cf M. Labò, in Biblioteca d’arte illustrata, Rome 1928. 1 5 It will probably be necessary to add to the names of the two North Italian innovators, Maffei and Castello, that of a third artist of whose career too little is yet known for it to be possible to say whether his style was fully formed by the 16ços. This artist is Sebastiano Mazzoni, a Florentine, who lived from 1611 to 1678, and is known to have worked in Venice (cf. an article by Fiocco in Dedalo, X, Milan 1928/9). His principal works, in the church of San Benedetto, are of 1649 and recall both Maffei and Preti; as one of the first teachers of Sebastiano Ricci, Mazzoni holds a special position as in intermediary between the Late Baroque and the transitional art of the early eighteenth century. 16 Cf. H. Voss, Malerei des Barock in Rom, Berlin n.d., pp. §83–7, and for the ample literature of the 16ços Vincenzo Golzio's bibliography (see Note 2). 17 In addition, for some of the types it would be worth considering links with the Preti of Valmontone. 18 Cf. A. M. Cerrato in Commentari, Florence 1959. 19 Cf. Voss, op. cit. (Note 17), pp. 573–83; for recent literature Golzio's bibliography (see Note 2). 20 Cf. Voss, op. cit. (Note 17), pp. 592–603; Lorenzetti, in Arte, XVII, Rome 1914; Cantalamessa, in Bolletino d'arte, 2nd series, I, Rome 1921/2; A. Mezzetti, in Rivista dell' Instituto Nazionale d'Archeologia e Storia dell' Arte, Rome 1955. 21 Spätbarock, Munich 1922. 22 This is shown most convincingly by Fraenger (Die Bildanalysen des Roland Fréart de Chambray, Heidelberg 1917) by means of a comparison between Poussin and Fréart. Cf. also Desjardins: op. cit. (see Note 12). It is French artistic theory, not French art, that offers the conclusive parallels with the renewal of Italian painting in the 165os. I am thinking of the theories of Roger de Piles (born 1635) concerning the superiority of colour to drawing (1688, 1673) and the freedom of genius from teachable rules (1681). Cf. my Academies of Art, past and present, Cambridge 1941. 23 It would be equally instructive to examine Ranke's account of the character of the late seventeenth century within the framework of Italian history. He calls this ‘an age of enjoyment', and says of the 166os: "The power of the Church was undergoing a transition from the boldness and decision of a monarchy to the calm deliberation and leisureliness of an aristocracy’ (rzth ed., p. 615). The tendencies of the restoration and the conquest were a thing of the past’ (ibid., p. 650). 24 Cf. the masterly account in Ranke's Franzōsische Geschichte, Tübingen 1852 etc., Vol. I, pp. 189–96, IV THE GENESIS OF THE PICTURESQUE pages 78–101 1 This paper owes much throughout to Christopher Hussey's classic The Picturesque published as early as 1927 and recently—at last—reprinted. A recent book of interest in the context of this and the following paper is D. Clifford, A History of Garden Design, London 1962. 2 On the word Sharawaggi and its connotations see below, pp. 102–7. 3 Quotations are from A. F. Sieveking's edition, London 1908, pp. 50–54. 4 Quotations are from Vol. Il of the 1732 edition. 5 A passage not quoted in the original essay connects Addison also with Shaftesbury's contrast between the orderly planning of the house and the informality of the garden. It appears in The Spectator No. 415 on the 'Art of Architecture' and introduces a new and fruitful argument: 'A thing that we see in succession ought to have variety . .. those on the contrary that we see at one glance ought to have symmetry; thus, at one glance, we see the front of a building. 6 Sources for these letters will be found in W. E. and W. J. Courthorpe (eds.), The Works of Alexander Pope, London 1871–89, Vols. VI, VIII and IX. 7 See G. Sherburn, The Early Career of Alexander Pope, Oxford 1934. 8 In this connection it is eminently important that Charles Coypel in his Díscours sur la Peinture of 1732 (delivered at the Royal Academy of Art in Paris in 1726) defined the Picturesque as 'un choix piquant et singulier des effets de la nature'. I found this quotation in Fiske Kimbalk's The Creation of the Rococo, Philadelphia 1943, p. 153- 9 To the sources here registered and discussed I should now add one to which Mr H. F. Clark has drawn attention, first in The Architectural Review, XCV, 1944, p. 125 f. then in his book, The English Landscape Garden, London 1948. It is Richard Castell's The Villas of the Ancients, published in 1728 under the patronage of Lord Burlington himself. The book comes a'little late in the context of my Florilegium, but one can assume that Pliny was already earlier used by Lord Burlington and perhaps by Pope as an authority to justify what they wanted to do anyway. Mr Clark's quotation about the imitatio ruris is very telling: "Hills, rocks, cascades, rivulets, woods and buildings . .. thrown into such an agreeable disorder as to have pleased the eye from several views, like so many beautiful landskips’. Bridgeman also might have been given more prominence by me, if I had known what Mr Peter Willis has brought out in his Cambridge Ph.D. thesis of t961. He proves there that Bridgeman deserves a little less credit than Walpole gives him, but some credit all the same. Dr Willis's summing-up is: He symbolized the break with the old and the beginning of the new, and if his part was no more than that of the herald of the landscape era it was no mean part to play.' Dr Willis is particularly interesting in his weighting of the evidence between Vanbrugh and Bridgeman, and his emphasis on the earliest occurrences of the ha-ha and of winding paths in French gardens and garden books before 17oo. The title of Mr Willis's thesis is Charles Bridgeman, Royal Gardener, and there is hope that it will be converted into a book. ## V A NOTE ON SHARAWAGGI pages 102–107 1 Homer E. Woodbridge, Sir William Temple, the Man and his Works, 1940. 2 Y. Z. Chang, 'A Note on Sharawadgi’, Modern Language Notes, 193o, p. 221. 3 China and the English Literature of the seventeenth century', Quarterly Bulletin of Chinese Bibliography, English edition, N.S., I. No. 4, December 1940. 4 For more recent research on the Chinese derivation see R. C. Bald: Sir William Chambers and the Chinese Garden' in Journal of the History of Ideas, X1, 1950. p. 287: and Needham: Science and Cirilization in China, Vol. IL, pp. 359-363. We are indebted to Mr Basil Gray for these references. 5 The Influence of Chinese Art in the West', in The Spirit of China, London (942. 6 Not only did several of the published accoumnts of China have transcribed word lists added as. for example. Athanasius Kircher's Atlas Chinensis, Amsterdam 1667, there also were separately printed dictionaries. This transpires from Robert Hooke's paper quoted in note 7. Besides, a number of manuscript dictionaries were available in England. Two such from Sir Hans Sloane's coflections are in the British Museum: Vocabularío de la lengua mandarina (a Spanish-Chinese dictionary in alphabetical order. seventeenth century. Sloane 3419) and Dietionarium Chinese, hoc est lingua Belgica juxta alphabeti ordinem, et Latini et Mandarinice quoque explicati Chinensum Charactares, (seyenteenth century, Sloane 2746). Others are in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, for instance one attached to Peter Mundy's account of his travels to China (MS. Rawl. A. 399). Moreover, amongst the manuscripts of Thomas Hyde (t636–1703), the great orientalist, and Bodley's Librarian from 166§ to 1701, there is one catalogued as Parvum Vocabularium Sinico-Anglicum and Aliud Parvum Vocabularium Sinense (Edward Bernard, Catalogi Librorum Manuscriptorum Anglicae et Hiberniae in unum collecti Oxoniae MDCXCV1, p. 286. Librorum Manuscriptorum Bibliothecae Bodleianae Classis XIII. continet autem illa Codices Orientales XXIX. E. Bibliotheca Viri Clarissimi Thomas Hyde, Pecunia Universitatis Comperatos A.D. MDCXCII, –1692), and amongst papers brought out of the study of the late Dr. Thomas Hyde of Oxford’ (B.M. Sloane 853) are various word lists with Chinese characters, their transcriptions and translations. Besides, Anthony Wood tells us in Athetae Oxonicnses, ed. Bliss. Vol. IV. 182o, p. 526, that amongst 'books by Dr. Hyde designed for the press, if he lives to finish them, he having already done something towards all of them' was a "Curiesa Chinensia and Selanensia’ and Varia Chinensia .. . omnía excerpta ex Ora et Scriptis nativi Chinensis Shin Éo-burgh. 7 John Webb: The Antiquity of China, London 1678, which though quite crazy in its attempt to link the Chinese with the Jews and in asserting that China was the place where Noah's Ark landed, does show at least the fascination of matters Chinese. Mr Chen in an article 'John Webb, a forgotten page in the early history of Sinology in Europe' in Chinese social and polítical Review, XIX, No. 3, 1935, pp. 295–330, has dealt in detail with Webb's sinological endeavours. Robert Hooke read a paper to the Royal Society (Philological Transacations, XVI, No. 18o, t686) which was entirely devoted to the Chinese language, 'Some Observations and Conjectures concerning the Character and Language of the Chinese, Made by R.H., F.R.S." What he has to say about his method seems worth quoting: By a Chinese Manuscript out of which I transcribed the Lord's Prayer in the year 1666 (when it was lost), I found that the pronuntiation had no Affinity with the strooks of the Character . . . Since that time I procured from China a Dictionary of the Court Language (as I found it written upon by the person that sent it me from thence). But this whole Book (which I found was Printed) consisted only of the Chinese Characters without any interpretation, or Pronuntiation, however by the help of the pictures of that, and à Chinese Almanack, I finally found out their Characters for numbers. ..’ (p. 66). I have not yet been able to procure sufficient helps to Inform myself of the whole Art of Writing and Reading the Chinese Characters . . . the best help 1 had was the Perusal of Some Books Printed in Chinese with the Pronuntiation and Signification of the Character m Latin Letters....' (p. 69). 8 Moreover, Temple's remarkable knowledge of Confucius indicates that he must have been familiar with the 1687 translation of the philosopher's works by Prosper Intorcetta, Christian Herdritch, Francis Rougemont and Philippe Couplet. 9 Histoire de l’Expedition Chrestienne au Royaume de la Chine enterprise par les P.P. deta compagnie de Jesus . . . tirées des commentaires du Père Matthieu Riccius par le Père Nicole Trigault nouvellement traduicte en français, Lyon 1616, p. 611. 10 The History of the - - . Monarchy of China by F. Alvarez Semedo, now put into English, London 1655, p. 112. 1 1 China and France or Two Treatises. The One of The Present State of China from the observation of two Jesuits lately returned from that Country. Written and published by the French King's cosmographer (Father Grueber, S.J.) and now Englished, London 1676, p. 74. 12 An Embassy from the East India Company of the United Provinces to the Grand Tartar Cham, Emperour of China, delivered by their Excell'cies P. de Goyer and J. de Keyser . . . and ingeniously described' by Mr. J. Nieuhoff. Englished by j. Ogílby, London 1669. Second edition of Vol. 1, 1673, identical with first edition to which belongs Vol. II, Atlas Chinensis being a second part of a relation of remarkable passages in two embassies from the East-India Čompany of the United Provinces to the Vice-Roy Singlamong and General Taising Lipon and to Kouchi Emperor of China and East Tartary. Englished by J. Ogilby, etc., 1671. 13 Very much later G. de Magalhaens (Nouvelle Relation de la Chine Composée en l'année 1668, Paris 1668, Englished by Ogilby. 1688) also mentions in the precincts of the Fourth Palace or Lama Tien ‘a Mountain made with hands like a Sugarloaf and environ'd with Rocks which were brought thither in former times from the Seaside, though far more remote with great labour and expense. These Rocks are for the most part full of holes and hollownesses, occasioned by the continual dashing of the waves; the Chinese taking great delight to behold those unpolished works of nature. And they are so disposed as to counterfeit the high outjuttings and steep and rugged Precipices of Rocks; so that at a moderate distance the whole seems to represent some craggy wild Mountain, the first work of Nature.' 14 Also transcribed as Chin-fo-Cum and Tschin-fo-Tsung, according to H. Belevitch-Stankevitch: Le Goût Chinois en France au temps de Louis XIV, Paris 1906, p. 228, or Shen Fumn-tsung, according to J. J. L. Duyvendak in 'An old Chinese Fragment in the Bodleian', in Bodleian Library Record, II, No. 28, 1949; we are indebted to Professor Beeston for having drawn our attention to the latter reference. 15 V. Pinot: La Chine et la formation de l’esprit philosophique en France, Paris 1932, brings a letter published in Mercure Galant, Sept. 1684, with a description of the Chinaman's visit at the Court of Versailles. 16 The Life and Time of Anthony Wood Antiquary of Oxford, 1632–1695, described by himself, collected from his Diaries and other Papers by A. Clark. Vol. III, 1894, p. 236: After his majesty was sate, he asked the vicechancellor (standing by him) for certaine books. Towhich the vice-chancellor answered that Dr. Hyde the Library keeper could answer him more fully than he. Whereupon he was called from the other part of the library, where his study was and being come, he knecled downe whereupon the King gave him his hand to kiss. Which beig done his majesty said, "Well, Dr. Hyde, was the Chinese here?" to which he answered "Yes, if it may please your majesty: and 1 learned many things of him."Then said his majesty. "He was a little blinking fellow, was he not?" to which he answered "Yes." and added that “all the Chineses, Tartars, and all that part of the world was narrow-eyed".. 17 A. H. Rowbotham in Missionary and Mandarin, Berkeley and Los Angeles 1942. p. 279, suggests that Pepys refers to Kircher's volume. In addition Chinese pictures seem to be mentioned in Gregorius Sharpe's re-edition of some of Thomas Hyde's works (Syntagma Dissertationum Quas Olim auctor doctissimus Thomas Hyde S. T.P. separation edidit A Gregorio Sharpe, Oxford 1767, Vol. II, P. 521): 'Horti Chinensis descriptio quae sequitur quamvis sine nomine in adversaris appareat proculdulit data es ab codem viro Sinensi qui epistolas jamjam exscriptas ad Hydium misit: Explicatio videtur esse cujusdam Tabulae pictae e China allatae." Sloane also owned some Chinese pictures, but again nothing is known as to when he acquired them (B.M. Sloane 5304. 5292–3. 5252, since transferred to the Department of Oriental Antiquities, now, under Chinese Woodcuts, B. 21–41.) 18 It seems to have been usual to question returned travellers; the Académie des Sciences in Paris prepared in 1685 a memoir (published by V. Pinot in Documents inédits relatifs à la connaissance de la Chine en France, Paris 1932, p. 7) of questions to be put to F. Couplet. ## VI RICHARD PAYNe KNIGHT pages 108–125 1 On Payne Knight's life, see the article in the Dictionary of National Biography and its bibliography. 2 Cf. Thieme-Becker's Künstlerlexikon. 3 This paper in its original form had as an appendix lengthy passages from the diary tentatively translated back into English by Brian Miller. 4 See A. T. Bolton: The Works of Robert Adam, London 1922. 5 See The Complete Works of Sir John Vanbrugh, Vol. IV, The Letters, ed. G. Webb, London 1928; and Christopher Hussey in English Homes, ed. H. Avray Tipping. London 1928, PeriodIV, Vol. II. 6 See G. H. Lovegrove in London Topographícat Record, IV, 1907. 7 Kindly conducted by the Headmaster of the Alexander Duckham Memorial Schools. 8 The Letters, p. 14, letter of 1707 about Kimbolton. 9 Ibid., p. 163. 10 P. Simpson and C. F. Bell: Designs hy Inigo Jones, Walpole Society, 1924, pls. 36 and 40; A Nicoll: Stuart Masques, London 1937, pp. 20, 145. Compare also the plate showing a performance by French actors at St Salvator in Munich in about 16§8. It is illustrated in S.W. Holsboer: L' Histoire de la mise en scène dans le théâtre français de 160oo à 1657, Paris 1933. pl. XI. 11 J. Gregor: Monumenta Scenica, Vol. II, pls. VII, VIII; also C. Ricci: La Scenografia ítaliana, Milan 193o, pl. 37; and A. Hyatt Mayor, The Bibiena Family, New York 1945. pl. 38 (ascribed to Giuseppe). 12 On the history of the building of Strawberry Hill, see Wilmarth S. Lewis's exemplary paper in the Metropolitan Museumn Studies, 1, New York 1934. 13 Letter of 19 December 1753, to Bentley. 14 The owner of Downton Castle at the time when I wrote this paper. Mr C. A. Rouse-Boughton-Knight, kindly lent me the two pictures of Downton, and allowed me to reproduce them. 15 An Analytical Enquiry into the Principles of Taste, London 18os; quoted here from the third edition, 1806. 16 Ibid., p. 218. 17 Ibid., p. 225. 18 Ibid., p. 222. 19 Ibid., p. 157. 20 Letter of 22 March 1796. 21 Preface to Alfred, 1823. 22 Symbolical Language, ed. in Specimens of Ancient Sculpture, Vol. II, p. 20. 23 Enquiry into the Principles of Taste, p. 123. 24 Worship of Priapus. 25 Ibid. 26 Reports from Committees, I, 1816, Vol.III. 27 P. XXXIX. 28 XIV, January, 1816. 29 The Judgement of Connoisseurs Upon the Works of Art, 1916, p. 6. 30 On the first phase see above, pp. 78–101. 31 Quoted from E. W. Manwaring, Italian Landscape in Eighteenth Century Engłand, 1925, p.133. 32 An Essay on . . Pope, Vol. II, ed. of 1806, p. 179. 33 Letters, September 10, 1763. 34 On Price see below, pp. 122–137. 35 Farington Díary, ed. Greig, Vol. I, p. 146. 36 On Repton see below, pp. 138–155. 37 The Landscape, 1, 17–20. 38 Essay on the Picturesque, ed. 181o, 1, p. 14. 39 The Landscape, II, 51–52. 40 Ibid., II, 82–84. 41 Ibid., I1, 75–76. 42 Ibid., I, 140–142. 43 Ibid., 1, 145–146. 44 Essay, I, 231. 45 The Landscape, 1, 114. 46 Ibid., II, 190. 47 Ibid., II, 194: 48– Ibid., II, 195. 49 Ibid., 1, 293. 50 See pp. 156–163. 51 Sketches and Hínts, p- 1o1 of Loudon’s edition. 52 Ibid., p. 103. 53 Ihid., p. 232. 54 Three Essays on the Picturesque. quoted from W. D. Templeman: The Life and Work of William Gilpin, Illinois Studies in Language and Literature, XXIV, Nos. 3–4, 1939. On Gilpin more recently: C P. Barbier, William Gilpin, Oxford 1963. 55Letters, 21 March, 1821. 56 The Landscape, 1, 369. 57 Ibid., III, 402. 58 Ihid., III, note 243. 59 Farington Diary, ed. Greig, Vols. Ill. p. 252, and IV, p. 31. 6o He had said apropos Tatton Park that one way of showing the extent of a man's property could be to place coats-of-arms on inns, milestones, or such-like objects. Knight ridiculed this remark. 61 The Landscape, III, 334. 62Not in 18o8, as the D.N.B. says. 63 He also renewed his attacks on Repton, and Repton answered back. 64 Analytical Enquiry, p. 234. 65 Ibid., p. 234. 66 Ibíd., p. 238. 67 Ibid., p. 237. 68 Ibid., p. 236. 69 Ibid., p. 196. 70 Ibid., p. 16. 71 Ibid., pp. 145 and 148. 72 Ibid., p. 154. 73 Ihid,, p. 69. 74 Ibid., pp. 65, 67. 75 Ibid.,p. 151. 76 Ibid., p. 145. 77 Ibid., p.9. 78Ibid., p. 88. 79 Ibid., p. 202. 8o Ibid., p. 186. 81 Ibid., p. 70. 82 Very recently Dr Lang has re-formulated the significance of Payne Knight in a way which somewhat differs from my interpretation. The paper is published in Concerning Architecture (ed. Sir John Summerson), London 1968. 83 Knight's French biographer, M. Jean-Jacques Mayoux, is of the same opinion. He writes of Knight's ‘esthétique d’ idéologue qui porte la marque de la raideur des derniers représentants du XVIII siècle intellectualiste' (p. 1zo), calls him very aptly a 'rationaliste fantaisiste' (p. 72), and ranges him with the last generation of the classicists rather than with the romantics (p. 119). The book (Richard Payne Knight et le pittoresque, Paris 1932) was not available to me until I had completed this article. Its chief use lies in its analysis of Knight's Enquiry. 84 Analytical Enquiry, p. 310. 85 Ibid., p. 300. 86 Ibid., p. 304. 87 Ibid., p. 302. Incidentally, Samuel Palmer in his Shoreham days was as infuriated by these sentences as Haydon was by Knight's Elgin evidence. The first of the two passages quoted left him speechless. He only scribbled into the margins: He produced some compositions of real excellence!! Michelangelo produced some compositions of real excel-Îence!!!' On the second passage he is more explicit: Those artists who are so base that they do not attempt grandeur of form and yet lyingly pretend to grand effect are now called modest; but those who, as William Blake, do attempt and achieve both, will, with time, by blind cunning and stupid wilfulness be set down impudent madmen: for our taste is Dutch; Rembrandt is our Da Vinci, and Rubens our Michelangelo! This is not an oversounding of the depth of our degradation' (A. H. Palmer: The Life and Letters of Samuel Palmer, London 1892, pp. 35 and 36). Geoffrey Grigson drew my attention to this passage. 88 Faríngton Diary, Vol. V, p. 14. 89 Ibid., Vol. III, p. 99. 90 Ibid., Vol, II, p. 91. 91 Analytical Enquiry, p. 103. 92 Ibid., p. 149. 93 The Landscape, note to II, 105. 94 Analytical Enquiry, P. 304. 95 Ibid., P. 1 10. 96 Ibid., p. 109. 97 Ibid., p. 109. VII UVEDAtE PRICE pages 126–137 tOn the controversies see pp. 118–124. 2See W. D. Templeman, Íllinois Studies in Language and Literature, XXIV, 1939. ## VIIIHUMPHRY REPTON pages 138-155 i On Repton's quarrels with Payne Knight and Uvedale Price something has been reported on pp. 118–122. They do not concern the following quotations much. 2 On calling the Elizabethan style Gothic see the following essay, pp. 160–161. 3 A topical remark, as written in 1794. ## IX GooD KING JAMes's GoTHIc' pages 156–163 1 Only Mr Hussey says of Easton Neston that 'its plan is an adaptation of that which prevailed in England in Plantagenet and Tudor times,' English Homes, ed. H. Avray Tipping, London 1928, Period IV, Vol. II, p. 132. 2See above pp. 110–111. 3 English Homes, Period IV, Vol. II. 4 Fig. LXI. 5 See e.g. M. Jourdain: English Decorative Plasterwork ofthe Renaissance, London 1926. 6 It may be retorted that even if the ceiling is not Jacobean, it would be more plausible to attribute it to c. 1785, the time when other Neo-Jacobean work went on at Audley End —see later in this article, and Tipping loc. cit. (see Note 1), Period II, Vol. II, pp. 261, etc. But the pattern of the staircase ceiling is, it seems to me, incomparably bolder. I am glad to see that the official guidebook of the Ministry of Public Building and Works (HMSO 19§8 and later) has accepted my dating and my attribution. 7 See above p. 11 1, Ills. 3 and 4. 8 See Mrs Esdaile: Walpole Society, XV, 1926–27. 9 The Art of J. M. Rysbrack in Terracotta, Spink & Son, 1932. 10 Cf. D. Stroud: Capability Brown, London 195o. Just in time for adding to this note comes a reminder from John Newman that at Cobham Hall in Kent considerable Jacobean alterations were made in 1770. 11 3 November 1754; ed. Cunningham, Vol. II, p. 401. On Belhouse see Royal Commission on Historic Monuments, volume South East Essex, 1923, p. 6; An Eighteenth Century Correspondence, ed. Lilian Dickins and Mary Stanton, London 191o, and Country Life, XLVII, p. 6§6, etc. 12 See An Eighteenth Century Correspondence, p.334. 13 The Aubrey quotation comes from his Chronologia Architectonica; the Evelyn quotation I took from Mark Girouard: Elizabethan Retrospects', in Concerning Architecture (ed. Sir John Summerson), London 1968. In the same volume Howard M. Colvin has written on Aubrey's Chronologia. 14 Quoted from Blickling Hall, National Trust Guide Book, 4th edition, 1959, p. 18. 15Quoted from Country Life, XXXII, p. 130. Professor Marcus Whiffen drew my attention to this passage. 16 Other instances in Walpole's letters of Elizabethan as part of Gothic: 25 July 1748: the bad taste that came between the charming venerable Gothic and pure architecture' —the bad taste being the seventeenth century including Wren as against Palladianism (II, 119); 4 August 1753: a sweet little chapel' of 1620 (II, 348).—On the other hand: Hardwick Hall 'not Gothic but of the betweenity, that intervened when Gothic declined and Palladian was creeping in' (III, 338; I September 176o). On this consciousness of a betweenity, f. e.g. also Baron von Pöllnitz the adventurer and observant traveller's remark on the Palace of Heidelberg: Ce qui reste du palais est dans un goût d’Architecture, que j’aurois peine à définir: il est ni Gothique, ni Moderne' (Mémoires, 1734–37). 1712 Aug. 1769; ed. Cunningham, Vol. V, p. 18o, Yale edition, Vol. 1, p. 189, etc. 18 Sketches and Hints, ed. Loudon, 1840, p. 53. The ‘mixed style of Queen Elizabeth's Gothic' occurs again in Repton's Designs for the Pavilion at Brighton in 18o8; ed. Loudon, p. 384. 19 First Series, Vol. III, First Series, Vol. II, Second Series, Vol. II. Dr Girouard in the paper to which reference has already been made has drawn attention to them. 20 On p. xx Loudon calls him Selim and says that he lived in Wiltshire. Whoever he really was, Barry is credited by Loudon with revising front elevation and plan, ibid., p. XIX. 21 More on these in Dr Girouard's paper. 22 Neale's Seats, Second Series, Vol. V. In the same year Webster also built Underley Hall in Westmorland, a very successful piece of Elizabethanism. ## X GOETHE AND ARCHITECTURE pages 164–173 1 Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol. 36, p. 202. 2 The Apollo even to Goethe still seemed to be superior to all other classical statues. (Díchtung und Wahrheit, Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol. 28, p. 85). 3 Collected Works, ed. Suphan, Vol. V, p. 4 Ibidem, Vol. IV, pp. 124 and 142. These are words used by Herder, ibidem, Vol. V, p.206. 6 27 April 1753. 7 4 March 1753. 8 12June 1754. 9 An excellent edition of Von deutscher Baukunst, with commentary by E.Beutler, was published in Munich in 1943. Other recent German publications on the subject of this article are! K. Koetschau: Saggio su Goethe e l’architettura gotica’, in P. Clemen-Festschrift, 1926; H. von Einem, new edition of Italienische Reise, ed. Christian Wegner, Hamburg 1954; Theodor Fischer, Goethes Verhältnis zur Baukunst, Munich 1948. Fischer, an early twentieth-century architect of some importance, gave this lecture in 1932. A translation of Von deutscher Baukunst by Geoffrey Grigson and myself was published in The Architectural Review, XCVIII, 1945, and it is from this that the present quotations are taken. For further and more recent literature see the introductory remark to this paper. io On Laugier there is now an excellent book: Wolfgang Herrmann, Laugier and Eighteenth Century French Theory, London 1962. 11 Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol. 28, p. 84ff. 12 Aus Goethes Brieftasche—Dritte Wallfahrt zur Erwins Grabe. Published as appendix to H. L. Wagner's translation of Du Théâtre, by L. S. Mercier. 13 Goethe himself wrote of Palladio: We must recognise merit where it is due: the English have long appreciated his qualities'. (27 September 1786). 14 Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol. 30, p. 135. 15 Italienische Reise, 23 March 1787–Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol. 31, p. 71. 16 Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol. 31, p. 238. 17 19 September 1786-Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol 3o. p. 77. 18– 2 October 1786–Weimar Edn., 1st series. Vol. 30, p. 109. 19 30 December 1795—Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol. 10, p. 360. 20 ‘Zur Theorie der bildenden Künste’, 1788, Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol. 47, p. 62. 21Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol. 47, p. 68. 22 What Goethe writes is this: We experience a pleasurable sensation when we move in a dance according to certain laws; it ought to be possible to induce a similar sensation by leading a person blindfold through a wellbuilt house.' But this same insistence on direct aesthetic experience in art and architecture led Goethe, on the other hand, to establish en passant (in the same article, dating from 1795, from which the previous quotation was taken) a principle of architectural criticism, re-established by Schmarsow and his school from 1892 onwards, and which is still valid today: that is, that architecture is an art to appraise not only with our eyes, but also with our sense of moving through space. I have added à note on Schmarsow's ancestors and descendants in this conception of architecture to an address I gave at the Royal Institute of British Architects. (Journal, August 1967). (Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol. 47. p. 68). 23 17 March 1817–Weimar Edn., 4th series Vol. 28, p. 23. 24 Weimar Edn., 4th series, Vol. 21, p. 296. 24 Weimar Edn., 4th series, Vol. 21, p. 296. 25 The theory of the Saracen origin of Gothic architecture was already familiar to Sir Christopher Wren. (‘'What we now call the Gothic style in architecture . . . I think should more correctly be termed the Saracen style' ('Report on Westminster Abbey', 1713, printed in Parentalia, 1750, p. 297). He had it from John Evelyn, who puts it forward in the second edition of his translation of Roland Fréart's Parallele (Parallel between Ancient and Modern Architecture, originally written in French, by Roland Fréart, Sieur de Chambray). The reference is in the appendix on architects. The second edition is dedicated to Wren, and the dedication is dated 1697. Publication, however, took place only in 1707. On French Gothicism see now P. Frankl, The Gothic, literary sources and interpretations,Princeton, 196o; and in much greater detail and with a juster appreciation of what is significantly French in the French Gothic Revival: Robin Middleton's brilliant Ph.D. thesis and his The Abbé de Cordemoy and the Graeco-Gothic Ideal’, in the Journál of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, XXV, 1962. Dr Middleton mentions that Florent Le Comte in 1699 also claimed that the Arabs invented Gothic. However, as with Wren, it is more likely that he got the suggestion from Evelyn verbally. 26 Weimar Edn., 1st series, Vol. 28, p. 99. 27 W. Freiherr von Biedermann, Goethes Gespräche, Vol. 3, 1889, n. 637. 8 August 1815, n. 28, ib., n. 666, 3 October 1815. 28–Ibidem, n. 665, 2 October 1815. 29 Kleine Schriften zur Kunst, Deutsche Literaturdenkmale des 18 und 19 Jahrhunderts, Heidelberg, 1886, pp. 106, 116 and 117. 30Conversations with Eckermann, 2 Apr. 1829. 31 21 March 1830. 32 Weimar Edn., 1st series, vol. 48, p. 206. English translation by Philip Wayne. 33 Conversations- with Eckermann, 21 October 1823. This idea was not new to him. Already in the letter, dated 181o, to Reinhart, quoted above, he called the Middle Ages a form of grub or larval state' (Weimar Edn., 4th series, Vol. 21, p. 296). 34 Weimar Edn., Ist series, Vol. 49, part II, p. 165. 35 Ibidem, p. 161. 36 Conversations with Eckermann, 11 March 1828. 37 Weimar Edn, ist series, Vol. 49. part II, p. 161. 38 Published in two volumes in 1675 and 1683—that is to say. in Boileau's time. The quotation given here comes from the end of Chapter 16. ## Xl Kari Friedrich Schinkel pages 174-195 1 For French architecture from 175o to 1815 see L. Hautecoeur: Histoire de l'architecture classique en France, Vols. IV and V, 1952 and 1953. 2 The standard work on Schinkel is still: Aus Schinkels Nachlass, edited by A. Freiherr von Wolzogen, 3 vol.. 1862–63. A selection from this was edited by H. Mackowsky in 1932. A great many of Schinkel's designs were published in exquisite engravings in Sammlung Architektonischer Entwürfe, 1819- 40. The best modern biography is by A. Grisebach, 1924. In 1939 the Academy of Architecture in Berlin decided the publication of a corpus of the whole oeuvre of Schinkel on the lines of the volumes of the Wren Society in this country. Eight volumes have so far come out (1942–62). 3 Quoted from Grisebach, p. 9 4 On Gilly see Alste Oncken, Berlin t935, an admirable monograph. Wolzogen, op. cit. (see Note 2), Vol. I, p. 173. 5 What we know about them nowadays we owe chiefly to the researches of Emil Kaufmann, first in Vienna and later in America. He published first an article in Zeitschrift für bildende Kunst, 1929–30, then Von Ledoux bis Le Corbusier, 1933, and later Three revolutionary Architects', in Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, New Series, XLII, Pt. 3, 1952, and Architecture in the Age of Reason, Cambridge, Mass., 1955.On Ledoux see also G. Levallet-Haug, 1934. On Boullée, see H. Rosenau, London 1953. The most recent treatment of architecture of the Ledoux to Schinkel age is a chapter in R. Rosenblum: Transformations in late eighteenth century Art, Princeton, 1967. 6 L'Architecture considérée sous le rapport de l’art, des moeurs et de la législation. 7 See below, pp. 204-9, especially pp. 208–9 8Legrand, incidentally, was a pupil and sonin-law of the mysterious Clérisseau, the friend of both Robert Adam and Charles Cameron. 9 Lithographed by F. Frick and published in 1799. 10 ll Grisebach, p. 29; Oncken pls. 92, 93. 11 Wolzogen, Vol. I, 160, etc. 12 On the panorama see F. Whitley: Artists and their Friends in England, 1700–1799, 2 vol., London 1928 and 1800–1820, 1928. 13 Ill, Grisebach, p. 39. 14 Ill. Grisebach, p: 55. 15 Wolzogen, Vol. III, p. 161. 16 Wolzogen, Vol. III p. 153. 17 On the British Museum see my article in The Architectural Review, CXIII, 1953, pp. 179–182. 18 Recently an excellent and exhaustive paper has been published on the history of museum buildings from the beginning to about 182o, H. Seling: ‘The Genesis of the Museum’, in The Architectural Review, CXLI, 1967. 19 IlI. Grisebach, pp. 161–65 and 170–74. 20 They are familiar from Loudon's Encyclopaedia of 1833 (e.g., pp. 854, 857, 950). Early examples actually carried out are, for instance, at Edensor (1838). 21 By Persius the Heilandskirche at Sacrow, 1841, and the Friedenskirche at Potsdam, 1843. On Persius in English see R. and P. Fleetwood-Hesketh in Architects' Journal, LXVIII, 1928, pp. 77 etc. and 113 etc. 22 Cf. L. D. Ettlinger in The Architectural Review, XCVII, 1945. 23 Ill. Grisebach, p. 65. 24 Painting by Canaletto in the National Gallery. 25 Ill. Grisebach, p. 111, more in F. Stahl: Schinkel, Berlin 1912, pp. 49, 62, 63; L. and D. Joseph: Geschichte der Baukunst des XIX Jahrhunderts, p. 19. 26 Wolzogen, Vol II, p. 208. 27 Ibid., pp. 211f and Vol. III, pP. 373ff. 28Although he visited factories on the Continent too, potteries such as that of Herr Villeroi at Mettlach on the Saar, and the machine building works of Cockrill at Seraing in Belgium and Aron Manby at Charenton near Paris. Aron Manby moved to Charenton from Tipton near Birmingham and Cockrill of course was English too. 29 Ill. Stahl, p. 21, 30 See Vol. II of these Essays, p. 15. ## XIl THe DoRic ReVIvAL pages 196–211 1 Letter to Volkmann 27 March 1761. 2 Letter of 21 November 1761. We owe this quotation to John Fleming who commumicated the unpublished letter to us on 2 February 1956. We thank him for his generosity. 3 Ed. Morgan, Cambridge, Mass., 1914. 4 See S. Lang, "Sull' Origine della Disposizione a Scacchiera nelle Città Medioevali". in Palladio, Anno VIII, 1V, 1955, p. 10§. 5 Cat. of Books Printed in the 15th Č. now in the British Museum, Pt. IV, 1916, p.124. The Reading Room copy carries a MS note to the effect that the date is still unknown. 6 Serlio also illustrates the Triumphal Arch' of Verona, whích has fluted Doric columns, without bases, attached to its upper storey. 7 Florence, Gab. dei Disegni, Arch. 477r. Reproduced in Bartoli, Vol. II, pl. CLXXXVI, fig. 321. 8 Guarini incidentally in his Architettura Civile of 1737 (p. 96) gives a fairly full list of Doric columns without-a base: Le Base gli Antichi esclusono, come in Roma si vede nel Tempio della Pietà al Carcere Juliano descritto del Serlio lib 3. Così parimente si trova il secondo ordine dell” Anfiteatro di Pola, e l’Arco trionfale a Verona tiene ezíandio le Colonne Doriche del terz’ ordine senza base, così le prime del Teatro di Marcello a Roma; siccome nel Duomo di Siracusa si veggono grossissime colonne Doriche accanalate, ma senza base; nè Vitruvio ancorchè descriva minutamente molte basi, nullamente parla niente della Dorica’. 9 E. W. Bodnar, S.J., ‘Cyríacus of Ancona and Athens', in Collection Latomus, XLIlI, Brussels 1960, p. 3f. 1o Vat. lat. 4424, fol. 28v; C. Huelsen, Il Libro di Giulíano da Sangallo, Leipzig 191o. The story of the manuscript tradition and the stay of Ciriaco in Athens has been fully told by E. W. Bodnar, op. cit. 11 See Huelsen, text vol., p. 43. 12 Huelsen, op. cit., p. 42. Bodnar, op. cit., p. 29 is more cautious, but also suggests that the Codex Manzoni is a copy of perhaps yet another set of excerpts for another friend. 13 Ed. H. Lemonnier, 1911 etc., e.g. Vol. II, p. 332 (July 1696: il est . . . plus à propos d’y mettre une base'), Vol. III, p. 128 (May 1701: la base attique qui est employée d’ordinaire dans cet ordre’), Vol. V, p. 295 (1741 : 16 radii preferred to 18). 14 J. M. Paton, Chapters on Mediaeval and Renaissance Visitors to Greek Lands, Princeton 1951, contains no relevant material, but shows that many visitors to the Holy Land passed through Greece and visited the Parthenon. None of them had much to say, and they certainly did not worry about bases to columns. 15 Voyage d’Italie, de Dalmatie, de Grèce et du Levant, 1678, Vol. II, pp. 143, 188. 16 Francesco Fanelli's Atene Attica, c. 169o, has a description of the temples on the Acropolis in which the Parthenon appears as "of the Doric order with forty-eight columns of 17 feet in circumference above the bases' and two very summary illustrations of the whole Acropolis. In J. Potter's Archaeologia Graeca, Oxford 1699, the Parthenon and the Theseion are also shown, but with bases to the columns! 17 A. Fraser Tytler of Woodhouselee: Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the Hon. Henry Home of Kames, Edinburgh 1814, 2nd ed. Vol. III, app. to Vol. II. 18 J. J. Winckelmann, 'Anmerkungen über die Baukunst der alten Temple zu Girgenti in Sicilien', in Sömtliche Werke, Donaueschingen 1825, Vol. II. 19 'Anmerkungen über die Baukunst der Alten', in Sömtliche Werke. 20 The following story was told us by John Fleming in his letter of 2 February 1956 already referred to. 21 J. Dennistoun: Memoirs of Strange and Lumisden, London 1855, Vol, II, pp. 48–49. 22 Suite de plans, coupes, profls . . – des trois temples antiques. . . dans la bourgade de Poesto. On the Gazola-Soufflot case see the correspondence of the Abbé Barthélemy, another Parisian amateur, and also that of the Comte de Caylus. For more details on the re-discovery of Paestum, and also on the connection of Hubert Robert with Paestum, see S. Lang in the Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, XIII, 195o. Robert and Fragonard had accompanied the Abbé de St Non to Naples in 176o and drawn as much of antique architecture in the neighbourhood as they possibly could. Gazola had helped them with his advice just as he had helped Marigny, Cochin and Soufflot. The result of the studies of the St Non team came out in St Non's Voyage Pittoresque of 1781–86, i.e. at the same time as the final publication of the Gazola material by Paoli. 23 The attribution of the book to Berkenhout appears now to be unfounded. 24 Winckelmann's conception of Greek art was inspired by Shaftesbury. See S. Lang: 'Vanbrugh's Theory and Hawksmoor's Buildings', in Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, XXIV, 1965, p. 140 ff. 25 However some writers of the fifteenth century explicitly gave preference to the Romans, e.g. Antonio Manetti who states in his Life of Brunelleschi (ed. Holtzinger, 1887, p. 23) that ‘in Rome the masters [of architecture] flourished more marvellously than in Greece'. 26 The best account of the battle is to be found in two papers by Professor Wittkower and Miss L. Lawrence in the Journal of the Warburg Institute, II, 1938–39. Cf. also for much valuable material L. Hautecoeur: Rome et la renaissance de l'antiquité à la fin du XVIIIe siècle, Paris 1912. 27 Illustrated in D. Irwin: English Neoclassical Art, London 1966. On Hamilton in particular, see D. Irwin in Art Bulletin, XLIV,1962. 28 Historical Remarks on Ancient Architecture', in Annual Register, 1767, p. 144, and The Grecian Orders of Architecture, p. 46. 29 The first of these proposed lectures is in a finished state and deals with general principles of architecture. The second with which we are concerned here is also complete, but most of it is crossed out. In the third edition of his Civil Architecture, 1755, Chambers says that his remarks had been intended for the second edition of this work' but then suppressed (p. 26), and the second edition came out in 1768. 30 That in itself was not new. It was a view put forward, e.g., by Caylus and explicitly opposed by Winckelmann. A less familiar quotation is the following from Nouveaux Mémoires ou Observations sur l’Italie par Deux Gentilshommes Suédois, London 1764, supposed to be by P. J. Grosley. They mention the striking similarity of Paestum to extant buildings in Upper Egypt; 'It is easy to convince oneself that their construction preceded the birth of the arts even in Greece. The Greeks only copied from them. 31 It is worth noting that in the appreciation of Greek literature and philosophy exactly the same battle was being fought in England at the same time. We have taken most of the following facts from M. L. Clarke: Greek Studies in England, 170o–183o, Cambridge 1945. 32 To be precise, the first appeared in 1765, the second in 1767. 33 Pythagoras: Antient Metaphysics, Vol. IlI, 1799; Orang Outang: Of the Origin and Progress of Language, Vol. I, 1773, p. 239. 34 See H. Grigson in The Architectural Review, CIV, 1948. 35 See the translation and comment by G. Grigson and N. Pevsner in The Architectural Review, XCVIII, 1945 and also the paper on Goethe and Architecture in the present volume, p. 165 ff. 36 In this connection it may also be worth recording that the same Riou who defended the Greeks so valiantly wrote in the very same Annual Register (1767) in defence of Gothic—although in a different context. He contrasts the ‘monstrous taste of heavy architexture' prevalent in Norman times, what Wren called Anglo-Saxon, with Wren's 'Saracenic’, i.e. the Modern Gothic . . . distinguished by the lightness of its works, the excessive boldness of its elaborations and of its sections, by the delicacy, profusion and extravagant fancy of its ornament.' The passage has not been noticed before, I think, in discussions of the Gothic Revival. Its source is probably Laugier who praises (Essai, p. 4, 1753) the boldness of design, delicacy of carving’ and ‘majesty and freedom of the Gothic style.' On Laugier see W. Hermann, Laugier and Eighteenth Century French Theory, London 1962. On Wren's Saracenic origin of the Gothic style see my paper on Goethe and Architecture, note 25. 37 Goethe in 1811, as we have seen in a previous paper, wrote the biography of the landscape painter Philipp Hackert, and Hackert had visited Sicily in 1777, accompanying Richard Payne Knight. A large painting of the temples of Agrigento by Hackert, dated 1778, has recently been published by Professor Krönig in Philipp Hackert und Russland', in Wallraf-Richartz-Jahrbuch, XXVIII, 1966, p. 318. 38 Named after the Temple of Apollo on Delos. 39 On Payne Knight see this volume pp. 108–125. The chimneypiece however was overlooked by us, and we owe information on it to Dr David Watkin whose outstandingly excellent doctoral thesis on Thomas Hope (Cambridge 1967) is yet unpublished but will, we hope, be published soon. He provides also a list of Greek Doric examples from Britain and also France and Germany, which is fuller than our list here following. 40 The drawings are in the British Museum. The temple front is illustrated in Donald R. Stewart, James Essex’, in The Architectural Révieiv, CVIII, t950, p. 320. 41 –At the same time he designed a kennel for the Bishop of Derry (Residence for a canine family’) which also has Doric columns. On the Triumphal Bridge see D. Stroud in The Architectural Review, CXXI, 1957, pp. 261–2, where earlier triumphal bridges by Piranesi (1750) and Thomas Sandby (1760) are mentioned. 42 In any case there are drawings of Paestum which are undoubtedly by the elder Piranesi and which incidentally are more evocative of the grandeur of the Dorie than the etchings. 43 The Dumont design is for a Monument to Painting. Sculpture and Architecture. It was presented by Dumont to the Accademia di S. Luca in Rome in 1746 and published in 1764 (in Morceaux d'’Architecture and also in Suite de projets détaillés de salles de spectacle). The same plan appears again not essentially modified in one of Ledoux's Gates (ill. in M. Raval's book, Paris 1945. p. 66). 44 Unless, in publishing it, he had doctored it, as he is known to have done more than once. See W. Herrmann in Art Bulletin, XLII, 1960 and J. Langner in Zeitschrift für Kunstgeschichte, XXIII, 1960. 45 A. Boinet: Les Eglises parisiennes, Paris 198, Vol. I. p. 325. We owe this and several more French references to R. Rosenblum: Transformations in late eighteenth century Art, Princeton 1967. 46 See M. Petzet: Soufflots Sainte-Geneviève, Berlin 1961, p. 122. 47 1. Stern: A l'ombre de Sophie Arnould; François Joseph Belanger, Paris 193o, Vol. I. 140: Sirén, loc cit., pl. 185; and Connolly and Zerbe, loc. cit. p. 158 etc. 48 A few more early French examples are the following: a portal in the Charité Convent in Paris by Antoine of c. 1779–80, illustrated by Hautecoeur, Histoire de l’architecture classique en France, Vol. IV, 1952, p. 23, an undated tondo by Hubert Robert in the museum of Amiens, now illustrated by Professor Rosenblum, loc. cit., fig. 12o, a design by Lequeu dated 178o which is for the portal of an Augustinian church (ill. Petzet loc, cit. fig. 72). the Cork Monument, Meréville by R. Pajou, 1782 (W atkin), the remodelling of the chancel of St Médard in Paris by L.-F. Petit-Radel in 1784 (see Rosenblum loc. cit., fig. 116). Ledoux's Barrière de Monceau, à rotunda and part of the series of monumental tollhouses on which Ledoux worked from 1784 to 1789, several works by Desprez which will be referred to in the text, Vaudoyer's design for a 'Maison d'un Cosmopolite', dated 1785 (E. Kaufmann: Architecture in the Age of Reason, Cambridge, Mass., 1955, p. 185 and fig. 192), Dufourny's Ginnasio in the Botanic Gardens at Palermo which was built in 1789– 92 and appears in C. L. V. Meeks: Italian Architecture, 1750–1914, New Haven 1966, fig. 28, F. A. Vincent's Zeuxis exhibited in the Salon of 1789 and illustrated by Professor Rosenblum (fig. 19), and Detournelle's design for a prison (mentioned by Hautecoeur, op. cit., Vol. V, p. 131) which combines crenellations with Doric columns. Professor Rosenblum also quotes from Delécluze's biography of David the telling fact that Les Barbus, the French primitivist group of young painters, admired in architecture only the Greek Doric of Sicily and Paestum (p. 436). 49 L Grabar: Istoria Russkago Isskustva, 191o– 1 5. Vol. III, p. 375 (in Russian), also Loukomski: Charles Cameron, London 1943, p. 66 and illustration on half-title. 5o Contributed by Dr Watkin. 51 See Dr Watkin's thesis referred to before. 2 We owe information on this to a letter from Dr Schenk von Schweinsberg. He also sent us the photograph illustrated and referred us to A. Klebe: Gotha und die umliegende Gegend, Gotha 1796. 53 See G. Wietek in Festschrift für G.Grundmann, 1962, p. 170. 54 H. Koch: Sachsische Gartenkunst, Berlin 1910, p. 376 ff. 55 Wietek, loc. cit. (see Note 46), p. 166. 6 The corresponding buildings and dates for Scandinavia and Russia are as follows. Scandinavia: Olof Templeman's Orangery at Uppsala c. 178o (Professor Sirén kindly told me of this), Desprez's stage decoration for Frigga c. 1784–6 (Hautecoeur, loc. cit., Vol. V, p. 83), the wooden Skärfva for Admiral Chapman, also in Sweden, and also of c. 1785 (O. Sirén: China and the Gardens of Europe, Stockholm 1950, p. 210 and pl. 186) and the south porch of Hämeenlinna (formerly Tavastehus) in Finland, again by Desprez and of 1798 (J. M. Richards: A Guide to Finnish Architecture, London 1966, fig. 41). For more examples see N. G. A. Wollin, Desprez en Suède, Malmö, 1939. Russia: Rotunda at Tsarskoe Selo, see text above; then lighthouses as Doric columns designed by Zakharov in 1792 (G. G. Grimm: Zakharov, 1940, figs. 1–4) 57 A. Öncken: Friedrich Gilly, Berlin 1935. p. 48. 58 Shown at the Royal Academy winter exhibition of French eighteenth-century art in 1967–8 (no. 430). Cf. P.-G. Dreyfus, Lépicié, 1922. 59 See R. Crozet: 'David et l’architecture néo-classique', in Gazette des Beaux-Arts, 6th series, XLV, 1955. Professor Rosenblum stresses the fact so telling in the context of the present article that a preparatory drawing for the Horati still has bases for the Tuscan columns (ibid., fig. 139), and he also mentions the Hôpital Cochin of 1778–81 as a specially early example and the church of St Pierre et St Paul at Courbevoie of 1789 as a specially impressive example (fig. 137). But the earliest French examples belong to Ledoux. They occur at the Hôtel Montmorency in 1772, the grand entrance to the salt works at Are et Senans in 1775, and then the Hôtel Thelusson in 1778-81. The squat Tuscan columns of the basement of the Chinese Pavilion at Cassan, L'Isle-Adam of c. 178o are illustrated in O. Sirén: China and the Gardens of Europe, and in C. Connolly and J. Zerbe: Les Pavillons (London 1962), p. 125, and Dr Rosenau in her paper 'The Engravings of the Grands Prix of the French Academy of Architecture', in Architectural History, III, 1960, shows P. Bernard's design for à Royal Exchange which won a prize in 1782 and Fontaine's Cenotaph which received second prize in 178s. Dr Watkin in his thesis mentioned more than once before has more carly examples. In England the earliest seems to be the Warwick Gaol as executed in 1779–82. Again Dr Watkin has a lengthy list. For Russia Igor Grabar shows the church at Tsarskoe Selo by Cameron of 1782–88; for Germany there seems to be nothing before 179o. Professor Rosenblum wisely places on one page an early Gilly drawing and a Weinbrenner drawing of 1795 as instances of the squattest of squat Tuscan columns (figs. 175 and 176). ## XIII THE EGYPTIAN REVIVAL pages 212–215 1 The Works of James Barry, 1809, Vol.I, p. 163. 2 See A Companion to Mr Bullock's London Museum and Pantherion . - now open for public inspection in the Egyptian Temple .. in Piccadilly, London 1812. Also H. Honour in Country Life, CXV, 1954, pp. 38 ff. 3 Robinson (1776-1858). who had been supervising assistant to Porden on the Moorish stables at Brighton, and later published two successful pattern books of Tudor houses and of cottages, is known for his work at Leamington. He built York Castle in Doric, Trelissick in Cornwall in Ionic, and the Swiss Cottage in Regent's Park in the chalet style. 4 Second Series, Vol. VIII, p. 1 53; according to information kindly communicated by Mr Stratton Davis, Papworth, the architect of Cheltenham, in 1827 provided Bullock with plans for a new town to be called Hygeia, which Bullock who had gone to America intended to build on land which he owned on the Ohio River in Kentucky. (See S. Giedion: Space, Time and Architecture, first edition, Cambridge, Mass., 1941, pp- 505 and 510.) § Lectures on Architecture, ed. A. T. Bolton, Sir John Soane's Museum Publications, No. 14. 1929. The lectures were delivered between 1809 and 1836. 6 On Denon see P. Lelièvre, Paris 1942. 7 In the Recueil de décorations intérieures of 1812. There are only two examples: a secrétaire exécuté pour M.V. à Amsterdam—the town where Thomas Hope came from—and a clock made for a gentleman in Spain. Two years earlier Soane's pupil, J. M. Gandy, in his Rural Architect had suggested and illustrated Lodges after the model of the Egyptian Entrances to their temples'. and in t809 publication had started of the Description de l’Egypte, a sumptuous affair in folio which at the time of its completion in 1829 had reached ten text volumes and fourteen volumes of plates. 8 See Lectures, pp. 20–21, 9 One case of direct American offspring must be recorded, the Bazaar and Casino of Mrs Frances Milton Trollope at Cincinnati opened at the end of the twenties, it seems. Mrs Trollope was a friend of the Bullocks (see Una Pope Hennessy: Three English Women in America, London 1929, p. 70). Alexander Jackson Davis incidentally claims in his diary to have introduced into the United States the Egyptian fashion, by exhibiting designs at the National Academy of Design in 1829'. (See R. H. Newton: Town and Davis, New York 1942, p. 61.) 1o In t843 it was described in the Penny Magazine, p. so3. The details, we read there, were "derived from the drawings and designs of Bonomi and David Roberts'. The younger Bonomi (1796–1878) was an architect and had been in Egypt in 1824–33 and again in 1842. David Roberts (1796–1864) is better known as a painter of architectural subjects. He published books on the Holy Land, Syria, Arabia, Egypt and Nubia in 1842 and in 1846–49. We owe the reference to the Marshall factory and to the literature on it to Mr C. Sharp. It was incidentally also illustrated in the Brítish Almanac for 1844, pp. 241–2. On Messrs. Marshall's see nowW. G. Rimmer: Marshalls of Leeds. Cambridge 1960. 11 On Thomas Hope see now Dr D. Watkin's excellent Ph.D. thesis, Cambridge 1967. to which reference has already been made in the preceding essay. 12 Illustrated in H. Clifford Smith, Buckingham Palace, London 1931, pl. 109. 13 Illustrated in A. Hoffmann, Der Landschafts-Garten (Geschichte der Gartenkunst, Vol. III), Hamburg 1963, P. 154. 13A We owe both these references to Dr David Watkins. 14 See John Harris in The Architectural Review, CXXII, 1957, p. 2. Mr Harris suggests the late fifties as the date, but on the strength of our findings this seems too early. 15 Quoted from E. Kaufmann: Architecture in the Age of Reason, Harvard 1955, p. 5o. 16 Hautecoeur, L’Architecture classique en France, vol. IV, 1952, enumerates early dates, Pp. 23 ff and ç04ff. There is no point in repeating all of them here. See also Hautecoeur vol. V, 1953, Pp. 289 f. 17 It was shown at the Royal Academy Winter Exhubition of French eighteenthcentury art, 1967–8 (no. 590). Also shown there were a painting with an Egyptian motif dated 1768 (no. 582, from the Bowes Museum, Barnard Castle) and a drawing of the late eighteenth century with Egyptian motifs (no. 189). 18 Hautecoeur, Vol. IV, p. 25. 19 N. G. A. Wollin, Les Gravures originales de Desprez, Malmö 1935, pl. 9–11. 20 N. G. A. Wollin: Desprez en Italie, Malmö 1935. Also in Les Gravures originales de Desprez, pl. 18–19. 21 See M. Gallet: Demeures parisiennes; l’époque de Louis XVI, Paris, n.d., p. 54. As M. Gallet kindly pointed out to Mr Harris Clodion exhibited a relief from the chapel in the Salon of 1773 (no. 25o). and a section through the chapel which was destroyed in the Revolution is in the Archives Nationales (ZI] 1036). One of the two figures is almost a copy after one in Piranesi's Cammini (see below). 22 The last two items are quoted by Hautecoeur op. cit., Vol. V. p. 33 and Vol. İV, p. 25. 23 Frigga 1787. 24 N. G. A. Wollin: Desprez en Suède, Malmö 1939. 25 Mme J.W.C.D.R.: Altichiero, Padua 1787. The authoress is Justine Wynne, Countess de Rosenberg. Čount Rosenberg had been Austrian Ambassador in Venice. Before she married him, she had been one of Casanova's innumerable mistresses, and before that she was pursued by Andrea Memmo, a Venetian patrician who followed her as far as Paris. Memmo, apart from being the editor of that interesting architectural theorist, the Padre Lodoli, was one of the earliest Venetian freemasons, having been initiated by Casanova. The immediate cause of Casanova’s arrest and confinement to the Piombi was this very initiation. Another early case of Egyptianism in Italy has recently been illustrated by Mario Praz. It is a table dated 1776 (M. Praz: Illustrated History of Interior Decoration, London 1966, p: 171). Of shortly before 18oo is a sketchbook by Valadier which, according to Dr Eva Brües (Kunstchronik XVIII, 1965, p. 315) contains Egyptianizing elements'. Incidentally, one odd early case occurs even in America. The great seal of the United States, dated 1776 and adopted in 1782, is unmistakably Egypticizing (see M. Frebault in The Architectural Review, CXXI, 1957, p. 152). 26 The Villa Altichiero had, apart from the Canope, a Chinese Pavilion and a Bois de Young. 27 The literature on Piranesi is too extensive to be quoted here. Hylton Thomas's book on Piranesi's drawings (London 1954) contains a bibliography. Reference must also be made to a correspondence in The Times Literary Supplement 26 June to 31 July 1953) apropos an article published on 13 February. The most recent Piranesi book is by H. Volkmann. 1965.We have not seen this. Hubert Robert's Capriccio must be an immediate reaction to the Caffè Greco. 28 Vol. III, p. LVIII. 29 Hautecoeur refers once or twice to Cornelius Pauw's Recherches Philosophiques sur les Egyptiens et les Chinois, 1773, à book read e.g. by Goethe. The idea must however be older; for Stukeley in 1743 asserted a common principle for Chinese script and Egyptian hieroglyphs (see W. R. Dawson, in Studies presented to F.Ll. Griffith, London 1932), and the same theory was put forward in a letter from P. Bouret to Leibniz, written in 1698 (See F. Merkel: Leibníz und China, Berlin 1952, p. 19). 30 In Migne's Patrología Latina, Vol. 82, coll. 552 and 654. 31 For Sta Maria in Trastevere see Architektonische Studien des Kais. Dtsch. Archaeol. Inst., Heft III, t889. p. 77. For Viterbo, etc., see A. Venturi: Storía dell' Arte Italíana, Vol. III, Milan 1904, pp. 796f. 32 It must be borne in mind that wingless sphinxes had been represented on Etruscan vases for example, and these might have been known. A. Chastel (L' "Etruscan Revival" du XVe siècle', in Revue Arch., 1959, I, p. 179, n.2) tells us that Fra Giovanni Nenni, the promoter of Etruscology, tried to establish the ancient role of Viterbo. Professor Chastel also quotes Stendhal (p. 165), who reports in his Histoire de la Peinture en Italie: On trouve dans la bibliothèque Riccardi à Florence un manuscrit qui porte la date 1282. L’auteur est Ristoro d’Árezzo. Il raconte que l’on venait de découvrir dans son pays une grande quantité de vases étrusques." 33 Voyageurs et écrivains français en Egypte, Cairo 1932. 34 Le Voyage d’outremer de Jean Thenaud, etc., ed. C. Schefer.Paris 1884, Pp. 53-54. Thenaud travelled in 1511. 35 Carré, Vol. I, p. 6, note ii. 36 See K. Giehlow: Die Hieroglyphenkunde des Humanismus', in Jahrbuch der kunsthistorischen Sammlungen des Allerhöchsten Kaiserhauses, XXXI1, 1915, the classic on the subject. We have made much use of Giehlow's paper. 37 For the next paragraphs see, apart from Giehlow's paper, the book by L. Volkmann: Bilderschriften der Renaissance, Leipzig 1923. 38 Professor Glanville kindly drew our attention to F. Sbordone: Horí Apollenis Hieroglyphica, Naples 194o. We are very grateful to him for having looked through this essay in its original form before it went to press. 39See J. Seznec: Survival of the Pagan Gods, Bollingen Series, Vol. 38, New York 1953, p. tooff.; also Fritz Saxl: TheAppartamento Borgia', in his Lectures, London 1957; and most recently E. H. Gombrich: Vom Wert der Kunstwissenschaft für die Symbolforschung", in Probleme der Kunstwissenschaft, II. Berlin 1966, pp. 30ff. 40 Book VIII, chapters 2 and 4. 41See Campana's Vita in Muratori, Rev, Ital. Script, new ed., III, 3, p. 6o. We owe this item to Mrs N. Rubinstein. 42 Cf.J. R. Spencer, ed.: Filarete's Treatise on Architecture, New Haven and London 1965, PP. 152ff. 43 Professor E. Wind has tried to explain the pyramid here as an echo of Origen's idea of Noah's Ark as a pyramid—a mathematicalmystical fantasy already refuted in the twelfth century by Hugh of St Victor. See Studies in Art and Literature for Bella de Costa Greene, Princeton 1954, p. 419. 44See E. Müntz: Raphael, Paris 1881, p. 590, from Fulvio's Antiquitates Urbis. 45 See\_ E. Visconti: Museo Pio-Clementino, 1784. Vol. 2. 46 The Villa Adriana is mentioned for the first time in the Renaissance in Flavio Biondo's Italia Illustrata, 14so. See H. Winnefeld: Die Villa des Hadrian,' in Jahrb, d. deutschen Archäol. Inst., 3 Ergänzungsheft. Berlin 1895, specially pp. zff 47 Cf. C. Huelsen, Il Libro di Giuliano da Sangallo, Leipzig 191o, text vol. p. XXVII. Giuliano also drew obelisks, some in the Libre, one with hieroglyphs in a drawing in the Bayonne Museum, and in his Sienese sketchbook. 48 E. Saxl, Lectures, 1957. Vol. I. pp. 174ff. 49 Before condemning Nanni one should bear in mind that representations of Etruscan sphinxes not too different from the Egyptian ones are now known to have existed (gf. Note 32 above). so E. H. Gombrich, in Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, XIV, 1951, p. 120. More recently Professor Murray in Bramante milanese: the Paintings and Engravings', in Arte Lombarda, VII, 1962, has argued (p. 31) against this conception and suggested that the hieroglyphs planned for the Belvedere reveal a rather different intention, namely a kind of guessing game rather like an anagram, that is they were to be intelligible; he also mentions (p. 3o) Bramante's fresco of Heraclitus and Democritos with a hieroglyphic frieze and in particular (p- 32) in Mantegna's St James led to Execution a panel with a hieroglyphic commentary on martyrdom: the vase stands for life, the circle for eternity, the palm for victory and the rudder for guidance, 51 Nicholas V. the first humanist on the Papal throne, intended to re-erect the obelisk of Old St Peter's in front of his new church to be rebuilt in the Renaissance style. The reason for this intention was that the obelisk was considered a witness of the martyrdom of St Peter. Paul II took this legacy over, and of Raphael it is known that he offered to transport an obelisk from the Mausoleum of Augustus to St Peter's for 90,00o ducats (see V. Golzio: Raffaello, Città del Vaticano 1936, p. 1o1, from the diary of the Venetian ambassador Marino Sanuto). §2 For the date of the discovery there is a terminus ante quem, since Bembo sent drawings of it to some friends before he left Rome in 1520 (Giehlow p. 111). 53Cf. E. Mandowsky and C. Mitchell, Pirro Ligorio, London 1963, p. 14o. We are greatly indebted to the Warburg Institute for making it possible for us to study the material of their Census of Antique Works of Art known to Renaissance Artists, which is being compiled in conjunction with the Institute of Fine Arts at New York University. 54 Ibid., p. 32. §5 H. Egger: Entwürfe Baldassare Peruzzis für den Einzug Karls V in Rom. Eine Studie zur Frage über die Echtheit des Sienesischen Skizzenbuches', in Jahrbuch der Kunsthist. Sammlungen des Allerhöchsten Kaiserhauses, XXIII, 1902. 56 These lions were taken by Pope Sixtus V to the Fontana Felice, erected by him near the Baths of Diocletian per essere sua impresa' in 1 86 (O. Marucchi, Il Museo Egizio Vaticano, Rome 1899, p. 136). 57 Cf. S. Schéle, Cornelis Bos, Stockholm 1965, p. 145. F. Hartt, Giulio Romano, Newhaven 1958, Vol. 1, p. 22 has only a few lines on the dado of the Stanza and attributes its basic design to Giulio too. 58 Cf. A Descriptive Catalogue of the Latin Manuscripts in the John Rylands Library at Manchester, Manchester 1921. The date of the Missal is uncertain. Pompeo Colonna, whose name appears, is given the title Divus' which makes it probable that the manuscript was written after his death in 1532 (he was created cardinal in 1517, which would create the terminus post quem). We are indebted to Mr Hall and Dr Taylor of the John Rylands Library for pointing this out. Mlle A. H. M. Roullet, however, has suggested an even later date, arguing that the features deriving from the Tabula Bembi were taken from à publication rather than from the original, and that the hieroglyphs were too ‘good" to be early in the century. We are deeply grateful to Mlle Roullet for much help and advice. 59 A. Lhotsky, ‘Apis Colonna, Fabeln und Theorien über die Abkunft der Habsburger in Mitteilungen des Östereichischen Instituts für Geschichtsforschung, LV, 1942, p. 187. quoting the Cron. Austr. (printed in Pez, SS rer. Austr., 2, p. 841): Erant duo germani fratres cuisdem prepotentis Romani filii genere de Columpne Apis nomine', etc. We are indebted to Professor O. Kurz for drawing our attention to the Colonna Missal and to the above reference. Cf. also F. Mugnus, Historia della Augustissima Famiglia Colonna, Venice 1658, p. 29. 60 A type created by Sansovino at Sta Maria del Popolo about 15oo and imported into France by the Chabot Monument now in the Louvre. 61 Our attention was first drawn to its existence by Sir John Summerson. 62 Cf. also Schéle, op. cit., p. 145. 63 See Vasari, ed. Milanesi, Vol. 4, p. 154. 64 Schéle, op. cit. has drawn attention to the very close relationship between an engraving of an Egyptian caryatid by Bos (pl. 27, no. 71) and the caryatids at Fontainebleau: both are female, both are terms—unlike the caryatids in the Stanze and their Egyptian prototypes from Tivoli. Bos's engraving appears to be undated, but he was in Paris probably prior to 1540, possibly even before 1537 (Schéle, p. 24). While there is no reason why Bos should transform the Egyptian male prototype into a woman (and there is no evidence as to his source), there is some justification for the sculptor at Fontainebleau to do so, assuming our contention (see below) that the Egyptian motif can be linked with Diane de Poitiers, to be correct. 65 There is an engraving by Ducerceau in the Metropolitan Museum which shows the same caryatid as Bos and is of much higher quality. In spite of that Schéle is of the opinion that Ducerceau copied Bos. Ducerceau probably returned from Italy about 1545. So he either copied the Fontainebleau doorway or the doorway must date from after c. 1545, or else all three—the doorway. Ducerceau's engraving, and Bos—must go back to an unknown prototype. 66 The Ruscelli caryatids almost certainly derive from an engraving by Cornelis Bos (Schéle, op. cit., pl. 37 no. 123), dated 1 546. 67 F. A. Yates: The French Academies of the síxteenth century, London 1947, p. 135. 68 J. d’Orliac: The Moon Mistress, London 1931, p. 312. 69 See J. B. Craven: Count Michael Maier, Kirkwall 191o. Mr C. H. Josten,of the Oxford Museum of the History of Science, drew our attention to the Arcana. 70 p.127. 71 pp-155, 401. 72 See illustration in J. von Schlosser: Kunstund Wunderkammern der Spätrenaissance, Leipzig 1908, fig. 34. 73 Others came later. The obelisk now on the Pincio was found in the sixteenth century and taken to the Palazzo Barberini in 1633, that of Bernini's fountain in the Plazza Navona was erected in 1649, that by the Pantheon in 1711, and Pius VI put up three obelisks: 1787 (Quirinal), and 1789 (Trinità dei Monti and Montecitorio). 74 Letter of 1o January 1657. 75 See P. Humbert. Paris 1933, and G. Cahen-Salvador, Paris 1951, also F. W. Gravit in The University of Michigan Contributions in Modern Philology, No. 14, 195o, and Bull. de la Société d’ Archéol. Copte, IV, 1938. 76 G. Camdeni ... Epistolae, ed. T. Smith, London 1691, p. 212. 77 Ibid., p. 224, Rubens's answer is printed in M. Rooses: Correspondence de Rubens, Vol. II, 1898, No. CLXII. 78 R. Lebegue: Les Correspondants de Peiresc dans les anciens Pays Bas, Brussels 1943, p- 49. 79 See R. Enking: Der Apisaltar J. M. Dinglingers, Glückstadt, Hamburg and New York 1939, p. 24, etc. 80 See the illustrations in V. Mascardi's Festa fatta in Roma alli 25 di Febraio, MDCXXXIV, Rome 1635, one of which is marked A.S. inventor' (see also Preface). 81 See Lettres de Poussin, ed. P. du Colombier, Paris 1929, p. 299. In his letter (25 November 168) Poussin explains the Egyptian motif by referring to 'novelty and variety', but also by stressing that it would make it evident that the Virgin is in Egypt (see e.g. E. G. Holt, A Documentary History of Art, Vol. II. p. 156). 82 See A. Blunt: The Drawings' of G. B. Castiglione and Stefano della Bella in the Collection of H.M. the Queen at Windsor Castle, London 1954, p. 30, catalogue No. 124. Mr Wilfrid Blunt has pointed out that the sphinx actually differs from both Sandys's and Valle's descriptions. The lion's body is however mentioned by Pliny. 83 A. Favaro in Mem. del R. Ist. Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti, XXV, 1896, p. 76. Here Burattini in a letter to Hevelius, the astronomer, calls Stefano his 'singularis amicus'. 84 Burattini also supplied Kircher with information. See Kircher's Oedipus, mentioned below, Vol. II, pt. 2, pp. 303, etc., and Vol. III, pp. 339–41. 85 See MS. entry in the British Museum copy of Kircher's Oedipus, 1654 (BM. 87. 1. 7) supposed to come from G. Brice's Description de Paris. 86Letter of the Duchess of Portland, 1742, quoted in G. R. de Beer: Sir Hans Sloane, Oxford 1953, p. 117. 87 We say the chief books; there were of course many more. Blondel for instance in his Cours from which we have quoted before and which was the principal corpus of architectural theory in France in the later eighteenth century names as his sources for Egypt P. W. Dorigny’s L'Egypte ancienne of 1762 and the measurements of the pyramids taken in 1693 by Jean-Matthieu de Chaselles. 88 English translation by D. Humphries, 1721–1725- 89 Book V, pl. 2 and 3. The most recent references are the Catalogue (by Hans Aurenhammer) of the Fischer von Erlach exhibition held in 1956–7 at Graz, Vienna and Salzburg. pp. 210 and 214. G. Kunoth: Die Historische Architektur Fischers von Erlach, Düsseldorf 19§6, and H. Sedlmayr: Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach, Munich 19§6. 90See S. Piggott, Oxford 1950, pp. 144 and 154. Stukeley's Egyptian interest is referred to in note 13. 91 L. Whistler: The Imagination of Vanburgh London 1954. p. 183. 92 See S. Rocheblave, 1889. The quotations below come from the Recucil, Vol. Ill, Avantpropos and Vol, V, p- 3. 93 On this see the preceeding essay- 94 Cours, Vol, IV, p. 245. 95 E. Viglione, in Studi di Letteratura Italiana, XIII, 1919, p. 67. 96 Count F. Algarotti: Opere, Venice 1791– 4. Vol. X, pt. II, p. 244. 97 It might be worth investigating whether Egyptian theatrical sets may not have appeared in the mid-eighteenth century. P. Zucker: Die Theaterdekoration des Klassizismus, Berlin 1925; C. Ricci: La Scenografia Italiana, Milan 193o; G. Freedley: Theatrical Design from the Baroque through Neo-Classicism, 3 vols., New York 1940, and J. Scholz: Baroque and Romantic StageDesign, New York t95o, are silent. 98 E. Kaufmann, in Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, New Ser., Vol. 42, 1952; H. Rosenau, London 1953. 99 De l'’architecture égyptienne ... 1803, PP. 208, 219, also p. 83. 100 The pyramid cannot here be followed through the next few decades, when it was a hallmarkof progressiveness, i.e. of faith in elementary geometry in architecture and in the primeval. After all, the Cestius Pyramid, as has already been said, was there for all to see. Hence e.g. Jardin's Sepulchral Chapel of 1748 (illustrated in John Harris's important paper on Legeay, Essays in the History of Architecture presented to Rudolf Wittkower, London 1967, fig. 30) or the pyramid of the Folie de Chartres, i.e. the Pare Monceau, of 1773–8 (illustrated in O. Sirén: China and the Gardens of Europe, New York 1950, P. 125) or John Carter's Pyramidical Dairy of 1774–8 already mentioned. Further examples are Carl August Ehrensvärd's proposed monument to Gustavus Il Adolphus for the square named after him in Stockholm (1782: see S. , A. Nilsson in –Konsthistorisk Tidskrift, XXXIII, 1964, and more recently R. Rosenblum: Transformations in late eighteenth century Art, Princeton 1967), Wyatt's mausoleum in the grounds of Cobham in Kent, of 1783, with a pyramid on the top. Gilly's design of 1791 with four attached Doric porticos (A. Oncken: Friedrich Gilly, Berlin 1935, pl. 13), Bonomi's mausoleum in the grounds of Blickling in Norfolk, 45 by 45 feet and erected in 1793, Peter Josef Krahe's suggested monument to General Marceau, a pyramid surrounded in the Boullée way by poplars (1799, see H. Vogel 'Aegyptisierende Baukunst des Klassizismus', in Zeitschrifi für bildende Kunst, LXII, 1928, p. 161), Selva's suggested monument to Napoleon (1813; see Elena Bessi: Selva, Padua 1936) and Weinbrenner's actually erected monument in the Market Place at Karlsruhe. This is as late as 1823–5, but Weinbrenner belonged to the group directly inspired by Gilly. 101 See D. Knoop and G. P. Jones: The Mediaeval Mason, Manchester 1933, and the many papers published by Professors Knoop and Jones, especially in the Ars Quatuor Coronatorum. The manuscripts referred to are Regius and Cooke, of the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. 102 See A. E. Waite: A New Encyclopaedia of Freemasonry, 1921. Waite and other masonic writers are positive on this point. There are, however, occasional minor indications of a connection between freemasonry and the mysteries of Egypt in the mid-eighteenth century. An example is the mock procession held in London by the Scald Miserable Masons in 1742 to annoy the masons who at that time were holding real processions. In this mock procession there appeared 'the Sun Hieroglyphical to rule the Day, the Moon emblematical to rule the Night', See J. Nichols and G. Steevens: The Genuine Works of William Hogarth, 181o, Vol. II, p. 161. 103 H. d'Almeras, Cagliostro, Paris 1904. 104 An excerpt of this was put into his Symbolische Weisheit der Aegypter, Berlin 1793, by Karl Philipp Moritz, the author who died at the age of thirty-seven in 1795, whose psychological novel Anten Reiser Goethe admired so much, and who had in 1782 travelled in England. His entertaining report of the journey is familiar in English translations. 10§ On the history of freemasonry in Germany and Austria, df. E. Kneisner: Geschichte der deutschen Freimaurerei, Berlin 1912, also still J. G. Friedel: Geschichte der Freimaurerei, Leípzig 1861. 106 Ed. Suphan, Vol. VI, p. 416 ff. 107 Herder, Älteste Urkundes des Menschengeschlechts (1774): Nach der Sage waren auch die ersten Aegyptertempel, wis die heiligen Höhen und Haine aller Nationen, ohne Götterbilder und Statuen: Es heisst man verehrte Steine .. . "Sie sollten Statuen vorstellen, die Erde vorstellen"—und ich sage, sie sollen nichts vorstellen, als was sie waren, Steine, Denkmale, die ersten Denkmale der Welt. Daher verbanden sie so gern allwegen das Viereckte und Runde—und es ward die bekannte Hermesfigur: Stein, worauf eine Kugel lag, das ist, nach dem Auge der Griechen, und der Deutung der Agypter Stein, mit einem Menschenkopf, daraus dann das ganze System des ersten Kunstschrittes entstanden, was noch in allen Kunstgeschichten—falsch ist; denn was hat dieser erste rohe viereckte, kugelgedeckte Stein mit einer Menschlichen Statue als Kunst gemein? In der Figur der Steine suchten sie ferner das Viereck, und das Rund mit der Spitze, dem Eins zu verbinden. . . . Als man nun in freie Luft kam, und sich die Kunst zufügte; zum Gebäude, zu ewigem Gebäude, was konnte aus Stein und Figur anders werden, als Pyramide und Obelisk? Viereck, Runde und Spitze auf die simpelste, ewigste Art verbunden, was konnt anders werden?' 108 Hautecoeur, Vol. V, p. 287. 109 See M. L. Biver: Le Paris de Napoléon, Paris 1963. p. 75 and fig. 12. 110 H. M. Colvin: Biogr. Dia., 1954, 139. 1 11 See David Watkin, op. cit. 112 Country Life, LVII, 1925, p. 130. 113 Still considerably later is the Masonic Lodge at Boston in Lincolnshire: 1860–3. 114 D. Irwin: English Neo-Classical Art, London 1966, 142. 115 Text p. 174, pl. 135. Professor Carrott built on the foundations laid in a paper in The Magazine of Art (XXXIII, 1940) by Professor Frank J. Roos Jr. and of course on Talbot Hamlin's Greek Revival Architecture in America, New York 1944. 116 See R. Hale Newton: Town and Davis New York 1942, p. 176. 117 See H. Vogel (Note 1oo above). 118 Italian Architecture, 1750–1914, New Haven 1966. 119 A. Venditt: Architettura neoclassica a Napoli, 1961, p. 264. 1 THE COUNTER-REFORMATION AND MANNERISM (pages 10–33) t RossO FiORENTINO: Moses defending the Daughters of Jethro, c.1523. Uffizi, Florence. Mansell Collection 2 PoNTORMo: Christ before Pílate, 1522–4. Certosa di Val d'Ema, Florence. Mansell Collection 3 PoNTORMO: Virgin and Child with St John the Baptist. Galleria Corsini. Florence. Mansell Collection 4 PonTORmo: Joseph in Egypt. Courtesy Trustees of the National Gallery, London 5 GruLo RomANo: Fall of the Giants, fresco in the Sala dei Giganti of the Palazzo del Te. Mantua, 1532–4 6 BeCCArUMr: Last Judgment. Accademia, Siena. Mansell Collection 7 PARMIGtANINO: Virgin and Child with SS. Stephen and John the Baptist. 1539–40. Gemäldegalerie, Dresden. Deutsche Fotothek Dresden 8 PARMIGIANINO: Madonna with the Rose, 1526– 3o. Gemäldegalerie, Dresden 9 MiCHELANGELO: Crucifxion of St Peter, fresco in the Cappella Paolina, The Vatican, 1542– so. Mansell Collection 10 TıNTORETTO: Moses Striking the Rock, 1577. Scuola di S. Rocco, Venice. Mansell Colleetion 11 VAsAR1: Immaculate Conception, 1541. SS. Apostoli, Florence. Mansell Collection 12 V&sAuı: Paul III receiving the Homage of Foreígn Nations, fresco in the Cancelleria, Rome, 1546. Mansell Collection 13 PERuzzν: Augustus and the Tiburtine Sibyl, 1528. Fontegiusta Church, near Siena. Mansell Collection 14 BroNziNO; Venus, Cupid, Folly and Time. Courtesy Trustees of the National Gallery, London 15 BroNziNo: Harrowing of Hell, 1552. Museo di Sta Croce, Florence, Mansell Collection 1 6 BAssANo (Jacopo da Ponte): Adoration of the Shepherds. Accademia. Venice. Mansell Collection 17 CERANO (G.B. Crespi): Mass of St Gregory. S. Vittore, Varese. Morbelli 18 Et Greco: Resurrection. Prado, Madrid 19 BArocCı (Federigo Fiori): Madonna of the Røsary, 1 588–91. S. Rocco, Sinigaglia. Mansell Collection 20 TiNToRETro: Removal of the Body of St Mark, c.1 562–6. painted for the Scuola di S. Marco. Venice. Accademia, Venice. Mansell Collection 21 BERNINI. Exstasy of St Teresa, 1645–52. Cornaro Chapel, Sta Maria della Vittoria. Rome. Mansell Collection 22 BERNIN1: St Longinus, 1629–38. St Peter's. Rome. Mansell Collection Il EARlY AND HiGh BAROQUE (pages 34-55) t RUBENs: Adoration of the Magi. Koninklijk Museum voor Schone Kunsten, Antwerp. ACL 2 ANNIBALE CARRACCt: Assumption, 1587. Gemäldegalerie, Dresden. Deutsche Fotothek Dresden 3 Et GREco: Adoration of the Shepherds. The Metropolitan Museum-of Art, New York 4 VELASQUEZ: Adoration of the Magi, 1619.Prado, Madrid 5 PIETER BRUEGEL THE ELDER: detail of The Peasant Dance, c.1 568. Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna 6 ADRIAEN BROUWER: The Smokers. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 7 REMBRANDT: Supper at Emmaus, 1648. Louvre, Paris. Giraudon 8 Frans Hais: so-called Yonker Ramp and his Sweetheart, 1623. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York (Benjamin Altman Bequest) 9 RuBENs; Apotheosis of the Duke of Buckingham, sketch for a ceiling at Osterley Park, c.1627. Courtesy Trustees of the National Gallery, London 10 REMBRANDT: Belshazzar's Feast. Courtesy Trustees of the National Gallery, London 11 CARAVAGGiO: Calling of St Matthew, 1597– 160o. S. Luigi dei Francesi, Rome. Mansell Collection 12 CARAVAGGiO: Basket of Fruit. Pinacoteca Ambrosiana, Milan. Mansell Collection 13 PiETER SAENREDAM: Interior of St Odulph's. Assendelft, 1649. Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam 14 SALOMON VAN RUYSDAEL: Landscape with a Ferry, 1649. Rijksmuseun, Amsterdam 15 CAREL FABRITIUS: Goldfinch, 1654 Royal Picture Gallery Mauritshuis, The Hague. Photo A. Dingjan t6 WiLLEM CLAESz. HEDA: Still-life, 1642. Alte Pinakothek,Munich. BayerischeStaatsgemaldesammlungen 17 CARAVAGGiO: Amor Victorious, Gemäldegalerie, Berhn-Dahlem. Mansell Collection 18 BERNINı: Apollo and Daphne, 1622–4. Villa Borghese, Rome. Mansell Collection 19 ANNIBALE CARRACCI: Polyphemus, detail of gallery ceiling in the Palazzo Farnese, Rome, 1595–1604. G.F.N. 20 NicoLAs PoussiN: Last Supper, from the ## List of Illustrations Sources of photographs are given in italics second series of the Sacraments, c.1644–8. Duke of Sutherland Collection, on loan to the National Gallery of Scotland, Reproduced by permission of the Duke of Sutherland 2t Gumo RENr: Aurora, ceiling of the salone of the Casino Rospigliosi-Pallavicini, Rome, 1613–14. Mansell Collection 22 NicoLas PoussiN: Rape of the Sabines. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York (Dick Fund) 23 NICOLAs POussIN: Death of Germanicus, 1627– 31. The Minneapolis Institute of Arts, Minneapolis, Minn. IIl THE CRISIs OF 1650 IN ITALIAN PAINTING (pages 56–76) 1 GioRpANo: Triumph of Judith, ceiling of the treasury of the Certosa di S. Martino, Naples; 1704. Mansell Collection 2 PRETI: Martyrdom of St Catherine; 1659. Sta Caterina, Valletta. Photo National Museum, Valletta, Malta 3 PrErı: Raising of Lazarus. Gallería di Palazzo Rosso, Genoa. Direzione Belle Arti, Comune di Genova 4 PRET: Wedding at Cana. Courtesy Trustces of the National Gallery, London 5 PRETı: Martyrdom of St Andrew, fresco in S. Andrea della Valle, Rome, 1651–2. Mansell Collection 6 PIETRO DA CORTONA: detail of salone ceiling in the Palazzo Barberini, Rome, 1633–9. Mansell Collectión 7 GUERCINO: Aurora, ceiling of the Casino Ludovisi, 1621–3. Mansell Collection 8 PREr: Allegory of Time, detail of ceiling in the Palazzo Pamfili, Valmontone, 1661. G.F.N. 9 PRET: detail of apse ceiling of S. Biagio, Modena, 1653–6. Cav. Uff. U. Orlandini, Modena 1o GioRDANo: Wedding at Cana. Museo Civico, Vicenza 11 PIETRO DA CORTONA: Allegory of Divine Providence and Barberini Power, ceiling of the salone of the Palazzo Barberini, Rome, 1633– 9. Mansell Collection 12 GrorDANo: Deposition. Accademia, Venice. Mansell Collection 13 GioRvaNo: Madonna of the Rosary, 1657. Museo di Capodimonte, Naples. Mansell Collection 14 GoRDANo: Healing of the Lame Man, 1653. Present whereabouts unknown. Courtauld Institute of Art, University of London 15 MsrvEr: Allegorical Portrait of a Podestà. Museo Civico, Vicenza. Mansell Collection 16 MAFFEI: Nativíty. Sta Maria del Castello, Carpenedolo 17 Marvet: Adoration of the Magi. Vicenza Cathedral. Museo Civico, Vicenza 18 MaFFEr: Visítation. Sta Maria del Castello, Carpenedolo 19 TiNroRErro: Vísitation, finished t88. Scuola di S. Rocco, Venice.-Mansell Collection 20 VALERIo CaSTELLO: Rape of Proserpina. Museo Nazionale, Rome 21 G. B. GAuuL: Virgin and Child with Saints, 166o. S. Rocco, Rome. G.F.N. 22 ANTONIO GHERARDI: Presentation of the Virgin in Sta Maria in Trivio, Rome, c. 1670–75 23 ANTONIO GHERARDI: Assumption, in Sta Maria in Trivio, Rome, c. 1670–75 24 GIOVANNI ColI– AND FHLIPPO GHERARDt: decoration of the gallery of the Palazzo Colonna, Rome, 1675–8. Mansell Collection 25 G. B. GAvιιr: Adoration of the Name of Jesus, ceiling of the nave of the Gesù, Rome, 1674–9. Mansell Collection 26 MARATT1: Virgin with Saints, 1683. Sta Maria del Popolo, Rome. Mansell Collection 27 Pozzo: Triumph of St Ignatius, ceiling of the nave of S. Ignazio, Rome, 1691–4. Mansell Collection 28 MARATtı: Virgin and Child with St Philip Neri. Galleria Pitti, Florence. Mansell Collection 29 GuıDo RENı: Virgin and Child with St Philip Neri. Sta Maria in Vallicella, Rome. Mansell Collection 30 MARATII: Immaculate Conception, 1671. S. Agostino, Siena. Grassi IV THE GENESIS OF THE PICTURESQUE (pages 78–101) 1 Garden plan with ronds-points, mazes and cabinets’, from B. Langley: New Principles of Gardening, 1728 2 Gardens of Vaux-le-Vicomte, by Le Nôtre. Martin Hürlimann 3 ‘The general Disposition of a Garden whose Slope is in Front of ye Building', from A. J Dezallier d'Argenville, tr. John James: Theory and Practice of Gardening, 1712 4 Pope's villa at Twickenham (after its purchase by Sir William Stanhope), engraved by A. Heckell in 1749. Courtesy Trustees of the British Museum, London 5 Plan of Pope's garden, from J. Serle: A Plan of Mr Popes Garden, 1745 6 Pope's grotto, from J. Serle: A Plan of Mr Pope's Garden, 1745 7, 8 The manor-house of Paston and its lands, before and after improvements, from S. Switzer: Ichnographia Rustica, Vol. II, 1718 9 A Forest or Rural Garden', from S. Switzer: Ichnographia Rustica, Vol. III, 1718 to Miserden, from J. Kip: Britannia Illustrata, Vol. II, 1740 11 Hammels, from J. Kip: Britannia Illustrata, Vol. II, 1740 12, t3 "Ruins after the old Roman manner’, from B. Langley: New Principles of Gardening, 1728 t4 'Shady walks with Temples of Trelliss work after the grand manner at Versailes', from B Langley: New Principles of Gardening, 1728 15 'An Avenue in Perspective terminated with the ruins of an ancient Building after the Roman manner', from B. Langley: New Principles of Gardening, 1728 V A NOTE ON SHARAWAGGI (pages 102–107) t Detail of watercolour fantasy in the Chinese manner, probably English, mid-17th C. Victoria and Albert Museum, London (Crown copyright) 2 SiR GoDEREY KNELLER: Portrait of a Chinese Convert, 1687, painted for James II. Royal Collection. Mansell Collection 3 CHIANG Ts’AN: detail of handscroll Massed Verdure of Wooded Peaks, early 13th C. Such landscapes remained the ideal well through the 17th C. Nelson-Atkins Gallery of Art, Kansas City 4 Part of the Shih-tzǔ Lin (Lion Grove), a famous garden at Suchow in Kiangsu Province, probably laid out in Mongol times. Suchow was noted for its gardens and fantastic rocks from a nearby lake. Colin Penn ## VI RICHaRd PAYNe KNIGHT (pages 108–125) 1 South front of Downton Castle, near Ludlow, Shropshire; 1774–8. Country Life 2 Dining room of Downton Castle; c. 1778. Country Life 3 Plan of Vanbrugh Castle, Blackheath 4 South front of Vanbrugh Castle, Blackheath, by Sir John Vanbrugh; c. 1717 and c.1720, with a later wing on the right, Country Life 5Strawberry Hill, Twickenham, detail showing buildings designed by Horace Walpole c.1750. A. É. Kersting 6 CLAUDE LORRAINE: The Enchanted Castle, probably 1664. Courtauld Institute of Art, University of London, reproduced by permission of the Trustees of T. C. Loyd 7, 8 Engraving of Downton Castle by J. Smith, from a drawing by Thomas Hearne; and lithograph of Downton Castle by F. Page. Reproduced by permission of Major W. Kincaid Lennox, Downton Castle VIIl HUmPHRy REPTON (pages 138–155) Ill. 8 is from Repton's Observations on the Theory and Practice of Landscape Gardening, 1803; the rest are from his Fragments on the Theory and Practice of Landscape Gardening, 1816 IX 'Good KING James's GOTHic' (pages 156–163) t Screen and staircase in the hall of Audley End, Essex, by Vanbrugh; c.172o. National Monuments Record 2–6Plans of Chastleton, Bucks.; Stanton Court, Glos.; Seaton Delaval, Yorks.; Mince-Pie House, Blackheath, London; and Vanbrugh Castle, Blackheath, London 7 Plaster ceiling of the staircase hall at Audley End, Essex, probably by Vanbrugh; c.172o. Ministry of Works (Crown copyright) 8 Plaster ceiling by William Kent above George II's Gate at Hampton Court; 1732. The Architectural Review 9 George Il's Gate at Hampton Court, remodelled by William Kent; 1732. National Monuments Record 1º JoíN BusíNELL: statue of Sir Thomas Gresham in Elīzabethan dress, from the Cornhill front of the Royal Exchange of 1667. Central Criminal Court, London. National Monuments Record 11 Temple of the British Worthies at Stowe, Bucks., by William Kent; 1733. Country Life 12 J. G. EccARDT: portrait of Horace Walpole in van Dyck dress, 1754. National Portrait Gallery, London 13, 14 Drawing room and 'brary ceiling at Burton Constable, Yorks., by Lightoller; c.1757–60. Country Life 15 Staircase at Marks Hall, Essex; c.1760. Country Life 16 Drawing room with chimneypiece and panelling in the Jacobean taste at Baggrave Hall, Leics.; c.176o. Country Life 17 Mamhead, Devon, by Anthony Salvin, 1828. From F. O. Morris: Country Seats of Noblemen and Gentlemen. 18 The Beau Ideal of an English villa', from J. C. Loudon: Encyclopedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa Architecture, 1842 (first published 1833) 19 Glenarm, Ireland, by Richard and William Morrison, c.1825. From J. Neale: Seats of Noblemen and Gentlemen, 2nd Series, 1824–9. Vol. II z0 Harlaxton, Lincs., by Salvin, 1831 etc. From F. O. Morris: Country Seats of Ñoblemen and Gentlemen. 21 Eshton Hall, Yorks., by Webster of Kendal, 1825–7. From J. Neale: Seats of Noblemen and Gentlemen, 2nd Series, 1824–9, Vol. V X GOETHE AND ARCHITECTURE (pages 164–173) 1 Strassburg Cathedral from the south-west, engraving published by Melchior Pauschinger of Strassburg, 18th C. British Museum, London. John R. Freeman 2 J. H. W. TisCHBEIN: Goethe in the Campagna, 1787. Städelsches Kunstinstitut, Frankfurt XI Karl FriedriCh SCHINkEl (pages 174–195) Unless otherwise stated, all subjects illustrated are by Schinkel. Illustrations 22, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 35 and 36 are from the Sammlung architektonischer Entwürfe, 1819–40. for which Schinkel made the drawings 1 Interior of a projected mausoleum for Queen Louise of Prussia, water-colour, 181o. Schinkel-Museum, National-Galerie, Berlin. Staatliche Museen zu Berlin 2 GEORGE DANCE THE YOUNGER: NeWgate Gaol, begun 1769 (demolished 1902). Courtesy Trustees of Sir John Soane's Museum, London 3 Lepoux: Barrière des Bonshommes (also called Barrière de Passy), Paris, 1785. from a drawing by Misbach. Paulme Sale, Paris, 1929 4 LEGRAND AND MoLINOs: rue des Colonnes, Paris, 1784, from a drawing by Friedrich Gilly 5 Lepoux: design for a savings bank in Paris, from his Architecture considérée sous le rapport de l’art, des moeurs et de la législation, Vol. II, 1804. R.L.B.A. 6 LEDoux: auditorium of the theatre at Besançon seen from the stage, from his Architecture considérée, vol. II, 18o4. R.I.B.A. (The theatre itself was destroyed by fire.) 7 GiLLY: sketch for an interior, 1794 8 LEpoux: design for à gaol at Aix-en-Provence, from his Architecture considérée, Vol. I, 1804, R.I.B.A. 9 GiLY: triumphal arch, from the projected monument to Frederick the Great, 1797. Dr Franz Stoedtner to GiLLY: design for a national theatre in Berlin, 1798. Dr Franz Stoedtner 11 Guiy: design for à mausoleum. Dr Franz Stoedtner 12 Lithograph of the Marienburg by F. Frick, after a drawing by Gilly. Dr Franz Stoedtner t3 Sketch of Rome from Schinkel's window on the Pincio, 1803/4. Schinkel-Museum, National-Galerie, Berlin. Staatliche Museen zu Berlin 14 Drawing of the interior of Milan Cathedral, 1803/4. Schinkel-Museum, National-Galerie, Berlin. Staatliche Museen zu Berlin 15 Evening (Gothic Cathedral among Trees), pen drawing, 1811. Dr Franz Stoedtner t6 Drawing showing how MilanCathedral ought to be situated, imagining it on a height above Trieste. Schinkel-Museum, National-Galerie, Berlin. Staatliche Museen zu Berlin 17 Stage set for The Magic Flute, showing the entrance to the Palace of the Queen of the Night. designed in 1815. Theater-Museum, Munich 18 Guardhouse, Berlin, 1816–18. Dr Franz Stoediner 19 Schauspielhaus, Berlin, 1818–21. Dr Franz Stoedtner 20 Old Museum, Berlin, 1823-30, photographed in 1966 after restoration. Staatliche Museen zu Berlin 21 SmıRkE: British Museum, London, façade of 1842–7. Helmut Gernsheim, courtesy Warburg Institute 23 DuRAND: elevation of a museum, from his Précis des leçons d’architecture, 1802–9 24 Roman bath at Charlottenhof, in the Royal Park, Potsdam, 1831–3. From A. Grisebach, Carl Friedrich Schinkel, 1924 25 Sketch for a basilica, c.183o. From A. Grisebach, Carl Friedrich Schinkel, 1924 26 Entrance of the Old Museum, Berlin, with the open colonnade on the right, 1823–30. Dr Franz Stoedtuer 31 Drawings of four proposed designs for the Werdersche Kirche, Berlin, 1824. Schinkel- Museum, National-Galerie, Berlin. Staatliche Museen zu Berlin 32 Corner of the School of Architecture in Berlin, 1831–5, photographed before the Second World War. Dr Franz Stoedtner 34 Project for a bazaar Unter den Linden in Berlin, 1827. Schinkel-Museum, National-Galerie, Berlin. Staatliche Museen zu Berlin 37 Sketch of the mills in Manchester, done during Schinkel's English journey in 1826 38 Design for the border of a damask tablenapkin; one other design for a napkin exists, in the same collection. Schinkel-Museum, National-Galerie, Berlin. Staatliche Museen zu Berlin XIl THe DoRic Revival (pages 196–211) 1 Temple of Ceres at Paestum, from G.P.M. Dumont: Les Ruines de Paestum, 1769 2 ANTOn RAPHAEL MENGS: detail of Parnassus, 1761, in the gallery of the Villa Albani, Rome. Mansell Collection 3 Doric temple, from Fra Giocondo's edition of Vitruvius's De architectura, 1511 4 Doric column, from Cesariano's edition of Vitruvius, 1521 5 Doric column from John Shute's book of orders, 1563 6 Doric colonnade from Palladio: I Quattro Libri dell Architettura, 1570 7 Tempio Dorico della Pietà a Roma’, drawn by Palladio. Røyal Institute of British Architects, London 8 Parthenon by Ciriaco d'Ancona, from the Codex Hamiltonianus, fol.8r. From C. Huelsen: Il Libro di Giuliano da Sangallo, 1910 9 Parthenon by Giuliano da Sangallo after Ciriaco, from the Codex Barberinianus, fol. 28v. From C. Huelsen: Il Libro di Giuliano da Sangallo, 1910 to Parthenon copied from Ciriaco d’Ancona, from the Codex Manzoni, fol. 73. From C. Huelsen: Il Libro di Giuliano da Sangallo, 1910 1 1 Doric temple, from Antonio Labacco's Libro. 1557 12 Parthenon, from Spon and Wheler: Voyage d’Italie, de Dalmatie, de Grèce et du Levant, 1678 t3 Temple of Ceres at Paestum, from Berkenhout: The Ruins of Paestum, 1767 14 Doric order at Paestum (left, on the Basilica, below right, on the Temple of Neptune), from Thomas Major: The Ruins of Paestum, 1768 15 Temple of Neptune at Paestum, from Dumont: Les Ruines de Paestum, 1769 16 Temple of Roma and Augustus, Athens, from Stuart and Revett: Antiquities of Athens, Vol. 1, 1762 17 Parthenon, from Stuart and Revett: Antiquities of Athens, Vol. II, 1788 18 Doric order, from James Newton: The Architecture of M. Vitruvius Pollio, 1791 19 Parthenon, from J.D. Le Roy: Les ruines des plus beaux monuments de la Grèce, 1758 2o Temple of Theseus’ in the park of Hagley Hall, Wores., by James Stuart, 1758. A.F. Kersting 21 PiRANESI: detail of plate 16 of the Carceri d'Invenzione, e.1761. British Museum, London. John R. Freeman 22 PiRANEsr: detail of drawing of the Temple of Neptune at Paestum, probably c.1777. Courtesy Trustees of Sir John Soane's Museum, London 23 Doric temple in the park of Shugborough Hall, Staffs., by James Stuart, €.1768. National Monuments Record 24 West front of Ayot St Lawrence church, Herts., by Nicholas Revett, 1778–9. Mrs Lesley Lewis 25 Chimneypiece in the drawing room óf Downton Castle, Shropshire, probably designed by Richard Payne Knight, c.1778. Country Life 26 SoANE: design for a triumphal bridge, 1778. Courtesy Trustees of Sir John Soane's Museum, London 27 Detail of etching of imaginary Roman thermae, possibly by Piranesi's son 28 Model of a proposed gaol for Warwick by Thomas Johnson, before 1779. Logan, Birmingham 29 Interior of Great Packington church, Warwickshire, by Joseph Bonomi, 179o. National Monuments Record 30 FRIEDRICH GILLY: design for a monument to Frederick the Great, 1797 31 Doric temple in the park at Gotha, c.178o. Courtesy Dr Schenk von Schweinsberg 32 GENELLI: design for a monument to Frederick the Great, 1786 33 LépiciÉ: La Halle, 1779. Coll. Marquis de Ganay. Royal Academy of Arts 34 DAviD: detail of The Oath of the Horatii, t784. Louvre, Paris ## XIII THE EGYPTIAN REVIVAL (pages 212–235) 1 HUBERT ROBERT: Capriccio égyptien, 1760. Private Collection, London. Royal Academy of Arts 2 Egyptian Hall, Piccadilly, London, by P.F. Robinson, 1812 (demolished). From an engraving by Thomas Shepherd, 1828 3 Library at Devonport, Devon, by Foulston, 1823. National Monuments Record 4 John Marshall's flax mill at Leeds, Yorks., 1838–40. C. Sharp 5 Entrance to the temple at Luxor, from Vivant Denon: Voyage dans la Basse et la Haute Egypte, 1802 6 JoíN MAnTIN: The Feast of Esther, engraving 7 Design for candelabra for Henry Holland, by Charles Heathcote Tatham, 1796. The actual candelabra are now at Buckingham Palace 8 ThomAs Hove: design for a chair in the Egyptian taste, from Household Furniture and Interior Decoration, t807 9 Canopic vase produced by Wedgwood's. Josiah Wedgwood & Sons, Lid. 0, 11 CropioN: terracotta statuettes, c.1773: Coll. Mr and Mrs John Harris 12 ANTON RAPHAEL MENGS: Moses, from the decoration of the Camera dei Papiri in the Vatican, €.177o. From an engraving in the Burattini, Tito Livio, 228 Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana 13 PiRANEsi: design for a chimneypiece from Diverse maniere d’adornare i Cammini, 1769 14 PiRANESt: decoration for the Caffè lnglese in Rome, 176o, illustrated in Diverse maniere d’adornare i Cammini, 1769 15 Roman sculpture of Father Nile, from a 16th-C. engraving 16 FRA PAsQUAtE: sphinx, t279. Museo Civico Viterbo. Dr S. Lang t7 Reverse of medal of Alberti by Matteo de Pasti, showing Alberti's device; c.145o. British Museum, London. John Webb (Brompton Studio) 18 GHiBERTı: Joseph in Egópt, gilt-bronze panel from the second doors of the Baptistery, Florence, c.1435- Mansell Collection zo Detail from the Tabula Bembi t9 GIULIANO DA SANGALLO: drawing of the telamoni at Tivoli, from the Codex Barberinianus, late tth C. From C. Huelsen, I Libro di Giuliano da Sangallo, 191o 21 Elephant and obelisk, woodcut from the Hypnerotomachia Poliphili, published by Aldus Manutius in Venice, 1499 22 Egyptian figures after Pirro Ligorio from the Codex Ursianus, (MS Vat. lat.3439), mid-16th C. Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana 23 MAARTEN VAN HEEMSKERCK: detail of drawing showing a Roman sarcophagus supported on sphinxes, c.1§32. From C. Huelsen and H. Egger. Das Römischen Skizzenbuch von M. van Heemskerck, 1913 24 Cynocephalus, from the Codex Pighianus, mid-16th C. Warburg Institute 25 Detail from a page of sketches of Egyptian subjects, from fol.49r of the Peruzzi Šketchbook in the Biblioteca Communale, Siena. Warburg Institute 26 RAPHAEL AND GIULIO ROMANO: detail of decoration of the Stanza dell' Incendio, The Vatican, 1514–17. Archivío Fotografico Musei e Gallerie Vaticani 27 ViNCENzo DE RossI: detail of tomb of Angelo Cesi, c.155o. Sta Maria della Pace, Rome. G.F.N. 28 Page from the Colonna Missal, Vol. I, fol. 79r. first half of 16th C. The Jołm Rylands Library Manchester 29 Tomb of Guillaume du Bellay, 1557. Le Mans Cathedral 3e Doorway at the Château de Fontainebleau, c.1540. R. J. Bourne 31 PRimATiCCio: Homecoming of Ulysses, in the Galerie d’Ulysse at Fontainebleau, c.1540. From an engraving by Van Thulden 32 JACQUES ANDROUET DUCERCEAU: engravings including à canephorus, probably c.1545. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 33 Drawing of the tomb of Diane de Poitiers, 1576, by Gaignières 34 Device of Henri II, fromG. Ruscelli: Le Imprese illustri, 1572–83 35 Pyramids of Giza, from G. Sandys: Relation of a Journey, 1615 36 Title page of Lorenzo Pignoria's edition of the Tabula Bembi (Mensa Isiaca), 1669 37 Title page of Michael Maier: Arcana Arcanissima, 1614.Courtesy Trustees of the British Museum, London 38 Section of the Great Pyramid, from John Greaves: Pyramídographia, 1646 39 STEFANO DELLA BELLA: póramid landscape, probably 164os. Royal Library, Windsor Castle. Reproduced by gracious permission of Her Majesty the Queen 40 Frontispiece to Athanasius Kircher: Sphingis Mystagogae, 1676 41 Pyramids of Giza, from J.B. Fischer von Erlach: Historische Architektur, 1721 42 The Great Sphinx, from F. L. Norden: Travels in Egypt and Nubia, 1757 43 Sphinx in the park of Chiswick House, London, 18th C. National Monuments Record 44 Sphinx in the park of Schloss Veitshöchheim, near Würzburg, by Ferdinand Tietz, 1768. J. D. K. Argles 45, 46 DEsPREZ: aquatints of imaginary tombs, after 1777. Coll. Bernström, Gothenburg 47 MυRo TEst: Camera Sepolcrale Egíziana, etching, 1762 48 BouLLEE: design for a cenotaph. Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris 49 Pyramid in the park of the Chàteau de Maupertuis, c.178o, possibly by Ledoux 5o LEDoux: design for the gun foundry of the ideal city of Chaux, from L'Architecture considérée, 1804. 51 Title page of the first publication of Mozart's The Magíc Flute, 1791 52 Detail of the entrance to Abney Park Cemetery, Stoke Newington, London, by William Hosking, 1840. National Monuments Record 53 A. W. N. PucIN: cemetery entrance in the Egyptian style, with a classical chapel beyond, from Apology for the Revival of Christian Architecture, 1843 54 Country Court House, Newark, N.J., by Haviland, 1837. Public Library, Newark, New Jersey 55 Halls of Justice ("The Tombs’), New York, by Haviland, 1836–8. The J. Clarence Davies Collection, Museum of the City of New York 56 Entrance to the cemetery at New Haven, Connecticut, by William Austin, 1845–8. Newport Historical Society ADAM, James, 197 Adam, Robert, 110. 200, 202 Addison, John, 82, 84–6, 88, 89 Aix-en-Provence, gaol, 178 Alberti, Leonbattista, 198, 218, 219 Aleandro, Girolamo, 227 Antoíne. J.D., 175, 209 Antonin, 190 Antonini, Giuseppe, 201 Aquínas, St Thomas, 198 Arens, J.A., 210 asceticism. 32 Ashridge, Herts., 138, 144, 149, 150 Attingham, Shropshire, 144 Aubrey, John, 160 Audley End, Essex. 156. 157. 158 Austin, Henry, 235 Ayot St Lawrence, Herts., 208 Azubius, Solomon. 228 BACICCIA, see Gaulli Bacon, Sir Francis, 44, 47 Baggrave Hall, Leics., 161 Balzac, J.L. Guez de, 54 Banks, Sir Joseph, 206 Barabíno, C.F., 235 Barachias, 228 Barnabite order, 18 Barocci (Federigo Fiori), 20, 25, 28, 29, 30. 35 Barry, Charles, 162 Barry, James, 209 Bassano, Jacopo, 28, 35, 67, 75 Beauvallet, P.N., 234 Beccafumi, Domenico, 15, 17 Belanger, F.J., 209 Bellarmine, Cardinal, 37 Bellori, G.P., 80, 81 Belon, Pierre, 224 Bembo, Pietro, 220 Berkenhout, John, 200, 201 Berlin, Guard House, 184, 185; Old Museum, 186, 188, 189; Schauspielhaus, 185, 186, 187; School of Architecture, 191, 192, 193; Werdersche Kirche, 190–191 Bernini, Gianlorenzo, 25, 30. 32, 33, 35. 47. 50,53,57 Bérulle, Cardinal, 40 Besançon, theatre, 1 77, 209 Bibiena, Francesco and Ferdinando Galli, 111 Bilton, Warw., 86 Biondo, Flavio, 219 Blackwell, Thomas, 206 Bloemaert, Abraham, 35 Blondel, François, 173, 199, 202, 216, 231 Blum, H., 198, 199 Boccaccio, Giovanni, 198 Bodin, Jean, 36 Boileau, Nicolas, 80, 86 Boisserée, Sulpiz, 171 Bonomi, Joseph, 21e Borgia, Francesco, 24 Born, Ignaz von, 233 Borromeo, St Charles, 22, 24 Bossuet, J.B., 40 Boullée, E.L., 175, 176, 231, 232 Boyle, Robert, 40 Bramante, Donato, 220 Bridgeman, Charles, 94 Brinckmann, A.E., 52 Brogniart, A.T., 175, 211 Bronzino, Agnolo, 13. 26, 27 Brouwer, Adriaan, 38, 39 Brown, Lancelot Capability'. 89, 117, 118, 129,160 Bruce of Kinnaird, 201 Bruegel, Pieter the Elder, 38, 39 Brunel, 1.K., 194 Bruno, Giordano, 35, 36, 41, 42 Bullock, Edward, 213 Buondelmonte, Cristoforo de, 218 Burckhardt, Jakob, 14 Burke, Edmund, 122, 123, 127 Burhington, Richard Boyle, Lord, 86, 88, 89 Burton Constable, Yorks., 160 Bushnell, John, t59 CAGLIOSTRO, Count, 233 Cajetan of Thiene, St., 18 Calcagnini, Celio, 225 Callot, Jacques, 35 Calvaert, Denys, 28 Calvinism, 36 Camaldolese order, 18 Camden, William, 227 Cameron, Charles, 209 Cano, Melchior, 18 capricci, 216 Capuchin order, 18 Caraffa, see Paul IV Caravaggio, M. da, 25, 36,37, 47, 48, 50, 69 Carnesecchi, Pietro, 22 Carracci, Agostino, Annibale and ## Index Numbers in italic indicate pages on which illustrations appear Carter, John, 214 Castello, Valerio, 57, 66, 68, 72, 74, 75 Castiglione, Baldassare, 53 Caylus, A.C.P. de Tubières, Comte de, 230 Cerano (G.B. Crespi), 28, 29 Cesari, Giuseppe, 35 Cesariano, 198 Cesi, Angelo, 222 Chalgrin, J.F.T., 175 Chambers, Sir William, 170, 202. 205, 214. 217 Chambray. R. Fréart de, 200 Chantelou, P. Fréart de, 227 Charron, Pierre, 40, 44, 54 Chastleton, Oxon., 157 Chaux, 175, 232 Cherpitel, Mathurin, 209, 214 Chinese gardens, 107, i50; see also Sharawaggi Chiswick, Mdx., 151, 230 Cígnani, Carlo, 57, 74 Ciriaco d’Ancona, 199, 219 Clarke, T.M., 162 Claude Lorraine, 101, 112, 113 Clement VII, Pope, 14 Clement VIII, Pope, 37 Clement IX, Pope, 39 Clodion (Claude-Michel), 215 Clovio, Giulio, 222 Cochin, C.N., 201 Cockerell, S.P., 234 Colonna, Cardinal Pompeo, 222 Colonna, Vittorio, 14 Colonna Missal, 222, 223 Col, Giovanni, 57, 70, 72, 75 concettismo. 50 Contarini, Cardinal Gaspare, t4 Coornhert, Dirck Volkertsz,, 36 Copernicus, 36, 42 Comneille, Pierte, 44, 52, 76 Correggio, Antonio Allegri. 36 Cortese, Cardinal Gregorio, t4 Cortona, Pietro da, 42,50, 57, 60, 61, 62, 63, 65,70 Couplet, Father Philippe. 105 Crespi, G.B., see Cerano Crespi, G.M., 57 Croce, Benedetto, 38, 50 cruelty, 32, 50 Cumberland, Richard, 206 DALTON, R., 202 Dance, James the Younger, 175. 176, 214 David, Jacques-Louis, 211 Leeds, Marshall's Mill, 213 Frome House, 143 Hearne, Thomas, 113, 119, 163 Morone, Giovanni di, 14. 16, 22 Daviler, A.C., 200 Pinturicchio (Bernardino di Betto), 219 Legrand, J.G., 177 Fuseli, Henry, 109, 125, 203 Heda, Willem Claesz., 49 Morris, Robert, 200 Della Bella, Stefano, 228 Le Nôtre, André, 80, 81, 82 Piranesi, G.B., 175, 178, 202, 204, 207, 208, 209, 215, 216, 222, 231 Heemskerck, Maarten van, 221, 224 Leo XI, Pope, 37 Della Valle, Pietro, 228 Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 233 Henri Il of France, 225 Pisanello (Antonio Pisano), 219 Lépicié, N. B., 211 GALLEO, Galilei, 41, 42 Mylne, Robert, 200 Pius IV, Pope, 22 Henri IV of France, 37 Le Roy, Jacques, 202, 204, 209 Dempster, Thomas, 204 Pius V. Pope (Ghisleri), 22, 23. 25 Herbert of Cherbury, Lord, 40, 44 gardens, see picturesque; Knight; Price; Repton, etc. Dendera, 213, 214 Herder, J.G., 165, 166, 206, 233 Le Vau, Louís, 54, 75 Playfəir, James, 214 Lightoller, T., 160 heroic in Baroque art, 25 Pléiade, 54 Ligorio, Pirro, 221, 222 NAsí, Joseph, 162 Descartes, René, 40, 42, 44, 45, 52, 76 Pocetti, 35 Gartner, Friedrich, 189 Pococke, Richard, 229, 230 Desprez, Jean-Louis, 214, 215, 230, 231 Gassendi, Pierre, 40, 47 Hobbes, Thomas, 76 Neale, J.P., 162 Poggio Bracciolini, 218, 219 Hogarth, William, 118 Gaulli, Gíovanni Battista (called Baciccia), 57, 69, 71, 72, 74 Dezallier d’Argenville, A.J., 85, 87 Liss, Jan, 66 Hoegl. Johann, 235 Nanni da Viterbo, 219 Pole, Reginald, 14, 16, 22 Locke, John, 76 Diane de Poîtiers, 224, 225 Gay, John, 89 Holland, Henry, 214 Pontormo, Jacopo, 13, 14, 15 London, George, 85, 92 Dilthey, Wilhelm, 36, 44 Genelli, Hans Christian, 178, 210, 211 Hollanda, Francesco da, 221 Pope, Alexander, 80, 82, 86, 88, 89, 90–91, 92,93 Newark, New Jersey, 235 Domenichino (Domenicho Zampieri), 32 London, British Museum, 186; Egyptian Hall, Piccadilly, 213; Newgate Gaol, 176; Stoke Newington Cemetery, 234 Donato, bishop of Padua, 199 Gherardi, Antonío, 57, 69, 70, 75 Newton, William, 202 Hope, Thomas, 210, 213, 214 Gherardi, Filippo, 57, 70, 72, 75 Doric architecture and Revival, 168, 169, 170, 171, 180, 197–211 Hume, David, 123 Poussin, Gaspard (Dughet), 112 Hurd, Bishop, 206 Loudon, J.C., 162 Niccolini, Antonio, 235 D'Orville, J.P., 200 Louis XIV of France, 54 Nieuhoff, Martinus, 105 Ghisleri, see Pius V Poussin, Nicolas, 35, 40, 47, 50, 51, 52, 53,55, 57, 65, 69, 74, 204 Hurlingham, London, 140 Dosio, G.A., 226 Louise of Prussia, mausoleum for, t74, 184 Nollekens, Joseph, 116 Giberti, G.M., 14, 16 Hypnerotomachia Poliphili, 220, 221 Pozzo, Andrea, 57, 72 Gilly, David, 176, 181 Norden, F.L., 229, 230 Downton Castle, Shropshire, 108, 109, 110, 112, 113, 119, 121, 150, 208 Preti, Mattia, 57, 58, 59, 61, 62, 65, 66, 68, 72, 75 Gilly, Friedrich, 176, 177, 178, 179, 18o, 181, 185,210,211 Luther, Martin, 36 nudity in Mannerist art, 26–27 Dryden, John, 80, 81 IGNATIUs OF LOvOLA, St, 18, 24, 32 Nuvaloni, Giuseppe, 74 Primaticcio, Francesco, 234 Du Bellay, Guillaume, 224 Gilpin, William, 120, 127, 128, 129 Procaccini, Giulio Cesare, 68, 75 infinity, 45, 46 Ducerceau, Jacques Androuet, 225 Isidore of Seville, St, 218 Price, Uvedale, 117, 118, 119, 122, 123, 124. 126–137, 142, 143, 147 MACCHIAVELLI, Niccolo, 36 OcíiNo, Bernardino, 22 Dufresnoy, C.A., 81 Gioffredi, Mario, 201, 203 Macchietti, Girolamo, 26 Dumont, G.P.M., 196, 201, 209 opera, so Pückler-Muskau, Prince, 188 Giordano, Luca, 56, 57, 58, 61, 62, 64, 65, 66, 72, 74, 75 Maffei, Francesco, 57, 66, 67, 68, 72, 75 Orsini, Fulvio, 221 JACOBEAN REVIVAL, 157–163 Pugin, A.W.N., 234 The Magic Flute, 183, 233 Ottonelli, 50 Dürer, Albrecht, 167 Giulio Romano, 15, 16, 222, 224 James, John, 85, 99, 199 'Magliabecchiano, Anonimo', 218 Glenarm, Ireland, 162 Jansenism, 39, 40 Magnasco, Alessandro, 57 Goethe, J.W. von, 109, 165–173, 168, 204. QUATREMÈRE de Quincy, A.C., 231 Maier, Count Michael, 226, 227, 230 PAESTUM, 169, 196, 201, 203, 207, 208 Quintinie, Jean de la, 85 Jesuit order, 18–33, 37, 38, 45 Major, Thomas, 201 Paine, James, 205 Egyptian Revival, 213–235 Gondoin, Jacques, 175 Johnson, Francis, 210 Malebranche, Nicolas, 76 Pancrazi, G.M., 200 Elgin Marbles, 115, 116 Gore, Charles, 109, 113, 119 Johnson, Thomas, 209 Malherbe, François de, 54 Elmes, James, 234 Palladio, Andrea, 53, 168, 169, 198, 199 Gori, A.F., 204 RACINE, Jean, 52, 76 Jolli, Antonio, 201 Mamshead, Devon, 162 pantheism, 35 Endsleigh on the Tamar, Beds., 146–7 Gotha, 210 Ranke, Karl von, 24, 37, 52 Manchester, 194 Erasmus, 36 Papworth, John Buonarotti, 213, 234 Raphael, 36, 222 Gothein, M., 22, 24 Mansart, François, 52, 75 eroticism, 26–28, 50 Great Packington, Warw., 210 Paris, Barrière des Bonshommes, 177 Kames, Lord, 206 Rapin, René, 81, 85, 99 Mantegna, Andrea, 220 Erwin von Steinbach, 166, 167 Parmigianino, 15, 18, 19, 26 Greaves, John, 228 Rebecca, Biagio, 210 Kent, William, 86, 94, 117, 158, 159, 160, 161 Pascal, Blaíse, 40, 76 Eshton Hall, Yorks., 162, 163 Greco, El, 13, 19, 25, 28, 29, 38, 41, 42 Kepler, Johann, 42 Marcellus II, Pope, 22 Pasquale, Fra, 218 Essex, James, 161, 208 Gregory XIII, Pope, 25 Marienburg, Prussia, 180 ethics, 40 Passignano (D. Cresti), 35. 69 Gregory of Nazianzus, St, 218 Kircher, Athanasius, 228 Reni, Guido, 52, 53, 74 Mariette, P.J., 204 Eusebius, 218 Pastor, Ludwig von, 14 Grotius, Hugo. 40, 44 Kléber. General J.B.. 234 Repton, Humphry, 118, 119, 120, 122, 139– 155,161,188 Patte, Pierre, 231 Evełyn, John, 81, 85, 106, 160, 226 Grueber, Father Johann, 105 Klemperer, Victor, 53. 54 Marks Hall, Essex, 160, 161 Paul III, Pope, 14 'externalization', 45 Klenze, Leo von, 189 Revett, Nicholas, 200, 201, 202, 207, 208, 209, 210 Paul IV, Pope (Caraffa), 14, 18, 22 Guercini, Il (Giovanni Francesco Barbieri) 59, Kneller, Sir Godfrey, 105 Mayer, Heinrich, 169, 17e, 171 Paul V, Pope, 37 Reynolds, Sir Joshua, 128, 159 Knight, Richard Payne, 109–125, 133, 134, 142, 143, 146, 147, 163, 208 FaBER, Petrus, 18 Maupertuís, 232 Peiresc, C.N. Fabri de, 226, 227 Ribera, José, 47, 50, 65 Mazarin, Cardinal, 76 Fabritius, Carel, 49 Köppen, Carl Friedrich, 233 Riccì, Sebastiano, 57, 70, 76 Melanchthon, Philip, 36 Faret, Nicolas, 53 HACKAERT, Philipp, 109 Knyff, Leonard, 94 Ricci, Father, 104, 105 Mengs, Anton Raphael, 197, 204, 211, 215 Peri, Jacopo, 50 Richardson, C.J., 162 Michelangelo, 20, 23, 25, 36 Perrault, Claude, 54, 199 Ferrari, Gaudenzio, 13 Hallerstein, Haller von, 235 Richelieu, Cardinal de, 38, 52, 76 Persius, Ludwig, t89 Ficino, Marsilio, 218 Hals, Frans, 42, 47 LABACCO, Antonio, 199, 200 Milizia, Francesco, 207 Hamilton, Gavin, 204, 211 La Fontaine, Jean de, 8o Peruzzi, Baldassare, 15, 26, 198; Peruzzi Sketchbook', 221 Riegl, Alois, 25 Fischer von Erlach, J.B., 200, 201, 229 Milan, 181, 182, 183 Hamilton, Sir William, 114 Lainez, Diego, 18 Riou, Stephen, 205 Mince-Pie House, Blackheath, 157 Flaxman, John, 109, 116, 234 Hammels, Herts., 94, 98 Petrarch, 198 Lanfranco, Giovanni, 69 Peyre, A.F., 175, 231 Fontaine, P.F.L., 175, 213 Hampton Court Palace, 158 Robinson, P.F., 162, 213 Langley, Batty, 78, 98, 99, 100, 101 Molinos, Jacques, 76, 177 Fontainebleau, 224, 225 Philip II of Spain, 37 Lanson, Gustave, 40 Rogers, Isaiah, 235 Monboddo, Lord, 206 Harestreet, Essex, 154 Fox, Charles James, 126 Piazzetta, Giambattista, 76 Laugier, Abbé, 167 Rome, 181 Francesco, Carlo, 74 Harlaxton, Lincs., 163 Latrobe, Benjamin, 210 picturesque, 79–1or; see also Knight. Price, Repton Harrison, Thomas, 210 Montfaucon, Bernard de, 229 Rosa, Salvatore, 101, 112 Francis Xavier, St, 18 Harvey, William, 44 Leasowes, The, 149, 150 Rose, Hans, 75 Franck, Sebastian, 36 Haviland, John, 234, 235 Friedländer, Walter, 53 Haydon, Benjamin, 116 Rosso Fiorentino, t0, 15, 224 Ledoux, C.N., 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 181. Morazzone (P. F. Mazzuchelli), 35 Pignoria, Lorenzo, 227 Morghen, Filippo, 201 Pinder, Wilhelm, 57 Rossi, Vincenzo de, 222, 224 256 Index SíELLY, Percy Bysshe, 120 Tesi, Mauro, 231 Vitruvius, 198 Shugborough, Staffs., 203, 208 Theatine order, 18, 22 Voltaire (François Aronet), 126 Shute, John, 198, 199 Thevenot, Jean de, 229 Vossler, Karl, 40, 50, 53 Siciolante da Sermoneta, 32 Thiene, St Gaetano da, 14 Vulliamy, Lewis, 189 Sixtus V, Pope, 25, 36, 38, 226 Thomson, James, 10o Sloane, Sir Hans, 229 Tintoretto, 20, 21, 28, 30, 31, 35, 67, 75 Smirke, Sir Robert, 175, 186 Tischbein, J.F.W., 168 WAl1Y, Charles de, 175 Soane, Sir John, 175, 179, 208, 209, 210, 213, Titian, 36 Toledo, Cardinal, 37 Walpole, Horace, 80, 94, 111, 112, 113, 117, –158, 160, 161, 166 Society of Dilettanti, 113, 20o, 201 toleration, 36 Walter, T. U., 235 Sodality of Divine Love, 14, 22 Trent, Council of, 14, 33 Wansleben, J.M., 229 Solimena, Francesco, 70, 76 Trevisani, Francesco, 76 Ware, Isaac, 200 Somaschi order, 18 Troil, Uno von, 206 Warren, Russell, 235 Soufflot, Jacques-Germain, 201 Twickenham, Middx., 86, 89, 90–91, 151 Warton, Thomas, 161 The Spectator, 84–86 Warwick. gaol, 209 Spengler, Oswald, 42 Webster, George, 162, 163 Spinoza, Benedict, 36, 41, 42, 44 URBAN VIII, Pope, 37, 38 Wedgwood and Co., 214 Spon, Jacob, 200, 201 Weisbach, Werner, 12–33 Stanton Court, Glos.. 157 Steele, Richard, 84–86 West, Benjamin, 116 VALERIANo, Piero, 225 Stephenson. David, 210 Westmacott, Richard, 116 Valla, Lorenzo, 36 Wheler, Sir George, 200 Stowe, Bucks., 159 Valleyficld, Perthshire. 151 Wild, J., 189 Strassburg, 164, 165–167, 170 Vanbrugh, Sir John, 110, 111, 156, 157, 158, Strawberry Hill, Twickenham, 111. 158 Wilkins, William, 115, 116, 175, 210 Strickland, William, 235 Wilson, Richard, 209 Strozzi, Bernardo, 66 Vanburgh Castle, Blackheath, 1 1o, 111, 157, 158 Winckelmann, 109, 165, 198, 203, 204 Stuart, James, 200, 201, 202, 203, 207, 208, 209, 210 Van Goyen. J.J., 47 Wise, H., 85, 92 Vasari, Georgio, 20, 22, 23 Woburn Abbey, Beds., 15o Stukeley, William, 229 Vaugelas, Claude Favre de, 54 Wölfflin, Heinrich, 14, 52 Sulpitius, Johannes, 198 Wyatt, Thomas Henry, 189 Vaux-le-Vicomte, 81 Wyatville, Sir Geoffrey, 160 Sweertius, Michiel, 227 Veitshöchheim, 230 Swift, Jonathan, 79, 89 Switzer, Stephen, 92–94, 92, 93, 95, 99 Velasquez, Diego, 35, 38, 42. 47 Vergerio, P.P. the Younger, 22 Xin-fo-Cum, 105–6 Vermeer, Jan, 76 Veronese, Paolo, 35, 58, 67, 75 Tabula Bembi, 220, 222, (223), 227 Taplow, Bucks., 151 Versailles, 53 YounG, Edward, 206 Vico, Enea, 220, 225 Tatham, Charles Heathcote, 214 Young, William, 207 Vignola, G.B. da, 198, 199 Temple, Sir William, 79–82, 103–106 Teresa of Avila, St, 24, 32 Vincent de Paul, St, 40 Terrasson, Jean, 230, 233 Vitelleschi, Muzio, 37 Vitelli, Luca, 72 ZucCARo, Taddeo, 13, 20, 28 Zurbarán, Francisco de, 30 ## Date Due <table><tr><td>0V-2.4 1972</td><td></td><td>0CT 141978</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>MAR 1 5 2004 072 4197</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>JUL 2 3 1370.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>APR2</td><td>1998</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MAR281978</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>APR101996</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>APR 2 2 19791AR 0 8 1897</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>FEB 2 3 1997</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>DEC 9 1980AR 1 2002</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Redd March8/</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MAR 2 D 1005</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MAR 0 g 1805</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">古dy CAT. NO. 23 233</td></tr></table> N6350 .P4 1968b v.1 Pevsner, Nikolaus Studies in art, architecture, and de