## Table of Contents Title Page Copyright Page OUTLINE OF A Theory of Colours Dedication The Translator’s Preface. Preface to the First Edition of 1810. Introduction. Part I. - PHYSIOLOGICAL COLOURS. I. - EFFECTS OF LIGHT AND DARKNESS ON THE EYE. II. - EFFECTS OF BLACK AND WHITE OBJECTS ON THE EYE. III. - GREY SURFACES AND OBJECTS. IV. - DAZZLING COLOURLESS OBJECTS. V. - COLOURED OBJECTS. VI. - COLOURED SHADOWS. VII. - FAINT LIGHTS. VIII. - SUBJECTIVE HALOS. PATHOLOGICAL COLOURS. APPENDIX. Part II. - PHYSICAL COLOURS. IX. - DIOPTRICAL COLOURS. X. - DIOPTRICAL COLOURS OF THE FIRST CLASS. XI. - DIOPTRICAL COLOURS OF THE SECOND CLASS.— REFRACTION. XII. - REFRACTION WITHOUT THE APPEARANCE OF COLOUR. XIII. - CONDITIONS OF THE APPEARANCE OF COLOUR. XIV. - CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH THE APPEARANCE OF COLOUR INCREASES. XV. - EXPLANATION OF THE FOREGOING PHENOMENA. XVI. - DECREASE OF THE APPEARANCE OF COLOUR. XVII. - GREY OBJECTS DISPLACED BY REFRACTION. XVIII. - COLOURED OBJECTS DISPLACED BY REFRACTION. XIX. - ACHROMATISM AND HYPERCHROMATISM. XX. - ADVANTAGES OF SUBJECTIVE EXPERIMENTS.— TRANSITION TO THE OBJECTIVE. XXI. - REFRACTION WITHOUT THE APPEARANCE OF COLOUR. XXII. - CONDITIONS OF THE APPEARANCE OF COLOUR. XXIII. - CONDITIONS OF THE INCREASE OF COLOUR. XXIV. - EXPLANATION OF THE FOREGOING PHENOMENA. XXV. - DECREASE OF THE APPEARANCE OF COLOUR. XXVI. - GREY OBJECTS. XXVII. - COLOURED OBJECTS. XXVIII. - ACHROMATISM AND HYPERCHROMATISM. XXIX. - COMBINATION OF SUBJECTIVE AND OBJECTIVE EXPERIMENTS. XXX. - TRANSITION. XXXI. - CATOPTRICAL COLOURS. XXXII. - PAROPTICAL COLOURS. XXXIII. - EPOPTICAL COLOURS. Part III. - CHEMICAL COLOURS. XXXIV. - CHEMICAL CONTRAST. XXXV. - WHITE. XXXVI. - BLACK. XXXVII. - FIRST EXCITATION OF COLOUR. XXXVIII. - AUGMENTATION OF COLOUR. XXXIX. - CULMINATION. XL. - FLUCTUATION. XLI. - PASSAGE THROUGH THE WHOLE SCALE. XLII. - INVERSION. XLIII. - FIXATION. XLIV. - INTERMIXTURE, REAL. XLV. - INTERMIXTURE, APPARENT. XLVI. - COMMUNICATION, ACTUAL. XLVII. - COMMUNICATION, APPARENT. XLVIII. - EXTRACTION. XLIX. - NOMENCLATURE. L. - MINERALS. LI. - PLANTS. LII. - WORMS, INSECTS, FISHES. LIII. - BIRDS. LIV. - MAMMALIA AND HUMAN BEINGS. LV. - PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL EFFECTS OF THE TRANSMISSION OF LIGHT THROUGH COLOURED MEDIUMS. LVI. - CHEMICAL EFFECT IN DIOPTRICAL ACHROMATISM. Part IV. - GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. THE FACILITY WITH WHICH COLOUR APPEARS. THE FORCE OF COLOUR. THE DEFINITE NATURE OF COLOUR. COMBINATION OF THE TWO PRINCIPLES. AUGMENTATION TO RED. JUNCTION OF THE TWO AUGMENTED EXTREMES. COMPLETENESS THE RESULT OF VARIETY IN COLOUR. HARMONY OF THE COMPLETE STATE. FACILITY WITH WHICH COLOUR MAY BE MADE TO TEND EITHER TO THE PLUS OR MINUS SIDE. EVANESCENCE OF COLOUR. PERMANENCE OF COLOUR. ## Part V. - RELATION TO OTHER PURSUITS—RELATION TO PHILOSOPHY.RELATION TO MATHEMATICS.RELATION TO THE TECHNICAL OPERATIONS OF THE DYER.RELATION TO PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY.RELATION TO NATURAL HISTORY.RELATION TO GENERAL PHYSICS.RELATION TO THE THEORY OF MUSIC.CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS ON TERMINOLOGY. Part VI. - EFFECT OF COLOUR WITH REFERENCE TO MORAL ASSOCIATIONS. YELLOW. RED-YELLOW. YELLOW-RED. BLUE. RED-BLUE. BLUE-RED. RED. GREEN. COMPLETENESS AND HARMONY. CHARACTERISTIC COMBINATIONS. YELLOW AND BLUE. YELLOW AND RED. BLUE AND RED. YELLOW-RED AND BLUE-RED. COMBINATIONS NON-CHARACTERISTIC. RELATION OF THE COMBINATION TO LIGHT AND DARK. CONSIDERATIONS DERIVED FROM THE EVIDENCE OF EXPERIENCE AND HISTORY. ÆSTHETIC INFLUENCE. CHIARO-SCURO. TENDENCY TO COLOUR. KEEPING. COLOURING. COLOUR IN GENERAL NATURE. COLOUR OF PARTICULAR OBJECTS. CHARACTERISTIC COLOURING. HARMONIOUS COLOURING. GENUINE TONE. FALSE TONE. WEAK COLOURING. THE MOTLEY. DREAD OF THEORY. ULTIMATE AIM. GROUNDS. PIGMENTS. ALLEGORICAL, SYMBOLICAL, MYSTICAL APPLICATION OF COLOUR. CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS. Notes. A CATALOG OF SELECTED DOVER BOOKS IN ALL FIELDS OF INTEREST OceanofPDF.com