# Acknowledgements

The explorations involved in this study have taken me into areas which I am, formally speaking, quite unqualified to enter: into art history, archaeology, anthropology, the history of science, biology, philosophy and cybernetics. I am painfully aware of the dangers of ‘a little knowledge’ in any of these subjects; and particularly that the drawing of analogies between one subject and another is a potentially even more dangerous exercise. For these reasons the customary expressions of thanks to colleagues and friends who have given me help are all the more deeply felt; and the equally customary dissociations of their names from responsibility for any of the opinions advanced here are probably all the more necessary.

In particular I am grateful to Nick Bullock for help with German architectural theory, and with translation; and to Tony Vidler for his ideas on the theory of type-forms. Nick Humphrey made some valuable suggestions on psychological and biological points. Carrie Humphrey directed me to some of the anthropological literature. Barrie Wilson presented me with a copy of the Rev. J. G. Wood’s Nature’s Teachings. With Bill Hillier and Adrian Leaman I have discussed several topics, but have found especially valuable their ideas relating to Karl Popper’s ‘World Three’ of objective knowledge and its implications for architectural and design theory, as touched on below.

Earlier versions of parts of the argument of the book were incorporated into a thesis submitted to the Faculty of Architecture and Fine Arts at Cambridge – a thesis which has undergone many vicissitudes, and whose history must be about the most tortuous of any ever presented anywhere. I received the most helpful criticisms and comments along that long route from three men distinguished in very different fields and all now dead: Bill Howell, Lancelot Law Whyte and David Clarke. I also received help from Robin Middleton, who provided several items of information about French architectural history; and from Joseph Rykwert. Finally I have profited most from many conversations over the years, both on the subject of this book and about design theory in general, with Lionel March.

The manuscript was typed by Barbara Jones.