# Preface to the revised edition

In the Introduction to the 1979 edition I expressed surprise that there was not at that time any other book on the history of biological analogy in architecture and the applied arts – especially given the fact that such analogies have been so pervasive in design theory since the beginnings of the science of biology in the early nineteenth century. There was Peter Collins’s chapter in Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture of 1965, which treated the topic as just one ‘analogy among many, but little else by way of comprehensive coverage. That situation, even more surprisingly, remains the same today, which is one reason why Routledge have thought it worthwhile to republish the book. Caroline van Eck’s Organicism in Nineteenth Century Architecture covers some of the same ground as my Chapters 3, 4 and 5: the writings of Semper, Viollet-le-Duc, and Eidlitz, and the influence of Goethe and Cuvier. Van Eck also discusses Ruskin and John Wellborn Root, neither of them treated here. But as its title indicates, her book stops at 1900; it is confined to architecture; and most important it looks back to an older tradition of organic metaphor – starting from Aristotle, and Alberti’s concept of concinnitas – more than it does to strictly biological and scientific analogies. Darwin for example makes only a brief and late appearance, and Spencer is completely absent.

I stand by the greater part of my original argument although there are some minor qualifications I would now make, some of them mentioned in the new Afterword on pp. 237–73. I regret having overlooked certain historical topics, such as Ernst Haeckel’s influence on Jugendstil and Art Nouveau, the relationship of nineteenth-century embryology and criminology to Adolf Loos’s ‘Ornament and Crime’, and the twentieth-century German school of organic architecture. The original text has nevertheless been left unaltered.

What has happened over the intervening thirty years is that there has been a great flowering of new theory in architecture and design, looking not just to understand and imitate natural forms, but seeking insights at deeper levels into biological processes, from which designers might derive models and methods. This activity has gathered pace over the past two decades. One reason has been the growing environmental crisis, the rise of green and sustainable design, and a belief that an architecture in closer harmony with nature needs to take lessons from organic forms and systems. A second major stimulus has been the general introduction of computers into the everyday practice of engineers, architects and industrial designers.

Computer-aided design was just 16 years old in 1979 – taking Ivan Sutherland’s Sketchpad system of 1963 as year zero. The technology in those days was unwieldy and expensive, the users mostly government departments and big companies, and the focus in architecture on prefabricated industrial systems of construction. In terms of method the emphasis was on static representation of finished designs in drawings and virtual 3D models, the automatic evaluation of structural, thermal and a few other aspects of physical performance, and costing. There was much academic interest in methods for the automated generation of architectural form by computer, but little solid progress.

All this changed when computers arrived on every desk in the 1980s, and when powerful new graphics and modelling software gave designers the means to create and explore new worlds of complex, fluid, curvilinear, ‘biomorphic’ shape. (The equation of ‘biological’ with ‘non-rectangular’ could sometimes nevertheless be rather simplistic.) Programs for simulating different aspects of the behaviour of mechanisms and structures allowed engineers to introduce explicitly ‘evolutionary’ methods for optimising performance. From as early as the 1960s computer scientists had begun to devise ‘genetic algorithms’ whose mode of operation closely mimics natural evolution, for solving otherwise intractable computational problems and for producing software semi-automatically. Since the 1990s design researchers have been building these algorithms into experimental computer systems that ‘evolve’ the designs of buildings and other artefacts. In the Afterword I try to explain these developments in more detail and point the reader to some selected literature.

There have been important theoretical debates going on about cultural and technological evolution, which continue to have impacts on theory in design and architecture. In 1976 the biologist Richard Dawkins floated his concept of ‘memes’ or units of information transmitted from person to person in human culture – the mental analogues of genes in biological inheritance. The theory has been applied inter alia to the historical evolution of the designs of artefacts. Elsewhere in academia, more conventional evolutionary thinking has continued to find applications in economic history and the history of technology. Again I have provided summaries and recommended readings in the Afterword. Within biology itself there has been new research in genetics, in development including the evolution of development (‘evo devo’) and in biomechanics, all with potential resonances for the theory of architecture and design.

Although there is much that is completely new in recent ‘biological’ developments in the practice and theory of design, this work does nevertheless often tend to echo or reinterpret ideas in the earlier history of biological analogy. Modern research in ‘biomimetics’ (engineering analysis of organisms and their behaviour with a view to applying the same principles in design) gives a new name and new rigour to what went under the banner of ‘biotechnique’ or ‘biotechnics’ in the 1920s and 1930s. Dawkins’s new science of memetics, as anthropologists have pointed out with some irritation, has affinities with the ‘cultural diffusionism’ of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century evolutionary anthropology. New theories about hierarchical structure in adaptive systems – whether organisms or artefacts – have their foundations in the 1940s and 1950s in the cybernetics of Norbert Wiener and W. Ross Ashby. Here then is a second motive for republishing The Evolution of Designs (which covers all these older themes): a hope that present-day biological analogists may find some value and intellectual stimulus in the work of their predecessors, and may even be alerted to the dangers of old errors.

One stylistic footnote: I hope today’s reader will forgive the fact that, writing in the 1970s, I referred to the designer and the architect throughout as ‘he’, and to indigenous peoples – perhaps taking my cue from nineteenth-century anthropology – as ‘primitives’ and even ‘savages’.

In the acknowledgements to the first edition my greatest thanks went to Lionel March. I would like to thank Lionel again, both for believing in the book in 1979 when some others did not, and for giving his generous endorsement to this new edition.