# Tools as organs or as extensions of the physical body

We now leave the question of decoration, and return to the evolutionary analogy as it was applied solely to the utilitarian aspects of artefacts. We have looked so far at the material products of man’s invention and handicraft as though their evolution might be seen as analogous to and so parallel with the evolution of organisms. But there is a quite distinct and alternative way in which evolutionary theory can be applied to artefacts. This is in the proposal that tools, or machines, or other implements, are in fact part of the evolution of one particular species of animal, i.e. man; that they are, so to speak, extensions of or substitutes for the various organs of his own physical body.

In this view there are in human evolution two kinds of hereditary processes going on at once. The two types have been distinguished by the use of two terms originally due to the theoretical biologist and demographer Alfred Lotka.<sup>1</sup> The first, genetical type of heredity, which man shares with all other creatures, Lotka calls ‘endosomatic’ or within the body; while the second type, unique to man and which is comprised by culture including material artefacts, he calls ‘exosomatic’ or outside the body.

The word ‘exosomatic’ hints at the notion of artefacts constituting a kind of shell or skin around man’s body, interposed by him between his naked self and the environment around. As P. B. Medawar puts it, tools are ‘appendages, exosomatic organs if you like, that evolve with us’.<sup>2</sup>

The image is very natural in relation to clothes, substituting for the function of skin – and by extension architecture. The simplest hand tools would extend or modify the functions of the hands themselves, while others might substitute for fingers or arms. And the bicycle or car replaces or improves on some functions of the legs. These are pieces of personal equipment which amplify the power or otherwise extend the muscular capacities of the body. On a larger scale such inventions as the telephone or broadcasting systems would serve to increase the range of man’s voice, hearing and sight, while access to a library or computer network would amplify his memory and mental power.

There is thus a very metaphorical sense in which one might see man and his material creations together as some kind of hybrid mechanical/organic creature, in which the processes of evolution go on at some speed in the mechanical parts by comparison with very much slower changes in the organic parts. From this point of view cultural evolution and specifically technological evolution is seen as a continuing phase of biological evolution in man, proceeding by different mechanisms, and overlaid onto the Darwinian, genetic process.

In order to understand some of the historical origins of this conception, and to mount a critical analysis, it is necessary at this point to go back as promised to some of the predecessors of Darwin; and in particular to examine the ‘transformist’ theories of Lamarck. Though Lamarck and Darwin are often linked in histories of the development of evolutionary thought, and although Darwin after the publication of the Origin was prepared to acknowledge the possible validity of some aspects of Lamarck’s theory, in fact the two men are more properly set in quite different philosophical and scientific traditions.

Lamarck’s debt to classical thought is to the Stoics rather than to Aristotle, and his ‘zoological philosophy’ begins from the doctrines of Stoic metaphysics, that the principles of the world are activity and continuity, and that all nature is connected into an organised and purposive whole.<sup>3</sup> It is pneuma, the spirit or breath of life, which for the Stoics effects this animation of material, and which is the unifying force that binds the world together.

Where in the Christian concept of nature, purpose and design were the work of God, in the naturalist philosophy to which such biological thinkers of the Enlightenment as Diderot and Buffon adhered, it was nature itself which possessed or was the source of moral purpose. Indeed for Diderot there was no sense in which the physical aspects of nature could be separated from the moral. C. C. Gillispie describes how, in this way,

the romantic nature philosophy of the Enlightenment . . . revived the ancient, the pagan sense of cosmic organism. Such was Goethe’s innate, indwelling order, the bodily expression of identity and personality. Individual animals participate in life process, in this sense, as organs do in the life of the single body. But (as will appear in the example of Lamarck) there is no correlation between this and a theological view of nature. On the contrary, the organismic is a selfsufficient order. It may be a moral order, but such morality will be naturalistic, never theistic. Diderot was an atheist, Goethe was no Christian.<sup>4</sup>

Lamarck, according to Gillispie, was the ‘intellectual successor to Diderot and Buffon’. His theory of evolution neither required nor gave any explanation of the fact of design or progress in nature, since it started from the assumption that these were intrinsic to the force of the life process which expressed itself in organisms. What was required was an account of how the life force came into conflict with inert physical matter and was diverted into various ‘channels of necessity’. This interaction of the life process with the contingencies and exigencies of materials and environment resulted in the production of those various different forms of life, the species, which are actually observed. Hence the basic tenet of Lamarck’s theory: that it is changes in the environment which are responsible for eliciting corresponding changes in the animal or plant. As Gillispie puts it: ‘the environment is a shifting set of circumstances and opportunities to which the organism responds creatively, . . . as an expression of its whole nature as a living thing.’<sup>5</sup>

Lamarck’s transformism takes the static ladder of creation of eighteenth-century natural history and sets it in motion. But this is not the kind of motion which we saw in Bonnet’s Echelle des Etres, where the species moved up the hierarchy of creation unchanged, and in orderly sequence. Lamarck’s image of evolution is rather of a movement where organisms are always struggling upwards against the constricting and disorderly forces of inorganic material, and changing, progressing as they go. Their progress ‘erodes’ channels in the physical environment, and the dead remnants of the life process fall back to the foot of the ladder where they are once more incorporated into the upward movement.

In this way Lamarck lays emphasis on the direct effects of environment upon the organism, and on the efforts of the individual animal somehow to adapt itself to its surroundings. He proposes that the origins of the adaptation of the organs or features of animals and plants lie in the so-called ‘inheritance of acquired characters’. During the life of the individual, the effect of various mechanical and other forces in the surrounding environment is to mould the form and structure of the parts into a more efficient and convenient shape. Parts or organs in frequent use become more highly developed. Others, falling into disuse, dwindle and disappear. These effects are passed on by some hereditary means to the descendants; and so, gradually, the marvellous adaptive complexity that we observe in nature is accumulated.

Lamarck summarises these aspects of his theory in three rules:

The production of a new organ in an animal body results from the arising and continuance of a new need, and from the new movement which this need brings into being and sustains.

The degree of development of organs and their force of action are always proportionate to the use made of these organs.

All that has been acquired, imprinted or changed in the organisation of the individual during the course of its life is preserved by generation and transmitted to the new individuals that descend from the individual so modified [inheritance of acquired characters].<sup>6</sup>

It is the way of life, therefore, of the organism which, for Lamarck, determines its form, rather than the other way round. As Lamarck puts it:

It is not the organs – that is to say, the form and character of the animal’s bodily parts – which have given rise to its habits and peculiar properties, but, on the contrary, it is its habits and manner of life and the conditions in which its ancestors lived that has in the course of time fashioned its bodily form, its organs and its qualities.<sup>7</sup>

In human evolution it is, traditionally, the blacksmith who is brought forward to give evidence on behalf of Lamarckian inheritance. The great development of his arm muscles, acquired during years of work at the forge, is supposed to be passed on to the strapping sons who carry on the business.

The Lamarckian view is in many ways an eminently plausible one. As Medawar says, ‘It is an intelligent and forthright doctrine, and, in ignorance of genetics, an alternative is difficult to propound.’<sup>8</sup> It is not only an intelligible theory, but somehow just and reasonable, that the offspring should inherit the benefits won by their parents in their hard battle with life. Unfortunately, in the light of the neo-Darwinian evolutionary genetics of the first half of this century, it has since been rejected as untrue. Neither Lamarck nor Darwin had access to any detailed knowledge of the workings of the hereditary process at the level of microscopic and molecular structures. Darwin himself, in fact, gave some support as indicated to Lamarck’s idea of ‘acquired characters’. But gradually, after his time, the area in which recourse could be taken to Lamarckian principles for explanation was gradually diminished; until with the new synthesis of genetics with whole areas of biological knowledge in the twenties and thirties, Lamarck – at least so far as the mainstream of biology was concerned – was wholly refuted.

The evidence was rather that the units of heredity, the genes, were highly stable, not subject to direct influence from the animal or plant’s environment during its lifetime at all. They were passed on to the descendants absolutely unchanged (although, in sexual reproduction, in somewhat different mixtures and recombinations), with the exception of occasional abrupt changes whose frequency appeared to be random and whose cause was, in relation to the animal’s pattern of life, largely accidental and external.

With the discoveries of modern biochemistry it has been shown that this precision of the hereditary mechanism, the great fidelity with which offspring resemble their parents, is due, ultimately, to the chemical stability of the DNA molecule. Only a single molecule could provide in so small a space a stable structure, where the hereditary information might be safely encoded and preserved with only minor changes over many thousands of generations.

The refutation of Lamarckism has its interpretation in molecular genetics, in what Crick has called the ‘central dogma’. The primary function of the genetic code embodied in the DNA is to determine the presence of particular proteins, mostly enzymes, which control in turn the processes of chemical activity in the cell, and thus ultimately determine the development, maintenance and functioning of organs and of the organism as a whole. The central dogma states, roughly, that information can pass only in one direction, from the DNA to the protein and not vice versa. Any changes in the amounts and disposition of protein molecules caused by conditions in the environment of the individual (Lamarck’s ‘acquired characters’) cannot effect an equivalent change in the hereditary material, the DNA.

While Darwin had been criticised for the random element implicit in the contribution of variations to evolution in his theory, Lamarck had on the other hand been ridiculed for his implication that the adaptation of organs is the result of a kind of sustained willing or effort on the part of creatures; as though ‘creatures produced new organs, or transformed old ones, by simply wanting hard enough and long enough’.<sup>9</sup> As has been shown by H. G. Cannon, it was possibly partly because Lamarck’s word besoins, meaning an animal’s functional needs, had been translated by Lyell and others as ‘wants’, hence desires, that he fell foul of this kind of criticism.<sup>10</sup> (It was Lyell who first introduced Lamarck’s ideas to an English audience – even if only to subject them to attack.) And despite the insistence of C. C. Gillispie that Lamarck was not a vitalist – he argues that Lamarck’s concept of the vital force was not at all mysterious, but was related to combustion, i.e. that it had a strictly physical basis<sup>11</sup> – the fact is that many of Lamarck’s critics have found a vitalist flavour in his writings. For instance, he talks of an unconscious sentiment interieur in the higher animals, and of the forces of life as distinct from mechanical, non-vital forces. This was probably of comparable importance in contributing to his scientific eclipse.

Lamarck’s theory, as applied to organic evolution, is now generally discredited, and without supporters (with the exception of some valiant rearguard action being fought mainly by Arthur Koestler). It is not possible for bodily changes resulting from activities of the individual during its lifetime to affect the genetic material directly – that is to say it is not possible for Lamarck’s ‘acquired characters’ to be inherited. The distinction between the two hypothesised styles of heredity, Darwinian and Lamarckian, has been characterised by Medawar (following J. Lederberg) as the distinction between an ‘elective’ and an ‘instructive’ process.<sup>12</sup>

Lamarckism was essentially an ‘instructive’ theory of evolution. An organism, so the theory suggested, somehow received instructions from its environment (acquired characters), and the information gained from these instructions could be passed on, genetically, to the next generation. But this is not a true picture, and instead the environment is now known to act in an ‘elective’ way, to bring out or choose genetic potentialities offered by the organism. In Medawar’s words: ‘So far as we know, the relationship between organism and environment in the evolutionary process is an elective relationship. The environment does not imprint genetical instructions upon living things.’<sup>13</sup>

In the lecture from which this quotation is drawn, Medawar is concerned first of all to point up this central difference of the Lamarckian from the Darwinian (or more properly ‘neo-Darwinian’) theory of heredity. But Medawar has a second purpose also, and that is to show simultaneously the essential difference between organic evolution and human cultural evolution. In the first case, natural evolution, we have the (properly speaking) genetic process, where the environment acts ‘electively’ in relation to changes in the organism. In the second, cultural case, we have a process in which the (metaphorically speaking) ‘hereditary material’ consists of mental concepts, or information in records, books and artefacts – and passes through such information channels as teaching and the oral tradition. Here the relationship of the ‘cultural environment’ to the individual is quite literally an ‘instructive’ one. The individual gains information about the world by being taught by his parents, in school, and through his experience of life in general.

We remember the blacksmith, who Lamarckists thought could pass on his well-developed biceps to his sons. This he cannot do. But what he certainly can do is to pass on to them his skill and knowledge of the blacksmith’s craft (as well as his tools and the smithy). In this respect his culturally ‘acquired characters’ – what he has learned of his trade from his predecessors, and through his own experience – can be inherited by his successors. We see then that Lamarckism, or at least the inheritance of acquired characters, was a theory which, while incorrect in relation to organic evolution where it was applied, turned out to be true when applied to culture.

One reason why Lamarck fell into this error was arguably that he was working by analogy: drawing analogies from culture to nature, and projecting an essentially cultural conception onto the natural world. A number of historians of science, as well as social scientists, have suggested that Darwin too was guilty of this same fault. Darwin drew inspiration, as we have seen, from Malthus’s theory of population limits for his idea of the selection mechanism; and less consciously perhaps from the political economy of the Scottish school for his ideas on the positive benefits of competition. What has not been proposed, I believe, is that the essential role of variations in Darwin’s theory, and the fact that they are random and undirected, have any counterpart or derivation in cultural or economic thinking.

With Lamarck it is exactly this cause of variation which is conceived in ‘cultural’ terms. Characters are acquired by the animal through its own efforts, in a way similar to that in which men acquire learning and material property through devoting themselves to study and to business. What is more, animals may in Lamarck’s theory pass on their bodily acquisitions, in an organic equivalent of the inheritance of material property or of the transmission of cultural knowledge in education, from one generation to the next.

Thus Lamarckism has an intrinsic teleological and progressive aspect to it, since the evolutionary process in the Lamarckian view is actually propelled by the strivings of organisms to satisfy those new needs of theirs which are continually arising. Again we might relate this progressive quality of

Lamarck’s theory to the cultural and social ethos of the Enlightenment and the Revolution; much in the same way that Darwinism has been set by many commentators in its nineteenth-century context of industrial, technological and commercial progress, and has been connected to the Victorian work ethic, with its emphasis on self-improvement and competition both at the individual and the national levels. The fact is, however, that this analysis is much more appropriately applied to social Darwinism, or to Spencerism, than it is to Darwin himself. Darwin saw no necessary progression in the rise or succession of natural species; merely that those of greater fitness survived. The more fit might in other senses be either ‘higher’ or ‘lower’ species. Indeed it was precisely on the grounds that his conception of evolution lacked overall direction, and random variations were without purpose or meaning, that Darwin, as I have emphasised, was made the subject of fierce philosophical attack.

One of Darwin’s leading critics on these grounds was Samuel Butler, who besides his activities as novelist and man of letters, was deeply interested in the theory of evolution, and wrote several books himself on the subject. Though it may take us down something of a sidetrack, it will be worth examining Butler’s views, which make their appearance not only in his serious biological works, but also find their expression in satirical form in his novel Erewhon.<sup>14</sup> The reason for choosing Butler out of all of Darwin’s opponents is that Butler was especially occupied with the analogy of evolution in machines; and it is arguable that his ideas on technology and tools were even directly influential on some architectural theorists of the modern movement, specifically Amadée Ozenfant and Le Corbusier. Butler played a great part in rehabilitating Lamarck’s theory, and the evolutionary contributions of Erasmus Darwin and Buffon, by publication of his Evolution Old and New.<sup>15</sup> This book was intended to promote a Lamarckian position while at the same time seeking to diminish Darwin’s prestige by suggesting that he was not as original as he first appeared; indeed Butler entered into a bitter feud with Darwin, based on the accusation that Darwin had not properly acknowledged his debts to these precursors.

When The Origin of Species first appeared, Butler read it and became immediately a convinced and enthusiastic Darwinist – partly because of the demolition of Christian mythology and the assault on traditional religious beliefs which the theory implied. Later he read a book called The Genesis of Species by St George Mivart, in which he found, to his amazement, an attack on Darwin – made by a Roman Catholic biologist – which was not an attack on evolution.<sup>16</sup> Mivart’s book took a Lamarckian position. Butler discovered, as he did also slightly later still from the ‘Historical Sketch’ added to The Origin of Species, that Darwin had had several illustrious predecessors, including Lamarck; and Butler much preferred Lamarck’s theory to that of Darwin. Butler took a special pleasure, with every topic, in adopting a stance exactly contrary to popular wisdom and to received ideas; and so it is perhaps not too cynical to attribute at least part of this shift in his position to the possibility that

Darwin first appealed to him because of the scientific and theological iconoclasm of his theory, but that later when Darwinism became orthodoxy, Butler moved to defend another unpopular cause.

However this may be, Butler certainly became a staunch Lamarckist, and wrote a book Life and Habit (whose title itself refers to a conception very close to Lamarck’s ‘acquired characters’) in defence of a teleological, directed explanation of the evolutionary process, arising out of the ‘needs and experiences’ of creatures.<sup>17</sup> Life and Habit was an attack on the mechanical, materialist philosophy which Butler saw underlying natural selection. (Later Bernard Shaw was to develop his own Lamarckian ideas of ‘creative evolution’, as expounded in Man and Superman and Back to Methuselah, out of a similar horror for the ‘hideous fatalism’ of Darwin’s theory. Shaw acknowledges that in these plays, Butler’s ‘extremely fresh, free and future-piercing suggestions have an obvious share’.)<sup>18</sup>

The two successive stages of Butler’s thought are reflected in the structure of a number of chapters in Erewhon, where the hero of the story visits the Colleges of Unreason, and hears the contrasting evolutionary arguments of two of the professors. The first of these professors represents a Darwinian point of view; the second a Lamarckian position. (We know this since, apart from anything else, Butler explains the intended significance of these Erewhon episodes in Life and Habit.)<sup>19</sup> The interest from the present point of view (and the paradox, as we shall see) is that Butler chooses to mount both sides of this biological discussion, somewhat whimsically, by means of the analogy with the evolution of technology.

The chapters in question are in fact reworkings of the substance of two essays which Butler had written some time earlier in New Zealand, entitled ‘Darwin among the Machines’<sup>20</sup> and ‘Lucubratio Ebria’<sup>21</sup> (the latter carrying the Lamarckian ideas). The two professors serve in effect to re-present the arguments of these two articles; while they also bolster their positions by swapping quotations from the great Erewhonian authority, The Book of Machines. The whole account thus lightly conceals its more serious purpose behind a jeu d’esprit, an extended improvisation on the amusing possibilities of transposing evolutionary theory into the mechanical field.

The first Erewhonian professor asks whether the conventional distinctions we make between machines and organisms have any reality, or whether any differences which remain are not disappearing very quickly. Machines depend on external sources of power; but then so do animals and plants. Animals are capable of regulating and controlling their own activity; but then is not the same function performed in the steam engine by the governor and the automatic mechanisms which control supplies of oil and fuel? Animals and plants are capable of reproduction of their own kind, which might not seem immediately to be true of machines. But then even flowers need the help of insects. There are some types of animal which do not reproduce, but depend on the agency of others always, such as the drones among bees.

The frightening thing about machines, the Erewhonian professor argues, is that their evolution – through ‘descent with modification’ – seems to be proceeding so fast. If they have achieved so much in a few thousand years of their evolution so far, who is to say what machines might not achieve in a few thousand years more? We are already the slaves of machines, he says; very soon they will overtake us and become superior in every way – not only in power but in intelligence. Men will become a mere parasitic species, spending their time in labouring to supply the wants of machines. His proposed remedy – which the Erewhonians had in fact adopted some time before the visit of the story’s hero – was to destroy all machines completely before their influence and domination could grow too great to be overcome.

The effect of Butler’s satire here is an attack on the mechanistic concept of organic evolution which, Butler came to believe, Darwin represented. By showing the self-evident absurdity of treating machines as though they possessed the capacities of organisms, Butler intends to show the inadequacy of treating organisms as though they were machines. For this purpose he develops a theme which in many ways parallels the Darwinian approach to the study of evolution in artefacts taken by the anthropologists. It is a short step from this to the proposition that their evolution is a process not directly controlled by man; and therefore one which could perhaps get out of his control entirely.

The identity of method between Pitt-Rivers and Balfour and the Erewhonian author is complete. Like the anthropologists, the latter

attempted to support his theory by pointing out the similarities existing between many machines of a widely different character, which served to show descent from a common ancestor. He divided machines into their genera, sub-genera, species, varieties, subvarieties, and so forth. He proved the existence of connecting links between machines that seemed to have very little in common, and showed that many more such links had existed, but had now perished. He pointed out tendencies to reversion, and the presence of rudimentary organs which existed in many machines feebly developed and perfectly useless, yet serving to mark descent from an ancestor to whom the function was actually useful.<sup>22</sup>

The second Erewhonian professor (whose opinions the Erewhonians had ignored) claimed that machines were not so potentially dangerous as the first writer had argued; and that machines, so far from evolving in their own right and threatening man by their superiority, were, on the contrary, evidence of a new and higher stage in the evolutionary development of man himself. ‘In fact, machines are to be regarded as the mode of development by which the human organism is now especially advancing, every past invention being an addition to the resources of the human body.’<sup>23</sup> It is the second professor who refers to man as a ‘machinate mammal’, and to machines as man’s ‘extra-corporeal limbs’ (partaking, no doubt, in Lotka’s ‘exosomatic’ style of evolution). He develops the analogy of tools with limbs in this passage:

The lower animals keep all their limbs at home in their own bodies, but many of man’s are loose, and lie about detached, now here and there, in various parts of the world – some being kept always handy for contingent use, and others being occasionally hundreds of miles away. A machine is merely a supplementary limb; this is the be all and end all of machinery. We do not use our own limbs other than as machines; and a leg is only a much better wooden leg than any one can manufacture.

‘Observe a man digging with a spade; his right fore-arm has become artificially lengthened, and his hand has become a joint. The handle of the spade is like a knob at the end of the humerus; the shaft is the additional bone, and the oblong iron plate is the new form of the hand which enables its possessor to disturb the earth in a way to which his original hand was unequal.’

## The professor goes on:

‘Having thus modified himself, not as other animals are modified, by circumstances over which they have not even the appearance of control, but having, as it were, taken forethought and added a cubit to his stature, civilisation began to dawn upon the race, the social good offices, the genial companionship of friends, the art of unreason, and all those habits of mind which most elevate men above the lower animals, in the course of time ensued.’<sup>24</sup>

The professor continues by expressing some misgivings about whether, with the replacement of the functions of man’s physical body by mechanical substitutes, the forces of competition and natural selection would cease in the end to act on the body, and so a general physical degeneracy might result. Ultimately, he suggests, the body might become purely rudimentary and man would consist of nothing more than soul and intelligence. Even at the time of writing, man had already become dependent on his mechanical limbs to a great degree, especially in old age. ‘ “His memory goes in his pocket-book. He becomes more and more complex as he grows older; he will then be seen with seeengines, or perhaps with artificial teeth and hair.” ’<sup>25</sup> On the other hand, the professor argues that wealth, more advanced methods of communication and travel, and more highly developed forms of social organisation, all increase man’s adaptation in a still more powerful way than do those earlier achievements of civilisation, mechanical tools and spoken or written language.

Of the two Erewhonian professors, the second one’s arguments are thus intended by Butler to illustrate how, just as the progress of machines makes improvements in the adaptation of man’s artificial limbs, achieved through purposeful effort and not by blind Darwinian chance, so, he implies, the evolution of his natural limbs (and those of all lower animals, and plants) take place by similar, Lamarckian means.

The great paradox or irony of these chapters of Erewhon arises out of the way in which Butler chooses to present his debate about the nature of organic evolution, by means of the analogy with technology. At the time when he wrote ‘Darwin among the Machines’ and ‘Lucubratio Ebria’, Butler was a (biological) Darwinist. The first essay, as its title indicates, applies Darwinian theory directly to machines. The second elaborates a Lamarckian interpretation of the nature of cultural evolution, of tools as man’s extra organs; but Butler is quite explicit on the point that nothing of this kind occurs in the evolution of other species. ‘The limbs of the lower animals have never been modified by an act of deliberation and forethought on their own part.’<sup>26</sup> At this point Butler was, rightly in the hindsight of present-day biological and anthropological opinion, a Darwinist with respect to biological evolution, and a Lamarckist for cultural evolution.

Later, as has been described, Butler came to adopt a Lamarckian view of both processes. If the Erewhon episodes are read as a biological debate between Lamarck and Darwin – and in Life and Habit they are explicitly interpreted as such – then the fact that this is presented through the mechanical analogy introduces a fatal flaw. Because, as we now believe, the Lamarckian argument is quite right in the cultural case, but quite wrong – unluckily for Butler – in the biological.

The important point for the distinction is very clearly stated in the passage quoted from the second professor. Technological evolution differs from biological by virtue of the participation of the mind of man and his active intellectual intervention in the process. Man introduces that intention and purpose which is lacking from the uncontrollable chance nature and ‘fatalism’ of organic evolution. Where the animals have not ‘even the appearance of control’ over their own circumstances, man has ‘taken forethought’, he has the all-important capacity for anticipating circumstances, and has ‘added a cubit to his stature’.

In the 1920s Le Corbusier and Amadée Ozenfant, in developing the artistic theory of Purism, advanced the concept of the objet-type. Certain stereotyped and mass-produced objects – the tobacco pipe, the guitar, the characteristic designs of bottle, carafe, cup and drinking glass common to every café in Paris and familiar from Cubist still-life – were all seen by the Purists as the endproducts of processes of technological evolution, and conceived very much in the spirit of the Erewhonian theory. We shall examine this idea more fully in chapter 9. The feature of the Purist ‘type-object’ which is of especial interest here is the fact of its being imagined, like in Erewhon, as an extension of the human body or a substitute organ.

Le Corbusier and Ozenfant say that Purism has taken its objets-types ‘for preference from among those that serve the most direct of human uses; those which are like extensions of man’s limbs, and thus of an extreme intimacy’.<sup>27</sup> Indeed, in Ozenfant’s later writings, the explicit term objetsmembres-humains is introduced to refer to those artefacts which take on their characteristic forms through their proximity and hence their fit to the human body; as for example the violin, the chair, or any tool used in the hands.<sup>28</sup>

The question arises whether Ozenfant or Le Corbusier had read Erewhon. The correspondences are very close: in references by Ozenfant to machines as ‘relays’ created by man and comparable to the products of animals, such as the bee’s honey;<sup>29</sup> in the obvious suggestion of the Purists’ notion of ‘mechanical selection’, as we shall see, by Butler’s ‘Darwin among the Machines’; or in the small but not perhaps coincidental point that it is the tobacco pipe which Butler chooses to illustrate ‘vestigial organs’ in artefacts,\* and the pipe too which is one of the Purists’ classic and favourite objets-types.<sup>30</sup> The final illustration to Le Corbusier’s Vers Une Architecture, indeed, depicts a briar pipe; and this comes at the conclusion of a chapter devoted largely to industrial evolution and the threat, or challenge, presented by technology to human values.<sup>31</sup>

The question of influence is a difficult one to answer with any finality; but there is what would seem to be some very strong evidence to be found in volume 18 of the Purists’ journal L’Esprit Nouveau, on an unnumbered page facing the editorial. Each issue of the later volumes of the magazine carries a list of books whose significance is unexplained (they are not ‘books received’ nor are they newly published), but which appear to be books gaining the seal of approval of the editors as truly embodying ‘l’esprit nouveau’. The list in volume 18 includes Butler’s Life and Habit in French translation.<sup>32</sup>

Although the concepts of the type-object and technical evolution make their appearance in several articles in earlier issues of L’Esprit Nouveau (and these sorts of general ideas were widely current in architectural and design theory at this period), it is only in later issues – specifically in volumes 23 and 24, in articles devoted to the 1925 Exposition of Decorative Arts<sup>33</sup> – that the recognisably Butlerian resonances become evident. It is here that objets-membres-humains are first introduced, with a discussion of how files and copying machines extend the capacities of our memories, how in our wardrobes are arranged our membres auxiliaires to protect us from heat and cold, and how ‘decorative art’ (which should properly concern the production of useful objects without decoration) becomes a kind of branch of orthopaedics or the manufacture of artificial limbs.<sup>34</sup> It seems highly probable that these ‘paradoxical definitions’ were inspired by Butler and Erewhon.