# Design as a process of growth

The first of these ideas for ‘speeding up craft evolution’ depends on nothing more than a very loose metaphor. The notion is here that the designer might imitate not the evolution of the species collectively, but rather the process of growth of the individual. The animal or plant starts from a seed, which is supplied with nutriment, and which develops into the fully-grown organism. In so doing it interacts in various ways with its environment, and its form becomes progressively more complex. In what might poetically be seen as a roughly parallel process, the designer develops an originally ill-formed and undeveloped ‘seminal’ idea into a gradually elaborated and finished design. During this development there is a continual interaction between the ‘growing’ design and its ‘environment’ – that is, the critical assessments and evaluations made by the designer.

It might be possible to try to support this idea, if rather shakily – although I have not found the particular extension of the argument advanced anywhere by writers on design – by calling attention to the fact, as was widely known and discussed in nineteenth-century biology, that the development of the animal embryo goes through a series of stages which appear to correspond roughly to the evolutionary history of the species as a whole; that, as it was phrased, ‘ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny’.<sup>1</sup> The suggestion, in the technological analogy, would thus be that the designer might somehow ‘grow’ forms on the drawing board in a way which could parallel their evolution by trial and error in practice, but which would take up only a fraction of the time.

On any close examination the whole notion collapses in inconsistencies. The growth of an organism follows a fixed developmental programme, which has a certain latitude or flexibility in response to environmental circumstances, to be sure, but for which the essential ‘design’ is carried from the beginning in the inherited genetic material. This ‘design’ of course has been produced over many generations, through evolution. If we wanted an analogy for the development of the organism in the design or architectural world, it would be much more reasonable to compare it to the process whereby a finished design – let us say, expressed in a set of drawings or in instructions of some other type – is realised in material form, through those instructions being carried into effect by the fabricator or the builder.

Still, the fact of these simple objections did not deter a number of architectural theorists of the last century and of the modern movement from making such a ‘growth’ analogy with design; although it is only fair to add that most of them were writing prior to the discoveries of modern genetics, and that the confusion of development with evolution was one that was very much encouraged by certain current biological and philosophical theories, to be traced principally to the work of Herbert Spencer.

Spencer describes in his Autobiography how his own interest in evolution was aroused originally when he found fossils exposed in the cuttings whose construction he worked on as a railway engineer; and how he was as a result inspired to read Lyell’s Principles of Geology, and through Lyell’s account came to learn about Lamarck’s work.<sup>2</sup> Spencer was not convinced by Lyell’s critical rejection of Lamarck, however. Later, reviewing a book on physiology, he first became aware of the principles enunciated by the embryologist von Baer, concerning the general course of development from fertilised egg to adult organism.<sup>3</sup> Von Baer’s work showed that the development of the embryo seemed always to move from the general to the particular, and that the simple, undifferentiated and homogeneous form of the egg was progressively changed into the complex and heterogeneous form of the mature creature.

Von Baer was not an evolutionist; but it appeared to later workers, among them Haeckel, that the successive stages of the developmental process which von Baer had investigated followed in an approximate way the very long-term evolutionary phases through which the species as a whole had passed – the ‘recapitulation’ hypothesis. C. U. M. Smith paraphrases an example discussed by von Baer himself: ‘The chick begins simply as a vertebrate, then becomes an air-breathing vertebrate, then a bird, then a terrestrial bird, then a gallinaceous bird and finally a domestic chicken.’<sup>4</sup>

We may notice by the way that these discoveries of mid-nineteenthcentury embryology, together with the Darwinian theory, provided a physical basis of explanation for those phenomena which Naturphilosophie had tried to account for by recourse to the abstract and metaphysical concept of the archetype. The embryos of all vertebrates, for example, are much more alike (due to their common evolutionary origin) than are the adult vertebrates themselves. T. H. Huxley, for one, urged very strongly that the question of ‘homology’ be approached through embryology.<sup>5</sup>

The ideas of von Baer were important in the formulation of Spencer’s own theory of biological evolution; but more than this, they shaped his much grander and broader conception of cosmic evolutionary development as a whole. For Spencer, evolution was a process manifested not just in organic nature, but in the inanimate world too; and not only in plants and animals, but in man, society and culture. Spencer published an article declaring his support for a belief in the evolution of natural species, entitled significantly ‘The Development Hypothesis’, in 1852;<sup>6</sup> and he stated his position more fully in the Principles of Psychology published in 1855.<sup>7</sup> There is thus some justice in the claim which has sometimes been made for the priority of Spencer over Darwin and Wallace, both of whom certainly had high regard for Spencer. (It has even been proposed that Darwinism might more properly be called ‘biological Spencerism’ than Spencer’s social and political philosophy, ‘social Darwinism’.)

Spencer, however, as he realised later to his mild regret, had originally missed the central Darwinian idea of selection – and it was only in the 1860s (in the Principles of Biology) that he began using the phrase ‘the survival of the fittest’ which Darwin himself later took over.<sup>8</sup> For his larger theory of cosmic evolution, Spencer developed a famous and much-repeated definition, which shows how closely he identified the two processes of the evolution of the species and the development of the individual. Spencer made various revisions to this definition throughout his life. One of the more succinct runs: ‘Evolution is a change from a state of relatively indefinite, incoherent, homogeneity to a state of relatively definite, coherent, heterogeneity.’<sup>9</sup> I have referred above in rather loose terms to the concepts of ‘growth’ and ‘development’ as though they were interchangeable; but it should be said that Spencer was careful to distinguish the two, as he applied them both in biology and in sociology. By growth he referred to simple increase in bulk; by development, an increase in structure, or a progressive differentiation of form.<sup>10</sup> It is this latter process which, according to him, universally characterises evolution.

Spencer’s ideas, particularly his social philosophy, met with huge popular interest; and his influence was especially strong in the United States. He made a widely reported visit to the country in 1882, and his books had a large American circulation. It is perhaps arguable in this light that evidence of the influence of Spencer is to be found in what Leopold Eidlitz has to say about evolution in relation to architecture and design – writing, as we recall, in the early 1880s.

For instance, Eidlitz links a discussion of the evolution of medieval architecture in terms of progress in construction technique with the idea that the architect in the process of design can ‘evolve’ ‘single cells’ to correspond to groups of persons who will inhabit the building; and that he will ‘develop for the purpose an appropriate structural form’.<sup>11</sup> There is here, therefore, a rather loose metaphorical reference to growth and evolution which would apply without clear distinction as well to the evolution of architectural forms over some lengthy historical period as to the development of a single specific design in the mind or on the drawing board of the architect.

The same is true for Montgomery Schuyler when he declares:

‘Architectural forms are not invented; they are developed, as natural forms are developed, by evolution.’<sup>12</sup> The context of the remark is the evolution of the pointed arch throughout the medieval period. But the clear implication, from what follows, is that modern engineering can much more quickly develop new forms – for a single given problem indeed, like the Forth Bridge – without the necessity of actually building a series of progressively improved versions.

There is some talk in Eidlitz’s The Nature and Function of Art of a mysterious ‘general law’ which applies to the entire natural world, including physical material. For instance, Eidlitz declares that ‘Nature never essays to compose forms, she acts upon a much broader and simpler law, which governs all matter.’<sup>13</sup> The operation of this law he describes in the following terms: ‘Matter moves, accumulates, and distributes itself, and in doing so facilitates or retards relations of matter of all kinds. Every relation of matter has a certain stability, which, in highly organised matter, becomes perceptible in the shape of energy of function.’<sup>14</sup> I think there can be little doubt that Eidlitz here refers to the ‘law’ of evolution, on Spencer’s definition.

When we move to Louis Sullivan, the influence of Spencer is not a matter for speculation, since Sullivan relates in The Autobiography of an Idea how his introduction to evolutionary thinking was principally through his reading of Spencer. ‘Spencer’s definition implying a progression from an unorganised simple through stages of growth and differentiation to a highly organised complex, seemed to fit his [Sullivan’s] own case.’<sup>15</sup> Spencer was not the only biological author known to Sullivan; he also read Asa Gray, Huxley, Tyndall and Darwin.<sup>16</sup> But his reaction to Darwin, though highly enthusiastic, was apparently uncritical; and does not seem to have had the same effect as reading Spencer. ‘In Darwin he [Sullivan] found much food. The Theory of Evolution seemed stupendous.’<sup>17</sup>

There are two reasons why Spencer should ‘fit Sullivan’s own case’ better than Darwin. The first of these is to do with Spencer’s identification of evolution with development. Like Eidlitz and Schuyler, Sullivan does not really differentiate, in his application of the growth/evolution metaphor, between the evolution of some structural principle such as the arch, or the column and lintel, through architectural history, and the development of a given design in the individual architect’s mind from the ‘seed’ of an idea, which then grows and is shaped.

The seed is a recurrent image in Sullivan’s writing; or sometimes it is a germ, or an acorn. Given nourishment and time to mature, the seed of an architectural design can grow quite naturally – unless it be trapped inside a husk of ‘intellectual misconceptions’ – and develop into the fully grown design. Sullivan mentions reading Beecher Wilson’s The Cell in Development and Inheritance in order to study ‘the power that ante-dates the seed-germ’, and describes how he was in the habit of redrawing Wilson’s diagrams of the stages of mitosis from memory.<sup>18</sup> Frank Lloyd Wright takes up the metaphor:

‘An inner-life principle is a gift to every seed. An inner-life principle is also necessary for every idea of a good building.’<sup>19</sup>\*

Sullivan first learned about both German philosophy and literature and the work of Spencer from a fellow draughtsman in the office of Le Baron Jenney, John Edelmann.<sup>20</sup> It was from Edelmann that Sullivan derived his ‘theory of suppressed functions’, which was the origin of ‘Form follows function’. The nature of this theory is not made plain in The Autobiography of an Idea. From other evidence it seems, however, that the central notion was of a series of functions which lay ‘suppressed’ or dormant in the architectural problem, being ‘released’ through the architect’s work as he developed a form.<sup>21</sup>

These ideas can be related directly to Spencer’s evolutionism. Spencer saw the increase in heterogeneity and the differentiation of form which occurred in evolution to be associated with an emergence and progressive differentiation or specialisation of organic function. In simple organisms, the same functions are carried on homogeneously throughout the body – hence their viability is not threatened by the removal of some part, and the removed part may even itself be capable of independent survival. In higher organisms, the parts become more differentiated, particular functions are carried on in special localised organs, and so the operation of the body as a whole may be vulnerable to the failure or removal of some specialised part. As Spencer expresses it, in moving up the evolutionary scale there is to be found ‘a gradual diminution in the number of like parts, and a multiplication of unlike ones. In the one extreme there are but few functions, and many similar agents to each function; in the other, there are many functions, and a few similar agents to each function.’<sup>22</sup> Spencer was introduced to this phenomenon of the ‘physiological division of labour’ by a study of the work of Milne-Edwards.

Thus an evolutionary development towards a more ‘definite coherent heterogeneity’, in Spencer’s phrase, would be a result or expression of the performance of ever more specific and distinct functions by the various organs of the body. Spencer is indeed properly described not just as an evolutionist, but as a functionalist. He gives two causes for the adaptations of organs through evolution: one of these is natural selection, but the second and more important cause, for Spencer, is ‘the increase or decrease of structure consequent on increase or decrease of function’<sup>23</sup> (i.e. a Lamarckian mechanism). In both the natural and the social worlds, the appearance of structure is to be explained in terms of function. ‘To understand how an organization originated and developed, it is requisite to understand the need subserved at the outset and afterwards.’<sup>24</sup> It is not difficult to see the attraction of Spencer’s views for someone with Sullivan’s concern for the relation of form to function in architecture.

Furthermore, progressive differentiation and specialisation of function in the animal body necessitates an increase in the functional interdependence, in Spencer’s word ‘coherence’, of the parts. This quality of functional coherence is central to Sullivan’s idea of the ‘organic’ in architecture – as indeed we have seen already from his scornful remarks about architectural ‘hybrids’. In Kindergarten Chats Sullivan speaks of the necessity, if a building is to be ‘organic’, for the function of every part to ‘have the same quality as the function of the whole’, and for the parts ‘to have the quality of the mass’, ‘to partake of its identity’ (his equivalents effectively for ‘unity’ and the ‘correlation of parts’).<sup>25</sup>

He makes a distinction between logical thinking, by which he means overly mechanical or exclusively analytic thinking, and organic thinking. Organic thinking involves seeking a ‘regular and systematic subdivision of function within form’ which can detect the overall similarity, the organic quality of the whole structure ‘descending from the mass down to the minutest subdivision of detail’.<sup>26</sup> Such an organic philosophy in architectural design stands in direct opposition, as Sullivan sees it, to the mechanical and additive compositional procedures of the Beaux Arts, with their disregard for the coherence of functional interrelations between the different elements from which the whole building is made up.

I mentioned that there were two main reasons behind Spencer’s particular appeal for Sullivan. Discussion of the second reason will divert us slightly from the main argument; but this is still the place for a brief account. Spencer’s social philosophy, being permeated with biological analogy, saw social forms and structures as the product of different environmental circumstances. ‘While spreading over the Earth mankind have found environments of various characters, and in each case the social life fallen into, partly determined by the social life previously led, has been partly determined by the influences of the new environment.’<sup>27</sup> Spencer conceived of society as an organism, and the institutions of society as organs. The ‘physiological division of labour’ in the animal body was paralleled by the specialisation of employment in society.<sup>28</sup> Social organisations represented adaptations of the collective ‘organism’, conferring fitness in the struggle for social survival in the face of natural conditions, and in competition with other social groups.

We will come in due course to a critique of this kind of biological social science, which was associated above all with the name of Spencer, and to an analysis of its consequences. Here we can simply notice how such a view of society provides strong encouragement to an ‘ecological’ or environmental theory of artistic style, along the lines indicated in an earlier chapter. Spencer saw social forms and social institutions – themselves evolved in response to natural environment – as shaping the thoughts and actions of men – and not the other way round. Such ideas, applied in art or design, would attribute stylistic or formal differences not to the imagination or inventive power of individual designers but to varying social conditions and utilitarian needs.

That Sullivan thought that the development of an ‘organic’ architecture would depend on the creation of a truly democratic society has already been mentioned. Echoing Spencer, Sullivan talks of the people, all the people, whose thought is given visible form in building, as constituting a ‘social organism’.<sup>29</sup> Only a democratic social organism can produce an organic architecture. In modern society the expression of the influence of machine methods of production in building is another consequence – although the machine is not to be allowed to dominate.

I should not want to leave the impression that I believe the whole of what Sullivan, and subsequently Wright, referred to as ‘organic’ in architecture can be attributed to the influence of Spencer. The word refers, for the two men, to a much more complex congeries of ideas, whose sources can be traced back in one direction to the functionalism of Greenough, Schuyler and Eidlitz, and in another to the tradition of Romantic naturalism and the picturesque in architecture.\* These broader philosophic and aesthetic connotations of the term, going beyond narrow and specific biological analogies, have been well explored by Donald Egbert in his essay ‘The Idea of Organic Expression and American Architecture’.<sup>30</sup> Against this background Egbert sets a variety of attitudes shared by Sullivan and Wright: their ideas about composition, their distaste for Renaissance architecture, and their preference – demonstrated particularly in Wright’s later work – for asymmetric, natural, easy response in architectural form to the demands both of the site and of the building’s functions. Organic architecture required the expression of the designer himself, besides just expression of functional needs and materials of construction; and in Sullivan’s view, at least, the ‘functions’ of a building might be as much ‘emotional’ as practical ones.<sup>31</sup>

A certain flowing quality, a plasticity or continuity was also involved: in Sullivan’s case, manifested in his use of stylised plant forms in decorative treatments carried out in his favourite terracotta; in Wright’s case in the integration of the structural elements of a building into an interconnected system, and in the moulding of its interior spaces into an interpenetrating and continuous spatial whole.

It is, however, the characteristically Spencerian ideas in Sullivan’s writings about design as a growth process, or rather a developmental process, which are both based on a much more definite (if wrongly conceived)

biological analogy than are these other meanings of ‘organic’, and which represent a distinctly new analogy between human and natural design, not previously developed by other writers (with the exception of the vague foreshadowing in the quoted remarks of Schuyler and Eidlitz). The fact remains nevertheless that Sullivan’s formulation, though possibly a highly suggestive metaphor and helpful to Sullivan in his own work, did nothing to solve the theoretical problem which arguably it set out to meet: how evolution of ‘organic’ forms in architecture could be achieved by the designer at his drawing board, without the time available for protracted trial of real buildings in actual use.