# The consequences of the biological fallacy

## Functional determinism

The title of this chapter alludes to a phrase used by Geoffrey Scott in The Architecture of Humanism.<sup>1</sup> Scott’s ‘biological fallacy’, however, refers to a rather particular failing of the evolutionary parallel as it was applied to architectural history. This is only one, I would suggest, out of many and various consequences which follow from the mistaken proposition that the evolution of human culture as a whole, and technical evolution in particular, are processes that are directly analogous to the evolution of organisms through variation and natural selection. (Perhaps even to talk of cultural ‘evolution’ implies an element of biological analogy. Possibly, however, we can accept the word in this context as a shorthand term, to convey the meaning which it had before its annexation into biology, of a process of change, development or unfolding of any kind.)

I have already touched briefly on the distinctions between cultural and organic evolution in chapter 8, where the principal differences were indicated between the respective theories of Lamarck and Darwin. I suggested there – relying largely on Medawar’s presentation of the argument – that the evolution of culture has ‘Lamarckian’ properties which, according to modern biological opinion, serve to differentiate its working from that of organic evolution in certain fundamental respects.

To recapitulate these points: the first difference is that, in the Darwinian and neo-Darwinian theory, the occurrence of variations is either treated as perfectly random, or else is attributed to causes which have no connection with the animal’s environment and habits. The way in which organisms seem to be perfectly fitted to their ways of life – all the evidence which supported the ‘argument from design’ – is attributable wholly to the effects of selection. So teleology in biological evolution is a kind of optical illusion: the process appears to be a directed and purposive one, because only those variations are preserved which turn out to be adaptive when subjected to selection.<sup>2</sup> No changes in the body of the individual which are produced during its lifetime as a result of environmental changes, be these advantageous or disadvantageous, are transmitted to that individual’s offspring (‘acquired characters’ are not heritable).

According to Lamarck’s theory, on the other hand, variations were supposed to be directly caused by the organism’s own attempts to become better adapted to a changing environment. A habit acquired by an animal during its life, or an adaptive bodily change, could be passed on to the next generation. Thus in Lamarck’s view biological evolution was driven by the deliberate efforts of creatures, and the whole movement of the evolutionary process was conceived in teleological and progressive terms. Darwin’s theory implied – though Darwin himself was hardly happy or willing to accept the consequence, and it was not a point always appreciated by those who sought to apply Darwinism to social affairs and to human history – that evolution was without direction, without any over-riding purpose or plan.

The theory of Darwin, using Lederberg’s terms, is an ‘elective’ theory of evolution, where the environment chooses appropriate changes in organisms from the range offered by variation. Lamarckism is an ‘instructive’ theory, where the environment is imagined to be able to exercise a direct effect on organisms, and to ‘teach’ them to change themselves in appropriate ways.

It is the fact that cultural evolution is an ‘instructive’ process in an analogous sense which gives it its ‘Lamarckian’ characteristics. The information which passes from one generation to the next, in culture, and which may thus be said to be inherited, is transmitted in the first place via the oral tradition. Language, unique to the human species, provides the channel by which the accumulated experience of each generation in coping with the problems of life can be passed on to the next. For many animal species, each generation meets the world no better prepared than its predecessors (or only marginally so, through genetic evolution). But human beings can, through language, develop a collective historical sense and memory, build up a body of traditional wisdom, and pass on their hard-won skills and knowledge through the instruction and education of their children, through religious customs and taboos, through art and artefacts, through social organisation – in short through culture.

Not that teaching in itself is a uniquely human trait, by any means, since many animals are able to instruct their young by a process of demonstration. Through the means of language, however, it is clearly possible for parents to teach their children by ‘telling’ as well as ‘showing’. What is more, language introduces the possibility for an individual – and through him any number of other persons – to acquire ‘vicarious experience’. The individual is able, by hearing others relay the details of actions or events where he was not present, to acquire the benefit of experiences not undergone or witnessed by himself. It is in this sense that language is a much more powerful agent for teaching than is mere demonstration. For private experiences, those of people quite remote, or even dead, become the property of many through being retailed by word of mouth.

When cultural information is passed on orally, there are limits placed on this process by the capacity of one man’s memory to store information and of the next man’s to learn. But with the introduction of written records, and subsequently their copying in large numbers through printing, these limits can be transcended, and the possibility arises of a cumulative growth and storage of knowledge and experience in books and libraries. (The same is true, to a limited extent – and was so even before the invention of printing – of tools and artworks.) Where before there had to be a continuous unbroken linking chain of information between the generations, or else something would be lost, now information can jump wide gaps in time. Thus Aristotle can convey his findings and opinions as directly to the present-day biologist as he did to Cuvier or to his own contemporaries. The most outstanding and characteristic feature of this last phase of cultural evolution is, of course, the rise of organised science.

Cultural evolution has the two typically Lamarckian properties: that ‘acquired characters’ are heritable; and that the deliberate efforts of individuals do contribute something, so that while one might not attribute purpose to the evolutionary process in itself, there is still a genuinely teleological character to the changes effected by the sum of these individual actions.

Furthermore, cultural evolution or change differs entirely from organic evolution – whether pictured according to the Lamarckian or the Darwinian theory – in the way in which the hereditary information is transmitted ‘exosomatically’, outside the body; and by the fact that the storage of such information is cumulative. Hence the cultural process is in a certain sense a directional one, since men retain a historical record of what is past, and practical or scientific knowledge builds always on the discoveries, observations and theoretical ideas of previous generations. (Whether or not one is prepared to call such a movement in science or in technological ability progressive is another issue.)

Let us now examine what theoretical consequences follow if cultural evolution is equated with organic evolution, or is assumed to possess Darwinian characteristics. The fallaciousness of these consequences is evident enough, once the arguments are made plain; but of course the trouble with much of the analogy as expounded in the design or archaeological literature is that the chain of reasoning is not laid open for inspection, and so we are left with general tendencies or predispositions towards certain views, which are broadly encouraged by the fallacies involved.

The first result, curiously, is that the individual designer or craftsman tends to fade away, and even disappears altogether. Certainly his conscious and deliberate contribution to the creation of designs is seriously underestimated and undervalued. In natural evolution the production of fitness (i.e. ‘design’) is achieved entirely through selection, working on variations in the animal body which are generated randomly or fortuitously.\* If the same is imagined to be true of technical evolution, then the only role for the manufacturer of artefacts is that of copying and of making small accidental or ‘blind’ changes as he does so. Such assumptions are made quite explicitly in the theory of craft evolution of Pitt-Rivers and Balfour.

The craftsman, in the evolutionary analogy, becomes merely a kind of midwife, his purpose to assist at the rebirth of the inherited design. The real, effective ‘designer’, in this view, is the ‘selective’ process which is constituted by the testing of the object in practical terms when it is put into use. The craftsman has only an error-correcting function; he spots failures in certain versions of the design of some artefact, and copies those other versions in which the failure does not occur – like the horticulturalist picking out specimens of flowers with the desired qualities for further breeding. Alternatively, he may detect a shortcoming in a design, and make changes randomly in that particular feature, in the hope of hitting by chance upon some appropriate alteration. What is not imagined is that he anticipates in any conscious way the results of such changes, or that he intentionally makes alterations to the design which are meant to produce specific effects.

Just as Darwin inverted the argument from design, and ‘stole away’ God as designer, to replace Him with natural selection, so the Darwinian analogy in technical evolution removes the human designer and replaces him with the ‘selective forces’ in the ‘functional environment’ of the designed object.

We have seen the tendency of the nineteenth-century critics, for example, to attribute the design of the Gothic cathedrals – their prime example

\* I am aware of making a vast simplification here, and of passing over the whole of a prolonged and extensive debate in biology about the ‘randomness’ or otherwise of variations, or what ‘random’ really means in this context. Perhaps it may serve here to notice that a strictly neo-Darwinian position, and an insistence on the absolutely blind and haphazard nature of the ultimate source of variations, can still be reconciled, according to some authorities, with many features of organic adaptation which to others have appeared to demand a directed or teleological explanation. Thus Baldwin, Schrödinger, Waddington and Simpson have shown how Lamarckian effects may be feigned or simulated through natural selection. Others such as Whyte, and recently Campbell, have argued that the selectors acting in the evolutionary process may be internal as well as external. For instance, they may be ‘structural’ (i.e. only certain organic forms or structures are allowable by the laws of physics, chemistry or geometry), or else they may be ‘vicarious’ (i.e. some internal mechanism ‘represents’ the selective features of the external environment, as for example the way in which taste sensations of bitterness or sweetness may stand, imperfectly, for the nutritional qualities of various foods). Campbell argues indeed for models of perception and of creative thought which are also based on a trial-and-error or ‘variation and selective retention’ mechanism. Thus he would argue that at the limits of the unknown, thought, and the senses, proceed on a quite ‘nonprescient’ and aleatory basis. Such a view does not of course deny the human capacities for foresight, anticipation and intentional action at an everyday level. See D. T. Campbell, ‘Unjustified Variation and Selective Retention in Scientific Discovery’, Studies in the Philosophy of Biology, ed. F. J. Ayala and T. Dobzhansky (London, 1974), pp. 139–61.

of evolution in architecture – to an anonymous collective of monks and masons responding to the social and material conditions of twelfth- and thirteenthcentury France. Modern scholarship would present a rather different view of the imaginative contribution of a few particular historical figures, and would also point to the abruptness rather than smooth continuity of stylistic change. (It was perhaps the paucity and relative obscurity of historical documentation for the medieval period which previously allowed the evolutionary and collective interpretation.)

Again, the Purists in their choice of objets-types favoured the anonymous, the banal; they concentrated typically on small utensils of mass manufacture. It was, possibly, less contentious to claim such objects as the products of ‘natural law’ – to deny in effect the human contribution to their design – than it would have been with such larger artefacts as buildings, with their wider stylistic variations and the more obvious evidences of personal authorship in their appearance. Walter Gropius too, in his new plan for the Bauhaus, called for the abandonment of individual prejudices and personal tastes (the forces of ‘desire’), and for their replacement by a collaborative, ‘scientific’ or ‘organic’ method of working (according to the dictates of ‘intellect’).

If the designer disappears, then any element of individual choice or purpose which he might exercise when designing disappears with him. The forms of designed objects are conceived as being wholly the product of their ‘environment’, the functional context in which testing or ‘selection’ acts. This process is perfectly automatic, deterministic. The phrase ‘Form follows function’, from being an aesthetic prescription that form should follow (i.e. express and not conceal) function, becomes a scientific assertion of causality: that form emerges as a necessary and unique consequence of function. As Choisy said of the flying buttress, ‘il ne fut point inventé, il s’imposa’.<sup>3</sup> Not only is there no human contribution to the designed object itself, but it is further implied that somehow the functions of artefacts – i.e. their environment, in the analogy – are in turn capable of definition without reference to human purposes and choices, and that by extension the measures of ‘fitness’ according to which selection of designs is made are also somehow amenable to objective and absolute definition.

The position is wholly paradoxical, of course, since ‘fitness’ in relation to ‘environment’ in the analogy corresponds to the appropriateness of an artefact for its intended purpose. The assessment of this appropriateness is something which, of its very nature, must be a matter of human judgement and taste; while the concept of an intended purpose without a human agent having the intentions or the purposes is perfectly absurd.

Nonetheless, these are the consequences of following an extreme ‘functional determinist’ position through to its logical (or rather, illogical) conclusion. Those architectural theorists who adopted such a stance imagined that the functions (environments) of artefacts or buildings might in some sense be defined prior to the derivation of their forms; indeed the forms would come automatically out of that definition of function. We will come to examine shortly the way in which this conception is in truth incompatible even with a strict interpretation of the biological analogy. Even in the biological case, neither ‘environment’ nor ‘fitness’ are defined in any absolute or objective sense, but always in relative terms – relative to the organism; and the idea that they might be defined in the absolute is based, I will suggest, on semantic confusions and on a misunderstanding of the biological theory.

But let us for a moment see what kinds of emphases in theoretical analysis were arguably the product or concomitant of such ideas; and what strategies were, perhaps unconsciously, adopted to conceal their shortcomings. Suppose the ‘environment’ of an artefact is to be imagined as having an independent existence in its own right, and that the criteria for selection of designs possessing greater ‘fitness’ are to be as well-defined and as independent of personal preference as possible; then the tendency will be to concentrate on those more utilitarian functions about which there is a great measure of consensus, and where there is little disagreement on criteria for satisfactory performance.

Everyone (or nearly everyone) will agree that a cup should hold water, or that a building should stand upright and keep out the rain. Because such functional requirements are so generally accepted, the impression might be sustained that they are objectively determinable, that they meet certain supposedly universal or ‘biological’ human needs, and are not the subject of culturally and individually variable choices. Certainly it will be progressively more difficult to preserve this impression the further the ‘functions’ or aspects of the ‘functional environment’ considered move away from the strictly practical, and towards the decorative, expressive or symbolic.

The accusation of materialism – an excessive concern with the constructional and practical aspects of architecture – was one that was levelled frequently at both Semper and Viollet-le-Duc; and my argument here would explain how this materialism – in so far as the charge is a fair one – would go along with their penchant for biological analogy. Semper attempted to fend off the criticism by arguing that the ‘variables’ in his equation of style included cultural, social and spiritual factors, as well as material constraints. In fact in the introduction to Der Stil, Semper is himself critical of what he names specifically as the materialist philosophy in design, which would have it that materials and utilitarian functions alone give rise to form.<sup>4</sup>

Again it is impossible to deny Semper’s awareness of the expressive and symbolic nature of architectural forms, or his belief that, through the expression of higher values, and through the historically inherited language of decorative motifs and elements, mere building is raised to the status of architecture. Earlier we saw how Semper, while attracted by the idea of applying Darwinian principles to architectural history, drew attention to the precise difference between organic and technical evolution which I have been labouring here: that the latter is, in his words, the free product of man’s ‘intelligence . . . genius, will, knowledge and power’. It is thus very debatable whether Semper himself can be finally accused of perpetrating any biological fallacy in this respect. What can be argued is that the evolutionary analogy is certainly conducive to the kind of materialist bias which is undeniably to be found in Semper’s system, whatever Semper’s own reservations and qualifications might have been.

For someone taking up a harder line materialist stance than Semper – prepared as he was to separate consideration of practical function from that of ornament – the phenomenon of decoration could clearly be embarrassing, and would have to be somehow explained away. Viollet-le-Duc’s tactic here was to try to deny altogether the existence of architectural decoration – other than attached sculpture, wall painting etc. – and to provide functional explanations for what he would have argued were only apparently decorative features, but which in fact served necessary structural and practical uses. This is especially the case with his treatment of Gothic, as Sir John Summerson has brought out so well in his essay on Viollet-le-Duc in Heavenly Mansions.<sup>5</sup>

Summerson distinguishes between a materialist philosophy of architecture, in which the function is held to determine absolutely the resultant form, and what he calls a ‘rationalist’ philosophy, by which he means the same as functionalism in its aesthetic sense – that is, the belief that architecture should have a functional rationale, and should display its purpose to the observer in a rational manner. As Summerson puts it, the difference is between ‘an architecture which aims at fulfilling certain specifiable functions with the nearest approximation to absolute efficiency and economy’ on the one hand, and ‘an architecture which seeks to express its function dialectically – to offer a visible argument to the spectator’ on the other.<sup>6</sup>

In his enthusiasm for Gothic, springing from an original emotional response to the poetic qualities of the great French medieval buildings, Violletle-Duc was led to an effort to interpret this personal response in explicit, communicable, rational terms; and was inclined to go too far in the process. Given the basic Gothic structural problem, then the mechanical means by which a solution had been found was certainly capable of rational analysis, up to a point. But, it goes without saying, the initial overall problem was not itself set in any comparably ‘rational’ manner. And even Viollet-le-Duc’s insistence on the necessary structural role and perfect economy of the separate features of the Gothic vault, for example, have been shown to be exaggerated in the light of subsequent experimental and theoretical analysis, such as the well-known critique of the engineer Pol Abraham.<sup>7</sup> The danger in Viollet-le-Duc’s method, which carried over into the philosophy of the modern movement in this century, was the confusion of means with ends, and the confusion of materialism or functional determinism with the functionalist aesthetic or with ‘rationalism’ in Summerson’s sense.

Neither Viollet-le-Duc nor Semper can be accused in the end of any thorough-going functional determinism. True style, for Semper, is ‘a certain degree of perfection’ achieved only through artistic response to the ‘environmental’ demands of the problem in hand. And for Viollet-le-Duc, as we have seen, there is nothing guaranteed or automatic about the relation of style to material means and social conditions; and it was only for certain very particular periods in history that he was prepared to allow that true style had been achieved.

In point of fact it is rather difficult to find any one figure, even in the modern movement, who is prepared openly to declare allegiance to the most extreme determinism or materialism. The likeliest candidate is the Socialist architect Hannes Meyer, Gropius’s successor at the Bauhaus, for whom the process of design consisted wholly in scientific and systematic analysis of the programme of requirements for a building, out of which the form, materials and even the textures and colours to be used would ‘come about automatically’.<sup>8</sup>

The Purists, Le Corbusier and Ozenfant, argued by contrast from a distinctly qualified position. They acknowledged the role of human creativity and aesthetic impulse in architecture and even in the design of tools; but they removed this to a higher plane of activity, the realm of pure form and plastic relationship, in which the artist could operate only when the ‘utilitarian basis of the enterprise’ had been properly established and the ‘biological’ requirements of function had been satisfied. (Meyer simply denied the existence of any such higher formal and aesthetic realm altogether.) Within the restricted functional and utilitarian realm, according to the Purists, there was no room for the personal, the intuitive, the speculative. It was necessary simply to determine and then submit to the logic of the problem as posed.

We have seen this argument well illustrated in the quotations from Ozenfant’s Foundations of Modern Art, where he expresses quite clearly the view that the evolution of artefacts in their mechanical and functional aspects is governed by (rather than constrained within or guided by) physical and natural laws which are quite rigid and unbreakable. Interference by human aesthetic or creative impulse can only serve to confuse and retard what must be recognised as an ineluctable progress towards mechanical efficiency. The products of the machine are ‘compelled’ into ‘certain shapes, their optimum’.

The imagination of the engineers is not aesthetic, since their creations are ‘predetermined’. ‘Aesthetic invention’ is an indication of ‘inadequacy’ in the sphere of mechanics, and ‘serves to hide the absence of knowledge’ (although Ozenfant rather spoils his argument in the example of the ‘automatic functioning of evolution’ in the case of the lightbulb, when he says that ‘someone thought of evacuating air through the base’).

Even the Purists’ objets-types hardly bear out their claim for this supposed automatic nature of the evolutionary process – let alone their strange suggestion that this evolution would necessarily produce standardised designs which would turn out to be made up from those elementary Platonic solids which were to constitute the ‘words’ of the new formal language of Purism.\* For it is very obvious that they have quite deliberately chosen only those objects which conform to certain pre-established formal criteria, of simplicity, geometrical purity and so on. There has been a great deal of judicious aesthetic selection exercised by Le Corbusier and Ozenfant over and above any ‘mechanical selection’ which might have gone on in the objects’ technical evolution. Many contemporary mass-produced articles, though no doubt cheaply produced and probably functionally quite serviceable, were, not surprisingly, over-ornate, ill-proportioned and certainly not of simple geometric form; as Le Corbusier well illustrates with selected pages from mail-order catalogues reproduced in La Ville Radieuse and elsewhere.<sup>9</sup>

It is clearly possible to find artefacts with widely differing forms answering to essentially equivalent functional purposes – perhaps decorated in a variety of styles, or even without decoration. Despite this, discussion has continued among design theorists of a materialist persuasion as to whether there might not be at least some types of artefact, particularly mechanical or engineering structures, whose forms would be largely or even wholly determined by functional requirements and the constraints of material and technique. The search for supposed examples of uniquely determined forms appears only to have turned up the crane hook;<sup>10</sup> and the general claim is obviously highly dubious.

As David Pye has so wittily and persuasively argued, the notion of any manufactured object being ‘purely functional’ or ‘purely utilitarian’ is on closer examination an unreal one; and what are often regarded as ‘unavoidable’ requirements of function, or limitations of material, are in fact matters of intentional choice on the part of the maker.<sup>11</sup> Many ‘functional’ requirements may be resolved ultimately into requirements for economy – in the broadest sense of economy in the manufacture, economy in material used, and so on. With the expenditure of more resources, more money or more effort, it will generally be possible to produce objects which will all serve the same intended

\* It is perhaps possible to sustain the argument that in certain limited areas of manufacture in the nineteenth century, particularly in artefacts constructed from metal components worked by machine tools, there was some tendency towards geometric design of this ideal Purist character. Herwin Schaefer in his book The Roots of Modern Design (London, 1970) shows some pictures of scientific instruments and other metal tools from the early 1800s which have an uncannily ‘modern’ and Purist appearance for exactly this reason (for instance figure 3, p. 11). But the argument applies obviously only to a very narrow range of materials and processes. Any casting, die-stamping or moulding process would have none of these limitations, for example – a fact to which the output of much nineteenth-century mass production bears eloquent witness. As a matter of fact later on Ozenfant comes to acknowledge this point – with a tinge, one senses, of regret – when he says that the use of such materials as rubber leads away from ‘geometric’ form in design. ‘The tendency towards electrification’ also, he says, ‘is creating machines that are practically formless.’ ‘Our mechanism is primitive, and that is why it still looks gratifyingly geometric.’ Foundations of Modern Art (London, 1931; revised edn., New York, 1952), p. 154.

purpose equally well, but for which the range of possible forms is correspondingly widened. The Purists’ dual ‘laws of nature’ are in fact deliberately imposed by man.

This is not to say that function and materials do not constrain the designer in any way; indeed I shall argue later that the geometrical and topological constraints, for example, which limit the possibilities of architectural arrangement are in many cases rather severe ones. The point is, rather, that design problems are not ‘objectively’ determined in the first place, but are created by cultural values and human purposes. The designer or client may change these purposes at will. And the decision to meet any problem with a solution that is maximally ‘efficient’ according to some engineering or economic criterion is itself also a matter of cultural choice – not imposed by any absolute external or inevitable necessity.

It certainly seems reasonable to suggest that, once given certain functional specifications, and once given fairly stringent requirements of economy (imposed by choice), then there might be parts or features of certain artefacts where the form would be able to vary only within rather strict limits, while in other parts the opportunity for morphological variety would be so much greater. We have seen how Greenough suggested this in relation to the hulls of sailing ships (by comparison with the forms of buildings); and the equivalent example of the general aerodynamic form of high-speed aeroplanes has been proposed more recently as a case where there is claimed to be a convergence onto a narrow range of possible shapes.<sup>12</sup> (Similar hydrodynamic and aerodynamic constraints act of course on the external forms of fishes and birds.)

But even in these instances, there is considerable possibility for alternative arrangements (and decorative schemes even) inside the fixed hull or envelope. It is precisely at those points in the design, one might argue, where the functional specification is rather weak, that an efflorescence of ornament would be expected – as in the figure-heads of sailing ships, well clear of the clean lines of the hull and away from the ‘ship-shape’ layout of decks and rigging.

We will come back to the conception that decoration is something which flourishes in those parts of an artefact where the limitations imposed by function are not so severe. Here, we may notice a tendency amongst certain modern movement designers and theorists to seek out deliberately those kinds of artefact where the functional specifications could perhaps (improperly) be represented as being so restrictive as to prevent any incorporation of ornament whatsoever. As previous chapters have shown, their favourite examples were vehicles of all kinds, or the larger civil engineering works such as bridges or aircraft hangers. By a selective focussing on these types of machines or structures, they could thus avoid confronting the embarrassing difficulties posed to functional determinism by objects or buildings which traditionally carried decorative or functionally ‘unnecessary’ features.

As Pye says, besides ‘cheap’, the expression ‘purely functional’ in design parlance can often be shown to mean either ‘stream-lined’ or else, more rarely, ‘light’.<sup>13</sup> It is clear that requirements for all three of these attributes would tend to be in conflict with the addition of ornament. In the design of vehicles, the properties of minimal weight and minimal air or water resistance are obviously at a premium (as Henry Ford was anxious to impress on his designers, with his injunction to ‘simplicate, and add lightness!’). No doubt the modern movement’s admiration of bicycles, and the characteristic enthusiasm for streamlining amongst such American industrial designers of the thirties as Raymond Loewy and Norman Bel Geddes, are related to this fact. We see that the requirements for lightness in artefacts which must be portable, or must move under their own power, is again reducible to a requirement for economy. With the reduction of weight and the consequent reduction of the amount of material used one would expect that the available field for decoration would be correspondingly narrowed.

In more recent years, some visionary and avant-garde architectural groups have found inspiration for building design in the forms of rockets, space capsules, underwater vehicles, or shelters built for polar exploration. This phenomenon is no doubt attributable in large part to a futurist preoccupation with technological imagery for its own sake. But there is also, I believe, an element of this same trend to seek out ‘functional environments’ of such extreme severity that the form is imagined to be wholly determined by engineering considerations. (There is the additional attraction to the futurist sensibility that such machines or dwellings are without cultural precedent, and thus freed from unwanted historical or traditional associations.)

Since buildings do not need to be carried or to move, it might be supposed that lightness is not an important requirement in architecture. Buckminster Fuller thought otherwise, and had a phase at one time of confounding architects by asking them how much their buildings weighed<sup>14</sup> – of course they did not know. There is, however, the matter of the transport of building materials to the site, and it was this question that particularly concerned Fuller. (His own ‘Dymaxion’ house was entirely prefabricated, packed in a (surprisingly small) container, and delivered to the site by rail or road.) Even more significantly, there is the consideration that the upper parts of buildings must be supported on the lower parts; and in large span or very tall constructions the requirement for reduction of weight in the superstructure assumes considerable importance – hence the ‘functional’ character of bridges, of the roofs of large enclosures, and in particular of the vaults of Gothic architecture.

The other side of this occupation with functional constraints and engineering limitations was that the modern movement tried to ignore or to suppress such traditional applications of the architect’s skill as the design of gardens, or monuments, where formal composition and symbolism are of the essence. The attempt was even made to determine the design of churches by exclusive reference to a ‘functional’ analysis of liturgical patterns.

We left Christopher Alexander in the last chapter at a point where his discussion in Notes on the Synthesis of Form was about to take a rather peculiar direction. We should now go back to pick up Alexander’s line of argument – which I will try to show is explicable in terms of the functional determinist position just described.

Remember that Alexander was making the case for better ‘formal pictures’ to replace or supplement the hazy and misconceived mental images which ‘selfconscious’ designers carry in their heads. In order to derive such formal pictures, he proposed that the designer list all the anticipated possible failures of the design to meet its functional requirements, that is, anticipated ‘misfits’, in his terms. These are to be chosen ‘(1) to be of equal scope, (2) to be as independent of one another as is reasonably possible, and (3) to be as small in scope and hence as specific and detailed and numerous as possible.’<sup>15</sup> The purpose is that by stating the areas of possible misfit at this very detailed level, it will be possible to avoid wrong-headed preconceptions about the structure of the problem in hand. The ‘misfit variables’ are to be equal in scope so that some requirements are not subsumed partly or entirely within the broader frame of reference of others, and for the same reason they are to be independent of one another. They are to be small in scope also because in this way the prejudice of ready-made semantic categories – ‘acoustics’, or whatever it might be – is avoided.

The next step, after having listed as many ‘misfit variables’ as possible, is to determine systematically whether or not in each case they are at all interrelated; that is to say, taking the misfits two by two, whether the designer can find some reason (or conceptual model) why there should be a causal relationship between each pair. What is produced therefore is an abstract structure of relationships (interactions) between unit elements (misfits). This is then amenable, as Alexander illustrates, to mathematical treatment using the methods of automatic classification, so that the structure is decomposed in a hierarchical manner into a series of levels of groupings of the ‘misfit variables’.<sup>16</sup> The theory is that in this way, as described, the real causal structure of the problem is revealed, and the groups of variables at each level correspond to relatively independent parts of the problem, to which it is possible to find separate solutions one at a time.

The ‘formal picture’ which Alexander himself is referring to is a formal picture not of the structure of the designed object itself (since it has not been designed yet), nor indeed of the structure of its environment or context as such. It is a model solely of the imagined interrelationships between those points or aspects where the one fails to fit the other (‘misfit variables’). This is surely, from a logical point of view, a most paradoxical sort of thing to be proposing. In order to imagine and set down these misfits in the first place, it must be that the designer has at least some image or mental picture both of context and of form – even if this be only the crudest and vaguest ‘design hypothesis’ – in order that he can imagine such a misfit at all. Furthermore, he can only be in any degree precise about the nature of this misfit and in what ways it might be causally interrelated with other misfits, to the extent to which he is prepared to be precise about exactly what form, what detailed design, he is proposing to fit to the given functional context.

But Alexander has been loath to admit, throughout, that the selfconscious designer must bring some specific proposed form, some design hypothesis, into conjunction with its context before he may embark on any testing and evaluation. Indeed, quite the opposite, the implication of his whole argument is that preconceptions about form are to be avoided, and that the form will emerge out of a precise definition of the context. Although his diagram of the unselfconscious process shows a ‘mental picture of the context’ and a ‘mental picture of the form’, he then goes on to argue that it is the designer’s mental picture of the context which is wrong, with no further mention made of the mental picture of the form.<sup>17</sup>

Alexander is concerned to make a specific denial, in a footnote, that there is any sense in which the context or function defines form uniquely. In general, he says, there will be several forms capable of meeting the given functional programme.<sup>18</sup> The fact is, however, that the whole structure of his argument has two large and decidedly determinist implications. First, the context (the problem) is capable of exact specification in the absence of consideration of particular forms, particular designs (and further, that ‘good fit’ is also capable of definition in the abstract). Second, given this precise definition of the context (the problem environment), then in some way the form will follow by a kind of mapping or natural extension of one into the other.

What is strange, as already mentioned, is that a stricter adherence to the terms of the original biological analogy ought in itself to have kept Alexander from falling into these particular errors. Ashby in Design for a Brain, for instance, is careful to specify a definition of environment in the biological context which is made in strictly operational terms. ‘Given an organism, its environment is defined as those variables whose changes affect the organism, and those variables which are changed by the organism’s behaviour. It is thus defined in a purely functional, not a material, sense.’<sup>19</sup> Notice that Ashby’s formulation has the consequence that a change in the organism may very well effect a corresponding change in (that particular) organism’s environment – if its result is that new environmental variables not previously impinging on that organism are now brought into play. To put it in characteristically cybernetic terms, the relationship is a feedback one: ‘The organism affects the environment, and the environment affects the organism.’<sup>20</sup>

If we follow the consequences of these observations for the strict analogy in design, then we find that since biological environment is defined only in relation to the organism, so by analogy the ‘functional environment’ of an artefact would be defined only together with and by reference to that artefact itself. There is an interaction between form and function. A change in the environment, i.e. in the required functions of a designed object, will elicit an appropriate change in the form; but conversely a change in the form of the object will have an effect on the functional environment.

I have already remarked in an earlier chapter on the relative nature of biological ‘fitness’ which, it is clear, would follow from the relative nature of environment. Different creatures must by virtue of their differences have different environments; and thus the modes of behaviour and qualities of bodily form which are conducive to survival in each case, i.e. the factors determining fitness, will also differ correspondingly. How is it then that ‘environment’ and ‘fitness’ can be imagined, either in biology itself or in the analogy with design, as being respectively an objective entity and an absolute measure?

I offer the tentative suggestion that one cause is semantic, arising from the everyday usage of the two words. We are accustomed to taking ‘the environment’ to signify natural landscape or urban surroundings – which perhaps encourages the idea of a separate entity existing in its own right. With ‘fitness’ the problem is more serious, since two rather distinct shades of meaning which the verb ‘fit’ can carry in English are easily confused. ‘To fit’ can mean ‘to touch at all points’, to be geometrically matched with, in the sense in which the clothes fit the man, or the tenon fits the mortice. Alternatively the word has a much more general meaning: ‘to be appropriate’ or well-adapted for some given purpose. It is of course the latter meaning which the term ‘fitness’ carries in biology.

In general the designer will be concerned, obviously, with producing ‘good fit’ between the form and its context in the larger interpretation of being appropriate to, as measured with reference to some given goal or intention. It is quite clear from Alexander’s discussion of the subject of fit and misfit that it is this appropriateness or rightness against a variety of criteria which he refers to when he first introduces the terms.<sup>21</sup> And yet it is fair to say that most of the concrete examples which he goes on to give, to convey the idea of ‘good fit’, emphasise the geometrical ‘close fit’ aspect; and that this is a consequent source of error.

One illustration he uses is the method by which a metal surface is ground level in engineering, by first placing it in contact with another standard block whose surface is already known to be flat.<sup>22</sup> The standard block is inked, and when the metal surface to be levelled is placed in contact, only those parts in slightly higher relief take the ink. The engineer then grinds away at the inked parts, and fits the surface again, until it is perfectly matched to the standard. The example is a peculiarly deceptive one, because ‘fitness’ here, i.e. appropriateness, is achieved precisely by making the blocks ‘fit’ in the ‘close fit’ sense. The goal or purpose is flatness; and it is against some measure or scale of flatness, i.e. the standard surface, that the degree of geometrical fit and so fitness is measured. The engineer wants to make the block flat because he has some practical purpose in mind for which a level surface is needed. But in other logically entirely equivalent instances he might require the production, very exactly, of metal surfaces to specified non-flat shapes; such as the moulds for pressing sheet steel panels for car bodies.

To contrast this with another situation to make the point clear: imagine instead a slowly accumulating layer of dust settling on the standard block. This layer of dust will also take up a perfectly flat surface on its underside, it will thus ‘fit’ the block. And yet there is no purpose in this, no adaptation of form to context. Again, we might say that a footprint in the sand is precisely fitted – in a geometric sense of touching at all points – the shape of the foot which makes it. And yet the footprint has no function for which it is designed. This is not like the fit between foot and shoe, for example. If ‘fit’ is conceived in the ‘close fit’ sense, however, this leads on naturally to the erroneous suggestion that ‘fitness’ is capable of measurement in quantitative and absolute terms, without reference to wider purposes or values.

Other examples given by Alexander emphasise the notion of a direct correspondence or one-to-one mapping between form and context. He speaks of a ‘diagram of forces’, a ‘constructive diagram’ which defines or suggests the form. Thus a diagram of traffic flows at an intersection can suggest the widths and directions of the required roads.<sup>23</sup> Alexander speaks of the designer understanding ‘what the context demands of the form’, and of the form being ‘defined by the programme’.<sup>24</sup> Other illustrations he gives to convey this idea include the pattern formed by iron filings in a magnetic field, or the shape taken up by a soap film in response to internal and external air pressures.<sup>25</sup> The metaphor thus represents the requirements or specifications for a designed object as a set of mechanical forces; indeed Alexander quotes D’Arcy Thompson’s remark in this connection that a form is ‘a diagram of forces’. The soap bubble too is the subject of a section in Growth and Form on the role of surface tension and problems of space partitioning and close-packing in the forms of cells.

Now I do not wish to suggest that problems to do with the resolution of mechanical forces, or for that matter questions of geometric ‘fit’, are unimportant in design; they are clearly of the first importance. It is as crucial that the shape of a building should fit its immediate surroundings in a geometric sense, and that the rooms inside and the constructional elements fit with each other and with the overall shape, as that the design of a glove fit the hand. Equally it is true in structural engineering design that, in a way that can be immediately appreciated visually, the shapes of girders, bridges or vaults are ‘diagrams’ of (strictly mechanical) forces.

But the danger in thinking of the overall functional (as opposed to specific structural or mechanical) requirements which a designed object is to fulfil in terms of a set of physical forces acting on the form of that object, is that this encourages the idea that such forces are all amenable to precise scientific specification, and that the form will be produced directly by the action of those forces. Alexander wrote an article in 1966 with the significant title – echoing D’Arcy Thompson’s dictum – ‘From a Set of Forces to a Form’.<sup>26</sup> Here the notion of fit or fitness is not discussed explicitly, but instead Alexander gives a rather general definition for the term ‘force’; which might in this context be either a physical force, like the force of gravity, or else it might be a social ‘force’, of convention or taste, or it might correspond to some supposed universal psychological or behavioural tendency, or it might be an economic or technological force. These forces would operate in what one might imagine as a variety of (spatial and non-spatial) ‘environments’ surrounding the natural or the designed object. It is these forces which, in Alexander’s contention, the form must yield to and acknowledge; it must reconcile them all.

As his example to illustrate this idea, however, Alexander takes the shape of a sandy surface, a dune or a beach, worked into a regular pattern of ripples by the action of the wind. The forces in this case (gravity, friction, wind pressure) are, as Alexander acknowledges, solely mechanical ones; and in the particular stable form which results these several forces are in equilibrium. In speaking of natural forms, Alexander does not make any reference in the essay in question to organic form, only to inorganic; nor does he resort to any explanation along similar lines to his account of the ripple pattern for the adapted forms of creatures or plants.

What he does do, however, is to compare the origins of the form of the sand dune or similar natural patterns with the origins of man-made objects and their shapes, and he points to a ‘basic difference’ between the two. This is that

A natural object is formed directly by the forces which act upon it and arise within it. A man-made object is also formed by certain forces; but there are many other latent forces which have no opportunity to influence the form directly, with the result that the system in which the object plays a part may be unstable. The form can be made stable with respect to all these forces only by artificial means.<sup>27</sup>

By ‘artificial means’ he refers to the process of design. Since it is up to the (selfconscious) designer to anticipate all the relevant forces and to imagine them acting on his proposed design (‘they have no opportunity to influence the form directly’) he may fail to consider some of the forces at all, or wrongly interpret their interactions, so the design will be unsatisfactory (‘the system . . . may be unstable’) in certain ways. This is the problem of the inadequacy of mental pictures.

But Alexander misses the much more important difference which separates any inorganic form, like the sand ripples or the bubble, both from organic forms and from the forms of those man-made objects such as tools, machines or buildings which are designed for well-defined practical purposes. This is that adaptations of form in both latter cases serve to resist those forces in the environment which threaten stability and survival; they serve to further the goals of the organism or the user respectively, in the face of those aspects of the environment which are hostile to those goals. It is not as though the form were a kind of plastic amorphous mass which simply receives the impress of external forces to give it its shape. There are conditions in the environment which are related to the purposes of the organism or artefact, certainly, and in a sense these ‘forces’ constrain or partly determine their form. But each organism or artefact has its own internal structure and organisation, its own integrity; and is not indefinitely deformable or malleable.

Herbert Simon speaks of the environment as a ‘mould’, and this suggests something like a jelly-mould, into which the liquid material of the organism or artefact is poured and sets solid. This is quite the wrong image.\* Although organism and environment are certainly all the time in constant interaction, this is not like the interaction of the wind and the sand dune; the organism does not yield and give to every moulding force from its environment – as the sand is pushed this way and that by the wind – for if it did so it would very soon be dead. It would be truer to say that the organism survives despite, indeed in defiance of, the destructive forces in its environment (this is the precise purpose of the ‘regulating mechanisms’, to protect the organism from environmental disturbance). On the other hand there will be beneficial aspects or forces in the environment which the organism will depend on and will turn to its advantage. Similar observations would apply to designed objects in relation to their functional environments.

If Alexander had stuck more closely to the terms of his own biological, or rather cybernetic, analogy, then he would have avoided some (if not all) of these difficulties. He would have been obliged to regard the designed object and its ‘functional environment’ as logically inseparable and mutually defining – truly as an ‘ensemble’ in his own terms. And he would have been obliged to treat their (simulated) interaction as a proper feedback process, in which the (mental or ‘formal’) representation of some artefact would be brought into contact with the representation of its environment; its (theoretical) performance tested; both form and context altered as a result; more tests made; and so on round in a continuing cycle. His argument should, one might suppose, have led him to propose a kind of simulated, and hence speeded up, version of technical evolution, carried on in the drawing office or in the ‘design laboratory’, and using mathematical or computer models to represent form, context and their interaction.

There could be no way, in such a scheme, in which the form would come out of the context; in which the design problem would, so to speak, produce its own solution. It would be necessary to bring some preconceived, pre-established design (even if this be only a very sketchy or ill-defined proposal) to the problem in hand in order that any process of testing and evaluating its anticipated performance could begin in the first place. In the biological analogy this would correspond to the way in which selection is at any point always acting on the inherited ‘design’ which has been passed down from the whole of the species’ evolutionary history.

But instead, Alexander’s proposed design method is, as we have seen, a kind of ‘one-pass’ procedure. He allows that the original definition of a design problem is a matter of personal choice and intention; and that even the list of ‘misfits’ which the designer compiles will have a ‘personal flavour’ and reflect his particular view of the problem.<sup>28</sup> But having listed these misfits, then the way in which this method is described from that point on involves a single phase of hierarchical decomposition of the problem’s structure, followed by a single phase of translation of the ‘constructive diagrams’ so provided into the resulting form.

There is one last paradox involved here. ‘Fitness’ or ‘good fit’ in the technological analogy means appropriateness to purpose. Alexander uses the term to express the adaptation of the overall form to the overall context. In the biological case we have little difficulty in drawing the outer boundary between organism and environment, and imagining fitness as a measure of the adaptation of the one to the other. However, in cybernetic terms, as Alexander himself points out, the distinction is a relatively arbitrarily determined one. It is quite legitimate cybernetically to treat the adaptation of a particular organ in relative isolation, for instance; in which case, the remainder of the body of the organism forms part of the ‘environment’ of the organ. The organs are adapted to each other as the whole organism is to the environment outside.

The same applies with perhaps even greater force in the design world. Here the form/context boundary is only fixed in relation to what the designer and his client have decided is being designed. (Indeed it is a prevalent disease among designers to be continually enlarging the terms of reference of the problems they have been set – to keep moving the form/context boundary further out.) In Alexander’s words: ‘The form is part of the world over which we have control, and which we decide to shape while leaving the rest of the world as it is.’<sup>29</sup> The design of a nut must fit an ‘environment’ which is very largely constituted by some given size of bolt, while the two together may be designed for a larger ‘environment’ still, such as an engine or a car. This is to say nothing more than that larger artefacts are made up generally from numbers of smaller discrete and identifiable component parts, all fitted or adapted to each other.

There is thus no distinction in principle between the form/context boundary of a design problem taken as a whole and the boundaries of the various subsidiary problems of design subsumed within the whole. It is possible that within the course of the design process the overall boundary and problem environment may be relatively unchanging, fixed by the terms of the exercise, the designer’s brief. But even this is unusual, and it is very common for both designer and client to revise their original goals and intentions in the light of information which the process of design itself produces. What is very certain is that, within the problem considered as a whole, the separate ‘environments’ of each sub-problem will be continually altering, and the boundaries between problems moved, as the various aspects of the design are worked on.

We ought always really to design with a number of nested overlapped form–context boundaries in mind. Indeed the form itself relies on its own inner organisation and on the internal fitness between the pieces it is made of to control its fit as a whole to the context outside.<sup>30</sup>

The implication, of course, is that the question of defining and measuring ‘fitness’, the question of evaluation according to stated purposes, is involved right down to the lowest levels of detail of the design problem. And what is more, the purposes at lower levels will be only determined by virtue of prior decisions about form made at a higher level, that is to say these purposes will only emerge in the course of the design process as particular forms are proposed and evaluated.

The point is very well made by Herbert Simon. Simon shows how some overall purpose for an artefact is decided at the boundary, or ‘interface’ as he terms it, between object and environment.<sup>31</sup> It is at this boundary that the degree of fitness or adaptation to the general purpose is measured. When we think of a clock in relation to its purpose, for example, ‘we may use the child’s definition: “a clock is to tell time” ’. So far as fulfilment of this main purpose is concerned, it is quite irrelevant how the internal mechanism of the clock is constructed, just so long as it works – tells time – in the environment chosen. There may well be several different but equally effective mechanical means for constructing clocks for the same environment: they might be clockwork or electric-driven, they might have pendulums or escape wheels, and so on. In Simon’s words:

we often find quite different inner environments [Simon refers to the interface as a division between an outer and an ‘inner environment’ – by which he means the internal organisation of the object or organism] accomplishing identical or similar goals in identical or similar outer environments – airplanes and birds, dolphins and tunafish, weight-driven clocks and spring-driven clocks, electrical relays and transistors. 32

Once the decision is made to drive a clock by means of a spring or to regulate it with an escapement, then this decision establishes a series of goals or purposes for the several internal parts of the mechanism. Each given wheel or lever now has a special function, a purpose in the ‘environment’ created by the other parts which it engages or to which it is connected. The purposes at each level of internal organisation are thus set in relation to the decided way of fulfilling a more general purpose at a higher level. Only when it is decided to drive the clock by electricity must the internal mechanism comprise some sort of electric motor; and the particular decided arrangement of this motor will determine the subsidiary functions of the motor’s parts, such as the coils or magnets. In a spring-driven mechanism, quite clearly, these types of components have no place, no function at all.

By the way in which Alexander presents his design method he seems to imply that the definitions of all the ‘misfits’, hence all the judgements of value, are to be made at the outset; and then a wholly logical and value-free series of operations may be performed so as to produce the form more or less automatically from there on. He thus completely overlooks the difficulty that at lower levels in the hierarchy of components or sub-problems within the design of the object, the functions of these components may very well only be decided as the process of design goes forward. At every level hypothetical proposals may be advanced as to suitable details or components, the ‘environment’ of each detail, and criteria for the evaluation of its ‘fitness’, being determined by the very nature of those proposals themselves.

I have suggested in this chapter that the biological analogy was conducive to a belief in functional determinism in design; it removed the designer, it encouraged an exclusive attention to utilitarian functions, and it suggested that designed objects were the product of selection exercised by their ‘functional environments’. I do not want to imply that this was the sole factor behind such a belief, however. There was another fallacy involved which was perhaps equally significant, and though this had little to do directly with the consequences of applying biological concepts to design, it is very relevant to my argument in the chapters which follow, and so a short account is in order.

Because the theorists of the modern movement admired the engineers, they wished to emulate their methods; and these methods they believed to be scientific ones. The engineers, it was thought, had the secure authority of science behind their work, and it was this scientific basis which gave their designs their originality and power. In the view of science which the architectural and design theorists took, however, it seems fairly plain that they were victims of a misconception which has been widely held within the philosophy of science itself, and which Karl Popper has been very actively concerned to expose: the so-called ‘inductive fallacy’.<sup>33</sup>

The inductive view of scientific procedure suggests that, from a simple accumulation and patient observation of the facts of nature, a pattern or law will emerge of its own accord and will impose itself on the scientific observer. What in fact happens – as Popper has most forcefully urged – is that the scientist, so far from being a passive observer, himself imposes some hypothetical explanation onto the phenomena in question (his observation is ‘theory-laden’) and then tests, by means of experiment, to see whether this hypothesis fits. The process is cyclical, so that a hypothesis creates demands for more observations, according to which the hypothesis may be modified. The origin of the hypothesis is in the whole body of relevant knowledge which constitutes that part of the science in question which has been developed so far. Hypotheses are framed, that is to say, in relation to what Popper would refer to as the ‘World Three’ of ‘objective knowledge’<sup>34</sup> (of which more in the next chapter).

It will be very clear how the inductive conception of scientific method would serve as a model for the sort of proposed systematic design method which Alexander puts forward. A series of discrete requirements or ‘forces’, or ‘misfits’, is analysed, and out of this analysis comes, so it is argued, the resulting form of the object or building in question. Alexander talks about the problems which arise ‘in trying to construct scientific hypotheses from a given body of data’ as being comparable with the task of producing architectural form out of the set of given requirements.<sup>35</sup> It should be said that Alexander’s point in this connection is that both processes, the creation of scientific hypotheses and of architectural form, demand invention and are not logically deductive ones, nor are they capable of being mechanised. But although he admits that ‘the data alone are not enough to define the hypothesis’, he suggests that what are required besides are only some organising principles of clarity and simplicity. What he does not pursue in any way is the key psychological question of where hypothesis and where invention, be they in the scientific or in the design field, ultimately come from.

The typical approach to design which characterised much of the work of the ‘design methods movement’, and which was taught in many architectural schools during the 1960s, implied a similar methodology to Alexander’s, although of a more informal nature. First ‘data’ were collected and assembled into the ‘programme’; meanwhile all premature urges to define the form and shape of the building were suppressed. And then, through an analysis of this programme, the designer was encouraged to determine what form the logic of his analysis must produce; he had to find out ‘what the building wanted to be’.

We have seen how Hannes Meyer, as a design methodologist ahead of his time, described his own approach in more or less the same terms. One of the principal intentions of the first-year course at the Bauhaus was deliberately to destroy any preconceptions the incoming students might have about design, and to wean them away from traditional ideas. Symptomatic of this mood are Meyer’s remarks: ‘our knowledge of the past is a burden that weighs upon us, and inherent in our advanced education are impediments tragically barring our new paths’.<sup>36</sup> ‘I try to approach the design entirely without any prepossessions or preconceived ideas.’<sup>37</sup> (What an extraordinary – indeed tragic – distortion of the whole purpose and nature of education these statements of Meyer’s betray!) As Hillier and Leaman put it, ‘ “Rationality” in design was virtually equated with purging the mind of preconceptions, to make way for a problem solving method which linked a procedure to a field of information.’<sup>38</sup> In this climate the notion of the value of an inherited body of understanding about buildings, and of the absolute necessity for design hypotheses to be based precisely on ‘preconceptions’ of some kind, were obviously not ones likely to find much support.

As I have tried to show here, and as others have pointed out before, this ‘rational’ view of design is in fact quite irrational. The designer always imposes some ‘design hypothesis’ onto the particular problem with which he is faced – a hypothesis which, like the scientific hypothesis, must again have its origins largely in the body of collective knowledge which designers possess about existing and past artefacts and their behaviour and properties. Hillier and Leaman’s paper, from which the quotation above comes, is called ‘How is Design Possible?’; and it is their argument, as here, that the designer’s preconceptions – as they term them, his ‘prestructures’ – are exactly what makes design possible at all, and indeed what makes possible the identification of a design problem in the first place.<sup>39</sup>

The origins of the design methods movement’s concept of ‘rational design’ have been traced epistemologically in an earlier essay by Hillier, Musgrove and O’Sullivan, ‘Knowledge and Design’; which again emphasises, in criticism of this conception, that ‘prestructures’ and a knowledge base are crucial to the designer’s capacity for action in the production and evaluation of design hypotheses.<sup>40</sup> The relationship of ‘rational’ design methods to the inductive fallacy in the philosophy of science is also pointed out in this same paper.