# The consequences of the biological fallacy

## Historical determinism and the denial of tradition

In the previous chapter I described two ways in which proponents of the biological analogy dealt with the question of ornament on buildings or on useful objects: either by ignoring or denying its existence, or else by separating two spheres of interest in design, the ‘utilitarian’ and the ‘plastic’ in Purist terms. Our review of the work of the evolutionary ethnologists has illustrated a third possibility: that decoration on utilitarian artefacts might be interpreted as a vestigial survival of some previously functional feature, and could thus be accounted for in wholly historical and ‘genetic’ terms. If the view is taken that functional constraints control the shapes of artefacts in part but not in whole, and that decoration is to be found in those parts where the constraints allow a measure of free play to the design, then the tendency is to treat ornament as the mere complement or antithesis of function, a kind of fortuitous and purposeless elaboration of form on which the pressures of selection fail to act. Objects on which the functional demands have become less rigorous – like Balfour’s ceremonial axe – will show a compensating increase in the extent and complication of their decoration. The idea is encouraged that the forms of artefacts consist of an irreducible functional body or kernel, with a shell or loose-fitting decorative garment around it – what Leroi-Gourhan called the ‘non-functional envelope . . . made up of survivals’.

I do not believe that such a conception is entirely wrong in itself, but it has dangers in that it treats ornamental or formal qualities of man-made artefacts as meaningless, or regards them as significant only inasmuch as they serve to connect one object to others through an evolutionary chain of successive copyings. It is a rather similar point, though more generally made, and not exclusively concerned with ornament, which I take to be at the centre of Geoffrey Scott’s attack on the ‘Biological Fallacy’ in The Architecture of Humanism.

Scott’s book was published in 1914, in a period of revulsion from biological analogies in many fields (including anthropology). Scott is full of passion in his denunciation of their baleful effects on the study of architectural history:

Of all the currents that have lapped the feet of architecture, since architecture fell to its present ruin, the philosophy of evolution must be held to have been the most powerful in its impulse, the most penetrating in its reach. The tide of that philosophy, white with distant promises, is darkened, no less, by the wreckage of nearer things destroyed.<sup>1</sup>

Scott’s argument is that an evolutionary approach to architectural criticism encourages the search for precedents and influences – ‘The most odious characteristics of an art become convenient evidences of heredity and environment’<sup>2</sup> – at the expense of any account of the intrinsic qualities of the building, any assessment of the personal contribution of the designer, and any real judgement about the relative worth of designs.

The principle of evolutionary art history, says Scott, is ‘that things are intelligible through a knowledge of their antecedents’.<sup>3</sup> Exclusive attention is therefore directed towards sequence; and the result is a levelling tendency, where minor works which serve largely to establish connections, or which provide the germ of something developed more fully at a later stage, are all accorded equal attention along with the highest and most mature achievements of the art. Scott’s main concern was to communicate the sensuous aesthetic delight in pure formal relationships which he saw in Renaissance architecture. So he was particularly upset by the evolutionists’ antipathy to the Renaissance, which they dismissed, he says, as ‘capricious’, on account of its formal inventiveness and discontinuity in stylistic development.\*

There is another aspect of the biological metaphor to which Scott directs his attack, which he parcels together as all part of the same evolutionary fallacy, but which ought to be conceptually separated. This is the idea that the progression of styles as a whole, in art and architecture – not just the chain of influences linking individual works – conforms to some general historical pattern or law. The example of the application of this idea which he holds out for special obloquy is the depiction of the Renaissance as divisible into phases of childhood, manhood, decline and senility.<sup>4</sup> The consequence, as he points out, is that Mannerism and Baroque are then treated as periods of decadence and weakness, where these are in fact styles of great intellectual and artistic vigour. At the same time a spurious value becomes attached to what is characterised as ‘strong’ and ‘healthy’ in styles, by contrast with what is perhaps fragile and transient, but no less valuable for that.

What Scott is offering as an ‘evolutionary’ analogy in the second case is clearly in fact a developmental or growth metaphor – of the birth, maturity and death of styles. If it is to be interpreted as an evolutionary metaphor, then this can only be in a roughly Spencerian sense. Even that would be not quite right, though. Spencer certainly equated the characteristics of biological development and biological evolution. But he did not imagine evolution, organic or cultural, as a repetitive and cyclic process – like the successive development and demise of many individuals, so to speak – with alternating phases of rise and decline. Spencer allowed on occasion that there might be retrogressive phases in evolution (back towards homogeneity and simplicity), and that it was not always smooth or uninterrupted.<sup>5</sup> But the broad picture of the process painted by his theory was of a generally one-directional continuous trend towards greater complexity and heterogeneity.

It would be fairer to associate this ‘life-cycle’ theory of the progress of styles in art with that larger tradition of systematic history which has attempted to identify empires or civilisations whose rise and fall might be argued to follow some few universal types of pattern. Popper says that this ‘ancient doctrine’ can be found in the works of such various political and historical thinkers as Plato, Vico and Machiavelli.<sup>6</sup> The idea seems to have been first given a consciously statistical treatment, and applied to more than one ‘empire’, by Quételet, the Belgian author of Social System and its Laws (published in 1848).<sup>7</sup> Later came an effort by the Russian political writer Nikolai Danilevsky to identify ‘culture-historical types’, of which he lists twelve, according to a classificatory method adopted from Cuvierian biology<sup>8</sup> (Danilevsky’s original training was in botany). The general approach is one which has been taken up in this century by Spengler, Toynbee and by the sociologist Sorokin.<sup>9</sup>

Our attention has lately been drawn, by Gombrich and others, to the pernicious influence of this ‘historicism’ in the study of art and architecture.<sup>10</sup> Historicism is the name given by Popper to the belief that regularities or trends in human history are discernible, so that predictions can be made of its future course – if not in detail, at least in general terms.<sup>11</sup> Nineteenth-century historicism in German art history is related back by Gombrich to the influence of Hegel and his Philosophy of History.<sup>12</sup> I have already touched in an earlier chapter on the ‘ecological analogy’ which might be said to be implied in the concept of artistic style as a product or necessary concomitant of the social, technological and religious conditions of the time. If, as Hegel saw it, style in the arts is an expression of the collective spirit of a society, and if that spirit is imagined to be undergoing a progressive evolution, then the proposition follows that stylistic changes will themselves succeed each other in some definite and in principle predictable sequence.

Popper’s definition of historicism includes beliefs in either of the two kinds of imagined historical trend or pattern: a repeated cycle, showing characteristics supposedly similar in many civilisations, or a continuous progressive ‘evolutionary’ movement throughout the history of the whole race.<sup>13</sup>

Both types of theory imagine a determinism and inevitability in the movement of history; but in the latter case especially there is the implication that what is newer is by that token better. Thus a premium is placed on novelty and legitimacy seems to be given to the idea of the artistic avant-garde, continually in revolution, continually in advance of public taste. Popper himself, indeed, in The Poverty of Historicism, links ‘moral modernism’ or ‘moral futurism’ – the idea that the morally good is what is ahead of its time – with ‘its counterpart in an aesthetic modernism or futurism’.<sup>14</sup>

Meanwhile the theory of the Zeitgeist is also debilitating for historical explanation and detailed criticism, as Gombrich points out.<sup>15</sup> The assumption is made a priori that a unity of style exists between all the arts of a period, and the critic simply seeks to confirm this belief by the selection of appropriate correspondences. To the more objective and uncommitted observer these claims for stylistic unity seem often to be post hoc rationalisations, and there are many phases in Western art where the prominent stylistic characteristics of the music of the period, say, are distinctly at odds with those of the visual arts, and again with those of literature. Gombrich himself is only prepared to envisage the possibility of some very broad correspondences across the arts, which might arise from a general atmosphere of conservatism or of experiment.

I do not propose to dwell at any length on this subject of historicism in art criticism and theory, for one reason because as mentioned it has recently been well aired elsewhere. It certainly seems more than plausible to connect a political and philosophical historicism with the tenets of architectural futurism: the extraordinary symbolic importance attached by the modern movement in architecture to the new science and technology and the new industrial materials of steel and glass;\* its repeatedly announced ambition to create an

\* One figure from the design world in whose writings the idea of the relentless upward dynamic of technological progress is particularly strong is Buckminster Fuller. For Fuller the trend is always towards higher speeds for vehicles, greater efficiencies for machines, better performance achieved at lower cost and with less material and energy input – the ‘Dymaxion principle. He has a chart which is very symptomatic of his philosophy, showing the number of chemical elements discovered up to a given date, represented as a curve which climbs ever more steeply towards the twentieth century. (See R. W. Marks, The Dymaxion World of Buckminster Fuller (New York, 1960), p. 152.) Fuller argues that these discoveries give a rough indication of the pace of scientific progress generally, and beyond that, of cultural and technical evolution as a whole; since, as he argues, social and political life follow economics, economics follow industry, industry follows technology and technology follows pure science. (The chart is actually entitled ‘Profile of the Industrial Revolution’.) The designer contributes to but at the same time must fall in with the necessary direction of this trend. In characteristic Fuller argot: ‘The visibly quickening chronologicality has therefore valid significance . . . [The] consistent acceleration takes place without man’s consciousness of its shaping.’ (Of course the basis of Fuller’s graph is in itself quite spurious. After the discovery of all the naturally occurring elements, the extrapolated curve – not shown by him – would continue perfectly flat.) It is revealing to see how embarrassed Fuller has become in recent years – as shown by his answers to questions asked at his public lectures – by recent calculations of the finiteness of the earth’s resources, and by the general mood of disenchantment with technology.

architecture which would be instrumental in bringing about a new social order; and the way in which any hint of the revival of traditional forms was castigated by historicist critics as ‘immoral’ and retrogressive.

What is of interest here is the extent to which historicism in design theory can be legitimately linked with the strictly biological analogy embodied in the idea of cultural change as a process of evolution. (Thus Gombrich associates the rise of futurism in art with both the ‘emergence of Hegelian historicism and Darwinian evolutionism’.)<sup>16</sup> There is no doubt that the ‘evolutionary’ social theories of Spencer, Morgan, Tylor and others, as applied to the general movement of cultural history, were imbued with a strongly progressive spirit, in both the technological and moral senses. The passage through Morgan’s stages of savagery and barbarism – or their equivalents – towards civilisation marked at the same time a development in the complexity and sophistication of man’s tools, an increase in his control over the natural environment, and a move towards greater justice and higher standards of social behaviour as expressed in legal codes, religious beliefs and social institutions. The high point of the whole process was that reached by the Anglo-Saxon race in the nineteenth century. Spencer’s view of history was also a confessedly deterministic one: he rejected free will as an illusion, and considered the impact of ‘great men’ on the course of events to be minimal – the chain of causation being the other way round, ideas and feelings being shaped by society.<sup>17</sup>

The strange thing to realise in retrospect, despite all the talk of ‘social Darwinism’, is how little the Darwinian theory really justified any such analogy. In the first place there was no necessary suggestion of progress in the ‘survival of the fittest’ – because fitness was always relative, and because the only ultimate criterion of overall fitness (as distinct from those qualities conferring relative fitness on competitors) was the fact of survival. It is through fitness being imagined to be measurable in absolute terms that the apparently progressive quality is introduced, so allowing the idea that one species, or more sinisterly one race within the human species, is ‘fitter’ than another – and that human evolution is headed towards the production of intellectual or physical supermen (with ‘fitness’ carrying a certain gymnastic overtone).

In the second place, Darwin did not propose – as Spencer did – any law of evolution as such, any goal or state towards which it was directed; he offered only a mechanism for the operation of selection, dependent on certain assumed laws of heredity and variation. On the contrary, Darwin effectively accepted the evolution of natural species on earth as a singular historical occurrence. The ‘evolutionary’ metaphor in deterministic theories of history owes much more to the earlier teleological and vitalist approaches to natural evolution, to Lamarck and to Lamarckists, than it does to Darwin.<sup>18</sup>

T. H. Huxley, Darwin’s apologist, curiously did believe in a ‘law of evolution of organic forms’. He believed not that Darwin had formulated such, but that this law was bound to be discovered ‘sooner or later’.<sup>19</sup> What is odd, as Popper points out, is that Huxley most definitely did not subscribe to the idea of a law of social progress, and he made a clear separation between the two ideas.<sup>20</sup> His imagined law of natural evolution would not presumably have pictured the process as one of improvement in any sense.

Much later, in the 1940s, Julian Huxley propounded a theory of evolutionary progress, defined as a continuing improvement in all-round biological efficiency through ‘increased control over and independence of the environment’.<sup>21</sup> (Huxley mentions how a similar criterion of independence was used by Spencer to describe evolutionary advance.) But even this was more by way of a generally observed trend, which was by no means universal in evolution – there are many instances where such efficiency appears to have declined – and with no guarantee of its continuation in the future. (Also it may be questioned whether ‘progress’ as so defined represents any amelioration from the point of view of human values.)

Where Darwin’s theory did form the basis of analogy in the social sciences was in the ideas of competition, selection and survival.<sup>22</sup> If Darwin himself had been influenced originally by the market theories of the political economists and by Malthus’s arguments about population and the food supply, then the reapplication of ‘natural selection’ to the political and economic fields was all the more rapid. The fact was that Darwinism, applied improperly to social affairs, appeared to condone or acquiesce in, as ‘natural’ and healthy necessities in society, gross differences of wealth and social position, a corresponding neglect of welfare or charity towards the poor and sick, and cut-throat business competition of the most vicious and acquisitive sort. The support of Darwin’s thinking was further invoked, as is well known, in attempts to lend scientific respectability to a priori assumptions and simple prejudices about supposed innate genetic differences in the intelligence and capacities of different races; and to dignify the virtues, as they were seen, of aggressive militarism and imperial conquest.

This side of social Darwinism is a large subject and not one to be entered very deeply here. Its relevance to the design and art-historical analogies is rather small. There are two points, nevertheless, to be made in this context. The first is that, besides any other fallacies involved, the belief that one race is superior to another and the notion that there is virtue in competition, hence that it should not be interfered with by legislative controls or by moral restraint, turn on the combination of the selection mechanism with the quite un-Darwinian and historicist belief that evolution is progressive, and will ‘naturally’ and inevitably lead to improvements – in the health, wealth and general moral condition of society.

The second and perhaps more important point here is that there was understandably and quite rightly a severe general reaction which took place in the early years of this century in many academic subjects (though not admittedly in some more disreputable areas of political thought) against the excesses, and the sinister political implications, of such ‘biological’ theories of society. And in this reaction, the relatively innocuous technological analogies with biology seem to have suffered by association and – at least in archaeology and anthropology – to have been swept away along with the rest.

## The denial of tradition

As we saw at the beginning of chapter 13, the property which distinguishes cultural from organic evolution in a quite fundamental respect is that ‘inherited’ cultural information is passed on outside the body, via language and teaching. Material culture can be cumulative in a very obvious way: artefacts, tools, books, survive and are collected in museums and libraries. And cultural or scientific knowledge can be cumulative in a rather more interesting sense; not simply that historical records or scientific ‘facts’ pile up, but that our whole understanding of some phenomenon or event is built up out of this mass of data and in relation to a larger structure of existing ideas. These ideas and data can be transformed, reinterpreted, ‘revolutionised’ even, while still based on the same inherited material which history and tradition provides.

Popper has introduced a most useful set of descriptive terms to mark off this body of ‘objective knowledge’ from the contents of the individual mind, and to indicate the degree of relative autonomy from the thoughts of individual men which it comes to assume.<sup>23</sup> He distinguishes three ‘worlds’. The first world, World One, is the objective world of material things. World Two is the subjective world of minds. What is new in the evolution of human culture is the appearance of a third world, distinct from the previous two although entirely parasitic upon them. This World Three is a world of ‘objective structures which are the products, not necessarily intentional, of minds . . . but which, once produced, exist independently of them’.<sup>24</sup> It is, in Popper’s own words, ‘the world of intelligibles, or of ideas in the objective sense; it is the world of possible objects of thought: the world of theories in themselves, and their logical relations; of arguments in themselves; and of problem situations in themselves.’<sup>25</sup> World Three is embodied, physically, in World One artefacts of many kinds such as books and tools. It has an existence which is relatively independent of the World Two thoughts and opinions of particular men – though it has its ultimate origins in and is accessible through these thoughts alone. It comprises knowledge that is in many cases not even known by individuals.

One of Popper’s favourite examples for demonstrating this last point is a book of logarithm tables, which no man, it is safe to say, carries in his head, or ever has done – not even Napier. It is possible indeed for modern tables of logarithms to be prepared by computer. And yet the knowledge comprised in such tables is of enormous practical importance and is in daily use by engineers for all kinds of real world projects. Even with less mechanical and repetitious subjects than logarithms, it is still quite possible for authors – let alone their readers – not to know in detail the contents of their own work. And when these authors die, their works may sit on library shelves for years, centuries even, before they are re-read and their significance appreciated.

To those who argue that conjectures, theories, books, journals, are only linguistic or symbolic expressions of subjective mental states, or means of communicating mental states between individuals, Popper offers the following demonstration of the (more or less) independent existence of the world of objective knowledge, in the form of two ‘thought experiments’:

Experiment (1). All our machines and tools are destroyed, and all our subjective learning, including our subjective knowledge of machines and tools, and how to use them. But libraries and our capacity to learn from them survive.

Clearly, after much suffering, our world may get going again.

Experiment (2). As before, machines and tools are destroyed, and our subjective learning, including our subjective knowledge of machines and tools, and how to use them. But this time all libraries are destroyed also, so that our capacity to learn from books becomes useless.<sup>26</sup>

It is obvious in this second case that it would take an enormously longer time for civilisation to recover and reach again the same level of knowledge. Notice, by the way, Popper’s mention of tools and machines here – he might well have included buildings – as well as libraries; and how both thought experiments require their destruction.

We might imagine on first thoughts that a theory of culture which emphasised evolution would be concerned precisely with the nature of tradition, and if it had any political flavour at all, that flavour would be conservative. (Nature does not, hence culture should not, make any jumps.) Nevertheless, as we have seen, an evolutionary theory of architectural history held a particular appeal for those nineteenth-century writers and those modern movement architects whose aims were essentially revolutionary: to create a new style, free from historical precedent, free from the load of cultural baggage which was weighing the designer down.

The paradox is understood by appreciating how, if cultural evolution is compared directly with organic evolution, the whole World Three body of traditional knowledge and the historical accumulation of man-made products – precisely what constitutes culture, we might say – tend, like the human designer himself, to disappear. Cultural ‘evolutionism’ involves a strange denial of the very fact of culture.

Let me try to show how this phenomenon manifests itself in various aspects of modern design theory. (I am not suggesting here that the biological analogy is the cause or whole explanation of these other ideas; simply that it coincides or fits together with them into an (apparently) coherent larger theoretical structure.) The first of these aspects is a certain view of artistic language and artistic communication, as found for example in the writings of the Purists Ozenfant and Le Corbusier.

While allowing the inevitability of ‘secondary’ associations or significance attaching to geometric forms of any sort, the Purists were interested in the ‘primary’ qualities of pure geometry which could serve, as they believed, to provide the mots fixes of a visual language that would transcend particular cultures and would require no prior knowledge for its comprehension. The similar idea is to be found elsewhere in the theory of early-twentieth-century painting, in Expressionism, most notably in Kandinsky’s writings, where the proposal is made, as Alan Colquoun puts it, that ‘shapes have physiognomic or expressive interest which communicates itself to us directly’.<sup>27</sup> Such Expressionist theory no doubt had considerable impact on modern architectural philosophy, especially because of the abstract and non-representational nature of architectural forms and their composition.

For example, the functionalism of the modern movement taught that the meaning of a building and the meaning of its component elements could be made perfectly transparent and directly accessible. The meanings signified would be no more, and no less, than a communication and a demonstration of the social and utilitarian functions served. The building, it was thought, could ‘mean’ simply what it was; it would convey an explanation of its nature and purpose through its open legibility and lack of guile, even though its forms be completely unfamiliar and without precedent.

The Expressionist theory of artistic communication presupposes some direct sympathy or resonance (even ‘vibrations’) between artist and audience. It is a theory diametrically opposed to that of the greater part of modern linguistics, or of the formal mathematical theory of communication, which study the ways in which information or meaning is conveyed by the operation of conventionalised codes. Here forms acquire significance only by virtue of their relationships to the larger structures of meaning in which they are situated, and in the context of prior expectations established in the observer or recipient of a message by virtue of his acquaintance with the given code. The opposition of these theories has been most profoundly, as well as entertainingly, illuminated in relation to aesthetic philosophy by Gombrich.<sup>28</sup>

Because of the anxiety of the modern movement to sever its connections with ‘the styles’ and in particular to escape from the language of the Classical orders, it was anxious equally to escape from an acknowledgement that the communication of meaning in architecture might be dependent on evolved structures or codes which were the product of convention, of time, and of the general public experience of buildings of the past. (It is not without significance, I think, that Hannes Meyer, the arch-functionalist, was an enthusiast for Esperanto, for a ‘supranational language’ (as too was Herbert Spencer). Meyer was also in favour of the use of shorthand, because it was ‘a script with no tradition’.)<sup>29</sup> Thus an Expressionist view of ‘direct’ communication of meaning through forms with supposed universal significance, outside history and culture, would be a most attractive one.

Popper has not developed, in any very extensive way, the application of his theory of three worlds to the phenomenon of language, but he is perfectly clear that natural language is one of the most characteristic and important of World Three products. And it will be equally clear that whereas the whole view of language as a social product, dependent on convention and developed historically, is a quintessentially World Three conception – the subjective World Two of minds interacting with and via the relatively autonomous language structures of World Three – the Expressionist theory of communication, on the other hand, is one which excludes World Three, substituting some imagined direct interaction of one individual mind with another individual mind.

There is a second and closely related way in which culture, and Popper’s World Three, tend to vanish from view in modern movement functionalism. This is in the picture (of a kind which we find well represented in Alexander’s work) which it offers of the relationship of man to the natural environment. With the rejection of historical styles and traditional forms in architecture, the attention of designers was directed towards new consideration of the basic utilitarian functions of building: control of climate, the way in which the various ‘biological’ needs of the occupants – for light, fresh air, hygienic conditions and so on – are satisfied, the material and engineering problems of construction. It was from the basis of a fundamental analysis of these material and practical functions of building that, for someone like Hannes Meyer for example, the forms of the new architecture were to be derived. Thus architecture was seen in many respects in the role which the Erewhonian author saw for all material artefacts, constituting a kind of skin or outer layer interposed between man and nature, shielding him from environmental forces or disturbances.

Tools and buildings were conceived solely as instruments for achieving utilitarian goals which might all be ultimately referred to the principal goal of ensuring survival of the human species and reproduction of the social order (social organisation and human institutions being themselves thought of as ‘adaptive’ devices in the struggle against nature or in the competition with other human groups). We have seen Frederick Kiesler putting such a view quite explicitly: that tools and architecture form a ‘technological environment’ between man and his natural surroundings, and that this technology serves basic human needs, of which the most important, according to Kiesler, is physical health.

There is a tradition in anthropological theory, associated above all with the name of Bronislaw Malinowski, which has seen culture in precisely this light. Thus Malinowski writes, in A Scientific Theory of Culture:

The problems set by man’s nutritive, reproductive, and hygienic needs must be solved. They are solved by the construction of a new, secondary, or artificial environment. This environment, which is neither more nor less than culture itself, has to be permanently reproduced, maintained, and managed.<sup>30</sup>

The theory of culture, Malinowski says, must ‘take its stand on biological fact’. The essential needs of man’s physical body are first met by arrangements for ‘feeding, heating, housing and clothing’; while at the same time provision must be made for protection against animal and human enemies, and against physical dangers. ‘All these primary problems of human beings are solved for the individual by artifacts, organization into coöperative groups, and also by the development of knowledge, a sense of value and ethics.’<sup>31</sup>

The creation of tools, the building up of social structures and the acquisition of knowledge in order to meet the basic bodily requirements, set up a ‘secondary type of determinism’: institutions of education and tradition are required, to pass on the knowledge and to provide stability and continuity in the social order; other features of culture, for example political and judicial, are needed to ensure the integration of the social group so that it may function harmoniously as a productive and life-preserving system; even artistic and recreational activities can be related back directly, says Malinowski, ‘to certain physiological characteristics of the human organism’.<sup>32</sup>

More recent work in anthropology which borrows an ‘ecological’ methodology from the study of animal behaviour continues in this kind of functionalist tradition which Malinowski represents.<sup>33</sup> Meanwhile an ‘adaptive’ theory of material culture and social organisation along similar lines has been developed in the last few years in archaeology, where efforts have been made to apply quantitative methods and modelling techniques to archaeological phenomena; as for example most comprehensively by David Clarke in his Analytical Archaeology.

Clarke draws extensively on cybernetics and turns particularly to Ashby for his formulation of a ‘general model for archaeological processes’. This model envisages the culture of some particular people as a complex whole, which is in a state of continuous dynamic interaction with its environment. The term culture, in this context, is taken to mean the entire combination of social organisation, religious tradition, economic system and material culture, grouped together and regarded as a single grand system. In a phrase quoted by Clarke from Binford, it is ‘the total extrasomatic means of adaptation’.<sup>34</sup>

Culture acts, for Clarke, as a regulator, protecting itself and the individuals within it from the extreme effects of environmental change. That part of the cultural system which serves this regulating function forms a kind of ‘insulating’ medium, as he terms it, between the members of the culture and the environment or context.

The regulator blocks and filters the extreme range of external fluctuations by constraining their variety and maintaining the essential system parameters within certain limits. From the point of view of survival, systems integrating good regulating subsystems are better able to survive unchanged than similar systems with less efficient ‘insulation’. Regulation controls the flow of variety from the environment to the system coupled to it. Much of social and material culture can be seen as in part exercising a regulating control over the effect of external and internal variations upon the system outcomes.<sup>35</sup>

This description relates quite clearly to the regulating or homeostatic function – identified by Cannon and modelled by Ashby – performed by the physiological mechanisms and by adaptations of behaviour in the individual; and it marks the extension of the same formal concept to cover culture generally.

We see that what Clarke has done is to represent the whole of some given culture as an adaptive system, which responds to the forces impinging on it from the environment (‘environment’ to include other, neighbouring cultures, as well as nature) by appropriate changes and reorganisations – these changes serving to maintain the stability and continuity of the culture (its ‘homeostasis’) and to increase its adaptedness for the particular circumstances. It is Clarke’s argument that the information which is stored in and which passes through the cultural system serves the ultimate purposes of survival; that the total sum of cultural information, much greater than that which any one man could carry, confers ‘fitness’ on the group. The more efficiently and effectively a cultural system can convey this ‘survival information’ to the new individuals who carry it on, so the better fitted it will be, not only for continued existence, but for growth in numbers, diversification, and for exploiting progressively more difficult and unpromising environments. In Clarke’s words: ‘Cultural systems are therefore information systems of cumulatively acquired knowledge partly replacing instinctive behaviour in man and selectively advantageous in his struggle for survival.’<sup>36</sup>

The idea can be, and has been, criticised on two grounds. The first kind of criticism questions the extent to which a deterministic chain of causality can be claimed to reach from the necessities of biological survival to the varieties of cultural phenomena, particularly those such as the fine arts, religion or the more abstract sciences which are the remotest from utilitarian or economic activities. Marshall Sahlins, in a critique of anthropological functionalism, has argued that a ‘law of diminishing returns’ applies to functionalist explanations, so that

the further removed the cultural fact from the sphere of utility to which it is referred – the organic, the economic, the social – the fewer and more mediated must be the relations between this fact and the phenomena of that sphere; and consequently the fewer and less specific are the functional constraints on the nature of the custom under consideration. So the less determinate will be the explanation by functional virtues; or, conversely, the greater will be the range of alternative cultural practices that could equally (or even better) serve the same purpose.

As Sahlins points out, the attempt at a utilitarian explanation of the nature of language on Malinowski’s part led to a serious impoverishment, whereby words were conceived simply as tools with which to get a ‘grip’ on things, or as instruments with which to act upon other people.<sup>38</sup> Amongst modern ‘sociobiologists’ such as E. O. Wilson, language is similarly explained as serving an adaptive communication function, rather than as the means for constructing an autonomous world of signification with its own internal structure and relationships.<sup>39</sup> The effort to provide a biologically adaptive purpose for the arts led even further in the direction of trivialisation (as in Herbert Spencer’s idea of art as a kind of recreation or pastime).

Our interest in the present study is in material artefacts serving largely practical functions, and clearly these would lie, along Sahlins’s notional spectrum, at the end closest to the ‘sphere of utility’. Even the most highly developed works of architecture still serve, amongst other purposes, the basic functions of enclosure and protection from the elements. And in primitive societies no doubt the primary use of many artefacts was directly in helping man cope in his struggle against natural forces, and in modifying the natural environment. What this view fails to represent, however, is the way in which, as society becomes more advanced technically, becomes materially more highly developed, so the greater part of the ‘environment’ with which the individual is in contact even indirectly is not a natural environment any more, but a manmade one. As Herbert Simon says, ‘The very species upon which man depends for his food – his corn and his cattle – are artifacts of his ingenuity. A ploughed field is no more part of nature than an asphalted street – and no less.’<sup>40</sup>

Indeed, many of the artefacts produced in modern society are not artefacts which protect man immediately from the forces of nature (like raincoats, or even houses); but are artefacts which enable him to deal with other artefacts (like tin-openers, or pencil sharpeners), or, more importantly, artefacts which help him deal with other men (such as books and telephones, or money). Instead of imagining man and his natural environment as interacting and this interaction being mediated or buffered by material artefacts, it would be more reasonable to present a picture of civilised man as living in an environment largely of his own creation, constituted by artefacts, with the natural environment existing alongside or else outside and beyond this man-made world.

Thus, although many artefacts may have originally had functions which were very largely concerned with immediate matters of economic necessity – and it is arguable that this was true of primitive language – as time goes by and material culture develops, so this world of material objects progressively acquires for itself a degree of autonomy and independence; it creates its own internal ‘problems’ and its own dynamic. The similar point is made specifically by Popper in relation to ‘objective knowledge’: that while the first functions served by the social communication of knowledge might have been in coping with the contingent practical difficulties of daily life, at a later stage and certainly within the framework of organised science the pursuit of knowledge is regulated, as Popper says, rather ‘by the idea of truth, or of getting nearer to the truth . . . than the idea of helping us to survive’.<sup>41</sup>

Though Popper promotes an image of the growth of scientific knowledge which is loosely analogous to organic evolution – that ‘competing’ hypotheses are subjected to critical test, and those which are best able to withstand that criticism (the ‘fittest’) will be retained, will survive – he is quick to point out that this has no necessary or simple relationship to human survival in general. ‘I did not state that the fittest hypothesis is always the one which helps our own survival. I said, rather, that the fittest hypothesis is the one which best solves the problem it was designed to solve.’<sup>42</sup> Popper makes this argument in relation to scientific knowledge; and he draws a sharp distinction in this context between the nature of the growth of ‘pure knowledge’ on the one hand, and the growth of applied knowledge together with the evolution of tools and material artefacts (in whose design the knowledge is applied) on the other. This distinction is to do with the fact that pure knowledge evolves, or is evolved, in the direction of greater generalisation and ever increasing integration of previously disparate areas of understanding.

The evolution of applied knowledge and of artefacts, meanwhile, is in an opposite direction, always differentiating into increasing numbers of ever more specialised applications (in the case of knowledge) or into specialised instruments for ever more particular purposes (in the case of tools and machines). As Popper says, the overall trends of these two contrasting types of ‘evolutionary’ change – in science and in technology – had both been remarked on by Herbert Spencer<sup>43</sup> (although Spencer’s universal law of evolution does not in itself acknowledge such a distinction, suggesting on the contrary that evolution in all fields was in the same general direction).

By drawing attention to the differences between ‘the evolutionary tree of instruments and that of pure knowledge’, Popper says that he hopes to offer ‘something like a refutation of the now so fashionable view that human knowledge can only be understood as an instrument in our struggle for survival’.<sup>44</sup> I am not quite sure whether Popper intends to imply by this opposition that the purposes of material artefacts are by contrast exclusively to aid human survival; but I am inclined to think that he must not. Elsewhere, for example, he talks of the ‘autonomy’ of the work of art, and the idea that the art of painting, regarded as a whole, creates its own internal relationships and problems.<sup>45</sup> Artistic aims in general, he says, are ‘independent of the aim to survive’.

It appears possible to envisage an equivalent ‘Popperian’ view of the evolution of useful artefacts along the lines of his conception of both artistic and scientific development, which is by no means wholly or even largely directed towards or constrained by matters of simple physical survival. Even organic evolution, Popper believes, does not necessarily and universally lead to ‘what may be called “utilitarian” results’,<sup>46</sup> and this is all the more true of the evolution of culture. In the history of art the production of previous artists, and the previous output of the individual himself, will give rise to problems.

The artist will pursue solutions to these problems, which are subject to a selective process, are subject to criticism, in the light of artistic aims and standards. In Popper’s words, ‘our aims can change and . . . the choice of an aim may become a problem; different aims may compete, and new aims may be invented and controlled by the method of trial and error-elimination.’<sup>47</sup>

In the equivalent picture of technology, we would have an evolving world of useful artefacts which acquires its own internal problems and aims and its own internal criteria for choices made between those aims. Its direction and development would not be controlled by ‘selective forces’ to do with human survival, but would be constrained by other factors arising from the previous course of technological history and its problems. Clarke’s archaeological theory does not deny tradition in one sense; it acknowledges the existence of an inherited body of cultural information – indeed it assigns this a crucial role. But it does deny to material culture this autonomy, this ‘life of its own’; and it sees all artefacts in a wholly utilitarian light, as forming nothing more than an elaborate ‘life-support system’.

The second ground for criticising the biologically ‘adaptive’ and functionalist theory of culture is if anything a more fundamental one. It turns on the argument that the central feature of culture is language, and that through language man imposes onto the natural world a structure of cultural and symbolic meaning by which the ‘utilitarian’ or the ‘economic’ is defined in the first place. It is not some universal and unavoidable problems of practical necessity, imposed by man’s biology and by the natural environment, which are responded to and solved with the use of cultural instruments, in this view. It is the conceptual categories of culture itself which originally create the ostensibly ‘practical’ problems – this practicality being largely a matter of cultural choice, and only in a minor way constrained by real material or biological necessity.

As Sahlins expresses the opposition of these two alternatives, it is a matter of

whether the cultural order is to be conceived as the codification of man’s actual purposeful and pragmatic action; or whether, conversely, human action in the world is to be understood as mediated by the cultural design, which gives order at once to practical experience, customary practice, and the relationship between the two.<sup>48</sup>

This kind of criticism of the ‘biological’ position does not deny that certain material conditions are ultimately necessary for the continuation of human life: adequate food supplies, bodily warmth, a certain freedom from disease and so on. What it does claim is that the limitations placed by the fulfilment of these conditions on the possibilities for social organisation, for systems of economic production, for the apparatus of technology, are very loose ones. Man must eat to live: but he can (in most parts of the world) choose to eat any of a great

## Historical determinism and the denial of tradition

variety of animal or plant species; he can prepare these foods in any of an almost infinite number of combinations, by a great range of cooking methods; and he can serve them according to social conventions governing the timing of meals, their setting, their polite forms and ceremonials and so on, which have very little or nothing to do with the biological function of nutrition, but which have a great deal to do with the cultural meanings with which the whole process is invested and according to which it is organised. It follows that all the ‘economic’ activities, of agriculture, the manufacture of agricultural tools and cooking utensils, the trading of foodstuffs, and so on, which are created to supply the alimentary ‘needs’ of society, all stem from what are at bottom a set of cultural choices. Instead of there being a deterministic relation between the biological necessity and the cultural form, biology serves only to set extreme limits on the cultural; it provides a ‘negative determination’, as Sahlins puts it, of the realm of cultural possibilities.<sup>49</sup>