# What remains of the analogy?

# The history and science of the artificial

What remains then, that is useful and true, out of the variety of analogies made between biology and the applied arts? It will help to clarify matters if the answer to this question is divided into two parts, the one concerned with history, the other with science. Indeed the confusion as to whether a theory of the design of artefacts should or could be a scientific as opposed to a historical theory is something which has bedevilled biological analogies since they were first formulated – as this account has, I hope, shown. In making this division I propose to differentiate between history and science in terms of the actual, as against the possible. As W. C. Kneale has said,

it seems possible to maintain that science should be distinguished from history (in the largest sense of that word), not as the study of universal truths from the study of singular truths, but rather as the study of what is possible or impossible from the study of what has been or actually is the case. Speaking metaphorically, we may say that science is about the frame of nature, while history is about the content.<sup>1</sup>

The biological analogy, despite its association with functionalist and historicist fallacies, leaves us with an overall picture of the history of technology – particularly in its earlier phases – which can, I believe, still be extremely helpful in guiding theory and research.

The starting point from which the ‘evolutionary’ aspects of the analogy began was the simple fact that in the production of many artefacts, especially in the craft or vernacular traditions, one object is very often copied in its design (perhaps with minor differences) from another. The truth of this observation is not altered by any of the criticism of the last two chapters. The fact of copying gives rise to a continuity in form and appearance, when the ‘genetic’ links are followed between a series of artefacts successively copied, each from the last. The characteristic form of the artefact may undergo a gradual transformation as a result of the small alterations introduced at each stage. The fact of many similar artefacts being thus produced with related but not identical forms (and functions) results in the appearance of what may be termed ‘populations’ of objects, amongst which it may be possible to identify ‘types’ according either to functional or to morphological criteria.

There may be geographical ‘diffusion’ of these populations, as a result of the objects (or the knowledge of how to make them) being carried by migrating artisans, or being transported through trade, capture in war and so on. It is perhaps possible for the series formed by repeated copyings to diverge into two or more branches, such that later members along the divided branches are functionally and formally quite distinct. (It may also be possible for branches to converge; this is a point we will come back to.) Thus far, to the extent to which a biological metaphor fits the case, it is not seriously misleading.

A programme something along these lines was proposed for the study of man-made objects by the critic George Kubler, in his The Shape of Time: Remarks on the History of Things.<sup>2</sup> Kubler in turn drew inspiration both from the work of the anthropologist Kroeber,<sup>3</sup> and from Henri Focillon’s Vie des Formes,<sup>4</sup> which Kubler calls ‘the boldest and most poetic affirmation of a biological conception of the nature of the history of art’.<sup>5</sup> Focillon’s concern was exclusively with the fine arts; with the ‘internal’ laws by which the forms employed in art are governed and organised, and how they develop in time. But Kubler defines his area of interest to include tools and other useful objects, and the purpose of his book is ‘to draw attention to some of the morphological problems of duration in series and sequence’.<sup>6</sup> A further purpose is to offer some corrective or counter-balance to the amount of attention given in twentieth-century art history to iconographical study, to the relative neglect of formal or morphological questions.

This emphasis throughout is on continuity in the history of the forms of artefacts, as they are replicated and their designs transmitted so as to produce sequences which may extend in some instances over extremely long periods. ‘Everything made now’, Kubler says, ‘is either a replica or a variant of something made a little time ago and so on back without break to the first morning of human time.’<sup>7</sup> He introduces the notion of a ‘prime’ object, which possesses a degree of novelty and original invention in its form (it is a ‘mutant’); to be distinguished from the mass of replicas in which the same form is reproduced and perhaps degraded.<sup>8</sup> Certain sets of objects or works may be grouped into ‘form-classes’. Complex objects may be made up from assemblies of separate parts or ‘traits’, each with its own sequential development.

The closest definition of a formal sequence that we can now venture is to affirm it as a historical network of gradually altered repetitions of the same trait. The sequence might therefore be described as having an armature. In cross section let us say that it shows a network, a mesh, or a cluster of subordinate traits; and in long section that it has a fiber-like structure of temporal stages, all recognisably similar, yet altering in their mesh from beginning to end.<sup>9</sup>

David Clarke in Analytical Archaeology has lately offered a theoretical approach to the treatment of archaeological material which has many affinities with Kubler’s proposals, but is set within a more precisely quantitative and statistical framework and supported by some applications to real data. The validity of this part of Clarke’s work is not in my view affected by the criticisms made of his ‘general model’ in the last chapter; although this method, as we shall see, is essentially descriptive only, and provides no real explanation of the phenomena involved.

The central image in Clarke’s work in this respect is of a population of artefacts (or perhaps of larger aggregations of artefacts) distributed in space (both in physical space and in abstract ‘classificatory space’), and undergoing gradual transformation in time, through growth or decline in numbers, through change in possession of different attributes, and thus through a gradual transition from one artefact type to another.<sup>10</sup>

In making such an analysis, the need for independent means of dating, other than the criteria of typological similarity or morphological relationship themselves, is paramount if the danger of circularity in the argument is to be avoided. This point is made strongly by Childe<sup>11</sup> – perhaps in reaction to the progressive evolutionism of the nineteenth century – when he emphasises how chronological evidence will be decisive in determining the evolutionary relationship in each instance, whether it represents a transformation towards more efficient or more complex and elaborated forms, perhaps, or whether it is alternatively a degenerating or ‘devolutionary’ series (as with the Celtic coins studied by Evans, for example).

Taking a single type of artefact, the known occurring examples may be tabulated by their typological characteristics and by their occurrence in time to yield a description of the changes occurring in that type. Clarke describes the kind of pattern of change which might be expected in some highly idealised hypothetical case.<sup>12</sup> At each period of time, or ‘phase’, there is a population of artefacts distributed normally around a dominant category and for each particular category or characteristic combination of attributes possessed by the artefact, there is a process of gradual increase in numbers over time, from rather few to a point where the category is dominant and most numerous, and then dwindling away again to disappearance.

Thus at each stage there is, in this very simplified and regular idealisation, a dominant category for the artefact type, and there are most examples to be found of this dominant form. But at the same time there are some rather fewer numbers of residual representatives of now ‘archaic’ and disappearing categories, and there are correspondingly a few representatives of emerging, new and ‘prototypical’ forms. Clarke has produced detailed empirical evidence, from finds of pottery and flint tools, to show the application of this theoretical model to actual data.<sup>13</sup> And he has other examples of a comparable process, in which the individual attributes of more complex artefacts, such as the decorative motifs on pottery and gravestones, are shown to lie in a similar ‘lenticular’ distribution about a moving modal form.

What Kubler and Clarke provide us with is a descriptive account of historical sequence in the development of artefact types, and means for describing their morphological change. We have learned from the argument of previous chapters to reject the idea that there is any simple or single necessary direction to such changes, or any deterministic character to the process of change in itself. Why then is it that directional changes are to be observed in certain sequences of objects – as is undoubtedly the case?

A number of possibilities present themselves. The first is a rather speculative suggestion: that there is some feature of the actual process of copying, as applied to particular forms, which results in similar distortions – the same kind of miscopying, in effect – being introduced at every stage. This explanation is essentially a psychological one. There is something in the way in which certain forms are perceived and reproduced by copyists which gives rise to (unconscious yet systematic) transformations, conforming to some regular trend. My own copying experiments with drawings (see chapter 7) have demonstrated this effect at a perhaps rather trivial level. In a different field, that of linguistics, it is well established that highly regular types of change occur historically in pronunciation, for example, in the same direction in separate languages and in a way which is unrelated to changes in meaning.

A second possible cause of such systematic trends is to do with the play of fashion. This is an area which has been brilliantly illuminated from a theoretical point of view by Gombrich; as in his essay ‘The Logic of Vanity Fair’.<sup>15</sup> The arts as much as economic life may be the scene of competition, in which each artist or craftsman strives to outdo his predecessors in the production of certain results or impressions. One example familiar from the evolutionary histories of architecture might, as Gombrich points out, be very plausibly interpreted in this light:<sup>16</sup> the sequence of French Gothic cathedrals, specifically the progressive increase in the heights of their naves, from 114 feet at Notre Dame, to 119 at Chartres, to 124 feet at Rheims, to 138 feet at Amiens. The sequence culminates in the spectacular attempt to vault the choir at Beauvais at a height of 157 feet; a project ending in disaster. The towers built by rival families in some Tuscan towns such as San Gimignano offer another precisely comparable case.

From the sublime to the (often) ridiculous, a field notoriously liable to competitive trends of this kind is the design of women’s clothing – the subject of a celebrated quantitative study made by Kroeber in collaboration with Jane Richardson.<sup>17</sup> It might be expected that sequences here would be extremely fickle; however, by measuring the positions of hemlines, waistlines and necklines over a period of three centuries, Kroeber and Richardson were able to show a regular fluctuation in the dimensions of dresses, moving back and forth between limits set by the constraints of decency at one extreme, and complete coverage of the body at the other. Clarke has a sequence illustrating the elaboration of decoration on English grandfather clocks between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries which might be interpreted in similar terms; from a simple and austere treatment, to baroque elaboration, and back to simplicity.<sup>18</sup>

Gombrich shows how these competitive trends are subject to a kind of artistic ‘inflation’, by which the attempts to achieve ever more pronounced and emphatic effects in themselves devalue the currency in which they are bought. ‘Competition for attention can lead to the unintended consequence of simply lowering the value of what you have been doing before.’<sup>19</sup> For this reason, as well as owing to technical limitations, the competitive spiral may lead to a crisis, at which the sequence abruptly ends. Alternatively, the excesses provoked in the one-upmanship of fashion may themselves create the circumstance in which a striking impression may be produced by moving in the exact opposite direction. Where a flamboyant luxuriance of decoration is the norm, then an unadorned purity of form will seem all the more dramatic. So the pendulum swings back once more.

There is a third possible cause of directional sequence in changes of artefact design, which for our subject here is by far the most important. It is to do with actual technical improvements, increases in the efficiency or performance of utilitarian objects or machines. We do not have to attribute any automatism to the process, nor do we have to deny the imaginative contributions of individual designers, to allow that repeated attempts to design some specific type of tool or apparatus may be progressively more successful in achieving the desired practical ends. Thus the first steam engines might have been ramshackle, inefficient and unreliable, whereas later models incorporated many improvements, to increase speed, power, strength or economy.

Such sequences of technical progress might in principle arise in two ways. The end-point of the series might be consciously envisaged by the craftsman or engineer from the beginning, with each successive try reaching nearer and nearer towards that goal. Gombrich offers two examples of this: the aeroplane, where the general ambition to make a powered flying machine long preceded the development of the requisite material and engineering means; and an example drawn from his own special area of interest, the evolution of technical means in painting for the achievement of a realistic illusion of the third dimension.<sup>20</sup> These processes of technical change, as Gombrich says, are thus genuinely ‘Lamarckian’ in the way in which their direction is the result of deliberate efforts to meet some perceived ‘need’ or to achieve some practical intention.

Alternatively, a series of unanticipated discoveries might occur along the course of the development of the object, which might be recognised to offer improvements and would thus be incorporated. ‘Once bronze was shown to cut better than stones, iron better than bronze and steel better than iron, these alternatives had only to be invented and presented for rational men to use them for their cutting tools.’<sup>21</sup>

Instead of attributing increases in efficiency (or ‘fitness’) in artefacts to selection exercised by some abstract ‘functional environment’, this view brings attention back to the designer himself, and the rational choices which he makes amongst available technical means so as to achieve definite practical ends. The designer finds himself in a specific historical situation, facing some particular problem. He responds to the logic of that situation with some design solution, and this in itself produces a change in the problem: it creates a new problem. Meanwhile parallel developments in other technologies change the repertoire of possible materials, manufacturing methods, mechanical devices, components, and so on, available to the designer; and social or cultural changes perhaps alter the functional demands which the artefact is designed to meet. Both Popper and Gombrich have argued in favour of an ‘analysis of situations’ in some such terms as a methodological alternative to historicist theories and an answer to their ‘poverty’ – Popper for the social sciences, Gombrich for the history of art and by extension for technological and design history.<sup>22</sup>

Henri Focillon has given an account of our favourite evolutionary topic, Gothic architecture and its engineering, according to essentially this method.<sup>23</sup> He treats developments in cathedral construction as a series of experiments, the results of each one informing the next. ‘By experiment’, he says, ‘I mean an investigation that is supported by prior knowledge, based upon a hypothesis, conducted with intelligent reason, and carried out in the realm of technique.’ Some experiments may have been inconclusive, wasted. Others showed the feasibility of various structural expedients, such as the flying buttress or certain variants of the ribbed vault. It should not be assumed that the logic according to which the results were judged was wholly an engineering logic; it might be the ‘logic of the eye’, or the ‘logic of the intellect’, all of which might either coincide, or be in conflict.

But it is, nevertheless, admissible to suppose that the experiments of Gothic art, bound powerfully one to the other, and in their royal progress discarding all solutions that were either hazardous or unpromising, constitute by their very sequence and concatenation a kind of logic – an irresistible logic that eventually expresses itself in stone with a classic decisiveness.<sup>24</sup>

Another period in the history of architecture of which we might imagine an account being profitably made through an analysis of its ‘situational logic’ is the development of the skyscraper office building in the Chicago of the 1880s and 1890s. Such an analysis would treat the basic problem set by restricted sites, the constraints of the requirement for daylight, the economic demand for a maximum of floor space; the mechanical inventions required to make buildings of such a height possible – principally the elevator and new designs of foundation; the limits of masonry construction, and their transcendence with the introduction of the steel frame; the contribution of electric light, fireproofing, improvements in plumbing; the competitive element in the drive towards even greater heights.

In general we can see that an approach to ‘artificial history’ through the logic of situations can provide an understanding of progressive development in the technical aspects, without resort to any deterministic theory of the necessity of one step following upon another. There is a logic of priorities, by which it is necessary for certain inventions or discoveries to be made before others are possible (thus the construction of the high-speed computer, though its principles were worked out a century earlier, had to wait on certain developments in electronics; or, another example, the pneumatic tyre exploited prior progress in the technology of vulcanising rubber). Again the logic of the matter clearly demands, in the kind of sequence represented by the substitution of stone by iron by bronze by steel in cutting instruments, that the historical order follow the relative merits of the materials in question. But this logic only defines the preconditions under which opportunities for various new technological ‘moves’ are created, and it does not determine their nature or future direction.

To sum up: the explanations of artefact sequences made according to a situational logic will be related to the cultural and social circumstances in which the demand for the artefact is created and given meaning; to the constraints imposed on design by technological and material means available at each historical juncture; and to the body of knowledge, scientific or otherwise, by which the designer is informed and on the basis of which his design ‘hypotheses’ are made and tested. Changes in form, and the emergence of ‘types’, will be the result of processes which represent responses to problems, and which must be referred to purposes. The study of typology and morphology by themselves (which is in effect what Clarke proposes) provide no such explanation, and, as Kubler says, avoid ‘the principal aim of history, which . . . has been to identify and reconstruct the particular problems to which any action or thing must correspond as a solution’.<sup>25</sup>

If the craft tradition provides many examples of nicely graduated series in which the changes in the forms of artefacts are small and slow, it is nevertheless easy, and increasingly so with the advance of technology, to point to abrupt transitions, radical innovations, large jumps which serve to break these sequences and which leave the analogy with biological evolution rather hard to sustain. It is quite beyond the scope of this study to try to give any theoretical account of the processes of technical invention or the nature of creativity in design – which are large enough subjects for books in their own right. Perhaps at the most general level, however, without going very far into the psychology of the question, it is possible to attribute radical novelty in the design of artefacts to two kinds of mental operation.

The first is through existing parts or components of a designed object, themselves perhaps produced by slow processes of technical evolution, being put together into new arrangements: a principle of fusion and/or recombination. Included within this category would be the kinds of inventive process alluded to briefly in chapter 6, by which new types of object are created by the amalgamation of two or more old ones: the convergence of several lines in the family tree of artefact evolution. Where the designer has access to a substantial body of information about artefacts from cultures remote both geographically and historically from his own, then even if he replicates such designs in their entirety (like the facsimile of the Parthenon in Nashville, Tennessee), the chain of copying is by this fact enabled to cross large gaps in time and space; and if he recombines elements or parts of designs drawn from many eclectic sources, the sequences become correspondingly more complex.

The second operation depends in a different way on the accumulation of historical cultural and scientific knowledge. Empirical experience of a range of related designs provides a body of knowledge and understanding on the basis of which it is possible to build a generalised theory of that class of artefacts, and so use the theory to extrapolate, beyond the tried cases, to hypothetical but related designs as yet not constructed.

An imaginary example drawn from the history of cookery may serve to illustrate these ideas. We might suppose that in primitive, stable or isolated cultures, culinary recipes are transmitted from one generation to the next with changes occurring only gradually (perhaps occasioned by the changing availability of different foodstuffs, changes in cooking technology, the vagaries of fashion in eating habits, etc.); so that the ‘artefact sequence’ represented by the succession of many versions of the same meal would show a genuinely evolutionary character. (Notice, incidentally, the very clear illustration which this example offers of the distinction between the inherited ‘design’, the recipe – in biological terms the ‘genotype’ – and the particular individual artefacts, the meals – or ‘phenotypes’ – in which the recipe is realised. Also the description of the dish which the recipe consititutes comprises no representation of what it tastes like, or even necessarily any picture of what it looks like, but only a set of instructions by which to make it.) Each generation of cooks makes the dish ‘like mother used to make it’, in the sure knowledge that by following the same procedure it will come out just as before.

When cooks become aware of recipes from other countries or other historical periods than their own – perhaps through the circulation of printed cookery books – then they are freed from the limitations of their particular traditional culinary culture, and they can experiment with an eclectic cuisine, perhaps combining separate elements of dishes from different regions and traditions. These combinations may be more or less successful, to the degree to which the cook can achieve a coherence, a ‘correlation of the parts’. The creation of wholly new dishes, and not just minor rearrangements of existing ones, will be dependent on the cook having a general understanding of the principles of different cooking processes, of the chemical and biological reactions, perhaps, which various ingredients undergo, and of the general kinds of effect and taste which novel combinations and treatments will produce. As the prophet of scientific gastronomy, Brillat-Savarin, put it:

The sciences are not like Minerva, who sprang fully armed from the brain of Jupiter; they are daughters of time, and take shape imperceptibly, first, by the combination of methods learned from experience, and later by the discovery of principles derived from the combination of these methods.<sup>26</sup>

We might say in general of the transition from craft procedures to ‘selfconscious’ methods that empirical knowledge, gradually codified perhaps into scientific knowledge, about the performance of actual past designs begins to allow predictions to be made about the engineering performance of new, hypothetical designs which differ substantially from tested precedent – so much so as to make a simple slight extrapolation unreliable. In the craft tradition, since there are no radical departures from the repeated type, it is possible for artefacts to be made which are technically very sophisticated, which exploit physical principles, chemical processes or the properties of materials in very subtle ways – but without any of their makers having any theoretical understanding of how these effects are achieved. The principles have been discovered empirically, and are embodied in the inherited design. We might speak, in a sense, of information being conveyed within the forms of the artefacts themselves. The craftsman knows how to make the object, he follows the traditional procedure (the recipe); but in many respects he literally does not know what he is doing.

It is rather in the nature of the problem that evidence for these observations is somewhat hard to come across, since we have little recorded documentary evidence from craftsmen of their actual methods of working; and, of course, they will in any case not have set down what they themselves do not know. Here and there it is possible, nevertheless, to pick up scraps of information which are sufficient to demonstrate beyond much doubt that these assertions are broadly true. These instances are mostly cases where the change is actually being made from a craft-based design process to a more consciously theory-based approach; and the actual individuals who have made this transition in their own lifetime are able to articulate what has happened.

Possibly the most striking illustration of this kind is provided by George Sturt’s remarkable and fascinating book The Wheelwright’s Shop, to which new attention has been drawn by the design theorist Christopher Jones, among others.<sup>27</sup> Sturt worked building farm wagons in the nineteenth century, and the book is his collected reminiscences, written at a time (the 1920s) when the old craft was finally disappearing. It provides a detailed testimony to the role of traditional technique – the knowledge of how, but without the knowledge of why – passed on from craftsman to craftsman, in preserving the continuity of tried and tested forms.

From what Sturt says it appears that the detailed information required for the construction of this extremely complex and subtly designed object, the wagon – no one timber of which was straight or square, but all precisely curved and tapered – was not stored in written records or in drawings at all, except for a few templates for particular components. Instead the information was stored in the heads of the wheelwrights, in their almost instinctive skills in cutting and shaping each piece; stored as an accumulated body of lore and tradition, shared between many men; learnt, through apprenticeship, either by verbal rules, or as physical actions and through the sequences of steps required to make each different part of the work; and stored above all in the shapes of existing wagons themselves, which were there to copy and to follow.

With certain features of the designs, it is quite clear from Sturt’s account that no one, no one at all, knew their explanation, not even Sturt himself, although he was an educated man in charge of the shop and had many years of learning from the example of master craftsmen. It took him years of reasoning and reflection to appreciate exactly why it was that a wheel must be ‘dished’ to a certain degree, what it was that fixed the diameter of wheels or the particular curve or taper of each plank. The experienced craftsman knew that these features were necessary, but did not question them or understand their meaning analytically.

There was nothing for it but practice and experience of every difficulty. Reasoned science for us did not exist. ‘Theirs is not to reason why.’ What we had to do was to live and work to the measurements, which had been tested and corrected long before our time in every village shop across the country.<sup>28</sup>

An equivalent example to that of Sturt, in the field of ship-building, is provided by J. S. Russell, who acted as naval architect to Brunel on the Great Eastern (an unhappy collaboration), and who was the author of the first systematic treatise on his subject in English, a magnificent book entitled The Modern System of Naval Architecture.<sup>29</sup> Russell had seen a revolution in the building of large ships during his own career, the change from timber construction to iron, and from sailing ships to steam propulsion. He had also been instrumental in the creation of the new profession of naval architecture, distinct from the craft of ship-building; and he makes the – not unexpected – analogy with the equivalent professional and craft distinction in the design of buildings.\* The new naval architect will work by science, calculation, ‘headwork’, where the craftsman worked by imitation, by copying and by inherited, manual skills.<sup>30</sup>

\* The car designer Raymond Dietrich has described how he and his colleague T. L. Hibbard, who together set up LeBaron Carrossiers in the early 1920s, wanted to make the break from the carriage-building tradition which had continued to dominate car body design technique up to that date; and how they turned for their model to the design process in architecture. ‘We wanted to be to cars what architects are to buildings.’ ‘The Dietrich Story – Part 1’, Veteran and Vintage (February, 1974), 156–62.

The need for theoretical texts such as his own, Russell says, is occasioned by the enormous changes in scale, techniques and materials of ship construction, to which the traditional methods and craft knowledge have become inapplicable. Only by means of a theoretical, scientific understanding can the performance of new unbuilt designs of ships be predicted with accuracy. In fact, as Russell recounts, a great number of the early experiments during the 1820s with large iron ships had been disasters – ships which overturned on launching, ships calamitously underpowered, ships whose stability could be ensured only by adding extra floats or masses of cement ballast. The design of these vessels had been based on erroneous rules of thumb, and on principles supposedly drawn from traditional boat-building experience but which were as it turned out ‘misknown, and misbelieved, and mistaught’.<sup>31</sup> The true but only tacitly known principles of the old craft techniques had been lost or ignored and were only to be rediscovered through scientific experiment and calculation (for example, by Russell’s own work in hydrodynamics, and that of such contemporaries as Froude, Griffiths and others). As Russell says:

The forms and proportions of ships, prescribed by traditional knowledge, and universally employed in the early parts of this century, have either ceased to exist, or are preserved as relics. Some even of the principles, which prescribed these forms, and were called Science, have lost their hold on the minds of men, and are abandoned.<sup>32</sup>

Our earlier example from cookery provides another case in point. It is quite possible to bake bread, to brew beer or to make an omelette without the slightest chemical knowledge of the (extremely complex) reactions and biological processes which go on in each case. The same is true of those ‘recipes’ which are used in the building trade. Vitruvius gives a detailed account of the chemical reactions of lime and of pozzolana when they are mixed with water for making mortar and concrete – an account which is, as one might imagine from the general state of Roman chemical theory, completely erroneous.<sup>33</sup> This was unimportant so long as the means of manufacture and the structural characteristics of these building materials were known by empirical experience.

It is an implication of this general point – that in craft production a degree of knowledge relating to effective or well-adapted designs is embodied in the craft products themselves and in traditional methods of manufacture, without that knowledge being appreciated or recorded consciously – that if the craft techniques and forms are abruptly abandoned, then that knowledge, acquired through many generations of trial and error, is altogether and unwittingly lost. (The effect is the same as in Popper’s ‘thought experiments’, where tools and machines were destroyed along with libraries.) It is not necessarily assimilated, in its entirety, into the consciously held analytical, scientific body of knowledge, set down in writing, which informs the self-conscious designer or engineer who replaces the craftsman and who works from principle rather than precedent. Russell’s account of nineteenth-century ship-building illustrates this point.

When new designs are made which represent substantial departures from precedent, and where there is no opportunity for the testing of these designs in the real world through constructing prototypes – as in the case of buildings, civil engineering works, large and costly ‘one-off’ machines and vehicles, and so on – then it becomes necessary to make certain theoretical predictions during the course of the design process about their anticipated performance. These predictions may be of a more or less specific or precise nature. They will have to do with the appearance of the artefact; with its physical behaviour in certain respects (perhaps strengths of structural members, weather-resisting properties of materials, the physics of the heating or lighting of buildings, whatever it may be); with the way in which people will use the object or building or behave in relation to it, how they will perceive it, even what their aesthetic judgements about it may be.

It would be reasonable to expect that such predictions would be more difficult to make, and less trustworthy (though no less important, for that) towards the psychological and aesthetic end of this range, and more reliable towards the geometrical, material and physical end. Indeed the predictions in these latter respects may be based in time on scientific knowledge of the properties of materials and structures, and the principles governing the behaviour of classes of related designs, of which the artefact in question represents one instance. This scientific knowledge is of course a formalisation, a generalisation and an extension of the empirical knowledge gained originally through the trial-and-error processes of the craft tradition – developed and tested perhaps in programmes of deliberate controlled experiment. We can see how an increase in generalised or scientific knowledge about the performance of artefacts in these physical and material aspects may be the cause of a departure from craft methods, since it opens up opportunities for radical innovation. At the same time, looked at in another way, such knowledge may be called for precisely because of the breakdown or abandonment of craft procedures (as in the case of hydrodynamics and ship design in the nineteenth century).

I offered the suggestion, in a previous chapter, that the architects and design theorists of the modern movement were guilty, in the view which they took of scientific method, of falling into the ‘inductive fallacy’. A second related misunderstanding about science and about its possible applications in design has been that somehow design method could be made scientific, and that there was some possibility of an equation of design method with scientific method. Whatever parallels might be made between design and scientific procedures in terms of Popper’s scheme of alternating hypothesis and test, of ‘conjecture and refutation’, the fact is that the nature and purpose of the two enterprises are fundamentally distinct. Design is concerned with making unique material objects to answer to specific purposes; while science is concerned with making statements about the characteristic behaviour of general classes of objects or phenomena under given conditions, and defining the limits on these classes and this behaviour. The relationship of the two has been made very clear by Lionel March in his essay ‘The Logic of Design’.<sup>34</sup>

If the modern movement theorists had actually gone to the engineers whom they admired and asked them how they went about the business of design, the engineers would have told them that, in all but the simplest and most highly constrained problems, their methods involved essentially the same element of intuition and speculation as did architecture or the applied arts. The key difference between the design processes of engineers and architects was not in the logic of their respective design methods, which was largely the same, but in the body of scientific knowledge which informed and constrained design in either case. The engineers were, and are, the possessors of a body of scientific theory about structures and machines; and it is this body of understanding which provides them with their design hypotheses, with their first preliminary sketch proposals or germinal ideas for designs. Furthermore, once an initial sketch is somewhat developed and begins to be filled out with detail, then the body of scientific understanding is brought to bear again, because it is in the light of this knowledge and the predictions of performance which it allows that the proposed design can be reliably and rigorously criticised and tested and accordingly modified.

The architects were unable to make use of science in architecture, because there was no science of architecture – or at least only a rather undeveloped science. That is to say, there did not exist, nor does there exist, a corpus of knowledge of a scientific kind at an abstract level about classes of existing and hypothetical buildings and their behaviour which can be compared with the mechanical and structural theory of the engineers.

This is not to say that no body of general or collective knowledge (‘World Three’ knowledge) exists in architecture. It quite evidently does, in what is transmitted in architectural education, in architectural literature and, not least, embodied in the designs of existing and historical buildings themselves. But such knowledge is not, with certain areas of exception, of an organised, explicit, communally available and, most important, scientific nature. The exceptions are provided by the findings of what has traditionally been distinguished as ‘building science’: studies of building performance in relation to physical and meteorological environment, the properties of building materials, and the engineering behaviour of architectural structures. If we are to talk about an architectural science in more general terms, then certainly such a science must start from, and incorporate, this existing building science.

We are brought back to the questions which I posed in chapter 1: how far can and should the project of a building or architectural science extend? More generally, what are the features or properties of artefacts of all kinds to which scientific study should be directed, and about which scientific predictions might be made?

My answers will necessarily have to be abbreviated and tentative ones. First, I suggest that, if we are to interpret the history of artefacts through a ‘logic of situations’, then we must accept as a corollary that certain features of artefacts, of their perception and mode of use by those who experience and employ them, are in principle beyond the reach of scientific predictions. The particular meanings which attach to artefacts, the aims which they serve, the exact ways in which they are seen and evaluated aesthetically, hence to some extent people’s behaviour in relation to them, are all products of the specific historical situations in which the objects or buildings are made and from which the observers or users come, and they are changed at every step by the new problems which those situations throw up and by the new and individual responses which those problems evoke.

The relation between the observer and the work of art or man-made object is mediated by the cultural structures of World Three; and these structures, and the meanings which they generate, are continually being transformed. We do not have to espouse a complete aesthetic relativism – as Gombrich shows – to accept that, because of our education and our awareness of history, every ‘move’, the appearance of every new work, alters the context in which we understand and appreciate not only that work itself, but in principle all other works as well.<sup>35</sup> Kubler calls this the ‘T. S. Eliot effect’, after Eliot’s observation of how ‘every major work of art forces upon us a reassessment of all previous works’.<sup>36</sup>

For these sorts of reason I am extremely sceptical of a great deal of the work which has been done in the last few years in architectural and environmental psychology and sociology. This seems to hold as a working assumption the belief that regularities of a reproducible and universal, presumably biologically-based, kind may be determined in the behavioural or aesthetic responses which people make to certain architectural forms, spatial arrangements, uses of colour and so on. As Hillier and Leaman suggest, such research is carried on within a biologically conceived ‘man-environment paradigm’ which actually removes the middle term, removes the structures of World Three, through which the man-made world acquires significance and is understood at all.<sup>37</sup>

The most that could be expected in this direction, in my view, is that certain very general perceptual constancies or behavioural dispositions might be attributable to the human physiological makeup; and that physiology would set the ‘outer limits’ – to speak very vaguely – on the broad ways, or would establish the general logic, according to which objects might be seen and given meaning. But this is obviously a long way from making detailed predictions about aesthetic or behavioural responses to particular works on particular historical occasions.

Incidentally, this criticism is not intended to deny the value of certain types of sociological research whose purpose is to canvass the users’ assessment of some building after it has been put up and occupied, or perhaps to seek consumers’ opinions of a given commercial product. It is only to argue that the findings of such studies – a kind of dignified ‘market research’ if you will – are essentially retrospective; and that if any predictions or response to future objects or buildings are made on their basis, then these are by way of short-term extrapolations only and lack any wide or long-range application.

Meanwhile the laws of physics, the laws of chemistry, the geometrical laws of three-dimensional space – on which rest, ultimately, the applied sciences of the engineering disciplines, including traditional building science – are clearly not altered by the course of technological or cultural history. (Only our knowledge of them may change.) Thus the predictions which may be made with their support about future buildings or other artefacts must be accorded a quite different status.

I offer this argument in support of the proposition that ‘sciences of the artificial’ must confine themselves, in so far as they aim to have long-term or reliable predictive powers, to the physical and material behaviour and attributes of artefacts. Whether the argument be accepted or not, there is a second and much more pragmatic reason for starting from this engineering end of the subject, and that is to do with what Medawar would refer to as the ‘agenda of research’.<sup>38</sup> It makes sense to begin in research with problems which there is actually some hope of solving in the short run rather than those which may possibly be of the most pressing political or immediate practical concern (which fact does not guarantee that they are readily soluble, since science works always at the frontiers which it has presently reached and cannot jump far beyond these). What is more there is a ‘logic of priorities’ in science, by which the investigation of certain sorts of question is absolutely dependent on having answers to other questions which are logically prior.

To take an illustration from architecture: supposing we wish to predict something about the way in which people will perceive or experience an architectural interior which is not yet built, it is obviously essential at the very least to be able to make accurate physical predictions first about that interior itself – about its dimensions; about its colours, which will depend on the materials of the surfaces and on the ways in which light enters the room and is reflected; about the temperature of the air, which will depend on a host of meteorological, material, mechanical and thermodynamic factors, and so on. Such predictions are by no means trivial, and some rather sophisticated physical and geometrical models are required in order to make them.

What then are the directions in which building science should now move? It is fair to say that most work in the subject in the past has concentrated on the behaviour of isolated building elements and the physical, chemical and structural properties of different building materials. More recently, and particularly with the development of computer models, efforts have been made to take a more holistic view, and to study the complex behaviour of the various systems from which the building is made up: the structural system, the ventilating and heating systems, the lighting system. This work has created needs for the description and classification of the geometric forms of building, since in order to generalise the results of experiments about the relation of physical performance of buildings to their shapes it is clearly necessary to have some way of characterising their designs in geometrical terms.

These results would be applied in the design process in the evaluation of schemes, as for instance when a hypothetical proposal for a building is put forward and the knowledge gained from the scientific activity is applied to making calculations of its particular anticipated performance in the various respects. But at the same time this knowledge informs the making of the ‘hypotheses’ in the first place, since these are not produced blindly but on the basis of a general understanding of the sorts of structures which may be appropriate for the building in question, the sorts of lighting which will be achieved by certain kinds of geometric arrangements of windows and walls, or whatever.

Thus the contribution of building science to architectural design is at two levels: it provides the means for predicting the behaviour of particular proposed designs in the physical and engineering aspects; but beyond this, and more broadly, it defines (in principle) the limits on possible designs which the given constraints impose. The design problem as a whole is only determined, as we have seen, by the purposes which the artefact is to serve, and in relation to some cultural framework which gives the object meaning. This is even true of artefacts as utilitarian-seeming as the beams or columns of an architectural structure. The need for the structural element is referrable to the purposes which the building as a whole is meant to serve, and these purposes are in turn created culturally.

Nevertheless, once a requirement for buildings, and hence beams, is decided upon, then it is the role of structural engineering to determine the possibilities for their design – which will be a function of the materials used, the patterns of loading, their profile in cross-section and so on. Tests of the strengths of beams can show the limits on their lengths or slenderness – beyond which the members fail or are unsafe – given certain values for these constraining factors.

It is not just limitations on the material possibilities in design which may be susceptible to systematic investigation. Design is concerned above all with the arrangement of elements or components – material or spatial – in different two- or three-dimensional configurations. Here the laws of geometry or topology also place restrictions, possibly quite severe ones, on the range and number of spatial arrangements which are possible for certain classes of design. We can thus distinguish, in structural design for example, between the selection of an appropriate configuration (the study of possible configurations from which the designer’s choice is made being essentially a matter for combinatorial analysis) and the assignment of appropriate sizes to the elements of that configuration – what Spillers has termed ‘parametric design’.<sup>39</sup> (The distinction is exemplified in any handbook of structural steel tables, where the configuration of each available steel member is given as a schematic cross-section and the possible sizes are listed separately in tabular form.)

Some nineteenth-century work on mechanisms, such as that of Reuleaux, had the purpose of enumerating possible arrangements of such mechanical elements as gears and linkages by means of a formal ‘algebra of machines’.<sup>40</sup> Developments in combinatorial mathematics over the last few decades, together with the introduction of computer techniques, have provided the tools with which to carry forward Reuleaux’s programme. For instance, the representation of mechanisms in mathematical form as graphs separates out the structural relationships between the components (i.e. how the drive or movement is transmitted from one part to another) from the incidental details of their specific sizes, shapes or materials of construction. As Freudenstein and Woo have argued, this opens up the very interesting possibility of an abstract classification of machines according to their structure, and independent of the particular functional uses – hoists, baby carriages, typewriters – to which they might be put.<sup>41</sup> Furthermore in certain limited areas it offers the prospect of being able to list all possible machines of a given class.

Some equivalent exercises in the enumeration of combinatorial possibilities of arrangement in design have been carried out in other areas of engineering, as for instance in cataloguing possible configurations for electrical circuits or possible ways of bracing framed structures for buildings. In the architectural context, I myself have made some studies of the possibilities for the topological arrangement of rectangular rooms in small rectangular plan layouts, these possibilities being regarded as distinct where the relationships of adjacency between the rooms are different, and no account being taken of dimensions.<sup>42</sup> These investigations have been taken further by various colleagues, and we have been able to enumerate all such plan arrangements with up to nine rooms and to classify these possibilities according to different properties of architectural interest. Meanwhile it has been shown, by March and Earl, how in principle a similar enumeration may be made of all topologically distinct sub-divisions of the plane into regions – i.e. all ‘plans’ in a very general sense – without restriction to any particular geometric discipline, rectangular or otherwise.<sup>43</sup>

The implications of this sort of work are that, if for example it is decided to design a house layout in which there are to be a given number of rectangular rooms adjacent to each other in certain specified ways and arranged all within a surrounding rectangular boundary, then the number of topologically distinct possibilities for that layout is finite, and they may be exhaustively tabulated. Limitations on the areas, proportions or dimensions of the rooms will set further bounds on the ‘solution space’ within which all admissible arrangements are contained. Of course the designer may not wish to restrict himself in this way to a rectangular geometry, or he may change his mind about the adjacencies or sizes of rooms – in which case the number and character of the possible solutions, and the boundaries of the solution space, will alter correspondingly.

The fact that houses in Western industrial societies consist very frequently of sub-divisions of an enclosed volume into rectangular spaces is a cultural peculiarity. Indeed the way in which the artefact ‘house’ may be identified at all in any society is by reference only to some cultural definition. Houses are obviously not limited in any obligatory or absolute way to consisting of rectangular rooms arranged together in various ways; but where they are so made up the limitations set by the geometry of the situation, as revealed by an investigation of the sort described, must necessarily apply. Topological and dimensional constraints set bounds, one might say, on what is allowable or feasible in the design of such plans, but within these bounds they do not by any means define what is desirable, let alone what particular choices the architect might actually make in any given scheme.

Whether such intrinsic material or spatial constraints are of real practical consequence for design will depend very much on how severe or restrictive they turn out to be. At this stage the question is one of open debate. In a rather different, anthropological context (and in the course of an antifunctionalist polemic) Sahlins expresses doubt on whether the ‘negative determinations’ set by physics, chemistry and biology on culture are of very great interest, since, as he argues, they are generally so loose and permissive.<sup>44</sup> But he is talking of institutions, forms of behaviour and language, not of material artefacts, which we might well imagine would be much more narrowly constrained by the laws of physics or geometry. Certainly, the limitations on architectural arrangement of the kind outlined above are much more constraining than most architects would intuitively – and without seeing the mathematical demonstration – allow.

Where might all this involve any biological analogy? There is a shared body of mechanical and structural theory which would apply equally to the study of artefacts and to the anatomy or ‘engineering’ of animals and plants. Indeed in biology there is currently something of a revival of interest in the kind of engineering analysis of organic structures and mechanisms which D’Arcy Thompson pioneered, and through which, as we saw in the account of the ‘principle of similitude’, it is possible to determine limitations on the possible forms and structures of organisms – their sizes, weights, strengths, speeds of locomotion and the like. Some attention has also been given, for instance by Rosen, to the question of whether the designs of organic systems approach ‘optimality’ in an engineering sense.<sup>45</sup> (The difficulty in a mathematical treatment of such problems, as Rosen says, is in the definition of appropriate cost functions according to which the success of the structures or organic processes in question can be measured.)

It is perhaps not quite right to speak of an analogy here any more, rather of two separate fields of study in which the same theoretical and analytical tools might be brought to bear. Still, there are certain broad similarities between artefacts and organisms to do with the coordination and purposiveness of their designs, the integration of their functioning parts and systems, which would possibly require the same kinds of analytic approach for their understanding in mechanical or engineering terms. And certainly there would seem to be potential application of some ideas from the theory of systems, coming from biology, to the sciences of the artificial.<sup>46</sup>

Where the two subjects have the most in common, in my view, as the foregoing has perhaps indicated, is in the study of morphology; not morphology in the purely descriptive sense in which Goethe originally conceived it, but morphology in the sense of the study of possible forms, of which the actual historical forms of organisms and of artefacts represent particular cases. After an explanation of homology – similarity of form due to common descent – was provided by The Origin of Species, the question of analogy in biology, as the zoologist C. F. A. Pantin has observed, was rather brushed aside. But, as Pantin says, ‘within the animal kingdom functionally analogous organs may achieve a remarkable similarity in quite unrelated creatures. The analogy is closest where the imposed functional specification is the most detailed.’<sup>47</sup>

It is Pantin’s argument that, for example, the functional specification for an eye must be very precise and cannot vary much between animals (assuming an equivalent standard of vision is to be provided), since the nature of the incoming light stimuli and the optics of the situation remain exactly similar, and the different ways the stimuli can be satisfactorily received are rather few. On the other hand there are very many different ways in which the problem of locomotion can be solved, and the specification here is much looser. It is the motor organs, though, which give any creature its characteristic general appearance, and this accounts for a great deal of the variety in animal form. Meanwhile the brains and eyes are always much the same. ‘An octopus is obviously staring at you – it is its arms that make it so inhuman and uncouth.’ Analogies are ‘far from trivial’, Pantin says, and the physiologist does not hesitate to argue ‘by analogy’ from the details of the octopus nerve or brain to the same organs in man, despite the great evolutionary gulf between the two species.

In a paper on ‘Organic Design’ Pantin comes to some very interesting conclusions provoked by the subject of analogy.<sup>48</sup> He suggests that some nineteenth-century views of evolutionary change were of a process through which the forms of organisms could be almost idefinitely and continuously deformed in any direction. As he puts it, ‘The older conceptions of evolutionary morphology stressed the graded adaptation of which the organism is capable, just as putty can be moulded to any desired shape’<sup>49</sup> (Darwin used the term ‘plastic’).

Pantin’s reflections on the matter suggest, as we have seen, that on the contrary there are only certain ways of meeting given functional specifications, that the materials available are of a restricted variety, and that there are strict constructional limitations set by ‘engineering’ considerations. His chosen metaphor for the morphological possibilities of organic structure would not be modelling clay, but rather a child’s constructional toy such as ‘Meccano’: ‘a set consisting of standard parts with unique properties, of strips, plates and wheels, which can be utilised for various objectives such as cranes and locomotives’.<sup>50</sup>

We see that Pantin puts a new kind of interpretation on the ‘conditions of existence’ of Aristotle and Cuvier. For them the conditions of existence were a theoretical teleological device, an appeal to final causes, whose only explanation could be metaphysical. What Pantin suggests is that there are ‘conditions of existence’ embodied in the material basis of life and in the physical laws which govern organic structure and process (indeed inorganic structure too). These conditions account for that distinctness of animal (or vegetable) species which Cuvier had insisted on, and for similar reasons. While Cuvier had argued that certain combinations of parts or organs were impossible functionally, Pantin is widening this argument to assert that in fact only certain structures or parts in themselves are possible.

What emerges is some sort of synthesis of, or compromise between, two views: at the one extreme the complete unalterable functional integrity of each separate species and the impossibility of any transformation of one into another, which had been the Cuvierian position; and at the other extreme, a complete evolutionary plasticity allowing transformation in any direction and with any result. Transformation clearly is possible, and has taken place through what appears to be a slow moulding, pushing and pulling, pinching and squeezing of organic forms into new shapes. But this process is channelled, Pantin says, along certain given routes, whose direction is constrained by the permutational possibilities of the ‘component parts’ and by the limited engineering possibilities available for the solution of any given functional problem.

Transferring all this back to the discussion of the design of manmade artefacts, we see that an evolutionary view of their history, in the craft tradition, would have to take account of the material, geometrical and mechanical limitations within which this evolutionary process must be constrained – the ‘conditions of existence’ of each artefact type. The same would apply where artefacts of novel form are created by recombination, amalgamation or on the basis of generalised engineering principle. This fact would provide a logical explanation of ‘analogies’ in the designs of man-made objects – similarities of form not attributable to any connection through common cultural influence.

As Hermann Weyl has said, evolution is a historical process, and an account of its evolution alone does not offer scientific explanation of any phenomenon. ‘Explanation . . . is to be sought not in its origin but in its immanent law. Knowledge of the laws and of the inner constitution of things must be far advanced before one may hope to understand or hypothetically to reconstruct their genesis.’<sup>51</sup> In architecture this needs what W. R. Lethaby was calling for over sixty years ago, ‘a systematic research into the possibilities of walls and vaults, and of the relations between the walls and the cell, and between one cell and another’.<sup>52</sup> ‘Some day we shall get a morphology of the art by some architectural Linnaeus or Darwin, who will start from the simple cell and relate it to the most complex structure. 53