ing meaning from outside reality complement each other and are both at work in varying degrees in the shaping and the perception of all works of art. In that sense, the making and the experience of architecture, as of every art, are always critical-historical acts, involving what the architect and the viewer have learned to distinguish and to image through their own relationship with life and things. It therefore follows that the strength and value of our contact with artwill depend upon the quality of our historical knowledge. And it is obvious that knowledge instead of learning is the word which has to be employed here. Venturi's two major books have been constructed along precisely these lines. They are both critical and historical. This one, the first, despite its significant introduction of several important modes of literary criticism into architectural writing, explores mainly the physical reaction to form and is thus basically empathetic in method. The second, Learning from Las Vegas (written with authors Denise Scott Brown and Steven Izenour), is primarily concerned with the function of sign in human art and is therefore fundamentally linguistic in its approach. Between them the two volumes, always impeccably visual in their argument, shape an impressive working aesthetic for contemporary architects. At this distance, I feel doubly honored to have been invited to write the original introduction, which now seems to me not so well written as the book itself (edited by Marian Scully), but embarrassingly correct in its conclusions. I am especially pleased to have had the wit to assert in it that Complexity and Contradiction was "the most important writing on the making of architecture since Le Corbusier's Vers une Architecture, of 1923." Time has shown that this outrageous statement was nothing more than the unvarnished truth, and the critics who found it most amusing or infuriating at that moment now seem to spend a remarkable amount of energy quoting Venturi without acknowledgment, or chiding him for not going far enough, or showing that they themselves had really said it all long before. It doesn't matter much. What counts is that this brilliant, liberating book was published when it was. Itprovided architects and critics alike with more realistic and effective weapons, so that the breadth and relevance which the architectural dialogue has since achieved were largely initiated by it. Of primary interest are the newly eloquent buildings that have been inspired by its method, of which those by Venturi and Rauch have not surprisingly remained the most intellectually focused, archetypal, and distinguished. Once again, as when it sponsored the exhibition from which Hitchcock and Johnson's The International Style of 1932 derived, The Museum of Modern Art started something important when it backed this book. V.S. April, 1977