## 12. Copley Square Competition, Venturi and Rauch, Gerod Clark andArthur Jones, 1966. (348–350) For a large open space in an American city Copley Square in Boston is quite contained—on the south by the hotel, on the west by the Public Library, at the northwest corner by the new Old South Church and by the row of commercial buildings on the north. But the open corner toward the southwest where the diagonal Huntington Avenue is to be terminated, and the leaking corner toward the southeast between Trinity Church and Copley Plaza tend to weaken the sense of enclosure. And toward the east the space is enclosed ambiguously by Trinity Church itself which tends to sit in the square rather than along it. The varying heights, rhythms and scales of these buildings as well as the streets which separate them from the center of the space, further diminish the spatial unity of the existing square. The rules of the competition confined the area to be designed within the block defined by the interior sidewalks of the three streets and thediagonal sidewalk along the northwest side of Trinity Church; of course, we could not change nor anticipate change in any of the disparate buildings around the space. So we made a non-piazza; we filled up the space to define the space. We filled it with non-dense matter, a consistent but rich grid of trees. These trees are too far apart to make a traditional bosque, yet too dense to be read as discreet elements. When you walk among them they are far enough apart to filter light with variety and to veil the church tantalizingly (you have to struggle to see the great façade) but from without, along the streets, they are a rigid form which defines the space and identifies the place. Their form as a whole, however (unlike our fountain project for Philadelphia in a different kind of context), is not a sculptural form sitting in a space because that would compete with Trinity Church. It is an overall, three-dimensional repetitive pattern without a climax, separated from the surroundings by the border of streets, and in contrast with Trinity Church which at one level of focus is accent enough in the whole composition. In the context of the "boring" consistent grid inside the square the chaotic buildings to the north become "interesting" and vital elements of the composition. Besides the mosaic of trees and tall lampposts, there is at a lower level, a grid-order made up of stepped mounds about four feet high between walkways. This grid reflects in miniature the gridiron pattern of the part of Boston surrounding Copley Square. It imitates the hierarchy of streets, big, little and medium found in the real city. Like the real gridiron city, it contains diagonal "avenues" which facilitate circulation and whose juxtaposition creates exceptional, residual blocks. Within the blocks of the lower grid is another pattern of benches, trash cans and drains in phase with the grid of trees and lampposts. This furniture, like the lampposts, is composed of conventional elements given new value by their new context. These "vulgar" elements are not specially designed; they are only thoughtfully chosen. (Compare these aluminum lampposts with the tastefully exotic bronze-like, anodized aluminum ones around the green in New Haven.) Materials are similarly plain except for the precious brick areas under the benches which make more vivid the banality of the blacktop walkways and the precast concrete of the stepped block sections, gutters and drains. There is grass only on top of the blocks where it will receive a minimum of wear. Rows of flowers atop the blocks border the avenues to extend the width of the avenues visually. Where the blocks are cut through, the cheek walls have very bold inscriptions of nursery rhymes, etc., cast into the concrete to interest children who cannot see over the blocks. The grid of trees, lampposts and street furniture and that of the hierarchy of streets are out of phase with each other along the north-south axes. These slight irregularities of rhythms contrast with the violent irregularities which come from the juxtapositions of the diagonal avenues upon the gridiron pattern of the streets which are manifest as I have said, in the residual, fragmentary blocks, triangular and polygonal in shape. Indeed, because of these contrapuntal juxtapositions of diagonals and the truncationsat the borders almost no typical or pure blocks remain. And of these, two are made exceptional. One block is reversed in section: that is, depressed exactly in the manner that the typical ones are elevated in order to make a little piazza to sit in in contrast with the typical walks you sit along; the other is level to contain a miniature replica of Trinity Church. The fragmentary blocks along the north side, gouged out with niches to sit in, are further exceptions.