from Le Corbusier, Oeuvre complète 1946–1952, 1955. ©1953. 78. Reproduced by permission of George Wittenborn, Inc., New York, from Karl Fleig (editor), Alvar Aalto, 1963. 79. Courtesy Louis I. Kahn. 80. The Museum of Modern Art. 81. Hedrich-Blessing. 82. The Museum of Modern Art. 83. The Museum of Modern Art. 84. The Museum of Modern Art. 85. © Ezra Stoller Associates. 86. Charles Brickbauer. 87. Courtesy Peter Blake. 88. Courtesy Peter Blake. 89. Courtesy Peter Blake. 90. © Lucien Hervé, Paris. 91. James L. Dillon & Co., Inc., Philadelphia. 92. Touring Club Italiano, Milan. 93. A. F. Kersting, London. 94. Reproduced by permission of Giulio Einaudi Editore, Turin, from Paolo Portoghesi and Bruno Zevi (editors), Michelangiolo Architetto, 1964. 95. Reproduced by permission of Giulio Einaudi Editore, Turin, from Paolo Portoghesi and Bruno Zevi (editors), Michelangiolo Architetto, 1964. 96. University News Service, University of Virginia. 97. MAS, Barcelona. 98. Touring Club Italiano, Milan. 99. From Colen Campbell, Vitruvius Britannicus, vol. II, London 1717. 100. Collection: Mr. & Mrs. Burton Tremaine, Meriden, Conn. 101. Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth-Middlesex, from Kenneth John Conant, Carolingian and Romanesque Architecture, 800-1200, Baltimore 1959. 102. From George William Sheldon, Artistic Country-Seats; Types of Recent American Villa and Cottage Architecture, with Instances of Country Clubhouses, D. Appleton and Company, New York 1886. 103. Photo by Georgina Masson, author of Italian Villas and Palaces, Thames and Hudson, London 1959. 104. Photo by John Szarkowski, author of The Idea of Louis Sullivan, The University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis. 1956 The University of Minnesota. 105. Pix Inc. 106. Archivo Fotografico, Monumenti Musei e Gallerie Pontificie, Vatican City. 107. Reproduced by permission, from Progressive Architecture, April 1961. 108. Photo by Martin Hürlimann, author of Englische Kathedralen, Atlantis Verlag, Zurich 1956. 109. Courtesy Casa de Portugal. Photo: SNI-YAN. 110. Alinari. 111. Reproduced by permission of Giulio Einaudi Editore, Turin, from Paolo Portoghesi and Bruno Zevi (editors), Michelangiolo Architetto, 1964. 112. Chicago Architectural Photo Co. 113. Reproduced by permission of Country Life Ltd., London, from A.S.G. Butler, The Architecture of Sir Edwin Lutyens, vol. III, New York 1950. ©Country Life. 114. Reproduced by permission, from Architectural Design, December 1962. 115. Photo by Martin Hürlimann, author of Italien, Atlantis Verlag, Zurich 1959. 116. Bildarchiv Foto Marburg, Marburg/Lahn. 117. Jean Roubier, Paris. 118. Bildarchiv Foto Marburg, Marburg/Lahn. 119. MAS, Barcelona. 120. MAS, Barcelona. 121. Robert Venturi. 122. From Colin Campbell Vitruvius Britannicus, vol. III, London 1725. 123. Jean Roubier, Paris. 124. Gebrüder Metz, Tübingen. 125. © Trustees of Sir John Soane's Museum. 126. Alinari. 127. Cunard Line. 128. Alinari. 129. Reproduced by permissionof Giulio Einaudi Editore, Turin, from Paolo Portoghesi and Bruno Zevi (editors), Michel. angiolo Architetto, 1964. 130. Photo by Martin Hürlimann, author of Italien, Atlantis Verlag, Zurich 1959. 131. Courtesy of Anton Schroll and Co., Vienna, publisher of Heinrich Decker, Romanesque Art in Italy, 1958. 132. Reproduced by permission of Verlag Gebr. Mann, Berlin, from H. Knackfuss, Didyma, part I, vol. III, 1940. 133. Reproduced by permission of Country Life Ltd., London, from A.S.G. Butler, The Architecture of Sir Edwin Lutyens, vol. I, 1935. Country Life. 134. The Museum of Modern Art. 135. MAS, Barcelona. 136. California Division of Highways. 137. Alinari. 138. Reproduced by permission of Harry N. Abrams, Inc., New York, from Henry A. Millon and Alfred Frazer, Key Monuments of the History of Architecture, 1964. 139. Reproduced by permission of Henry-Russell Hitchcock from his book In the Nature of Materials, Duell, Sloan & Pearce, New York 1942. 140. Archives Nationales, Paris. 141. Archives Nationales, Paris. 142. Touring Club Italiano, Milan. 143. © Trustees of Sir John Soane's Museum. 144. Reproduced by permission of Architectural Book Publishing Co., Inc., New York, from W. Hegemann and E. Peets, The American Vitruvius. 1922 Paul Wenzel and Maurice Krakow. 145. Reproduced by permission of Architectural Book Publishing Co., Inc., New York, from W. Hegemann and E. Peets, The American Vitruvius. © 1922 Paul Wenzel and Maurice Krakow. 146. J. B. Piranesi, Vedute di Roma, vol. 13. New York Public Library Art Room. 147. Reproduced by permission of Yale University Press, New Haven, from Vincent Scully, The Shingle Style, 1955. 148. Reproduced by permission of Architectural Book Publishing Co., Inc., New York, from Katharine Hooker and Myron Hunt, Farmbouses andSmall Provincial Buildings in Southern Italy, 1925. 149. A. F. Kersting, London. 150. Alinari. 151. The Museum of Modern Art. 152. Theo Frey, Weiningen. 153. Reproduced by permission of George Wittenborn, Inc., New York, from Karl Fleig (editor), Alvar Aalto, 1963. 154. Reproduced by permission of Country Life Ltd., London, from H. Avray Tipping and Christopher Hussey, English Homes, Period IV-Vol. Il, The