Work of Sir John Vanbrugh and His School, 1699-1736, 1928. © Country Life. 155. Reproduced by permission of Propyläen Verlag, Berlin, from Gustav Pauli, Die Kunst des Klassizismus und der Romantik, 1925. 156. Alinari. 157. Abraham Guillén, Lima. 158. Archives Photographiques, Caisse Nationale des Monuments Historiques, Paris. 159. Robert Venturi. 160. Bildarchiv Foto Marburg, Marburg/Lahn. 161. © Country Life. 162. Robert Venturi. 163. From RussellSturgis, A History of Architecture, vol. I, The Baker & Taylor Company, New York 1906. 164. Reproduced by permission of Propyläen Verlag, Berlin, from Heinrich Schafer and Walter Andrae, Die Kunst des Alten Orients, 1925. 165. Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth-Middlesex, from Rudolf Wittkower, Art and Architecture in Italy, 1600- 1750. Baltimore 1958. 166. Pierre Devinoy, Paris. 167. Staatlichen Graphischen Sammlung, Munich. 168. Hirmer Verlag, Munich. 169. Reproduced by permission, from L'Architettura, June 1964. 170. Alinari. 171. © Trustees of Sir John Soane's Museum. 172. Robert Venturi. 173. Robert Venturi. 174. The Museum of Modern Art. 175. © Ezra Stoller Associates. 176. Ernest Nash, Fototeca Unione, Rome. 177. Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth-Middlesex, from Nikolaus Pevsner, An Outline of European Architecture, Baltimore1960. 178. Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth-Middlesex, from Nikolaus Pevsner, An Outline of European Architecture, Baltimore 1960. 179. Friedrich Hewicker, Kaltenkirchen. 180. Courtesy Prestel Verlag, Munich. Photo: Erich Müller. 181. Reproduced by permission of Giulio Einaudi Editore, Turin, from Paolo Portoghesi and Bruno Zevi (editors), Michelangiolo Architetto, 1964 182. Reproduced by permission of Giulio Einaudi Editore, Turin, from Paolo Portoghesi and Bruno Zevi (editors), Michelangiolo Architetto, 1964. 183. Alinari-Anderson. 184. Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth-Middlesex, from G. H. Hamilton, The Art and Architecture of Russia, Baltimore 1954. 185. Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth-Middlesex, from George Kubler and Martin Soria, Art and Architecture in Spain and Portugal and Their American Dominions, 1500- 1800, Baltimore 1959. 186. Reproduced by permission of Touring Club Italiano, Milan, from L. V. Bertanelli (editor), Guida d'Italia, Lazio, 1935. 187. Reproduced by permission of Alec Tiranti Ltd., London, fromJ. C. Shepherd and G. A. Jellicoe, Italian Gardens of the Renaissance, 1953. 188. Courtesy Louis I. Kahn. 189. Alinari. 190. Reproduced by permission of Rudolf Wittkower, from his book, Art and Architecture in Italy, 1600-1750, Penguin Books, Inc., Baltimore 1958. 191. Riccardo Moncalvo, Turin. 192. Heikki Havas, Helsinki. 193. Reproduced by permission of Arkady, Warsaw, from Maria and Kazimierz Piechotka, Wooden Synagogues, 1959. 194. Reproduced by permission of George Wittenborn, Inc., New York, from Karl Fleig (editor), Alvar Aalto, 1963. 195. G. Kleine-Tebbe, Bremen. 196. From Architectural Forum, February 1950. 197. From Architectural Forum, February 1950. 198. Reproduced by permission of The University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, from Thomas Tileston Waterman, The Mansions of Virginia, 1706–1776, 1946. ©1945. 199. Robert Venturi. 200. Reproduced by permission of Herold Druck- und Verlagsgesellschaft M.B.H., Vienna, from Hans Sedlmayr, Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach, 1956. 201. Alinari. 202. From Casabella, no. 217, 1957. 203. Reproduced by permission of Alec Tiranti Ltd., London, from J. C. Shepherd and G. A. Jellicoe, Italian Gardens of the Renaissance, 1953. 204. Touring Club Italiano, Milan. 205. The Museum of Modern Art. 206. Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth-Middlesex, from Nikolaus Pevsner, An Outline of European Architecture, Baltimore 1960. 207. Soprintendenza alle Gallerie, Florence. 208. Istituto Centrale del Restauro, Rome. 209. Collection: The Whitney Museum of American Art. 210. Courtesy André Emmerich Gallery. 211. Photo by John Szarkowski, author of The Idea of Louis Sullivan, The University of MinnesotaPress, Minneapolis. 1956 The University of Minnesota. 212. Soprintendenza alle Gallerie, Florence. 213. Hirmer Fotoarchiv, Munich. 214. Hirmer Fotoarchiv, Munich. 215. From Colen Campbell, Vitruvius Britannicus, vol. I, London 1715. 216. From John Woolfe and James Gandon, Vitruvius Britannicus, vol. V, London 1771. 218. Robert Venturi. 219. Robert Venturi. 217. Courtesy City Museum and Art Gallery, Birmingham. 220. Robert Venturi. 221. Robert Venturi. 222. Reproduced by permission of Electa Editrice, Milan, from Palladio, 1951. 223. H. Roger-Viollet, Paris. 224. Slide Collection, University of Pennsylvania. 225. From I. T. Frary, Thomas Jefferson, Architect and Builder, Garrett and Massie, Inc., Richmond 1939. 226. Robert Venturi. 227. From Colen Campbell Vitruvius Britannicus, vols. I and III, London 1715 and 1725. 228. Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.,Harmondsworth-Middlesex, from Nikolaus Pevsner, An Outline of European Architecture,Baltimore 1960. 229. Bildarchiv Foto Marburg, Marburg/Lahn.