## Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture Robert Venturi ## with an introduction by Vincent Scully "I AM ESPECIALLY pleased to have had the wit to assert in [my original introduction] that Complexity and Contradiction was 'the most important writing on the making of architecture since Le Corbusier's Vers une Architecture, of 1923.' Time has shown that this outrageous statement was nothing more than the unvarnished truth, and the critics who found it most amusing or infuriating at that moment now seem to spend a remarkable amount of energy quoting Venturi without acknowledgment, or chiding him for not going far enough, or showing that they themselves had really said it all long before. It doesn't matter much. What counts is that this brilliant, liberating book was published when it was. It providedarchitects and critics alike with more realistic and effective weapons, so that the breadth and relevance which the architectural dialogue has since achieved were largely initiated by it."—Vincent Scully, April, 1977. RoBERT VENTURI is a partner in the firm ofVenturi and Rauch, Architects and Planners, Philadelphia. He has taught at Yale University and the University of Pennsylvania and was a Fellow and later Architect in Residence at the American Academy in Rome. His writing, teaching, and architectural work have had a decisive influence on the younger generation of architects throughout the world. Since Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture first appeared in 1966, it has become an essential document in architectural literature. Mr. Venturi is also the author, with Denise Scott Brown and Steven Izenour, of Learning from Las Vegas, published by The MIT Press. The Museum of Modern Art 11 West 53 Street New York, N.Y. 10019 Distributed by Harry N. Abrams, Inc. 100 Fifth Avenue New York, N.Y. 10011