Residual space that is open might be called "open poché." Kahn's "servant space," which sometimes harbors mechanical equipment, and the poché in the walls of Roman and Baroque architecture are alternative means of accommodating an inside different from the outside. Aldo van Eyck has said: "Architecture should be conceived of as a configuration of intermediary places clearly defined. This does not imply continual transition or endless postponement with respect to place and occasion. On the contrary, it implies a break away from the contemporary concept (call it sickness) of spatial continuity and the tendency to erase every articulation between spaces, i.e., between outside and inside, between one space and another (between one reality and another). Instead the transition must be articulated by means of defined in-between places which induce simultaneous awareness of what is significant on either side. An inbetween space in this sense provides the common ground where conflicting polarities can again become twin phenomena."36 Residual space is sometimes awkward. Like structural poché it is seldom economic. It is always leftover, inflected toward something more important beyond itself. The qualifications, contrasts, and tensions inherent in these spaces are perhaps cogent to Kahn's statement that "a building should have bad spaces as well as good spaces." Redundant enclosure, like crowded intricacies, is rare in our architecture. With some significant exceptions in the work of Le Corbusier and Kahn, Modern architecture has tended to ignore such complex spatial ideas. The "utility core" of Mies or early Johnson is not relevant because it becomes a passive accent in a dominant open space, rather than an active parallel to another perimeter. Contradictory interior space does not admit Modern architecture's requirement of a unity and continuity of all spaces. Nor do layers in depth, especially ,with contrapuntal juxtapositions, satisfy its requirements of economic and unequivocal relationships of forms and materials. And crowded intricacy within a rigid boundary (which is not a transparent framework) contradicts the modern tenet which says that a building grows from the inside out. What are the justifications for multiple enclosure and for theinside's being different from the outside? When Wright expressed his dictum: "an organic form grows its structure out of conditions as a plant grows out of the soil, both unfold similarly from within," 37 he had a long precedent behind him. Other Americans had advocated what was at the moment a healthy thing—a needed battle cry: Greenough: Instead of forcing the functions of every sort of building into one general form, adopting an outward shape for the sake of the eyes or association, without references to the inner distribution, let us begin from the heart as a nucleus and work outward.38 Thoreau: What of architectural beauty I now see, I know has grown gradually from within outward, out of the necessities and character of the indweller.39 Sullivan: [The architect] must cause a building to grow naturally, logically, and poetically out of its condition.40.. . Outward appearances resemble inner purposes.41 Even Le Corbusier has written: "The plan proceeds from within to without; the exterior is the result of an interior."42 But Wright's biological analogy is self-limiting, because the development of a plant is influenced into particular distortions by the particular forces of its environment as well as by its genetic order of growth. D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson saw form as a record of development in environment. The inherently rectangular order of structure and space of Aalto's apartment house in Bremen (76, 195) yields to the inner needs for light and space toward the south, like the growth of a flower toward the sun. But generally speaking, for Wright the exterior and interior space of his invariably isolated buildings was continuous, and as he was an urbanophobe, the suburban environment of his buildings, when specifically regional, was not so particularly limiting spatially as an urban context. (The flowing plan of the Robie House, however, adapts to the constriction of the back sides of its corner lot.) Wright however, I believe, refused to recognize the setting that was not sympathetic to the direct expression of the interior. The Guggenheim Museum is an anomaly on Fifth Avenue. But the Johnson Wax Building perhaps makes a negative gesture toward its indifferent urban environment by dominating and excluding it. Contrast and even conflict between exterior and interior forces exist outside architecture as well. Kepes has said: "Every phenomenon—a physical object, an organic form, a feeling, a thought, our group life—owes its shape and character to the duel between opposing tendencies; a physical configuration is a product of the duel between