# APPENDIX ONE A LIST OF C. R. ASHBEE'S ARCHITECTURAL WORKS This list includes all Ashbee's architectural works known to me, executed and unexecuted. The entries are arranged as far as possible in order of the date of their design. When Ashbee designed for a particular site on more than one occasion, all the designs for that site are listed at the date of the earliest; except that, when one of the later designs was executed, the date of that design is preferred. Works which I have not been able to date precisely will be found at the end of the list, numbers 75 to 91; the order in which they have been arranged reflects very conjectural dating. The buildings are referred to by their original names where there was one, and any modern name is given later in brackets. In the case of executed designs the rest of the address, house-numbers, street- and road-names, and the names of counties, have been adapted to modern usage. Postal rather than administrative addresses have been used. In the case of executed work, the dates should be taken to cover the period of design and execution. The materials listed are those of the external walls; materials are not listed in the case of repair or restoration work. Drawings' refers to the whereabouts of original drawings, not of illustrations. I Oxford University Extension College Model design for a centre for University Extension teaching Date: c. 1892 Source: A, 1893, vol. 49, p. 83 Not built. Drawings: V&A Prints and Drawings Sources: DSR 28 July 1893 and 25 April 1898 Sources listed in Chapter 11, note 53, including Ashbee Collection, vol. I, pp. 2–10; vol. 2, pp. 34, 36–50, 54 Neubauten in London (Berlin 19oo), plates 7 and 9 B, 1904, vol. 86, p. 31 5. Demolished 1968. Some fittings are now in the V&A. 3 Carlyle's House, 24 Cheyne Row, London SW3 Repairs and restoration Date:1895 Client: Carlyle's House Purchase Fund Committee Contractor: D. G. West, King's Road, London SW3 Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. I, p. II Cottages, pp.57-61 4 The Wodehouse, Wombourne, Addition of chapel and billiard room, alterations to gables and chimneys, and restoration of part of the interior Date:1895-7 Client: Thomas Bradney Shaw-Hellier Materials: brick, stone, half-timber and roughcast Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; The Wodehouse, Wombourne Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol 1, pp. 12–19, vol. 2, pp.185-99 AR, 1898, vol 4, Royal Academy Supplement: Third Series Further alterations to the house were made in 1912 by J. and H. E. Lavender of Wolverhampton. Both Ashbee's chapel and his billiard room have been altered internally. ## 5 House for James Guthrie, Cheyne Walk, London SW3 New studio-house Date: probably 1896 Client: it is not clear whether the house was designed at Guthrie's suggestion, or on Ashbee's initiative. Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Sources: letter from Guthrie to Ashbee of 4 Nov 1896, FA Not built. ## 6 72-3 Cheyne Walk, London SW3 Flat and separate sculptor's studio at 72; new studiohouse at 73 Date: 1896-7 Clients: John Wenlock Rollins for 72; E. A. Walton for 73 Contractor: C. R. Ashbee Materials: brick, stone and roughcast Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Sources: DSR 4 Dec 1896 Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 21-5; vol. 2, pp. 61– 9, vol. 3 Neubauten in London (Berlin 1900), plates 10 and 12 Destroyed by bombs, 17 April 1941. ## 7 Danvers Tower, on the western corner of Cheyne Walk and Danvers Street, London SW3 Block of studio-flats Date: 1896-8 Clients: Edwin Abbey, John Tweed and Ernest Oppler were thought of as potential clients at an early stage. Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Sources: London County Council: Corporate Property, Charities and Endowment Committee, Presented Papers I March, 5 April, 17 May and 20 Dec 1897, 17 Jan and 28 March 1898, and Minutes of Proceedings 20 July 1897, 5 April 1898. Rough estimate of costs, RIBA Library Letter from Ashbee to Janet Forbes, March 1898, FA Not built. ## 8 118–19 Cheyne Walk, London SW3 Repairs and alterations; addition of studio in garden Date:1897-8 Clients: Maxwell Balfour and Lionel Curtis Contractor: C. R. Ashbee Materials: brick Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Sources: DSR 11 March 1898 BN, 1901, vol.81, p. 835 Cottages, pp. 61-6 These houses were bombed during the Second World War; they have been rebuilt, and added to. ## 9 74 Cheyne Walk, London SW3 New studio-house Date:1897-8 Client: F. A. Forbes Contractor: C. R. Ashbee Materials: brick, stone and roughcast Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Sources: DSR 24 Dec 1897 Letter from Ashbee to Janet Forbes, 7 Oct 1897, FA Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 50–63; vol. 2, pp. 151-63: vol.3 BN, 1902, vol. 82, p. 846 Moderne Bauformen (Stuttgart), 1903, vol. 2, plate 75 Destroyed by bombs, 17 April 1941. ## 10 Hutton drinking fountain, Ashby, ## Wigginton and Comberford Roads, Tamworth, Staffordshire Drinking fountain and horse trough Date:1898 Client: Mrs Hutton Materials: blue Pennant sandstone. red Peterhead granite, wrought iron, gilt copper and hammered aluminium Sources: Mitchell Scrapbooks, Tamworth Public Library Ashbee Collection, vol. I, p. 313; vol. 2, p. 221 House Beautiful (Chicago), 1910, vol. 27, p. 102 Demolished c. 1965. ## II 38 and 39 Cheyne Walk, London SW3 38 a new studio-house with separate studio in the garden; 39 a new house Date:1898-9 Clients: Miss C. L. Christian at 38; probably C. R. Ashbee at 39 Contractor: C. R. Ashbee Materials: Bath stone, Bracknell brick, roughcast Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Sources: DSR 24 Sept 1898 Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 38-45; vol. 2, Pp.164-77,371-8,380-3 Neubauten in London (Berlin 19oo), plates 8 and 9 Builders' Journal and Architectural Record, 19o1-2, vol. 15, pp. 82-3 B, 1901, vol. 80, p. 64 The interior of 39 has been very much altered. ## 12 4 Danvers Street, London SW3 Various schemes for alterations and additions to an existing house (1898–9); a new studio (1908); and a new house (1913) Clients: 1898-9: Miss St John Partridge; 1908: Miss H. G. Liddle Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Sources: Ms specification for work in 1908, and undated bill of quanțities, RIBA Library Typescript in Chelsea Miscellany Book 13 (1), CPL It is unlikely that any of these schemes was carried out. The house was bombed during the Second World War. ## 13 Sts Peter and Paul, ## Horndon-on-the-Hill, Essex Removal of plaster to reveal the roof timbers, and of encumbrances surrounding the timber structure of the tower Date:1898-1900 Client: The Reverend S. W. Fischel Contractors: H. C. Mitchell of Tamworth, Staffordshire; the Guild of Handicraft Sources: Reports of 7 July 1898 and 31 Jan 1899, Horndon-on-the-Hill parish chest Ashbee Collection, vol. I, pp. 315-20; vol. 2, pp.242-55 Craftsmanship, pp. 137, 140, 142 ## 14 St Mary, Stratford-le-Bow, London E3 Repair of walls, of roof to chancel, and of nave; addition of choir vestry, fitting of oak dado to walls and piers Date:1899 Client: Restoration Committee Contractors: H. C. Mitchell of Tamworth, Staffordshire, for masons' work; Guild of Handicraft for carpentry and smiths' work Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, p. 395; vol. 2, pp.228-33 Osborn C. Hills, Saint Mary, Stratford, Bow (19oo) It is not clear just what part Ashbee played in this work. The detailtd architectural work was in the care of Walter A. Hills and Osborn C. Hills, architects, and Ashbee was officially only a member of the Restoration Committee and of a supervising committee formed by the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings; however, he listed the repair of this church among his architectural works when applying for the Slade Professorship at Oxford. ## 15 The Shoehorn, 15 Station Road, Orpington, Kent New house Date:1900 Client: Henry Fountain Contractor: B. J. White and Sons, 6 Camden Terrace, Chislehurst, Kent Materials: brick Cost: £1,260 Drawings: Drawings submitted to the District Surveyor, now in the possession of the London Borough of Bromley Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 75–8; vol. 2, PP.33I-9 Cottages, pp. 23-5 A single-storey extension has been added, and the chimney stack has been removed. ## 16 40-5 Cheyne Walk, London SW3 Six schemes for a group of studios and houses (undated—possibly the earliest scheme); for a block of flats (19oo–o1); for a block of larger flats with garages (July 1907); for a variant of the July 1907 scheme in two blocks (Nov 19o7); for an adaptation of the Nov 1907 scheme to a 'University Hall Extension' (Nov 1907); and finally for a Fraternity House' for the University of London (1912) Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Sources: WGC, pp. 84-5 and plate 76 17 115-16 Cheyne Walk, London SW3 Scheme for workshops for the Guild of Handicraft (c. 19oo?); undated designs for flats; undated design for a studio-house; final design for 'World's End House' a studio-house, dated 1914 Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Sources: Prospectus at CPL None of these schemes was built. ## 18 Hallingbury Place, Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire Addition of a billiard room, incorporating panelling and a mantelpiece from Coopersale in Essex Date:1901 Client: George Bramston Archer-Houblon Contractor: Guild of Handicraft for carpenters' work, metalwork and decoration Materials: brick Source: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 28–35; vol. 2, pp. 130–4, 136–9; vol.3 Drawing of Coopersale inscribed by Ashbee at the National Monuments Record 'Memoirs', vol. 7, pp. 288–9 Builders' Journal and Architectural Record, 19o1-2, vol. 15, p. 113 Part of Ashbee's work was obscured after a few years behind a ceiling designed by C. Harrison Townsend. All of Hallingbury Place was demolished in 1922. 19 75 Cheyne Walk, London SW3 New house Date:1901-2 Client: Mrs William Hunt Contractor: General Builders Ltd., Notting Hill; carpenters' work by the Guild of Handicraft Materials: brick, stone and roughcast Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Sources: DSR 4 April 1902 Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 341-3, 345, vol. 3 Moderne Bauformen (Stuttgart), 1903, vol. 2, plate 43 Destroyed by bombs, 17 April 1941. 20 Izod's Cottage, High Street, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire (now Shreelaine) New house Date: 1902 Client: W. N. Izod Contractor: C. R. Ashbee Materials: stone and brick; some materials from a demolished house on the site were used. Cost: £270 Drawings: CT Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 90–3, vol. 3 Cottages, pp. 7-1 I Craftsmanship, pp. 50-1, 54-5 ## 21 I-4 Lion Cottages, Broad Campden, ## Gloucestershire (now Studio Cottage and Adelaide Cottage) Repair and reconstruction of four cottages as two dwellings Date: 1902 Client: C. R. Ashbee Cost: £158 Drawings: CT Sources: Cottages, pp. 43-4 Lawrence Weaver, TheCountry Life' Book of Cottages (2nd ed. 1919), p. 207 ## 22 The Mill, Chipping Campden, Addition of woodshed and engine house (1902); proposed pottery kilns (1909) Client: The Guild of Handicraft Drawings: CT Sources: The Guild of Handicraft Ltd. Annual Report for 1902, V&A Library The kilns, which were part of a scheme for carrying on William De Morgan's work at Campden, were not built. 23 Studio-house in Calf's Lane, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire (now The Long House) Adapted from an existing building Date: 1902 Client: George Loosely Drawings: CT Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 97–9 ## 24 Coombe End Farmhouse, Whitchurch, Reading, Berkshire Addition of a wing at the north-cast corner of the house Date: 1902 Client: Rickman J. Godlee Materials: brick, flint and oak Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 1o1-7, vol. 3 Cottages, pp. 54–7 ## 25 Labourers'cottages Scheme for a block of five or six cottages Date:1902 Drawings: CT The block was presumably intended for a site in or near Chipping Campden; if so, it seems that it was not built. 26 Cottage in Sheep Street, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire (now High House) New house Date:1902-3 Client: Lord Gainsborough Contractor: C. R. Ashbee Materials: Campden Hill stone Cost: about £170 Drawings: CT Sources: Cottages, pp. 10-12, 14 ## 27 Porthgwidden, near Feock, Cornwall Scheme for rebuilding; laying-out of a rose garden Date: 1902-3 Client: William Hugh Spottiswoode Sources:A&CES:1903:434 Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 363, 365 J, 14 Nov 1902 and 12 Jan 1913 It is not clear how extensive Ashbee's scheme was; nor is it clear whether anything was built apart from a verandah. ## 28 Houses at Catbrook, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire (now Maryvale and Catbrook Furlong) Furlong) A pair of new semi-detached houses Date: 1902-3 Client : J. Bell Gripper Contractor: C. R. Ashbee Materials: brick, stone and roughcast Cost: £915 Drawings: CT Sources: Cottages, pp. 14-17 ## 29 Woolstaplers' Hall, High Street, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire Removal of internal partitions, and an outhouse (1902-3); scheme for restoration of the west wing of the building, additions to the east wing, and a new entrance to the east wing (1907-9) Client: C. R. Ashbee Drawings: CT Sources: Cottages, pp. 66–70 British Architect, 1910, vol. 74, p. 309 Ashbee Collection, vol. I, pp. 231-42 Of the 1907-9 scheme, only the new entrance to the east wing and some other minor changes were carried out. For the present condition of the interior of Wool staplers' Hall, see Chapter 5, note 10. 30 Little Coppice, Pinewood Road, Iver, Buckinghamshire New house Date: 1903; extension at the back, 1905 Client: Mr H. Wrightson Contractor: W. Hartley of Wexham, Buckinghamshire Materials: brick and roughcast Cost: £875 Drawings: Drawings submitted to the District Surveyor, now in the possession of South Bucks District Council Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 81–9; vol. 3 Cottages, pp. 19–23 ## 3I Dinah's Cottage, Park Road, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire (now Brooklyn) Reconstruction of two cottages as one dwelling Date: 1903 Client: Rob Martin Holland Drawings: CT Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 113-17 Cottages, pp.44–7 ## 32 Market Hall, Chipping Campden, Repairs, particularly to the pier at the south-east corner Date: 1903 Client: Lord Gainsborough Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. I, pp. 109—1 1 C. R. Ashbee, ‘Chipping Campden and its Craftsmanship: I: The Village'Christian Art (Boston, Mass.), 1908, vol. 4, pp. 81–2 Application papers for Fellowship of the RIBA, RIBA Library ## 33 Elm Tree House, High Street, Various unexecuted schemes for repairing Elm Tree House as a dwelling (1902–3); executed plans for the adaptation of Elm Tree House and the malthouse at the back as premises for the Campden School of Arts and Crafts (19o4); moving a small slated cottage to stand next to the malthouse (1907-8) Client: The Campden School of Arts and Crafts Drawings: CT Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. I, pp. 134-5, 149, 151,vol.3 Cottages, pp. 126–8 WGC, pp. 86–7 and platcs 78-85 The malthouse has been demolished. 34 Cottage in Westington, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire (now Woodroffe House) Repairs and alterations; addition of gabled wing to east front; conversion of stable in garden to studio Date: 1904 Client: Paul Woodroffe Contractor: Espley and Co. Ltd., 77 High Street, Evesham, Worcestershire Material: stone Drawings: CT Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 216–19 Cottages, pp. 50-1 Alterations have been made in the kitchen wing to the south. ## 35 St Stephen's, Springfield, Wolverhampton, West Midlands Scheme for a new church, clergy house and parish hall Date: 1904-5 Client: Laurence Hodson Drawings: The Art Workers'Guild Sources: J, 3 Dec 1902, 3 Feb 1903, Sept 1904, 12 April 1905, 9 March 1924 BN, 1905, vol. 89, p. 471 Not built. ## 36 The Cedars, Westington, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire (now Abbotsbury) Demolition of one wing, addition of gable, bay window etc. Date:1904-5 Client: St John Hankin Materials: stone and timber Drawings: CT Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 219–21, 223 Cottages, pp. 52-4 ## 37 House at Catbrook, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire New studio-house Date: 1905 Client: G. F. Nicholls Drawings: CT Not built. ## 38 House at Catbrook, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire New house Date: 1905 Clients: Canon and Mrs Glazebrook Drawings: CT Not built. ## 39 Cottages at Letchworth, Hertfordshire A pair of semi-detached timber cottages, apparently built as part of the Cheap Cottages Exhibition at Letchworth Date: 1905 Materials: timber Cost: £300 Sources: Cottages, Pp. 31-40 BN, 1905, vol. 89, pp. 106 and 131 The reference in BN suggests that these cottages were built; but they no longer exist and there appears to be no evidence of their whereabouts. 40 House in Denham Road, Iver, Buckinghamshire (now High Larch) New housc Date: 1905 Client: Alan Thompson Contractor: W. Hartley, of Wexham, Bucking hamshire Materials: brick and roughcast Cost: £850 Drawings: Drawings submitted to the District Surveyor, now in the possession of South Bucks District Council Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, p. 125 Cottages, pp. 31-4 S, 1906, vol. 36, pp. 50, 52 The house has been much added to. ## 4I Five Bells, Pinewood Road, Iver, Buckinghamshire Pair of new semi-detached houses Date: 1905 Client: Alan Thompson Contractor: W. Hartley, of Wexham, Bucking hamshire Materials: brick and roughcast Drawings: Drawings submitted to the District Surveyor, now in the possession of South Bucks District Council Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 129, 131 These houses appear to have been demolished. ## 42 Uplands Cottage, Wellington Heath, Ledbury, Herefordshire Addition of a substantial wing to an existing house Date:1905 Client: Mrs Curtis Materials: stone and roughcast Sources: JJuly 1914 Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 268–75 Walter Shaw Sparrow (ed.), Flats Urban Houses and Cottage Homes (n.d.), facing p. 148 Walter Shaw Sparrow, Our Homes and How to Make the Best of Them (1909), facing p. 48 43 Cottages at Catbrook, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire (now Clapgat, Greenstead, The Haven and Paynsley) A block of four new cottages Date: 1903 (early schemes); 1905–6 (executed scheme) Client: C. R. Ashbee Contractor: C. R. Ashbee Materials: brick, roughcast and stone Cost: c. £900 Drawings: CT Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. I, pp. 224-7 Cottages, pp. 27–8 The thatch which crowned these cottages has recently been removed. 44 The Island House, High Street, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire Repairs and internal alterations Date: 1905-6 Client: E. Peter Jones Drawings: CT Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 202-5 Cottages, pp. 76–9 Alterations to Ashbee's work have been carried out recently. 45 The Norman Chapel, Broad Campden, Gloucestershire Adaptation of a ruined Norman chapel and mediaeval priest's house to a dwelling; addition of a service wing; laying out of the garden Date: 1905-7 Client: Ananda Coomaraswamy Contractor: Guild of Handicraft for carpenters' work Materials: stone, brick and roughcast Drawings: CT Sources: J, 24 Nov 1905 Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 171-201 B,1907, vol.93, pp. 223-4 C. R. Ashbee, 'The "Norman Chapel" Buildings at Broad Campden, in Gloucestershire' S, 1907, vol.41, pp. 289–96 B, 1909, vol. 96, p. 44 1 Ashbee's service wing has been altered on the south side, and the building has been extended to the west. ## 46 House in Népstadion útca, 46 House in Népstadion útca, Budapest, Hungary (Népstadion útca was formerly Stefania útca) New house Date:1905-7 Client: Zsombor de Szász Materials: brick and roughcast Sources: J, 3 July 1905 and 28 Jan 1907 Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 355, 357 B, 1910, vol. 98, p. 326 Builders' Journal and Architectural Engineer, 1906 vol. 24, pp. 56–7 Magyar Iparmüvészet (Budapest), 191o, vol. 13, plates 66–8, 85 The house has been demolished. 47 The Poor House, Holcombe Rogus, Wellington, Somerset Replacing timbers and repairs to screen and upper floor; new staircase Date: 1906 Contractor: Guild of Handicraft Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 206–15 Cottages, pp. 7I-2 BN, 1906, vol. 91, p. 13 Craftsmanship, p. 140 48 13, 15 and 17 Enfield Road, I-55 (odd) Dudley Road, and 50, 52, and 54 Heathfield Road, Ellesmere Port, Cheshire New terraced and semi-detached houses Date: 1906 Client: E. Peter Jones Materials: brick and roughcast Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 258–65 Cottages, pp. III-I3 B, 1910, vol. 98, p. 464 B, refers to fifty-six houses, but only thirty-four corresponding to Ashbee's designs can be identified today. ## 49 Shops and cottages at Iver, Buckinghamshire Scheme for a block of four cottages, village store and butcher's shop Date: c. 1906 Client: Alan Thompson Sources: Cottages, pp. 30–1 S, 1906, vol. 36, pp. 49–50 It is not clear whether this scheme was built. ## 50 St Nicholas, Saintbury, Gloucestershire Reroofing of chancel Date:1906-7 Contractor: Guild of Handicraft Sources: J, 28 Jan 1907 Ashbee Collection, vol. 4, pp. 46–51 Craftsmanship, pp. 139, 142 A photograph of the church in the Ashbee Collection is annotated 'Tower restoration'; but it is not clear what work, if any, Ashbee may have done on the tower. ## 51 Byways, Yarnton, Oxfordshire New house Date: 1907 Client: H. A. Evans Materials: brick, stone and roughcast Sources: Ashbée Collection, vol. 4, pp. 81–7 AR, 1914, vol. 36, p. 50 and plate IV ## 52 Houses on the corner of Old Church Street Schemes for a group, or groups, of houses and flats at 64-71 Cheyne Walk and the first properties on the west side of Old Church Street Dates: 1907;c. 1912 Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Not built. ## 53 Villa San Giorgio, Taormina, Sicily New house Date:1907-9 Client: Thomas Bradney Shaw-Hellier Contractor: decorative carving by Alec Miller and Will Hart Materials: Basaltic and other stone, roughcast Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; The Wodehouse, Wombourne, West Midlands Sources: J, Jan 1907, 25 May 1908, 31March 1909 Ashbee Collection, vol. 4, pp. 2-38 AR, 1911, vol. 29, pp. 84-7 ## 54 Farm buildings, whereabouts unknown Date: 1909 Client Miss Gardiner Drawings: CT It is not known whether this scheme was executed. ## 55 23-37 (odd) Squirrels Heath Avenue, Gidea Park, Romford, Essex A group of new detached and semi-detached houses Date: 1910-1I Contractor: R. Emmott Materials: brick Source: Gidea Park Exhibition Committee, The Book of the Exhibition of Houses and Cottages (191I), pp.141-2 These houses were designed in association with Gripper and Stevenson, architects. The scheme envisaged houses on both sides of Squirrels Heath Avenue, but they were built on one side only. ## 56 Buildings for Morley College, Webber Street and Waterloo Road, London SEr New buildings, including lecture room gymnasium, classrooms, etc. Date:1911 Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection Sources: WGC, pp. 85-6 and plate 77 Not built. ## 57 The Anchorage, St Mawes, Truro, Cornwall Additions to a house (?) Date: 1912-13 Client: Mrs Dudley Ryder Materials: stone Sources: J, 19 July and 23 Oct 1912, 11, 14 and 22 Jan 1913 ## 58 71 Cheyne Walk, London SW3 Various schemes for adding to, adapting or replacing the existing buildings, between 1907 and 1910 (see Chapter 10 above, pp. 251-2); executed design for a studio-house (1912-13) Client: Daisy D. Ladenburg Contractors: G. Munday and Sons, 9 Botolph Lane, Eastcheap, London EC3; J. W. Pyment and Sons, and Thornton and Downer, both of Chipping Campden Materials: red Old English and silver-grey facing brick Drawings: RIBA Drawings Collection; CPL Sources: DSR 27 Sept 1912 Ashbee Collection, vol. 4, pp. 163–75 AR 1922, vol. 51, p. 245 Destroyed by bombs 17 April 1941. ## 59 Kirklands, Hillyfields, Sidcot, Avon (now Penhaven) New house Date: 1913 Client: Mr S. Maltby Materials: brick Sources: J, April 1913 ## 60 St Peter, Seal, Kent Repairs to tower (1913); repairs to east window (1939) Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 4, pp. 185, 198–201 ## 61 Studios in Oakley Street and Glebe Place, London SW3 A group of thirteen studios Date: 1913? Drawings: CPL Not built. ## 62 Barn, Broad Campden, Gloucestershire Date:1914 Drawings: CT Probably not executed. ## 63 Cottages, Broad Campden, Gloucestershire Various blocks of new cottages on the Guild of Handicraft estate at Broad Campden Date: 1914-15 Drawings: CT Sources: J, 12 Nov 1914 Not executed. The drawings may relate to attempts to provide housing for Belgian refugees. ## 64 27 Riley Street, London SW3 Adaptation of existing building as a studio-house Date: 1915 Drawings: CPL Not built. ## 65 Sûq el Qattanin, Jerusalem, Israel Repairs Date: 1919 Client: The Pro-Jerusalem Society Sources: FA Jerusalem, Box 2, Folder 9 Jerusalem 1918–1920, pp. 6–7 ## 66 The Rampart Walk, Jerusalem, Israel Repairs Date: 1919-22 Client: The Pro-Jerusalem Society Drawings: FA Jerusalem, Box I, Folder 2 Sources: Jerusalem 1918–1920, pp. 2, 4, 21-2 Jerusalem 1920–1922, pp. 12-13 ## 67 The Citadel, Jerusalem, Israel Repairs; laying out of the Citadel gardens Date:1919-22 Client: The Pro-Jerusalem Society Drawings: FA Jerusalem, Box 1, Folders 3 and 5, Box 2, Folder I Sources: Jerusalem 1918–1920, pp. 1, 2, 19, 21 Jerusalem 1920–1922, pp. 5-12 ## 68 YMCA Building, Jaffa Road, Jerusalem, Israel Date:1920 Client: Dr Harte Drawings: FA Jerusalem, Box 5, Folder 5 Not built. ## 69 Bible House, Jerusalem, Israel Date:c. 1920 Client: The British and Foreign Bible Society Drawings: FA Jerusalem, Box 6, Folder I Not built. ## 70 Post Office, Post Office Square, Jerusalem, Israel Addition of gabled wing Date:c. 1920 Drawings: FA Jerusalem, Box 5, Folder 6 Probably not built. ## 71 Hotel, Ard es Sillam, Jerusalem, Israel Date:1922 Client: Thomas Cook and Son Drawings: FA Jerusalem, Box 5, Folder 2 Not built. ## 72 House at Godden Green, Sevenoaks, Removal of attic storey and other alterations Date: 1924-5 Client: C. R. Ashbee Contractor: carving to porch by Alec Miller Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 4, n.p. ## 73 Sts Peter and Paul, Shoreham, Kent Repair of porch Date: 1925 Source: Ashbee Collection, vol. 4, n.p. ## 74 The Hatch, Godden Green, Sevenoaks, Kent Alterations Date: 1932 Client: Lady Campbell Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 4, n.p. Works of uncertain date: ## 75 Houses in Christ Church Street, Queen's Road and Smith Street, London SW3 Queen's Road and Smith Street, London SW3 (Queen's Road is now Royal Hospital Road) Scheme for fourteen houses in Christ Church Street, three or more in Queen's Road and twelve in Smith Street Drawings: CPL The drawing is not dated, but seems to be inscribed by Ernest Godman; this would give a date before 1906. Not built. 76 Farm House, Broad Campden, Gloucestershire Repairs, alterations and enlargement of an existing building Drawings: CT There are survey drawings of July 1902, and notes to the effect that the house was destroyed in 1904 and the stones numbered and stored by Ashbee. His proposals were not executed. ## 77 Roberts House, High Street, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire Repairs and alterations Drawings: CT Not executed. 78 Grammar School, High Street, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire Adaptation of seventeenth-century portion of the building to a dwelling Drawings: CT Not executed. 79 Cottage in Park Road, Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire Repair and reconstruction Clients: Mrs Gilchrist Thompson and Mrs H. W. Wrightson Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. I, pp. 119, 121 Cottages, pp. 48–50 The cottage was thatched when Ashbce worked on it, but is so no longer. ## 80 Cottage at Abbots Langley, Hertfordshire New house Client: Trinity College, Oxford Materials: brick and roughcast Cost: £230 Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 1, pp. 370–1 Cottages, pp. 16–19 Exact whereabouts unknown. ## 81 House in The Square, Findon, West Sussex New house, designed as a ‘nursing cottage Client: Mrs William Hunt Materials: brick, flint and roughcast Cost: £400 Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 2, pp. 350, 352 Cottages, pp. 23 and 26–7 ## 82 4 Little Davis Place, London SW3 (Little Davis Place is now Apollo Place) (Little Davis Place is now Apollo Place) Alterations to an existing building (?) Client: Mr Bird Drawings: CPL The drawings are not dated but are inscribed by George Chettle and must therefore date from 1904 or later. Probably not built. 83 Houses on the eastern corner of Cheyne Walk and Danvers Street, London SW3 A new house at 77 Cheyne Walk, and further building at 2, and possibly 4 Danvers Street Drawings: CPL The drawings are not dated but the plans are in George Chettle's hand and must therefore date from 1904 or later. Not built. ## 84 Houses on the western corner of Oakley Street and Cheyne Walk, London SW3 A group consisting of two houses at 35 and 36 Cheyne Walk, and further buildings in Oakley Street Drawings: CPL The drawings are not dated but are inscribed in George Chettle's hand and must therefore date from 1904 or later. Not built. ## 85 Gates at Poyston Hall, Haverfordwest, tea Two masonry piers and wrought iron gates with heraldic figures in lead Client: Dr Henry Owen Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 2, p. 345 AR, Aug 1907, p. ix The decorative leadwork has been removed. ## 86 Manor Gate Cottage, Holmsbury St Mary, Surrey Repairs (?) Client: Elsa Ashbee Sources: J, March 1908 and 30 Oct 1919 Ashbee Collection, vol. 4, pp. 124-7 Work on this building is attributed to Ashbee because photographs of it are in the Ashbee Collection, but it is not clear what the work was. ## 87 House at Wroxton, Oxfordshire (now the Wroxton Hotel) (now the Wroxton Hotel) Addition of one wing, and alterations Material: stone Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 4, pp. 39–41 House Beautiful (Chicago), 191o, vol. 28, p. 53 ## 88 House at Mackies Hill, Peaslake, Surrey Repairs and alterations, addition of a studio Client: Miss Liddle Materials: brick, and salvaged timber for the studio Cost: £460 Sources: Ashbee Collection, vol. 4, pp. 92–7 Lawrence Weaver, Small Country Houses: Their Repair and Enlargement (1914), pp. 26–9 89 116 and 117 Cheyne Walk, London SW3 New house Client: Mrs Hunt Drawings: CPL Not built. 90 68–9 Cheyne Walk, London SW3 Various designs for a house, flats and studio flats Drawings: CPL The drawings are not dated but show 71 Cheyne Walk (1912–13) as it was built. Not built. 91 Rosemary Hall, Greenwich, Connecticut, USA Unidentified scheme for building Source: J, 7 Aug 1924