# APPENDIX THREE A LIST OF BOOKS, PAMPHLETS ETC. PRINTED AT THE ESSEX HOUSE PRESS Items are listed as far as possible in order of publication. Recording the titles of Essex House Press books is not always a straightforward matter. Ashbee followed the irritating practice of Kelmscott and some other private presses in often dispensing with a title-page; and he gave idiosyncratic titles to some of his reprints of well-known books. In some cases, his titles have been altered to those in normal use. The typefaces listed are those used for the setting of the body of the text; decorative typefaces are not listed. A handmade paper with a special Essex House Press water-mark was used on most Essex House books, and its use can be assumed where no other paper is mentioned in this list. Where other papers were used they have been recorded, and described either as handmade' or ordinary'. I 'Memorandum and Articles of Association of the Guild of Handicraft (Limited)’(1898). Caslon type. A few copies printed for the shareholders of the Company. 2 Benvenuto Cellini, The Treatises on Goldsmithing and Sculpture (1898). Translated by C. R. Ashbee. Caslon type. 6oo copies at £1.1 5s.od. 3 -, The Hymn of Bardaisan : The First Christian Poem (1899). Translated by F. Crawford Burkitt. Caslon type. 3oo copies at 7s.6d. 4 C.R. Ashbee, Walter Crane, Selwyn Image, C. H. Townsend, Christopher Whall and Henry Wilson, Beauty's Awakening: A Masque of Winter and of Spring (1899). The text of the Art Workers' Guild Masque, performed in June 1899. Caslon type. 25 copies on Essex House Press paper. A larger edition was printed by the Studio, presumably from plates, and issued as their Summer Number, with illustrations added. 5 John Bunyan, The Pilgrim's Progress (1899). Frontispiece by Reginald Savage. Caslon type. 75o copies at £1.1os.od. 6 Percy Bysshe Shelley, Adonais (19oo). Frontispiece by C. R. Ashbee. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. so copies at £1.Ios.od. The first of the Great Poems of the Language' series. 7 Osborn C. Hills, Saint Mary Stratford Bow (1900). Caslon type. Ordinary paper. 25o copies at 12s.6d. 8 William Shakespeare, The Poems (190o). Edited by F. S. Ellis. Frontispiece by Reginald Savage. Caslon type. 45o copies at £2. 9 John Keats, The Eve of St Agnes (190o). Frontispiece by Reginald Savage. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. 125 copies at £2.2s.od. The second of the 'Great Poems of the Language' series. 10 Baldassare Castiglione, The Courtyer (190o). The 1 56ı translation by Sir Thomas Hoby, edited by Janet Ashbee. Caslon type. 200 copies at £3.3s.od. I1 Francis William Bourdillon, Through the Gateway (19oo). Caslon type. 50 copies. Privately printed for the author. 12 George Thompson, Ruskin and Modern Business (19oo). Caslon type. Number of copies unknown. Privately printed. 13 Thomas Gray, Elegy written in a Country Churchyard (19o1). Frontispiece by George Thomson. Decorative initials partly by Florence Kingsford. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. 125 copies at L2.2s.od. The third of the Great Pocms of the Language' series. I4 Walt Whitman, Hymn on the Death of Lincoln (19o1). Frontispiece by C. R. Ashbcc. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. 125 copies at £2.2s.od. The fourth of the 'Great Poems of the Language' series. 15 C. R. Ashbee, Report ... to the National Trust (19o1). Endeavour type. Some copies on Essex House Press paper, some on ordinary paper. Number of copies unknown. 16 C. R. Ashbee, An Endeavour towards the teaching of John Ruskin and William Morris (19o1). Frontispicce by George Thomson. Endeavour type. 3so copies at £i. A second impression was printed, apparently from plates, on ordinary paper, and sold at is.od; the number of copies is unknown. 17 John Woolman, A Journal of the Life and Travels of John Woolman in the Service of the Gospel (19o1). Frontispiece by Reginald Savage. Caslon type. 25o copies at £2.2s.od. 18 Erasmus, The Praise of Folie (1901). The 1549 translation by Sir Thomas Chaloner, edited by Janet Ashbee. Illustrations by William Strang. Caslon type. 250 copies at £3.3s.od. 19 , A letter from Percy B. Shelley to T. Peacock July MDCCCXVL (1901). Endeavour type. 50 copies, of which 5 were on vellum. Privately printed for Wilfred Buckley. 20 William Penn, Some Fruits of Solitude (1901). Frontispiece by T. Sturge Moore. Caslon type. 250 copies at £2.2s.od. 21 C. R. Ashbee, American Sheaves and English Seed Corn (1901). Endeavour type. 300 copies at £1.10s.od. A second impression on ordinary paper may have been issued. 22 , T'he Psalter (1901). Endeavour type. 250 copies on paper at £4.4s.od; 1o copies on vellum at £16.16s.0d. 23 , John Hunter leaves St George's Hospital (19or). Caslon type. Handmade paper. Number of copies unknown. Privately printed. 24 Edmund Spenser, Epithalamion (1901). Frontispiece by Reginald Savage. Decorative initials by Florence Kingsford. 15o copies at £2.2s.od. The fifth of the Great Poems of the Language' series. 25 William Strang, The Doings of Death (1901). A series of twelve woodcuts issued in portfolio or in book form. 140 copies at £6.6s.od. 26 C. R. Ashbee, The Masque of the Edwards of England (19o2). Illustrations by Edith Harwood. Endeavour type. Printed on grey paper except for 20 copies on vellum. The illustrations in the paper copies printed by chromolithography by Sprague and Company, and finished by hand; in the vellum copies the illustrations are coloured entirely by hand. 3oo copies on papcr at £3.3s.od; 2o copies on vellum at £12.125.0d. 27 Ernest Godman, The Old Palace of Bromley-by-Bow (1902). Caslon type. 300 copies on ordinary paper at £1.Is.od. 28 , Three Letters from R. L. Stevenson (1902). Caslon type. 6o copies, of which 6 were on vellum. Privately printed. 29 Geoffrey Chaucer, The Flower and the Leaf (1902). Illustrations and decorative initials by Edith Harwood. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. 165 copies at £3.3s.od. The sixth of the Great Poems of the Language' series. 30 Robert Burns, Tam O'Shanter (19o2). Frontispiece by William Strang. Decorative initials by Florence Kingsford. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. 150 copies at £2.2s.od. The seventh of the 'Great Poems of the Language' series. 31 John Milton, Comus (19o2). Frontispiece by Reginald Savage. Decorative initials by Florence Kingsford. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. I 5o copies at £3.3s.od. The eighth of the 'Great Poems of the Language' series. 32 -, The Snow Lay on the Ground (1902). Illustration by Paul Woodroffe. Endeavour and Prayer Book types. 40o copies of a Christmas carol printed for distribution to the subscribers of the Essex House Press; some for sale at gs.od. 33 Christopher Wren, Life and Works of Sir Christopher Wren (1903). Edited by E. J. Enthoven. Illustrations by E. H. New and others. Caslon type. 20o copies at £3.13s.6d. 34 Heinrich Heine, Ausgewaehlte Lieder (1903). Edited by Edmond Holmes. Frontispiece by Reginald Savage. Endeavour type. 25o copies on Essex House Press paper at £1.1s.od., and 12 copies on vellum at £2.2s.od. 35 William Wordsworth, Ode on Intimations of Immortality (1903). Frontispiece by Walter Crane. Decorative initials by Annie Power. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. The ninth of the Great Poems of the Language' series. 36 The Prayer Book of King Edward VII (1903). Illustrations by C. R. Ashbee. Prayer Book and Endeavour types. 40o copies on Essex House Press paper at £12.12s.od. and 10 on vellum at £40.os.od. 37 C. R. Ashbee, A Key to the principal decorations in The Prayer Book of King Edward VII (1903). Endeavour type. 250 copies at 2s.6d. 38 -, Supplement to The Prayer Book of King Edward VII showing the American variants (1903). Illustrations by C. R. Ashbee. Prayer Book and Endeavour types. 10o copies at 1os.6d. 39 Edwin Gunn, The Great House, Leyton (1903). Illustrations by Edwin Gunn and others. Caslon type. 350 copies on ordinary paper at £1.Is.od. 40 Janet Ashbee (ed.), The Essex House Song Book (19o3-5). Music drawn by Paul Woodroffe. Endeavour type. 2oo copies on Essex House Press paper at £6.3s.od. and 5 on vellum at £3o.1 5s.od. 41 Thomas Hood, Miss Kilmansegg and her Precious Leg (1904). Illustrations by Reginald Savage. Caslon type. 2oo copies on Essex House Press paper at £1.5s.od. and 4 on vellum at £3.3s.od. 42 Samuel Taylor Coleridge, The Ancient Mariner (19o4). Frontispiece by William Strang. Decorative initials by Florence Kingsford. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. 15o copies at £,2.12s.6d. The tenth of the ‘Great Poems of the Language' series. 43 Percy Bysshe Shelley, Prometheus Unbound (19o4). Frontispiece by C. R. Ashbee. Prayer Book type. 2oo copies on Essex House Press paper at £2.2s.od. and 20 on vellum at £7.7s.od. 44 F. Allen Whiting, A successful English experiment (19o4). Illustrations by E. H. New and George Thomson. Caslon type. so copies on Essex House Press paper. A second impression, presumably from plates on ordinary paper, was issued at is.od. 45 Gerald Bishop, A May-Day Interlude (1904). Illustration by E. H. New. Caslon type. 24 copies on Essex House Press paper; soo copies on ordinary paper at 2s.6d. 46 C. R. Ashbee, A Bibliography of the Essex House Press (19o4). Endeavour type. so copies on Essex House Press paper at 2s.6d. and 2oo copies on ordinary paper at Is.od. 47 John Dryden, Alexander's Feast (1904). Frontispiece by Reginald Savage. Decorative initials by Florence Kingsford. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. 140 copies at £2.2s.od. The eleventh in the 'Great Poems of the Language' series. 48 Cicero, De Amicitia (1904). With a translation by John Harrington, edited by E. D. Ross. Illustrations by C. R. Ashbee. Endeavour type. 1 5o copies on Essex House Press paper at £r.1 ss.od. and 1o copies on vellum at £6.6s.od. 49 Lord Redesdale, An Address at the opening of the Campden School of Arts and Crafts (1904). Caslon type. 5o copies at £1.Is.od. 50 Oliver Goldsmith, The Deserted Village (1904). Frontispiece by C. R. Ashbee. Decorative initials by Florence Kingsford and Annie Power. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. 15o copies at £2.12s.6d. The twelfth in the 'Great Poems of the Language' series. 51 Thomas à Kempis, The Imitation of Christ (1904). Edited by Ernest Godman from translations of 1504 and I58o. Illustrations by C. R. Ashbee. Prayer Book and Endeavour types. 1oo copies on Essex House Press paper at £s.ss.od. and 1o copies on vellum at LIS.ISs.od. 52 C. R. Ashbee (ed.), The Last Records of a Cotswold Community (1904). Illustrations by E. H. New. Endeavour type. 75 copies on Essex House Press paper at £i.Is.od. and 15o copies on ordinary paper at 12s.6d. 53 , Report on the Campden School of Arts and Crafts 1903-4 (1904). Caslon type. Printed on ordinary paper. Number of copies unknown. 54 Bernard Sleigh, Conscience (1904). A single woodcut. Number of copies unknown. 55 Ernest A. Mann, Brooke House, Hackney (1904). Caslon type. Printed on ordinary paper. Number of copies unknown. 56 Alfred Tennyson, Maud (19os). Frontispiece by Laurence Housman and Reginald Savage. Decorative initials by Annie Power. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. 125 copies at £3.3s.od. The thirteenth in the 'Great Poems of the Language' series. 57 Lily Nightingale, A Cycle of Sonnets (190s). Caslon type. Printed on handmade paper. 25o copies, price unknown. 58 Ernest Godman, Mediaeval Architecture in Essex (19o5). Illustrations by Ernest Godman and others. Caslon type. Printed on handmade paper. 25o copies, priced according to the binding. 59 Edward Fitzgerald, The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam (19os). Illustrations by C. R. Ashbee. Prayer Book and Endeavour types. 88 copies on Essex Housc Press paper at £2.2s.od. and 17 copies on vellum at £4.4s.od. Printed for the Omar Khayyam Club. 60 Caroline Hazard, The Illuminators (19o5). Prayer Book type. Number of copies unknown. Privately printed. 61 Lord Redesdale, The Second Address ... at the Campden School of Arts and Crafts (1905). Illustration by E. H. New. Caslon type. 5o copies at £1.Is.od. 62 Ernest Godman, Norman Architecture in Essex (19o5). Illustrations by Ernest Godman and others. Caslon type. Printed on handmade paper. 3oo copies at 12s.6d. 63 C. R. Ashbee, Echoes from the City of the Sun (19os). Decorations by C. R. Ashbee. Endcavour type. 25o copies on Essex House Press paper at 12s.6d. and one on vellum, not for sale. 64 Walter C. Pepys and Ernest Godman, The Church of St Dunstan, Stepney (190s). Illustrations by Ernest Godman and others. Caslon type. Printed on ordinary paper. 35o copies, price unknown. 65 -, Report on the Campden School of Arts and Crafts 1904-5 (1905). Illustration by E. H. New. Caslon type. Printed on ordinary paper. About 10o copies at Is.od. 66 F. A. Hyett, An Octet of Sonnets (1905). Caslon type. Privately printed for the author. 67 Robert Browning, The Flight of the Duchess (19o6). Frontispiece by Paul Woodroffe. Decorative initials by Raymond Binns. Caslon type. Printed on vellum. 125 copies at £2.12s.6d. The fourteenth of the 'Great Poems of the Language' series. 68 John Fisher, A Mornynge Remembraunce (1906). Frontispiece by C. R. Ashbee. Prayer Book and Endeavour types. 125 copies on Essex House Press paper at £1.1s.od. and 7 copies on vellum at £3.3s.od. 69 Hugh E. Seebohm (trans.), The Picture of Kebes the Theban (19o6). Caslon type. 5o copies on Essex House Press paper for Hugh Seebohm, and 25o copies on ordinary paper at §s.6d. 70 Laurence Housman, Mendicant Rhymes (1906). Endeavour and Prayer Book types. Printed on handmade paper. 300 copies at 12s.6d. 7I C. R. Ashbee, Socialism and Politics: A Study in the Re-adjustment of the Values of Life (1906). Caslon type. Printed on handmade paper. 25o copies at 3s.6d. 72 C. R. Ashbee, A Book of Cottages and Little Houses (1906). Illustrations by F. L. Griggs and others. Caslon type. 5o copies on Essex House Press paper at £1.5s.od. and 2oo copies on ordinary paper at 12s.6d. 73 Archibald Ramage, An Essay on Dr Johnson (19o6). Frontispiece by Alec Miller. Caslon type. Printed on ordinary paper. 2oo copies at §s.od. 74 C. R. Ashbee, On the Need for the Establishment of Country Schools of Arts and Crafts (19o6). Caslon type. Printed on ordinary paper. 2oo copies at 5s.od. 75 -, Report on the Campden School of Arts and Crafts 1905–6 (1906). Illustration by E.H. New. Caslon typc. Printed on ordinary paper. Number of copies unknown. Price Is.od. 76 Lord Redesdale, A Tale of Old and New Japan (19o6). Caslon type. Printed on ordinary paper. Number of copies unknown. Privately printed for the author. 77 Ananda Coomaraswamy, The Deeper Meaning of the Struggle (1907). Caslon type. 75 copies on handmade paper at is.od. and 1,ooo copies on ordinary paper at 4d. 78 Ananda Coomaraswamy, Nētra Mangalya (19o8). Caslon type. Printed on ordinary paper. 25 copies for private circulation. 79 Ananda Coomaraswamy, The Aims of Indian Art (1908). Caslon type. 225 copies on ordinary paper at 2s.6d.; so copies on handmade paper at ss.od.; and 2 copies on vellum, not for sale. 80 Ananda Coomaraswamy, The Influence of Greek on Indian Art (19o8). Caslon type. 75 copies on ordinary paper for private circulation, followed by a second impression of so copies. 81 C. R. Ashbee, Conradin: A Philosophical Ballad (1908). Illustrations by Philippe Mairet. Praycr Book type. 25o copies on handmade paper at £1.Is.od. and one copy on vellum. 82 Ananda Coomaraswamy, The Two Painters (1908). Caslon type. 30 copies on handmade paper and one on vellum. Not for sale. 83 Ananda Coomaraswamy, Mediaeval Sinhalese Art (1908). Caslon type. 400 copies on ordinary paper at £3.3s.od. and 25 copies on handmade paper at £s.ss.od. 84 Ananda Coomaraswamy (trans.), Voluspa (1909). Caslon type. 10o copies on handmade paper at 2s.6d. and one copy on vellum. 85 W. P. D. Stebbing, The Church of Worth, in Sussex (1909). Illustrations by C. Terry Pledge. Caslon type. 88 copies on ordinary paper at 3s.6d. and 25 copies on handmade paper at s.od. 86 Vincent A. Smith (ed.), The Edicts of Asoka (19o9). Caslon, Prayer Book and Endeavour types. Printed on handmade paper. 10o copies at £1.Is.od. 87 C. R. Ashbee, Modern English Silverwork (1909). Lithograph illustrations by Philippe Mairet. Caslon type. 2oo copies, of which some have the text printed on handmade paper, but most on ordinary paper. The ordinary paper copies cost £2.2s.od. The lithographed plates were probably not printed at the Essex House Press. 88 C. R. Ashbee, T'he Private Press : A Study in Idealism (19o9). Various illustrations. Endeavour type. 125 copies on handmade paper and two on vellum. Privately printed for the Club of Odd Volumes, Boston, Massachusetts. 89 C. R. Ashbee, The Guild of Handicraft: Its Deed of Trust and Rules for the Guidance of its Guildsmen (191o). Endeavour type. 1o0 copies on handmade paper at 5s.od. 90 Ananda Coomaraswamy, The Oriental View of Woman (1910). Caslon type. 125 copies on ordinary paper. Price unknown. 91 Ananda Coomaraswamy, Selected Examples of Indian Art (1910). Caslon type. 400 copies on ordinary paper at £1.5s.od. and 25 copies on handmade paper at £3.3s.od. 92 Ananda Coomaraswamy, Domestic Handicraft and Culture (1910). Caslon type. Number of copies and price unknown. 93 Ananda Coomaraswamy, Indian Drawings (19ro). Illustrations by Ananda Coomaraswamy. Caslon type. Printed on ordinary paper. 40o copies at £1.Ss.od. 94 William Rothenstein, Two Drawings by Hok'sai (191o). Caslon type. Printed on ordinary paper. 150 copies at 1os.6d.