## BIBLIOGRAPHY ## BOOKS Albrecht, Donald. The Mythic City: Photographs of New York by Samuel H. Gottscho. 1925–1940. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2005. Albrecht, Donald. Paris/New York: Design/Fashion/ Culture/1925–1940. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2008. Albrecht, Donald and Broikos, Chrysanthe, ed. On the Job: Design and the American Office. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2000. Aldersey-Williams, Hugh. New American Design. New York: Rizzoli International Publications, 1988. Ambasz, Emilio. The Architecture of Luis Barragán. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1976. Apeloig, Philippe. Jean Widmer: A Devotion to Modernism. New York: The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, 2003. Arup in Beijing: Solutions for a Modern City. London: Black Dog Publishing, 2009. Ault, Julie. Come Alive! The Spirited Art of Sister Corita. London: Four Corners Books, 2006. Baljeu, Joost. Theo van Doesburg. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1974. Benevolo, Leonardo. The History of the City. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1975. Benevolo, Leonardo. History of Modern Architecture. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1977. Bergdoll, Barry and Dickerman, Leah. Bauhaus 1919–1933: Workshops for Modernity. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2009. Blackwell, Lewis. 20th Century Type. New York: Yale University Press, 2004. Blotkamp, Carel, et al. De Stijl: The Formative Years 1917–1922. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1982. Bock, Manfred, ed. De Stijl: 1917–1931, Visions of Utopia. New York: Abbeville Press, 1982. Booth-Clibborn, Edward and Baroni, Danielle. The Language of Graphics. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1980. Braybrooke, Susan. Print Casebooks 3, 1978/79 Edition, The Best in Environmental Graphics. New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1979. Braybrooke, Susan. Print Casebooks 4, 1980/81 Edition, The Best in Environmental Graphics. Baltimore: RC Publications, 1980. Braybrooke, Susan. Print Casebooks 6, 1984/85 Edition, The Best in Environmental Graphics. Baltimore: RC Publications, 1984. Braybrooke, Susan. Print Casebooks 7, 1987/88 Edition, The Best in Environmental Graphics. Baltimore: RC Publications, 1987. Burke, Christopher. Paul Renner: The Art of Typography. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1998. Busch, Akiko. Print Casebooks 8, 1989/90 Edition, The Best in Environmental Graphics. New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1989. Carpenter, Edward K. The Print Casebook, First Annual Edition, The Best in Environmental Graphics. New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1975. Chermayeff & Geismar Associates. Designing. New York: Graphis, 2003. Chermayeff & Geismar Associates. Trademarks. New York: Chermayeff & Geismar Associates, 2000. Cohen, Arthur A. Herbert Bayer: The Complete Work. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1984. Cohen, Barbara; Heller, Steven; Chwast, Seymour. Trylon and Persiphere: The 1939 New York World’s Fair. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1989. Constantine, Mildred. The Ubiquitous Sign. New York: American Institute of Graphic Arts, 1970. Craig, James and Barton, Bruce. Thirty Centuries of Graphic Design. New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1987. Crosby, Fletcher, Forbes. A Sign Systems Manual. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1970. Desilets, Deborah. Morris Lapidus: The Architecture of Joy. New York: Rizzoli, 2011. de Noblet, Jocelyn, ed. Industrial Design: Reflections of a Century. Paris: Flammarion, 1993. Diamonstein-Spielvogel, Barbaralee. The Landmarks of New York: An Illustrated Record of the City’s Historic Buildings. New York: The Monacelli Press, 2005. Diethelm, Walter. Form & Communication. Zurich: ABC Verlag Zurich, 1974. Eskilson, Stephen J. Graphic Design: A New History. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007. Feldman, Edmund Burke. Varieties of Visual Experience: Art as Image and Idea. New York: Prentice-Hall, 1971. Finke, Gail. You Are Here: Graphics That Direct, Explain, and Entertain. Cincinnati: ST Publications, 1999. Fletcher, Sir Banister. A History of Architecture. London: Butterworths, 1989 Follis, John. Architectural Signing and Graphics. New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1979. Friedman, Mildred, ed. De Stijl: 1917–1931, Visions of Utopia. Minneapolis: Walker Art Center, 1982. Friedman, Mildred. Graphic Design in America: A Visual Language History. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1989. Gardner, Louise. Art through the Ages. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1970. Gaur, Albertine. A History of Writing. London: The British Museum, 1983. Gossel, Peter. Modern Architecture A–Z. Cologne: Taschen, 2007. Gray, Nicolete. Lettering on Buildings. London: Architectural Press, 1960. Grossholz, Andrea, ed. Who’s Who in Graphic Design. Zurich: Benteli-Werd Verlags AG, 1994. Heller, Steven and Cohen, Elaine Lustig. Born Modern: The Life and Design of Alvin Lustig. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2010. Heller, Steven, ed. I Heart Design. Beverly: Rockport Publishers, 2011. Heller, Steven. Paul Rand. London: Phaidon Press Limited, 1999. Heller, Steven and Fili, Louise. Stylepedia. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2006. Henrion, FHK. AGI Annals. Zurich: Alliance Graphique Internationale, 1989. Herdeg, Walter. Archigraphia. Zurich: The Graphis Press, 1978. Hess, Richard and Muller, Marion. Dorfsman and CBS. New York: Rizzoli International Publications, 1987. Hughes, Robert. American Visions: The Epic History of Art in America. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1997. Igarashi, Takenobu. Igarashi Space Graphics. Tokyo: Shoten Kenchiku-sha Co., Ltd., 1983. The Institute of Graphic Designers. Graphic Design, San Francisco. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1979. Jackson, Kenneth T., ed. The Encyclopedia of New York City. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995. Kinneir, Jock. Words and Buildings: The Art of Public Lettering. London: Architectural Press, 1980. Kostof, Spiro. America by Design. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987. Kostof, Spiro. The City Assembled. London: Thames and Hudson, 1992. Kunstler, James Howard. The Geography of Nowhere. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1993. Leggio, James, ed. Vienna 1900: Art, Architecture, and Design. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1986. Lemmen, Hans van. Tiles: 1,000 Years of Architectural Decoration. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1993 Lin, Mariah. This Way Please. Beijing: Sandu Publishing, 2009. Lin, Maya. Boundaries. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000. Lodder, Christina. Russian Constructivism. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983. Lynch, Kevin. The Image of the City. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1960. Masaaki, Hiromura. Space Graphysm. Amsterdam: BIS Publishers, 2003. Mattie, Erik. World’s Fairs. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1998. McCullough, David. The Greater Journey: Americans in Paris. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2011. Meggs, Philip B. A History of Graphic Design. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2005. Middendorp, Jan. Dutch Type. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 2004. Middleton, William D. Grand Central . . . the World’s Greatest Railway Terminal. San Marino: Golden West Books, 1977. Miller, J. Abbott. Signs and Spaces. New York: Rock port Allworth Press, 1994. Miller, R. Craig. Modern Design 1980–1990. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1990. Müller-Brockmann, Josef. A History of Visual Communication. Zurich: RR. Weber AG, 1986. Neuhart, John. Eames Design. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1989. Ovenden, Mark. Transit Maps of the World. New York: Penguin Books, 2003. Parissien, Steven. Pennsylvania Station: McKim, Mead and White. London: Phaidon Press, Ltd., 1996. Parissien, Steven. Station to Station. London: Phaidon Press, Ltd., 1997. Pevsner, Nikolaus. Pioneers of Modern Design: From William Morris to Walter Gropius. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005. Phillips, Lisa. High Styles: Twentieth-Century American Design. New York: Whitney Museum of American Art, 1985. Pile, John. A History of Interior Design. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000. Powell, Kenneth. Grand Central Terminal: Warren and Wetmore. London: Phaidon Press, Ltd., 1996. Rees, Helen. The Dutch PTT: Design in the Public Service 1920–1990. London: Design Museum, 1990. Remington, R. Roger. Lester Beall: Trailblazer of American Graphic Design. New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1996. Remington, R. Roger and Hodik, Barbara J. Nine Pioneers in American Graphic Design. Boston: MIT Press, 1989. Riley, Terence. Frank Lloyd Wright Architect. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1994. Rouard-Snowman, Margo. Museum Graphics. London: Thames and Hudson, 1992. Roussel, Christine. The Art of Rockefeller Center. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2006. Rudofsky, Bernard. Streets for People. New York: Doubleday & Company, 1969. Rydell, Robert W. and Schiavo, Laura Burd. Designing Tomorrow: America’s World’s Fairs of the 1930s. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010. Sharp, Dennis. Bauhaus, Dessau: Walter Gropius. London: Phaidon Press, Ltd., 1993. Shaughnessy, Adrian. Supergraphics. London: Unit Editions, 2010. Shaw, Paul. Helvetica and the New York City Subway System. New York: Blue Pencil Editions, 2009. Silver, Nathan. Lost New York. New York: Weathervane Books, 1967. Smith, G. E. Kidder. Source Book of American Architecture. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996. Smith, Whitney. Flags and Arms across the World. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1975. Society for Environmental Graphic Design. SEGD Design Annual 1987/1988. Tokyo: FP Books, 1989. Solomon, Nancy B., ed. Architecture: Celebrating the Past, Designing the Future. Washington, DC: American Institute of Architects, 2008. Sprigg, June. Shaker Design. New York: Whitney Museum of American Art, Norton Publications, 1986. Sprigg, June and Larkin, David. Shaker: Life, Work and Art. New York; Stewart Tabori & Chang, 1987. Stern, Robert A. M. New York 1930: Architecture and Urbanism between the Two World Wars. New York: Rizzoli International Publications, 1987. Stern, Robert A. M. New York 1960: Architecture and Urbanism between the Second World War and the Bicentennial. New York: The Monacelli Press, 1995. Stern, Rudi. Let There Be Neon. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1979. Sutton, James. Signs in Action. New York: Reinhold Publishing Company, 1965. Taylor, Lisa. Cities: The Forces That Shape Them. New York: Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 1982. Taylor, Lisa. Urban Open Spaces. New York: Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 1979. Tell, Darcy. Times Square Spectacular: Lighting Up Broadway. New York: Harper Collins Books, 2007. TwoPoints.Net, ed. Left, Right, Up, Down: New Direc tions in Signage and Wayfinding. Berlin: Gestalten, 2010. Uebele, Andreas. Signage Systems & Information Graphics: A Professional Sourcebook. London: Thames and Hudson, 2007. Van Hoogstraten, Nicholas. Lost Broadway Theaters. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1991. Varnedoe, Kirk. Vienna 1900: Art, Architecture & Design. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1986. Varnedoe, Kirk and Gopnik, Adam. High & Low: Modern Art and Popular Culture. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1990. Venturi, Robert. Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1977. Venturi, Robert. Learning from Las Vegas. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1977. Vigne, Georges. Hector Guimard: Architect, Designer 1867–1942. New York: Delano Greenidge Editions, 2003. Vignelli Associates. Vignelli Design. New York: Rizzoli International Publications, 1990. Watkin, David. A History of Western Architecture. London: Thames and Hudson, 1986. Yew, Wei, ed. The Olympic Image: The First 100 Years. New York: Quon Editions, 1996. Younger, William Lee. Old Brooklyn in Early Photographs 1865–1929. New York: Dover Publications, 1978. Zim, Larry. The World of Tomorrow: The 1939 New York World’s Fair. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1990. ## PERIODICALS Aldersey-Williams, Hugh. “PTT: Studio Dumbar Flex ible Geometry.” Eye. London: Autumn 1990, pp. 54–61. Baines, Phil. “A Design (To Sign Roads By).” Eye. Winter 1999, pp. 26–36. Bassi, Robert A. “Chicago: Still the City of ‘Firsts.’” Print. 1968, pp. 26–33, 114, 118, 121. Berry, John D. “Legible in Public Space.” Eye. Spring 2008, pp. 18–25. Brandon, Kelly. “The Writing on the Wall: A Conversation in Two Languages.” Identity. Summer 1993, pp. 68–72. Braybrooke, Susan. “Fling Out the Banner!” Print. March/April 1978, pp. 37–49. Canty, Donald J. “Beyond Writing on the Wall.” Architectural Record, May 1992, pp. 44–45. Carpenter, Edward K. “What Goes on Here: Messages in the Environment.” Print, March/April 1976, pp. 37–49. Cembalest, Robin. “Apocalypse Then.” Print. March/ April 1997, pp. 130–133. Chermayeff, Ivan. “Graphic Design in Public: How Important Is It?” Immovable Objects: Urban Open Spaces. 1979, p. 47. Dean, Andrea O. “Graphics in the Environment.” AIA Journal, 1975. Drummond, Scott. “Monumental Endeavors.” Dimensions. Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 14–16. Dugdale, Juanita. “You are here.” ID magazine. November 1993, pp. 66–73. Dugdale, Juanita. “Landmarks and Milestones: Building an Environmental Graphic Design Time Line.” Dimensions. Vol. 1, No. 1, 1993, pp. 5–13. Dunlop, Beth. “Interview: Timothy F. Rub on the Work of Joseph Urban.” The Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts. Issue 8, Spring 1988, pp. 104–119. Elliman, Paul. “City of Words.” Eye. Summer 2001, pp. 62–66. Gandee, Charles K. “Missed Connections.” Architectural Record, March 1987, pp. 128–139 Kennedy, Randy. “Award to Artist Who Gives Slums a Human Face.” New York Times, October 20, 2010, pp. C1–C2. Kennedy, Randy. “Underground Renaissance Man: Watch the Aesthetic Walls, Please.” New York Times, August 3, 2007, pp. C33–C34. Knapp, Pat, ed. SEGD Design 25, No. 25, 2009. Lahr, John. “New York Is New York—Alas.” Print, 1968, pp. 50–57, 122, 130. Lees, John and Farman, Melvin. “The Sign along the Highway.” Print, 1968, pp. 58–61. Linn, Charles. “Signs of the Times.” Architectural Record. June 1997, pp. 85–91. Lukach, Joan M. “Design in Transit: Boston’s Revitalized Subway System.” Print, 1968, pp. 62–67. Margolies, John. “New Amsterdam Theater.” Architectural Record. June 1997, pp. 113–119. Meggs, Philip B. “Peter Behrens: Design’s Man of the Century?” Print, March/April 1991, pp. 70–79. Murphy, Jim. “A Grand Gateway.” Progressive Architecture. November 1987, pp. 96–105. Ohlson, Kristin. “Farmer Turns Geneticist on Quest for Black Kernel.” New York Times, May 11, 1998, p. A10. Pearson, Clifford A. “Five-Star Motel.” Architectural Record, August 1994, pp. 64–69. Rodenbeck, Max. “In Search of Lost Time: Snohetta’s Alexandria Library.” Architecture, October 2001, pp. 77, 105–110. Russell, James S. “VSBA Today.” Architectural Record. February 1998, pp. 58–67. Sarhandi, Daoud and Rivas, Carolina. “This Is 1968 . . . This Is Mexico.” Eye. Summer 2005, pp. 24–37. Shaw, Paul. “In Praise of Neon.” Baseline. No. 54, 2008, pp. 22–31. Shaw, Warren. “The First Subway Line.” Metropolis. April 1992, pp. 23–27. Sinclair, Mark. “Disappearing Information.” Print. August 2011, pp. 65–69. Stiff, Paul. “The Way Ahead.” Eye. Winter 2010, p. 42. Treu, Martin. “Messages from the Past.” Dimension: A Design Journal of the Society for Environmental Graphic Design, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 7–13. Trieb, Marc. “Alphabets, Building, Cities.” Print. May/ June 1978, pp. 47–53. Turner, Raymond. “Designing London Transport.” Places. Summer 1994, pp. 52–79. Vanderbilt, Tom. “Making the Cut.” Print. January/February 2005, pp. 65–71. Walters, John L. “Brian’s Signature.” Eye. Spring 2009, pp. 46–49. Walters, John L. “In the Thick of It.” Eye. Spring 2011, pp. 20–29. Wood, Gaby. “Massive Attack.” New York Times Magazine, February 27, 2011, pp. 24–31.