# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS / ABOUT THE AUTHOR ## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This book is dedicated to Doug Morris . . . my partner in life, work, and love who has always given me the time, freedom, and support to pursue my dreams. This book would not have been possible without the assistance, support, and generous contributions of so many people. I would like to thank the following designers, architects, photographers, and colleagues for generously contributing examples of their work— Florian Aicher, Jeroen Barendse, Michael Bierut, Andrew Bordwin, Margaret Calvert, Ken Carbone, Ivan Chermayeff, Greg D’Onofrio, Michael Donovan, Lou Dorfsman, Gert Dumbar, Garry Emery, Alan Fletcher, Richard Foy, Tom Geismar, Milton Glaser, Richard Haas, Steve Heller, Armin Hoffman, Takenobu Igarashi, Maya Lin, Rebecca Maloney, Jan Middendorp, Abbott Miller, Shizuko Yoshikawa Müller, Debra Nichols, Jonathan Posnett, Robert Probst, JR, Dan Reisinger, Paula Scher, Clifford Selbert, Paul Shaw, Barbara Stauffacher Solomon, Erik Speikermann, Erica Stoller, Massimo Vignelli, Roger Whitehouse, James Wines, and Lance Wyman. A special thanks to Jim Polshek and Deborah Sussman for taking time out of their busy schedules to provide me their wonderful forewords to this book. Their support and friendship over the years, as well as their inspiring work, has been a tremendous influence to my evolution as a designer, author, and educator. To Winnie Prentiss, publisher; Emily Potts senior acquisition editor; and John Gettings, managing editor at Rockport Publishers for their continued encouragement and support throughout this entire process. And to Regina Grenier for her patience and collabora tive spirit in realizing this book. To Andreina Carrillo, my former student and colleague at Poulin + Morris Inc., for her invaluable insights and contributions to the design of this volume. And, as always, to my students—past, present, and future, who continue to inspire and challenge me. ## ABOUT THE AUTHOR Richard Poulin is cofounder, design director, and principal of Poulin + Morris Inc., an internationally recognized, multidisciplinary design consultancy located in New York City. His work has been published in periodicals and books worldwide, is in the permanent collection of the Library of Congress, and has received awards from the American Institute of Architects, American Institute of Graphic Arts, Applied Arts, Communication Arts, Creative Review, Graphis, ID, Print, Society for Environmental Graphic Design, Society of Publication Designers, Type Directors Club, and the Art Directors Clubs of Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco. Richard is a fellow of the Society for Environmental Graphic Design (SEGD), the organization’s highest honor for lifetime achievement; and past president and board member of the New York Chapter of the American Institute of Graphic Arts (AIGA). He is also a recipient of a research grant in design history from the Graham Foundation for Advanced Studies in the Fine Arts. Since 1992, Richard has been a faculty member of the School of Visual Arts in New York City and was formerly an adjunct professor at The Cooper Union. He has also taught and lectured at Carnegie-Mellon University, Maryland Institute College of Art, Massachusetts College of Art, North Carolina State University, Simmons College, Syracuse University, University of the Arts, and University of Cincinnati. Richard is the author of the The Language of Graphic Design: An Illustrated Handbook for Understanding Fundamental Design Principles (Rockport Publishers, 2011) and the coauthor of Typography Referenced (Rockport Publishers, 2011). He lives in New York City and Clinton Corners, New York, with his partner of twenty-two years. ## COLOPHON Graphic Design and Architecture: A 20th–Century History was designed and typeset by Poulin + Morris Inc., New York, New York. Digital type composition and page layouts were originated on Apple G5 computers, utilizing Adobe InDesign CS5, Version 5.5.5 software. # ROCKPAPERINK branding·typography·logos·color·design management• design for change• posters• fashion www.RockPaperlnk.com © 2012 Rockport Publishers © Text Richard Poulin All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without written permission of the copyright owners. All images in this book have been reproduced with the knowledge and prior consent of the artists concerned, and no responsibility is accepted by producer, publisher, or printer for any infringement of copyright or otherwise, arising from the contents of this publication. Every effort has been made to ensure that credits accurately comply with information supplied. We apologize for any inaccuracies that may have occurred and will resolve inaccurate or missing information in a subsequent reprinting of the book. First published in the United States of America by Rockport Publishers, a member of Quayside Publishing Group 100 Cummings Center Suite 406-L Beverly, Massachusetts 01915-6101 Telephone: (978) 282-9590 Fax: (978) 283-2742 www.rockpub.com ## Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Poulin, Richard. Graphic design and architecture, a 20th century history : a guide to type, image, symbol, and visual storytelling in the modern world / Richard Poulin. pages cm Summary: "This innovative volume is the first to provide the design student, practitioner, and educator with an invaluable comprehensive reference of visual and narrative material that illustrates and evaluates the unique and important history surrounding graphic design and architecture. Graphic Design and Architecture, A 20th Century History closely examines the relationship between typography, image, symbolism, and the built environment by exploring principal themes, major technological developments, important manufacturers, and pioneering designers over the last 100 years. It is a complete resource that belongs on every designer's bookshelf"-- Provided by publisher. ISBN 978-1-59253-779-2 1. Design--History--20th century. 2. Visual communication--History--20th century. 3. Communication in architecture--History--20th century. 4. Architecture and society--History--20th century. I. Title. 741.609'04--dc23 NK1390.P67 2012 2012021721 ISBN: 978-1-59253-779-2 Digital edition published in 2012 eISBN: 978-1-61058-633-7 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Design: Poulin + Morris Inc. Printed in China