## Foreword When Thomas Kuhn introduced the notion of a Paradigm Shift into the public debate, he was describing the periodic reconstruction of accepted ideas, roles, and procedures in scientific inquiry.\* Most of what he said applies to ideas in design as well. But after the design profession embraced Sullivan’s 1896 principle, Form Follows Function,\*\* the celebration of mass producible forms by the Bauhaus in the 1920s; the affectation of “streamlining” adopted when design aligned itself with marketing in the 1930s; the influence of operations research in the late 1940s; the practice of minimalism by the Hochschule für Gestaltung (HfG) at Ulm in the 1950s and 1960s; the predominance of the systems approach in the 1970s; and the concern with concurrent engineering in the 1980s and 1990s are at best advances in design thinking that pale by comparison to the paradigm shift in design we are now witnessing. What outsiders do not appreciate, perhaps, is the conflict and pain that theorists and practitioners experience during the transition from one paradigm to another. Reinhart Butter, Klaus Krippendorff, and I happened to be at the HfG Ulm during 1960 to 1961, when the prevailing functionalist paradigm came to be questioned and started to break down. The HfG Ulm was a school far ahead of its time. There, the protagonists of form-followsfunction and minimalism, on the one hand, and the rather diverse advocates of gestalt psychology, operations research, systems theory, and sociology of technology, on the other, were engaged in continuous and bitter disputes that later fueled many debates in the larger design community. Although the dissolution of the prevailing paradigm seemed imminent then, a new synthesis was not yet in sight. Significant ideas and inventions have their gestation periods. To take root, paradigm shifts require a new generation of proponents, a fertile cultural climate, but also significant technological advances. It is not surprising, therefore, that the term “Product Semantics” did not emerge until 1984.\*\*\* Some thought that semantic considerations would merely add to the design discourse. However, they became not only the key to the design of human–machine interfaces, they are now the principal drivers of information technology. Product semantics, the way I have observed it taught at The Ohio State University (OSU), was only the first step toward that long-awaited synthesis. The Semantic Turn reviews the history of semantic concerns in design, presents their philosophical roots, and lays out several compelling design methods that take seriously what Klaus Krippendorff considers axiomatic for human-centered design: that humans do not respond to the physical properties of things — to their form, structure and function — but to their individual and cultural meanings. This premise radically breaks with functionalist traditions in design. A new paradigm is recognized when its basis has become obviously true while rendering previous truths obsolete. I fully subscribe to the book’s premise and its far-reaching implications. The Semantic Turn boldly outlines a new science for design that offers designers a solid ground on which to state and validate their claims — not unlike the “hard” disciplines, but without the shortcomings of Herbert Simon’s 1969 proposal.\* I am particularly pleased about the inclusion of systematic design methods, as they are rooted in my own contributions. Klaus Krippendorff accomplishes this synthesis as a recognized designer and as a distinguished scholar of human communication and language use. Reinhart Butter contributes examples from his pioneering explorations at OSU. The Semantic Turn is an indispensable guide for the future of the design profession and a must for students, teachers, practitioners, and employers of design. I applaud the work that went into this remarkable redesign of design. Bruce Archer London May 15, 2005