## References Abend, C. Joshua (1973). Product Appearance as Communication, Special Technical Publication 545. Philadelphia, PA: The American Society for Testing and Materials, pp. 35–53. Agre, Philip E. (2000). Notes on the New Design Space. http://dlis.gseis.ucla.edu/ pagre/ (Accessed May, 2000). Aldersey-Williams, Hugh, Lorraine Wild, Daralice Boles, Katherine McCoy, Michael McCoy, Roy Slade, and Niels Diffrient (1990). The New Cranbrook Design Discourse. New York: Rizzoli International Publications. Alexander, Christopher (1964). Notes on a Synthesis of Form, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Alexander, Christopher (1979). The Timeless Way of Building. New York: Oxford University Press. Alexander, Christopher, Sara Ishikawa, and Murray Silverstein, with Max Jacobson, Ingrid Fiksdahl-King, and Shlomo Angel (1977). A Pattern Language. New York: Oxford University Press. Altshuller, Genrich, Lec Shulyak, and Steven Rodman (Translators) (1997). 40 Principles: TRIZ Keys to Technical Innovation. Worchester, MA: Technical Innovation Center. American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 3rd ed. (1992). Boston, New York: Houghton Mifflin Co. Andrews, Alison (1996). Designing Intrinsically Motivating Interactivity: Interactive Technologies in Service to Their Users, MA Thesis, The Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. Archer, L. Bruce (1984). Systematic Method for Designers, in N. Cross (Ed.), Developments in Design Methodology. New York: John Wiley, pp. 57–82. Argyris, Chris, Robert Putnam, and Diana McLain Smith (1985). Action Science. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Argyris, Chris and Donald Schön (1978). Organizational Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley. Aristotle. Poetics. Engl. by Samuel J. Butcher (1951). Aristotle’s Theory of Poetry and Fine Arts, 4th ed. New York: Dover. Ashby, W. Ross (1956). Introduction to Cybernetics. London: Chapman and Hall. Asimov, Isaac (1974). Foundation Trilogy: Three Classics of Science Fiction. New York: Avon. Athavankar, Uday A. (1987). Web of Images Within. ARTHAYA, Proceedings of a Conference on Visual Semantics. Bombay, India: Indian Institute of Technology, Industrial Design Center, January 20–22, 1987. Athavankar, Uday A. (1989). Categorization: natural language and design. Design Issues, 5(2), 100–111. Austin, John (1962). How to Do Things with Words. London: Oxford University Press. Bakhtin, Mikhail (1984). The Dialogical Principle. Tzvetan Todorov (Ed.). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Balaram, S. (1989). Product symbolism of Gandhi and its connection with Indian mythology. Design Issues 5(2) 68–85. Barthes, Roland (1983). The Fashion System. M. Ward and R. Howard (Translators). New York: Hill & Wang. Bateson, Gregory (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine. Bateson, Mary C. (2001). Address to the American Society for Cybernetics (Vancouver, Canada). Baudrillard, Jean (1983). Simulations. New York: Semiotext(e). Bense, Max (1954). Aesthetica. Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt. Bense, Max (1956). Aesthetische Information, Aesthetica II. Krefeld und Baden-Baden: Agis-Verlag. Bense, Max (1958). Aesthetik und Zivilization, Aesthetica III. Krefeld und Baden-Baden: Agis-Verlag. Bense, Max (1960). Programmierung des Schönen, Aesthetica IV. Krefeld und Baden-Baden: Agis-Verlag. Bense, Max (1971). Zeichen und Design. Semiotische Aesthetic. Baden-Baden: Agis-Verlag. Berlin, Brent and Paul Kay (1969). Basic Color Terms: Their Universality and Evolution. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. Betts, Paul (1998). Science, semiotics and society: The Ulm Hochschule für Gestaltung in retrospect. Design Issues 14(2), 67–82. Bhavani, Suresh K. and Bonnie E. John (1997). Exploring the unrealized potential of computer-aided drafting, in K. Krippendorff (Ed.) et al. Design in the Age of Information; A Report to the National Science Foundation (NSF). Raleigh, NC: Design Research Laboratory, North Carolina State University, pp. 149–157. Bill, Max (1949). Die mathematische Denkweise in der Kunst unserer Zeit. Das Werk 36(3), 86–90. Bill, Max (1952). Form: eine Bilanz über die Formentwicklung um die Mitte des XX. Jahrhunderts. Basel: Verlag K. Werner. Blaich, Robert (1989). Philips corporate design: a personal account. Design Issues, 5(2), 1–8. Blaich, Robert, and Janet Blaich (1993). Product Design and Corporate Strategy. New York: McGraw-Hill. Blumer, Herbert (1972). Symbolic interaction, in R.W. Budd and B.D. Ruben (Eds.), Interdisciplinary Approaches to Human Communication. Rochelle Park, NJ: Hayden, pp. 135–153. Blumer, Herbert (1990). Industrialization as an Agent of Social Change. A Critical Analysis. David R. Maines and Thomas J. Morrione (Eds.). New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Blumer, Herbert (2000). Selected Works of Herbert Blumer. A Public Philosophy for Mass Society. Stanford M. Lyman and Arthur J. Vidich (Eds.). Urbana: University of Illinois Press. Bohm, David (1996). On Dialogue. New York: Routledge. Bonsiepe, Gui (1993). Alles ist Design — der Rest verdampft, Form, 144, 30–31. Bonsiepe, Gui (1996). Interface; Design neu begreifen. Mannheim, Germany: Bollmann Verlag. Boulding, Kenneth E. (1978). Ecodynamics. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications. Broadbent, Geoffrey, Richard Bunt, and Charles Jencks (1980). Signs, Symbols, and Architecture. New York: John Wiley. Brown, Richard Harvey (1987). Society as Text; Essays on Rhetoric, Reason, and Reality. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Bruner, Jerome (1986). Actual Minds, Possible Worlds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Buber, Martin (1958). I and Thou (2nd ed.). New York: Scribner. Buchanan, Richard, et al. (Eds.) (1999). Doctoral Education in Design 1998; Proceedings of the Ohio State Conference. Pittsburgh, PA: School of Design, Carnegie Mellon University. Bunt, Richard and Charles Jencks (Eds.) (1980). Signs, Symbols, and Architecture. New York: John Wiley. Burandt, Ulrich (1978). Ergonomie für Design und Entwicklung. Köln, Germany: Otto Schmidt Verlag. Burandt, Ulrich (Ed.) (in press). Updating Ergonomics. Berlin, Germany: Gestalten Verlag. Bürdek, Bernhard E. (1991/2004). Design, Geschichte, Theorie und Praxis der Produktgestaltung. Berlin: Springer Verlag. Bürdek, Bernhard E. (1997). On language, objects and design, Formdiskurs, 3, 6–15. Butcher, Samuel J. (1951). Aristotle’s Theory of Poetry and Fine Arts, 4th ed. New York: Dover. Butter, Reinhart (1989). Putting theory into practice: an application of product semantics to transportation design. Design Issues 5(2), 51–67. Butter, Reinhart (1990). The practical side of a theory — an approach to the application of product semantics. in S. Väkevä (Ed.). Product Semantics ’89. Helsinki: University of Industrial Arts, pp. b3–b17. Buttler, Mary Beth, and Kate Ehrlich (1994). Usability engineering for Lotus 1-2-3 Release 4, in M.E. Wiklund (Ed.), Usability in Practice; How Companies Develop User-Friendly Products. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, pp 293–326. Chen, Lin-Lin, and Joseph Liang (2001). Image interpolation for synthesizing affective product shapes, in M.G. Helander, H.M. Khalid, and T.M. Po, Proceedings of the International Conference on Affective Human Factors Design. London: ASEAN Academic Press, pp. 531–537. Chernyshevsky, Nikolai G. (1855). Die Ästhetischen Beziehungen der Kunst zur Wirklichkeit. Dissertation at St. Petersburg University, Russia. Pp. 362-533 in N. G. Tschernyschevsky (1953), Ausgewählte Philosophische Schriften Moskau: Verlag für fremdsprachige Literatur. Cited in Kathryn Feuer's (1986) Introduction to Chernyshevsky's What Is to Be Done? Ann Arbor, MI: Ardis. Cochran, Larry R. (1990). Narrative as a paradigm for career research, in R.A. Young and W.A. Borgen (Eds.), Methodological Approaches to the Study of Career. New York: Praeger, pp. 71–86. Cooper, Allan (1999). The Inmates Are Running the Asylum: Why High Tech Products Drive Us Crazy and How to Restore the Sanity. Indianapolis, IN: Sams Publisher. Coulter, Jeff (1983). Rethinking Cognitive Theory. London: Macmillan. Cross, Nigel (Ed.) (1984). Developments in Design Methodology. New York: Wiley. Cross, Nigel (2000). Design as a discipline, in D. Durling and K. Friedman (Eds.), Doctoral Education in Design: Foundations for the Future. Staffordshire, UK: Staffordshire University Press, pp. 93–100. Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly (1997). Finding Flow: the Psychology of Engagement with Everyday Life. New York: Basic Books. Danto, Arthur C. (1985). Narration and Knowledge. New York: Columbia University Press. Diaz-Kommonen, Lily (2002). Art, Fact, and Artifact Production. Helsinki: University of Art and Design. Douglas, Mary (1986). How Institutions Think. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University. Douglas, Mary (1996). Thought Styles; Critical Essays on Good Taste. London & Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Dreyfus, Hubert L. (1992). Being-in-the-world; A Commentary on Heidegger’s Being and Time, Division 1. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Dreyfuss, Henry (1960). The Measure of Man, Human Factors in Design. New York: Whitney Library of Design. 2nd Edition by Allan R. Tilley and Henry Dreyfuss Associates (2002). The Measure of Man and Women, Human Factors in Design. New York: Wiley. Durling, David and Ken Friedman (Eds.) (2000). Doctoral Education in Design: Foundations for the Future. Staffordshire, UK: Staffordshire University Press. Dykstra-Erickson, Elizabeth (1997). Heuristics as common language for HCI design and evaluation, in K. Krippendorff (Ed.) et al., Design in the Age of Information; a Report to the National Science Foundation (NSF). Raleigh, NC: Design Research Laboratory, North Carolina State University, pp. 73–78. Eco, Umberto (1976). A Theory of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. Eco, Umberto (1980). Function and sign: the semiotics of architecture, in R. Bunt and C. Jencks (Eds.), Signs, Symbols and Architecture, New York: Wiley, pp. 11–69. Eco, Umberto (1984). Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. Edwards, Cliff (1999). Many Products Have Gone the Way of the Edsel. Johnson City Press, May 23, 1999, Vol. 28, p. 30. Ellinger, Theodor (1966). Die Informationsfunktion des Produktes. Köln: Westdeutscher Verlag. Enders, Gerdum (1999). Design als Element wirtschaftlicher Dynamik. Volume 7 of a Series on “Design im Kontext” German Design Council. Herne, Germany: Verlag für Wissenschaft und Kunst. Ericsson, K. Anders, and Herbert A. Simon (1993). Protocol Analysis — Revised Edition: Verbal Reports as Data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Faber, Ingrid (1998). Typografie im Desktop Publishing: Experten- und Laienwortschatz. Frankfurt/M: Peter Lang AG, Europäischer Verlag der Wissenschaften. Feuer, Kathryn (1986). Introduction to Chernyshevsky's ‘What Is to Be Done?’ Ann Arbor, MI: Ardis. Fischer, Richard (1984). Grundlagen einer Theorie der Produktsprache, Heft 3, Anzeichenfunktionen. Offenbach: HfG Offenbach. Flach, John M. (1994). Situation awareness: the emperor’s new clothes, in M. Mouloua and R. Parasuraman (Eds.), Human Performance in Automated Systems: Current Research and Trends. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp. 241–248. Flach, John M. and Kevin B. Bennet (1996). A theoretical framework for representational design, in R. Parasuraman and M. Mouloua (Eds.), Automation and Human Performance: Theory and Applications. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Flach, John M., Peter Hancock, Jeff Caird, and Kim Vicente (Eds.) (1995). Global Perspectives on the Ecology of Human-Machine Systems. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Foerster, Heinz von (1981). On constructing a reality, in Heinz von Foerster (Ed.), Observing Systems. Seaside, CA: Intersystems Publications, pp. 288–309. Foucault, Michel (1980). Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, C. Gorden (Ed.). New York: Pantheon Books. Foucault, Michel (1990). The History of Sexuality. R. Hurley (Translator). New York: Vintage Books. Friedrich, Theodor, et al. (Ed.) (undated). Goethe. Vierzigster Teil: Zur Farbenlehre (original 1810). Leipzig: Verlag Reclam. Galuszka, Frank and Elizabeth Dykstra-Erickson (1997). Society, sensibility, and the design of tools for collaboration, in K. Krippendorff (Ed.) et al. (1997). Design in the Age of Information; a Report to the National Science Foundation (NSF). Raleigh, NC: Design Research Laboratory, North Carolina State University, pp. 79-83. Garnich, Rolf (1979). Ästhetik, Konstruction and Design; Eine structurelle Ästhetik. Ravensburg: Otto Maier Verlag. Gates, Bill (1996). The Road Ahead. New York: Penguin Books. Gerdum, Enders (1999). Design als Element wirtschaftlicher Dynamik. Volume 7 of a Series on “Design im Kontext” German Design Council. Herne, Germany: Verlag für Wissenschaft und Kunst. Gibson, James J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston MA: Houghton Mifflin. Gibson, William (1984/1995). Neuromancer (Remembering Tomorrow). New York: ACE Books, Penguin. Ginnow-Merkert, Hartmut (1997). Beyond Cosmetics, in K. Krippendorff (Ed.) et al. Design in the Age of Information; A Report to the National Science Foundation (NSF). Raleigh, NC: Design Research Laboratory, North Carolina State University, pp. 171-174. Glasersfeld, Ernst von (1995). Radical Constructivism; A Way of Knowing and Learning. Washington, DC: Falmer Press. Goffman, Erwing (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. Gomoll, Tom, and Irene Wong (1994). User-aided design at Apple Computer, in M.E. Wiklund (Ed.), Usability in Practice; How Companies Develop User-Friendly Products. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, pp. 83–109. Gramsci, Antonio (1971). Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci (Q. Hoare and G.N. Smith, Translators). New York: International Publishers. Green, William S. and Patrick W. Jordan (2002). Pleasure with Products, Beyond Usability. London and New York: Taylor & Francis. Grint, Keith and Steve Woolgar (1997). The Machine at Work: Technology, Work and Organization. Cambridge: Polity Press. Gros, Jochen (1984). Das zunehmende Bedürfnis nach Form. Form, 107, 11–25. Gros, Jochen (1987). Grundlagen einer Theorie der Produktsprache, Heft 4, Symbolfunktionen. Offenbach: HfG Offenbach. Hargreaves-Heap, Shaun and Angus Ross (Eds.) (1992). Mary Douglas: Understanding the Enterprise Culture. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Press. Heidegger, Martin (1977). Basic Writings (D.F. Krell, Ed.). New York: Harper & Row. Helander, Martin G., Halimahtun M. Khalid, and Tham Ming Po (Eds.). (2001). Proceedings of the International Conference on Affective Human Factors Design. London: ASEAN Academic Press. Hirsch, E.D., Jr. (1967). Validity in Interpretation. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Holquist, Michael (1990). Dialogism; Bakhtin and His World. New York: Routledge Holt, Michael (June 6, 2003). Good Designer = Good Design Teacher? PhDs in Design [PhD-Design@jiscmail.ac.uk]. Hubbard, Ruth (1990). The Politics of Women’s Biology. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. International Standards Organization, ISO 9241-11 (1998). Jastrow, Joseph (1900). Fact and Fable in Psychology. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Co. Kahneman, Daniel, Paul Slowic, and Amos Twersky (Eds.) (1985). Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. Käo, Tönis and Julius Lengert (1984). Produktgestalt. Edwin A. Schricker (Ed.). Stuttgart: Siemens AG. Karmasin, Helene (1993). Mehrwert durch Zeichenwahl, in M. Titzmann (Ed.), Zeichen(theorie) und Praxis. Passau: Wissenschaftsverlag Rothe, pp. 73–87. Karmasin, Helene (1994). Produkte als Botschaften. Wien: Überreuter Wirschaftsverlag. Karmasin, Helene (1998). Cultural theory and product semantics; design as part of social communication. Formdiskurs 4,1:12-25. Karmasin, Helene (2004). Produkte als Botschaften. Vienna, Austria: Ueberreuter Wirtschaftsverlag. Karmasin, Helene and Mathias Karmasin (1997). Cultural Theory. Vienna, Austria: Linde. Kempton, Willet (1987). Two theories of home heat control, in D. Holland and N. Quinn (Eds.), Cultural Models in Language and Thought. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 222–242. Korzybski, Alfred (1933). Science and Sanity; an Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Systems and General Semantics. New York: The International non-Aristotelian Library Publishing Company. Krampen, Martin (1979). Meaning in the Urban Environment. London: Pion Ltd. Krampen, Martin (1989). Semiotics in architecture and industrial product design. Design Issues, 5(2), 124–140. Krippendorff, Klaus (1961a). Der Kommunikative Aspekt der Produktgestaltung: Gegenstände als Zeichen und Symbole. Mimeo, Hochschule für Gestaltung Ulm, February 1, 1961. Krippendorff, Klaus (1961b). Produktgestalter kontra Konstrukteur. Output, 4 and 5, 18–21. Krippendorff, Klaus (1961c). Über den Zeichen- und Symbolcharakter von Gegenständen: Versuch zu einer Zeichentheorie für die Programmierung von Produktformen in sozialen Kommunikationsstrukturen. Graduate Thesis. Ulm: Hochschule für Gestaltung Ulm. Krippendorff, Klaus (1986). Information Theory; Structural Models for Qualitative Data. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. Krippendorff, Klaus (1989). “On the Essential Contexts of Artifacts” or on the Proposition that “Design is Making Sense (of Things).” Design Issues, 5(2), 9–39. Krippendorff, Klaus (1990). Product semantics; a triangulation and four design theories, in S. Väkevä (Ed.). Product Semantics '89. Helsinki: University of Industrial Arts, pp. a3-a23. Krippendorff, Klaus (1993a). Major metaphors of communication and some constructivist reflections on their use. Cybernetics & Human Knowing, 2(1), 3–25. Krippendorff, Klaus (1993b). Design: A Discourse on Meaning, a Workbook. Philadelphia, PA: University of the Arts. Krippendorff, Klaus (1995). Redesigning design; an invitation to a responsible future, in P. Tahkokallio and S. Vihma (Eds.). Design – Pleasure or Responsibility? Helsinki: University of Art and Design, pp. 138–162. Krippendorff, Klaus (Ed.) et al. (1997). Design in the Age of Information; a Report to the National Science Foundation (NSF). Raleigh, NC: Design Research Laboratory, North Carolina State University. Krippendorff, Klaus (2004a). Content Analysis; an Introduction to Its Methodology. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Krippendorff, Klaus (2004b). Intrinsic motivation and human-centered design. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, 5(1), 43–72. Krippendorff, Klaus (in press). The social reality of meaning, The American Journal of SEMIOTICS, 18.(4). Krippendorff, Klaus and Reinhart Butter (1984). Exploring the symbolic qualities of form, Innovation, 3(2), 4-9. Krippendorff, Klaus and Reinhart Butter (Eds.) (1989). Product semantics, Design Issues, 5(2). Krippendorff, Klaus and Reinhart Butter (1993). Where meanings escape functions. Design Management Journal, 4(2), 30–37. Krug, Steven (2000). Don’t Make Me Think, a Common Sense Approach to Web Usability. Berkeley, CA: New Riders. Kuhn, Thomas (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: Chicago University Press. Labov, William, and David Fanshel (1977). Therapeutic Discourse; Psychotherapy as Conversation. New York: Academic Press. Lafont, Christina (1999). The Linguistic Turn in Hermeneutic Philosophy. José Medina (Translator). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Lakoff, George (1987). Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson (1980). Metaphors We Live By. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Lannoch, Helga, and Hans-Jürgen Lannoch (1989). Towards a semantic notion of space. Design Issues, 5(2), 40–50. Reprinted, in S. Väkevä (Ed.) (1990). Product Semantics ’89. Helsinki: University of Industrial Arts, pp. c1–c11. Lasswell, Harold D. (1960). The structure and function of communication in society, in W. Schramm (Ed.). Mass Communication. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, pp. 117–130. Lee, Seung Hee, and Pieter Jan Stappers (2003). Kansei evaluation of matching 2D to 3D images extracted by observation of 3D objects. Journal of the 6th Asian Design International Conference. Tsukuba, Japan. Lindinger, Herbert (Ed.) (1987). Hochschule für Gestaltung Ulm; Die Moral der Gegenstände. Berlin: Wilhelm Ernst & Sohn Verlag. Translated as Herbert Lindinger (Ed.) (1990). Ulm Design; The Morality of Objects. Hochschule für Gestaltung Ulm 1953–1968. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Love, Terrence (April 25, 2004). PhD-Design@jiscmail.ac.uk Lukas, Paul (1998). The ghastliest product launches. Fortune, March 16, 1998, vol. 44. MacIntyre, Alasdair C. (1984). After Virtue. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press. Maldonado, Tomás (1961). Beiträge zur Terminologie der Semiotik. Ulm: Ebner. Malone, T.W. (1980). Toward a theory of intrinsically motivating instruction, Cognitive Science, 5(4), 333–369. Malone, T.W. and M.R. Lepper (1987), Making learning fun: a taxonomy of intrinsic motivations for learning, in R.E. Snow and M.J. Farr (Eds.), Aptitude, Learning, and Instruction, III: Conative and Affective Process Analysis. Hillside, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 223–253. Mansfield, Edwin, J. Rapaport, J. Schnee, S. Wagner, and M. Hamburger (1971). Research and Innovation in Modern Corporations. New York: Norton. Margolin, Victor and Richard Buchanan (Eds.) (1995). The Idea of Design. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995. Marx, Karl, and Frederick Engels (1845, 1970). The German Ideology, part one. C.J. Arthur (Ed.). New York: International Publishers. Maturana, Humberto R. (1988). Reality: the search for objectivity or the quest for a compelling argument. The Irish Journal of Psychology, 9(1), 25–82. Maturana, Humberto R. and Francisco J. Varela (1988). The Tree of Knowledge; the Biological Roots of Human Understanding. Boston, MA: Shambhala. McDowel, Dan (1999). The Triton and Patterns Projects of the San Diego Unified School District. http://projects.edtech.sandi.net/staffdev/tpss99/processguides/brainstorming.html (Accessed July 2005). McMath, Robert (1998). What Were They Thinking? Marketing Lessons I’ve Learned from Over 80,000 New Product Innovations and Idiocies. New York: Times Business. Michl, Jan (1995). Form follows what? The modernist notion of function as a carte blanche. Magazine of the Faculty of Architecture & Town Planning [Yechnion, Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel] 10, 20–31. http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2360/jm-eng.fff-hai.html (Accessed July 2005). Miller, George A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on our capacity for processing information. The Psychological Review, 63, 81–97. Miller, Hugh and Mirja Kälviäinen (2001). Objects for an enjoyable life: social and design aspects, in M.G. Helander, H.M. Khalid, and T.M. Po (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Affective Human Factors Design. London: Asean Academic Press, pp. 487–494. Mitchell, W.J.T. (Ed.) (1981). On Narrative, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Morris, Charles W. (1938). Foundations of the Theory of Signs. International Encyclopedia of Unified Science Vol. 1. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Morris, Charles W. (1955). Signs, Language and Behavior. New York: George Braziller. Mukai, Shutaro (1979). Zwischen Universalität und Individualität. Semiosis, 13(1), 41–51. Mukai, Shutaro (1986). Katachi no Semiosisu (Semiosis of Form, in Japanese). Tokyo: Shichosha. Mukai, Shutaro (1991). Characters that represent, reflect, and translate culture — in the context of the revolution in modern art, in Yoshihiko Ikegami (Ed.), Foundations of Semiotics, Vol. 8. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamin Publishing Co. Mukai, Shutaro (2003). Katachi no Shigaku (Japanese of Poetics of Form). Tokyo: Bijutsu Shuppan-sha, Publisher. Mukai, Shutaro and Akiyo Kobayashi (2003). The Idea and Formation of Design; 35 Years of the Science of Design. Tokyo: Musachino Art University. Nagamachi, Mitsuo (1995). Kansei engineering: A new ergonomic consumer-oriented technology for product development. International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 15, 3–11. Nagamachi, Mitsuo (1996). Kansei Engineering. Japan: Kaibundo Publisher. Nelson, Harold, and Erik Stolterman (2002). The Design Way, Intentional Chance in an Unpredictable World: Foundations and Fundamentals of Design Competence. Englewood, NJ: Educational Technology Publications. Newell, Allen, and Herbert A. Simon (1972). Human Problem Solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Nielson, Jacob (1993). Usability Engineering. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Norman, Donald A. (1988). The Psychology of Everyday Things. New York: Basic Books. Norman, Donald A. (1998). The Invisible Computer. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Norman, Donald A. (2004). Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things. New York: Basic Books. Osgood, Charles E. (1974). Probing subjective culture/Part 1: Cross-linguistic tool-making. Journal of Communication, 24(1), 21–35; Part 2: Cross-cultural tool using. Journal of Communication 24(2), 82–100. Osgood, Charles E. and George J. Suci (1969). Factor Analysis of Meaning. Semantic Differential Technique — A Sourcebook. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter. Osgood, Charles E., G.J. Suci, and Percy H. Tannenbaum (1957). The Measurement of Meaning. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press. Parsons, Talcot, Edward Shils, Kaspar D. Naegele, and Jesse R. Pitts (Eds.) (1961). Theories of Society; Foundations of Modern Sociological Theory. New York: Free Press of Glencoe. Peirce, Charles S. (1931). Collected Papers. C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss (Eds.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Pinch, Trevor J. and Wiebe E. Bijker (1987). The social construction of facts and artifacts: or how the sociology of science and the sociology of technology might benefit each other, in W.E. Bijker, T.P. Hughes, and T.J. Pinch (Eds.), The Social Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 17–50. Pirsig, Robert M. (1999). Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance: An Inquiry into Values (25th Anniversary Edition). New York: Morrow. Polkinghorne, Donald (1988). Narrative Knowing and the Human Sciences. Albany: State University of New York. Popper, Karl R. (1959). The Logic of Scientific Discovery, New York: Basic Books. Prieto, L.J. (1973). Signe et instrument. In Litterature, Histoire, Linguistique. Receuil d’Etudes Offert a Bernard Gagnebin. Lausanne: Edition l’Age d'Homme — as reviewed by Martin Krampen (1979). Putnam, Hilary (1981). Reason, Truth and History. New York: Cambridge University Press. Reinmöller, Patrick (1995). Produktsprache — Verständlichkeit des Umgangs mit Produkten durch Produktgestaltung. Köln: Fördergesellschaft Produkt-Marketing E.V. Rittel, Horst W.J. (1992). Planen, Entwerfen, Design; Ausgewählte Schriften zur Theorie und Methodik, Wolf D. Reuter (Ed.). Stuttgart, Berlin, Köln: Verlag W. Kohlhammer. Rittel, Horst W.J. and Melvin M. Webber, (1984). Planning problems are wicked problems, in N. Cross (Ed.), Developments in Design Methodology. New York: Wiley, pp 135–144. Rorty, Richard (Ed.) (1970). The Linguistic Turn: Recent Essays in Philosophical Method. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Rorty, Richard (1979). Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Rorty, Richard (1989). Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. New York: Cambridge University Press. Rosch, Eleanor (1978). Principles of categorization, in E. Rosch and B.B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and Categorization. New York: Wiley. pp. 27–48. Rosch, Eleanor (1981). Prototype classification and logical classification: the two systems, in E. Scholnick, (Ed.), New Trends in Cognitive Representation: Challenges to Piaget’s Theory, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1983, pp. 73–86. Russell, Bertrand (1959). Wisdom of the West. London: Rathbone Books. Sarbin, Teodore R. (1986). Narrative Psychology. New York: Praeger. Saussure, Ferdinand de (1916). Cours de Linguistique Générale, English translation by Wade Baskin (1959). Course in General Linguistics, New York: Philosophical Library. Schön, Donald A. (1979). Generative metaphor: a perspective on problem solving in social policy, in A. Orthony (Ed.), Metaphor and Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 254–283. Schön, Donald A. (1983). The Reflective Practitioner; How Professionals Think in Action. New York: Basic Books. Searle, John R. (1969). Speech Acts, an Essay in the Philosophy of Language. New York: Cambridge University Press. Searle, John R. (1995). The Construction of Social Reality. New York: Free Press. Sebeok, Thomas (Ed.) (1986). Encyclopedic Dictionary of Semiotics. New York: Mouton De Gruyter. Semantics in Design (1998). Partial proceedings: http://semantics-in-design. hfg-gmuend.de (Accessed May 2004). Shannon, Claude E. and Warren Weaver (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press. Shotter, John (1993). Conversational Realities. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Shulyak, Lev (undated). Introduction to TRIZ. http://www.triz.org/downloads/ 40Ptriz.pdf. (Accessed May, 2005). Silverman, Jonathan and Dean Rader (2002). The World Is a Text: Writing, Reading, and Thinking About Culture and Its Contexts. New York: Prentice Hall. Simon, Herbert A. (1969/2001). The Sciences of the Artificial, 3rd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Simon, Herbert A. (1973). The organization of complex systems, in H.H. Pattee (Ed.), Hierarchy Theory. New York: G. Braziller, pp. 3–27. Snyder, Carolyn (2003). Paper Prototyping: The Fast and Easy Way to Design and Refine User Interfaces. Morgan Kaufmann (Elsevier). Spence, Donald P. (1982). Narrative Truth and Historical Truth. New York: W.W. Norton. Spitz, Rene (2002). The Political History of the Ulm School of Design, 1953–1968. Berlin/ Stuttgart: Axel Menges. Steffen, Dagmar (1997). On a Theory of Product Language, formdiskurs, 3(2), 16–27. Steffen, Dagmar (2000). Design als Productsprache. Frankfurt/Main: Verlag form. Stewart, John (1995). Language as Articulate Contact; Toward a Post-Semiotic Philosophy of Communication. Albany NY: SUNY Press. Suchman, Lucy A. (1985). Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human Machine Communication. Palo Alto: Xerox Corporation, ISL-6. Cited on p. 313 in S. Woolgar (1987). Suchman, Lucy A. (1987). Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human Machine Communication. New York: Cambridge University Press. Sullivan, Louis Henry (1896). The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered. Lippincott’s Magazine, March 1896. http://www.njit.edu/v2/Library/archlib/ pub-domain/sullivan-1896-tall-bldg.html. (Accessed April 20, 2005). Also pp. 202–213 in I. Athey (Ed.) (1947). Kindergarten Chats (revised 1918) and Other Writings. New York: Wittenborn Schultz. Tahkokallio, Päivi and Susann Vihma (Eds.) (1995). Design — Pleasure or Responsibility? Helsinki: University of Art and Design. Thompson, D’Arcy W. (1952). On Growth of Form, 2nd ed. New York: Cambridge University Press. Thompson, Stith (1932). Motif-Index of Folk Literature: A Classification of Narrative Elements in Folk-Tales, Ballads, Myths, Fables, Mediaeval Romances, Exempla, Fabliaux, Jest-Books, and Local Legends. Bloomingdale, IN: Indiana University Studies. Uexküll, Jacob von (1934/1957). A Stroll Through the Worlds of Animals and Men: A Picture Book of Invisible Worlds, in C.H. Schiller (Ed.). Instinctive Behavior: The Development of a Modern Concept. New York: International University Press pp. 5–80. Väkevä, Seppo (1987). Toutesemantiikka (Product Semantics). Helsinki: University of Industrial Arts. Väkevä, Seppo (Ed.) (1990). Product Semantics '89. Helsinki: University of Industrial Arts. Veblen, Thorstein (1931). The Theory of the Leisure Class; an Economic Study of Institutions. New York: The Viking Press. Verne, Donald Phillip (1981). Vico’s Science of Imagination. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Vihma, Susann (1990a). Tiotteen muodon kuvaaminen (Interpretation of the product form). Helsinki: University of Industrial Arts. Vihma, Susann (Ed.) (1990b). Semantic Visions in Design. Helsinki: University of Industrial Arts. Vihma, Susann (Ed.) (1992). Objects and Images. Helsinki: University of Industrial Arts. Wachsmann, Christiana (Ed.) (1991). Objekt + Objektiv = Objektivität? Fotographie an der HfG Ulm 1953–1968. Ulm: Stadtarchiv. Cited in P. Betts (1998). Wade, Nicholas (July 15, 2003). Early Voices: The Leap to Language. New York: The New York Times Science Section: F1, F4. Walther, Elisabeth (1974). Allgemeine Zeichenlehre. Einführung in die Grundlagen der Semiotik. Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt. White, H. (1981). The value of narrativity in the representation of reality, in W.J.T. Mitchell (Ed.). On Narrative, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 1–23. Whitehead, Alfred North, and Bertrand Russell (1910/1958). Principia Mathematica, 3rd ed. New York: Macmillan. Whorf, Benjamin Lee (1956). Language, Thought and Reality, John B. Carroll (Ed.). New York: John Wiley and MIT. Widdowson, Henry G. (2005). Text, Context, Pretext (Language in Society). London: Blackwell. Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1921). Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. London: Routledge. Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1953). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell. Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1980). Culture and Value. (G.H. von Wright, Ed.; P. Winch, Translator.) Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Woolgar, Steve (1987). Reconstructing man and machine: a note on sociological critiques of cognitivism, in W.E. Bijker, T.P. Hughes, and T.J. Pinch (Eds.). The Social Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 311–328 Yagou, Artemis (1999). The Shape of Technology — The Case of Radio Set Design, National Technical University of Athens, Greece. Yammiyavar, Pradeep G. (2000). Emotion as a Semantic Construct in Product Design. Bangalore, India: Indian Institute of Science, Centre for Electronics Design and Technology. Zaltman, Geralt (2003). How Consumers Think: Essential Insights into the Mind of the Market. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Zillmann, Dolf (1964). Konzept der Semantischen Aspektanalyse. Zürich: Institut für Kommunikationsforschung.