Human-Centered Design / Art and Philosophy "A brilliant book so superbly designed, encompassing theory and application. Klaus Krippendorff demonstrates his authority in the semantics of design with a bold inter-disciplinary approach. The book unveils a systematic design discourse, treating readers to rare critiques of established ideas and illustrative reviews of design cases. ... refreshing in style and deep in semantics, adding value to our shared knowledge in a connected discipline. An invaluable enrichment of the science for design, it must be read by designers and non-designers alike. A timeless masterpiece passionately conceptualized. \- Professor Halimahtun M. Khalid Director, Institute of Design and Ergonomics Applications University of Malaysia "...a major contribution to design thinking. Klaus Krippendorff's philosophy addresses how we create and use artifacts in view of the meanings we give them. It builds a human and systematic foundation for professional design practice based on creative engagement with users and stakeholders. Krippendorff's intellectual journey reflects the central themes in design and design research today, helping new designers think their way into the field. Professor Ken Friedman Norwegian School of Management and Denmark's Design School "... a courageous outline for a concrete science for design that paradigmatically deviates from the natural sciences. It... offers designers a solid ground from which to justify their products and environments... proposes systematically human-centered design methods, and an epistemology for improving the world rather than re-searching it. ... a major step into a fascinating future for all of us." Professor Emeritus Shutaro Mukai Former Director, Department of Science of Design Musahino Art University, Tokyo, Japan "... takes design theory to a new level... Billiantly building on Wittgenstein and generalizing classical accounts of affordances... This highly readable book is especially relevant to the challenges we face in designing in and for a global economy." ohn Seely Brown Former Chief Scientist, Xerox Corporation & Director of its Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) TF1727