## Acknowledgements An ancient interest in climate history was rekindled during the week I spent as a fly on the wall at the June 1998 Chapman Conference, “Mechanism of Millennial-Scale Global Climate Change,” in Snowbird, Utah. Listening to the folks who mine environmental history from the Greenland Ice Sheet and the Bermuda Rise discuss state-of-the-art research on climate oscillations was a truly exhilarating experience, and I thank the organizers for allowing a mere historian to kibitz what was intended to be a family conversation. The outline for this book was subsequently presented as a paper in September 1998 at the conference “Environmental Violence” organized at UC Berkeley by Nancy Peluso and Michael Watts. Vinayak Chaturvedi, Tom Brass and Gopal Balakrishnan generously offered expert and luminous criticisms of this project in its early stages. Kurt Cuffey spruced up some of the physics in Chapter 7. Dan Monk and Sara Lipton, Michelle Huang and Chi-She Li, and Steve and Cheryl Murakami provided the essential aloha. The truly hard work was done by Steve Hiatt, Colin Robinson, Jane Hindle and my other colleagues at Verso Books, while David Deis created the excellent maps and graphics and Tom Hassett proofread the galleys with care. A MacArthur Fellowship provided unencumbered opportunities for research and writing. The real windfalls in my life, however, have been the sturdy love and patience of my compañera, Alessandra Moctezuma; the unceasing delight of my children, Jack and Roisín; and the friendship of two incomparable rogue-intellectuals and raconteurs, David Reid and Mike Sprinker. David took precious time off from 1940s New York to help weed my final draft. Mike introduced me to the impressive work of South Asian Marxist historians and provided a decisively important critique of the book’s original conception. His death from a heart attack in August 1999, after a long and apparently successful fight against cancer, was simply an obscenity. He was one of the genuinely great souls of the American Left. As José Martí once said of Wendell Phillips: “He was implacable and fiery, as are all tender men who love justice.” I dedicate this book to his beloved wife and co-thinker, Modhumita Roy, and thank her for the courage she has shared with all of us.