## Glossary agregado Tenant or tolerated squatter (literally, one who lives by favor on another’s land); same as morador. agreste Intermediate zone between the drought-stricken sertão and humid coastal zona de mata. bajra Pearl millet: extremely drought resistant and more nutritious than higher-status grains. bania Moneylender (and usually trader). beata(o) Lay ascetic. caatinga Thorny scrub forest. caboclo Mixed-race person. cangaceiro Outlaw. cash Bronze coin (1/1000th of a tael). coronel Rural political boss (plural: coroneis). culturrstelsel “Culture system”: obligatory regime of agricultural export production in Netherlands East Indies. dacoit Robbery/expropriation. Deccan Peninusular interior of India south of the Narmada River; also the volcanic Deccan Plateau. durbar State meeting of officials. Encilhamento Speculative bubble in the early Brazilian Republic. ENSO El Niño-Southern Oscillation. fazenda Cattle ranch (in the Nordeste). fazendeiro Rancher (hacendado). fellah Peasant (plural fellahin). flagelado “Ccourged one” (drought victim). gente de cor People of color. gram Pulse grown during rabi. hsien Chinese county. ITCZ Intertropical Convergence Zone (of trade winds). jagunco Pejorative term for herdsmen of the sertão/follower of Conselheiro. jawar Sorghum vulgare. khatedar Equivalent of ryot in Berar. kaoliang All-purpose sorghum: milled for grain while stalks used in construction. kharif Growing season of crops harvested in the autumn. lakh 100,000. makhzan Government/royal power (Morocco). malguzar Landowner, often with tenants (India’s Central Provinces). mandioca Cassava (the root is poisonous unless carefully prepared). maund Unit of weight (82 lbs.). milreis Nineteenth-century Brazilian currenc. MSLP Mean Sea Level Pressure. mu One-sixth of an acre (China). NAO North Atlantic Oscillation. Nian rebellion Vast peasant uprising north of the Huai River (1851–68) led by Zhang Luoxing and <table><tr><td></td><td>defeated by U. S. Grant&#x27;s host, Li Hongzhan.</td></tr><tr><td>Nordeste</td><td>Eight states of the Brazilian northeast whose vast interior is the sertão.</td></tr><tr><td>parceiro</td><td>Sharecropper.</td></tr><tr><td>rabi</td><td>Growing season of crops harvested in the spring.</td></tr><tr><td>retirante</td><td>Refugee (Brazil).</td></tr><tr><td>ryot</td><td>Peasant (Deccan).</td></tr><tr><td>ryotwari</td><td>System by which each peasant is assessed separately for revenue.</td></tr><tr><td>sabha</td><td>Association.</td></tr><tr><td>seca</td><td>Drought.</td></tr><tr><td>sertão</td><td>Backland region of Brazil&#x27;s Nordeste.</td></tr><tr><td>sertanejo</td><td>Resident of the sertão.</td></tr><tr><td>shi</td><td>Measure of grain: about 176 pounds in weight.</td></tr><tr><td>SOI</td><td>Southern Oscillation Index.</td></tr><tr><td>sowcar</td><td>Moneylender (also sahukar).</td></tr><tr><td>SPCZ</td><td>South Pacific Convergence Zone.</td></tr><tr><td>SST</td><td>Sea surface temperature.</td></tr><tr><td>takavi</td><td>State-backed agricultural loan (also taqavi and tagai).</td></tr><tr><td>tael</td><td>Chinese ounce of silver; nineteenth-century monetary unit.</td></tr><tr><td>taluk</td><td>Indian revenue division.</td></tr><tr><td>talukdar</td><td>Large landowner.</td></tr><tr><td>teleconnection</td><td>Correlation between widely separated climate events.</td></tr><tr><td>thermocline</td><td>The sharp temperature gradient separating warm surface layer of ocean from deeper cold water.</td></tr><tr><td>Warm Pool</td><td>Trade Wind–driven pooling of very warm surface water in the western Pacific (Indonesia and Queensland); it drives earth&#x27;s largest tropical convection system; both migrate towards the International Date Line during El Niño events.</td></tr><tr><td>vaqueiro zamindar</td><td>Cowboy (in Brazil&#x27;s Nordeste).</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Property-holder under permanent settlement (Bengal).</td></tr><tr><td>zemstvo</td><td>Provincial and county council.</td></tr><tr><td>zona de mata</td><td>Well-watered zone of sugar cultivation on the coast of the Nordeste.</td></tr></table>