the one hand, the modernity of the grand department stores and the specialized luxury shops of the major towns and provincial capitals that catered to shoppers in search of the novel and exotic unnecessary and, on the other hand, the traditionalism of the myriad drab retail outlets that provided staples to customers who spent as much as half their income on food. By contrast with the United States, where department stores accounted for about 10 percent and small independent shops for 57 percent of the annual turnover in retailing (the remainder being accounted for by chains), on the Continent, even in the best of times, the former accounted for perhaps 5 percent whereas small retailers contributed from 79 percent (Germany) to 91 percent (Italy).20 The bourgeois mode of consumption was also visible in outlooks toward innovation. Laissez-faire ideologies notwithstanding, the regnant outlooks favored both sheltering national markets from outside competition and protecting acquired positions within domestic markets whether by vulnerable retailers in battle against left-wing cooperatives and national chains or by overbearing big manufacturers manipulating cartel arrangements.

The tensions engendered by the bourgeois mode of consumption were visible in class conflict around distribution.This conflict was manifest in the formation of vigorous left-wing cooperative movements, not to mention the huge hostility to them. It was also evident in the animus against the spread of mass consumption, not just because mass consumption implied redistributive policies, but also because it upset consumption-reaffirming class hierarchies. That struggles over the politics of distribution would figure so prominently in the push to the Right in interwar politics acknowledged the swing position of middle classes whose fortunes seemed so bound up with traditional retailing practices; in France, shopkeepers were still regarded as the pillar of the republic; in Germany, the backbone of the nation.21

## THE CENTRALITY OF THE SMALL RETAILER

If we focus here not on the most innovative players, but on the most traditional, namely, small retailers, it is because they played such a pivotal, if fundamentally ambiguous role in shoring up the bourgeois mode of consumption. On the one hand, they were fated to be losers. Or at least so it appeared from the high mortality rates of single firms and the repeated dire predictions about their imminent demise by liberal and Marxian political economists. On the other hand, small retailers laid claim to being the mainstay of the bourgeois social system, by virtue of their venerable lineage, their proprietorship, and their performance as cultural-economic mediators in the hierarchy of consumption. Although many individual firms were fated to live and die like mayflies (Eintagsfliege), to recall Werner Sombart's disparaging description, the category as a whole displayed a Darwinian tenacity, being constantly replenished by struggling rural immigrants and the urban underemployed.²2

That small retailers could claim - or it could be claimed on their behalf– that they were central to the mechanism of bourgeois socialcultural reproduction could resonate as truth if we imagine for a moment the operations of the typical European food retailing establishment of the 1930s.This would have been an unincorporated one family business, owned and operated with help from relatives or from one or two paid workers. Store hours would have been as long as ten to twelve hours daily, but the shopkeeper might reopen well after closing if the customers or their custom were sufficiently important. Clients were mainly from the neighborhood, and they would have known both the shopkeeper and each other. They shopped daily, often using credit, buying necessities almost exclusively.They were indifferent to packaging and, being little exposed to advertising, rarely bought with an eye to brand names. The shopkeepers or their assistants took their order, fetched the articles from behind the counter, measured them out, wrapped them, touted up the prices, and either took cash or debited the sum to the account book. If there were any eccentricity in the orders, on the side either of excess or of privation, it would have been noted by one and all.

All else being equal, the shopkeeper too was a traditionalist. Because his customers were bound to him by ties of community and credit, he had little reason to innovate. Many of his business calculations were intuitive, mistakes in his own favor offsetting errors in respect to his creditors and customers. He would have set prices “irrationally," which is to say that he did not compare them to the “market," namely, to the prices set by his competitors in other localities nor even his own original outlays or the costs of