restocking, as turnover was slow and record keeping negligent. In a pricing system with much haggling and discounting, in which owners and clients pretty much agreed on the relationship between price and value, the price system was infinitely and often casually customized.23 In practice, this might mean that the shopkeeper sweetened prices for madame's captivating servant girl, musing about her charms and deferring to madame herself, who kept an eagle eye on the household ledger books. But he extended no favors to the aged and half-deaf widow, and he trifled with the sums charged to the slatternly housewife who entrusted a dim-witted neighbor lad to haul home her groceries.

It is notorious that this solidaristic form of commerce had long been under pressure, and that from the 1880s, if not earlier, the retailing trades had developed an elaborate ideology of defense, in the course of which they clarified their role in the preservation of the class order, craft traditions, and national consumer culture. In Germany, this defense was especially vociferous and organized, the context being disquiet over the precarious status of the Mittelstand, pervasive outlooks that saw society as a fixed natural social hierarchy, and real doubt about whether modern commercial civilization was not wholly antithetical to Germany's status as a Kulturnation, in which the courage of stalwart Helden (heroes) of Prussia's aristocrat past checked the chicanery of parvenu Händler (merchants).24 Over time, it was claimed on behalf of small retailers, they were the part that represented the whole of the middle class. Their preservation was indispensable to the sanctity of the bourgeois order itself.

## THE CRISIS OF THE BOURGEOIS MODE: NEOMERCANTILISM VERSUS REFORM COALITIONS

The Great Depression of the 1930s set the stage for the last struggle around the bourgeois mode of consumption. In the course of this crisis all defenses would be pulled out, most radically and violently in Germany.The ultimate outcome was the elimination of small-scale retailing as the mainstay and signifier of the bourgeois mode of consumption.Thereafter the distribution system would slowly be reshaped around a new middle-class social formation. Its innovators would be an amalgam of modernizers from old firms and entrepreneurs in new endeavors such as marketing and advertising.The circuitry would move from the local and personal to the national and impersonal. More and more, business culture would change its emphasis from the efficiency of the producer to the rationality of the consumer. Distribution, which had once been an appendage of the producer, a central ally of a mercantilist conception of political economy, would move to be the dynamic factor of economic growth and an ally of the consumer.

In this respect, the 1930s were truly crisis years for the old arrangements of distribution and the myriad interests invested in them. With the compression of industrial prices, commercial costs started to show up hugely, inducing experts to investigate prices and costs while agitating consumers with a new awareness of their collective interests. With demand so unpredictable and consumer purchasing power, although apparently rising overall, fluctuating erratically, more and more resources were devoted to service competition. This trend put great pressure on small retailers, who in turn loudly protested the unfair competition of multiple-shop firms and variety chain stores. Increasingly, state policy was uncertain as to whether to support wages and workers by backing more efficient distribution or to support retailers with price maintenance and other protections. Both choices had wide political ramifications, the former being especially risky since the modernization of retailing implied association with left-wing cooperativism, unfettered big business, and the cosmopolitan outlooks identified with the United States and international “Jewish influence."To support the rationalization of retailing also risked losing influence over consumers to unbridled consumption and impersonal market forces.

The powerful coalitions of interest that shaped up around the defense of traditional retailing practices in the mid-1930s thus cannot be dismissed as the last gasp of desperate petty bourgeois shopkeepers, now under the wing of conservative and fascist politicians. The most conspicuous results were laws that directly or indirectly sought to restrict and limit the development of the multiple-shop, variety chain store, and other forms of large-scale retailing. These were introduced in most of the states of western continental Europe, Austria and Germany in the lead. The major exceptions were Italy, where new laws seemed unwarranted because of prior legislation and the slow introduction of new retailing practices, and Sweden, whose evolution was closer to that of Great Britain and the United States.25

Behind this legislation lay the struggle between two outlooks on the modern market: One, the Americanized or Fordist vision, foresaw a whole new nexus of institutions revolving around the rationalized distribution networks of major corporations. This outlook emphasized low unit costs, standardized goods, high turnover, and consumer choice. In the United States it was supported by the New Deal, organized labor, and big business, and consumers were its beneficiaries.The other outlook can be described as neomercantilist. This advocated protected markets within which government and the corporatist organizations of wholesalers and retailers would revamp distribution.This outlook claimed to reconnect craft and customers by improving the quality and range of goods and of the services established to sell them. The coalition behind it included those sectors of big business operating through cartelized distribution systems. It had the widespread support of small retailers and gained backing from the state. It operated at the expense of the consumer.

The latter coalition exploited the idea that European distribution had to be treated as a“social question," the solution to which would be found both in legal protections and a more organized and scientific approach to defending middle-class interests. Arguing against those who highlighted the statistical insignificance of the small retailer to the middle classes and reproached them for their monopolistic pricing practices, supporters spoke of“social utility" and “economies of locality," intangibles such as community goodwill and services such as store credit, repair work, and advice, which were especially important to neophyte consumers and to operation of new consumer durables such as radios and household electric appliances.26

In national policy considerations, arguments in support of the small retailer were secondary to broader arguments that to defend the small retailer was also to safeguard the social order and national identity. Ultimately, autarkic economic policies designed to protect national industries and balance of trade affected consumption as well as production. Late 1930s autarkic regimes, notably in Germany and Italy, contemplated all kinds of restraints on domestic consumption, including curbs on alien institutions like the