chain store and bans on luxury imports such as coffee, advertising and shop window signs in foreign languages, and cultural commodities like film and fashion. All of these goods and innovations challenged conventional notions of value, craft, and appropriate consumer behavior.

## THE CHAIN STORE: PRICE, QUALITY, AND CONSUMER SOVEREIGNTY

In the eyes of the neomercantilist coalition, the variety or unit price store was the archdevil. Chain retailing was by no means new in Europe. The older multiple shops, as they were also called, had usually specialized in particular trades, such as food, women's wear, or shoes. In other words, they delivered familiar assortments of goods at familiar prices, only with greater efficiency. By contrast, the unit price store grouped together all variety of expensive merchandise, from processed foods and feather dusters to windup clocks, selling the whole range at one or two fixed prices. As in the five and dime stores in the United States, the prices might range: in Germany from 10 pfennigs to 1 mark, then from 10, 25, 50, 75, to 100 marks; in France, from 1 to 50 centimes up to 3, 25, and 50 francs. In sheer quantity, stores of this type were not especially numerous in the mid-1930s: There were perhaps twelve thousand in all of Europe, including Great Britain. Whereas they accounted for as much as 7 percent of the retail turnover in England, they yielded only 1.3 percent in France, 1.5 percent in Germany, and 0.3 percent in Italy, compared to 23 percent in the United States.2/ Few of these enterprises were actually promoted by U.S. firms. With its 759 European subsidiaries, Woolworth's was the conspicuous exception.28 In spite of its relatively small numbers the chain store became the object of wideranging regulation in all European countries except Britain and Sweden, where the protectionist coalitions proved unsuccessful.29

Since the one-price store was not unlike the department store or other retailing innovations that similarly offered new variety, high turnover, and low prices as a function of economies of bulk buying and low operating costs, one might appropriately ask, Why no such resistance? Like chain stores, of which they were an offshoot, the one-price stores were accused of various unfair practices: cornering manufacturers, cutting wages for employees, selling brand names discounted as bargain bait, and depriving the communities in which they were situated of their rightful share of the market profits. In turn, regulations against them took the form of price maintenance, discriminatory taxes, restrictions on services, and outright curbs on new establishments.

The resistance was motivated by fear of losing the values and identity embedded in earlier forms of commerce.Thus, the most troubling issue for observers was the success, evidenced by the chains' incursions, of modern retailing's strategy of moving downward and outward in terms of class and locality. One-price marketing responded to two major gaps in the distribution cycle that the department store, with its tendency to remain in the major commercial cities and to move to an upscale clientele, had not addressed: One gap was the outlying urban areas and towns under 100,000 people; the other was the gap between quality and price that was satisfied by offering a range of nonbranded convenience goods at low fixed price.30 Previously the institutions of retailing had cleaved to the division between luxury and subsistence, between the “palace of consumption" and the lowly food provisioner. Now, in search of new profits, with capital and know-how from the department stores themselves, large-scale operators appropriated the successful ploys of the department store in the display, assortment, turnover, and pricing of goods. In so doing, the one-price store damaged small businesses by undercutting their position with respect to suppliers and their influence over consumers.

Indeed, small businesses desperately complained about their loss of control over pricing goods. Unable to lower costs or improve services, they responded by seeking regulations to maintain prices. But price maintenance was a hard policy to sustain unless the elasticity of demand was small as it was for staples or in the absence of rival outlets. Moreover, prosecuting violators was difficult. Sometimes efforts backfired; in Catholic, corporatist, and heavily regulated Austria, it was reported that the special tribunals set up to prosecute independent retailers for underselling their competitors only enhanced the defendants' popularity. Not surprisingly, customers bitterly resented that store owners should be sentenced for selling too cheaply.31

The protest against the one-price variety store was directed not just against lower prices but the use of price to establish quality. The changeover from individualized pricing to fixed, clearly marked prices is a momentous one since it demands that consumers and retailers adopt a new understanding of value. In the typical small store stocked with a familiar set range of items, price policy permitted some bargaining, precisely because both merchant and client agreed on estimates of the item's quality, its craftsmanship, and its use. As the quantity of new goods proliferated and new items were offered for sale, customers could not easily determine the relationship between quality and price.32 To orient customers, the one-price store grouped goods according to price categories, the marked price thereby fixing the “objective valuation" of the good. In turn, the housewife, having satisfied the need for staples, was offered a clutter of new goods. She could use her pin money, say ten pfennigs, fifty centimes, or five lire, to choose among them. Lacking other product information, she relied on the posted price to estimate the worth of the object's characteristics. The upshot of this system, it was protested, was to gull ignorant customers into buying “useless" and “bad quality" articles. Its real fault was to undercut the shopkeeper's mastery and to challenge the tenets of a moral economy based on fixed needs for fixed social groups.33

Behind the protest over the shift in power from the personalized shopkeeper to impersonal large-scale retailing, we can discern protests against the disruptive implications of “consumer sovereignty."The term, as originally conceived in American usage, implied recognition of the formal freedom of choice of consumers, made operational by higher income and the intense competition of market agents.34In Europe, social reformers had advanced ideas of consumer agency akin to this concept since the turn of the century. For example, the leading theorist of French cooperativism, Charles Gide, had long advocated that the consumer be king. In a charming word play on Descartes's motto, French cooperativists stressed the centrality of consumption to personhood by placing the slogan Je depense, donc je suis, on the masthead of their journal.35

However, consumer citizenship in the European context emphasized social participation rather than individual freedom, equality of rights acquired through economic redistribution and political organization rather than by means of consumer choices exercised in the marketplace. In any case, the possibility of enhancing citizenship rights by means of increased consumption, according to European views, presumed that consumers shared a common understanding of taste and quality. If this was not an innate characteristic or the result of a shared standard of living, it was readily acquired through the camaraderie of consumer cooperatives and political associations. Consequently, it was with real dismay that reformers discovered that when offered wider choice, consumers who were assumed to satisfy their wants with “the purchase of objects that were unique and individual" showed a“distinct preference for uniformity in necessities but also in taste in general."36 Unguided by any standard but price, modern consumers threatened to forsake not just an economic institution, local retailing, but also a social and cultural legacy that was indispensable to the class order and to community solidarity.

The spread locally of an out-of-control American style of consumer sovereignty, together with the growing internationalization of markets for consumer goods in the wake of World War I, raised the scary uncertainty that the growing taste for everyday commodities wouldn't be satisfied within