the confines of the national market. This dread fueled protectionist campaigns to “buy national" as early as the mid-1920s. From the middle of the next decade, Europe's so-called command economies took up the issue of regulating consumer behavior in the interest of economic planning and national security.37 In that context, observers referred to the American experience, not to condemn the idea of consumer sovereignty (as admirers of American free-trade capitalism might expect), but to extol the protectionist impulses that in the United States during the late nineteenth century had inspired the world's first "buy national" campaigns. European consumers had to develop “a national economic consciousness," a French observer recalled. In support, he fulsomely acknowledged the economist Simon N. Patten's insistence on engendering“national habits of consumption" consistent with the U.S. resources and production skills. Most French consumer theorists limited themselves to advocating consumer education, to teach consumers to request the“quality" of “artisan”products in the face of “taste for the standardized, ersatz, product line."38 Some were becoming sharply aware that drives to nationalize consumption standards could degenerate into political outrages.The same French expert who approved of Patten's protectionism cringed at the sight of the placards at the 1934 Nuremberg rallies of the Nazi Party that read, “Tell me where you buy, and I'll tell you who you are. If you can't pass up a Jewish or foreign merchant, you aren't German."39

## POSTWAR STOCKTAKING

The neomercantalist strategies that shored up the bourgeois model of consumption were so deeply implicated in the new order from 1940 to 1945 that Nazi Germany established on the European continent that its final defeat in April 1945 reverberated in every practice with which it was associated – including protected and traditionalist distribution systems.40 In the event, the problem of distribution emerged from the war with a new profile: the sheer destruction of commerce in bombed out urban neighborhoods and wrecked transport and communication systems. The black market and currency fluctuations wreaked havoc with traditional delivery systems as did years of rationing. On top of this, there was pressure to supply occupying armies, destitute civilians, and swelling refugee populations.

The biggest challenge of all sprang from U.S. political and ideological hegemony, which pressed home the intellectual bankruptcy of mercantilist outlooks. In postwar reconstruction debates, protectionism was linked not just to Nazi control, but also to the USSR's closed economy. At the same time, Americanizers advanced a notion of democracy that put consumer choices and satisfaction at the center of reconstruction. Leading European experts visited U.S. retailing organizations and firms in the context of the European Recovery Program (ERP) “productivity missions" and as the American supermarket began to appear to be a feasible model with the development of the Common Market and Europe's “auto-frigo" revolution of the early 1960s. American brands flooded onto the European distribution networks, and in the 1960s, and perhaps sooner, U.S. capital was invested in European retailing operations.⁴1

Nevertheless, although Europeans interested in modernizing distribution networks had become well acquainted with the latest in U.S. techniques and methods, often under programs sponsored by the ERP, significant transformations did not occur until the second half of the 1950s. The huge increase in self-services in 1950s Europe is symptomatic: rising from 1,200 in 1950 to 45,500 in 1960, including 600 supermarkets.42 This rise was especially notable in the land of small shops, Germany, where labor shortages and the rising pay in industry sucked away family and paid employees from the traditional retailers. In 1951 there were still only 39 self-service stores in West Germany. By 1955 there were 203; by 1960, only five years later, their number had shot up to 17,132. By 1965 West Germany had more than 53,000 self-service shops.43

These changes, which have been characterized as amounting to a“commercial revolution," have to be seen in the context of broader changes in the European market, society, and values.The most obvious change was rising income, which must in turn be traced to the enhanced productivity that resulted from technological innovations and economies of scale and scope that would have been unthinkable without the widening and deepening of European markets under the pressure of U.S. free-trade doctrines. In effect, the formation of the Common Market after 1957 caused Europe to look more like the inner circle of the two Europes identified in the ICC's 1931 distribution study.⁴4

State policy was obviously significant to this change, although different legislation seems to have produced not dissimilar results, other factors being equal.Thus the French laws of December 31, 1945, and May 24, 1951, and the emphasis in the Second Plan on promoting consumption carried a strong message on the need to modernize distributive networks. By contrast, West Germany's restrictive Ladenschlussgesetz, the Shop Closing Act of 1956, reflected the fear of Verdrangungswettbewerb, or “displacing competition," that the “social market" of West Germany's Christian Democratic government was supposed to prevent. Overriding the opposition of the self-styled “consumer democrat," Ludwig Erhard, the architect of West Germany's economic miracle, the law was passed with the support of unions, retailers' associations, and conservative Catholics. Whether this legislation testified to a persistent reverence for the small retailer, social Catholic distaste for mass consumption, or the tight labor market of the German economic miracle bears study. Although it was bothersome to consumers, nothing suggests the law curbed the modernization of distribution or the competitiveness of big German retailers. In Italy, retailing continued to be governed by the late 1920s regulations. It is doubtful that this alone appreciably slowed the modernization of retailing. Other factors such as high unemployment and the Italian Republic's casual attitude toward collecting taxes from small entrepreneurs were far more significant in preserving small retailers.45

More generally, we have to look at the vast social and cultural transformations behind the remarkably accelerated spread of mass consumption from the mid-1950s through the 1960s: the extraordinarily rapid rates of population growth composed of high postwar birth rates and immigration; the huge urbanization with its proliferation of new households, the result of rural exodus and“decohabitation"; the new needs and values that were the result of higher incomes, exposure to new products, access to credit, and new gender roles, all of which responded to and reinforced changing class stratification..

When we speak of the transformation of the pyramidal structure of class relations under bourgeois society, what Henri Mendras calls the “middleclass constellation," we need to remember that this entailed a triple change: The first involved the reclassifying of differences within the bourgeoisie proper, as a rentier class was transformed into a professional elite, with a life-style publicized as akin to that of the middle class of cadres.The second change involved the redefining of the relations between the working class and a lower middle class, formed less and less of craftsmen and shopkeepers and more of salaried employees in service occupations. Finally, change entailed the elimination of the peasantry.46 Urbanization was obviously crucial to all of this; it promoted new consumer mores and needs and gave impetus to the new entrepreneurship in distribution, flourishing around the edges of the old town centers and in the provinces away from the capital cities. In France, some of the leading innovators came from the western agricultural regions of Normandy and Brittany, the latter a real backwater until its remarkable modernization in the 1960s.The transformation of the Norman wholesaler Promodès from a regional company focusing mainly on wholesaling into a large diversified international group focusing on retailing was emblematic. The new company joined two rivalrous old family grocery firms, the venerable Duval-Lemonniers of Carentan and the Halleys of Cherbourg, who merged their forces in the early 1960s to go national. In 1962, they opened the first supermarket; in 1964, the first large cash-and-carry self-service; in 1970, the first hypermarket; in 1976, their first stores abroad; in 1979, they went public on the Paris Stock Exchange; and in 1980, they opened their first store in the United States. The scope of this development, the company history aptly records, suggests, “More than a change of size, it is a change of culture" (Plus qu’un changement de taille, c’est un changement de culture).47

With fuller study on, say, changes in family decision making processes, income distribution, and household organization, we shall better capture