the cultural dimension of this consumer revolution. Edouard Leclerc, the onetime Jesuit seminarian from Landerneau in Brittany turned apostle on behalf of discount food selling, gives us some insight into the pattern of acceptance and resistance that accompanied his giant success. 48 The first customers for his no-frills food discount centers were distinctly upper class, namely, functionaries, cadres, and bourgeois; all were people capable, as he tells it, of calculating how to improve their standard of living. They had no qualms about shopping around for the best price to cut costs on food in order to save for car payments, keep up mortgages on apartments, and make the down payments on second homes. Evidently, they also had the necessary equipment in the form of modern kitchens (with refrigerators) and automobiles, flexibility to schedule shopping, and ample shopping skills. As for the decor? “They couldn't give a hoot. They don't go into a store to dream, to be blown away. They have what they need at home. The neon lights, music, chrome, mirrors of variety stores (bazars populaires) might still dazzle people who live in slums." Leclerc was confident that the lower classes too would soon follow the upper classes. If we give their initial obstinacy a more sympathetic reading, it appears not at all illogical: Abiding economic insecurity, the physical immobility of those lacking transportation, the traditionalism of female roles, and the conservatism of self-protective subcultures all would have deterred experimentation. If Leclerc simplified the issue, he captured the logic impelling change: “As soon as unskilled workers and agricultural laborers have to pay car installments at the start of the month, they too would learn that ‘a sou is a sou,' that it's far better to shop at the discount center, ugly though it is, than to pay for the smiles and shop windows at the corner grocer."49

## CONVERGENCES AND DIFFERENTIATION IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF POST-FORDISM

By the late 1960s, the new institutions of distribution appeared to be a major force shaping a “one-class market" in Europe.50 Even optimists were excited by the swooping upward curves in the diffusion of consumer durables; observers highlighted that these curves tended to overlap, indicating that basic appliances were spreading across classes whose consumption habits had not previously touched and across regions that had hitherto appeared utterly distant from each other in development. As new national standards of consumer well-being were established and rising income blunted some of the sharp differences in the patterns of provisioning and purchase of household durables, it seemed that Western Europe had converged with the United States around a common model of consumer modernity.51

Yet examined from the vantage point of the 1990s, this development retained many hallmarks of Europeanness. The commercial revolution saw the persistence of small retailers alongside the big, the reworking of old types of cooperation such as retail buying groups, and the establishment of voluntary wholesale chains whereby the small-scale retailers combined with each other and with wholesalers to obtain economies of scale and specialization. Through the 1970s, it was common to characterize the persistence of older forms as backwardness or resistance to modernity. Yet in a new global context, the persistence of old styles of segmented, localized retailing and the linkages between the traditional and the new made sense. In the quest after outlets and suppliers in a highly competitive and ever-more globalized marketplace, these well-articulated local networks presented advantages when supported by local government and in quick reach of distant suppliers and outlets through computerized communications.

From the vantage point of the 1990s a European narrative of the rise of mass consumer society could doubtless be told such as to diminish, if not exclude the influence of the United States. Whether that is useful heuristically or is only an ideological exercise to redress the United States's preponderance in the recent European past is to be debated. What can be said for now is that American experience of 1920 to 1970 should not be identified with modernity in itself. The very interactions of European enterprise with American models demonstrate that there was more than one path of transition from a regime of scarcity and constraint to one of consumer abundance. In continental Europe, this transition was especially travailed, and the structures, social dynamics, and habits of mind accumulated in the process are unlikely utterly to disappear.