# THE BOURGEOIS VERSUS THE FORDIST MODE OF CONSUMPTION / THE CENTRALITY OF THE SMALL RETAILER / THE CRISIS OF THE BOURGEOIS MODE: NEOMERCANTILISM VERSUS REFORM COALITIONS / THE CHAIN STORE: PRICE, QUALITY, AND CONSUMER SOVEREIGNTY / POSTWAR STOCKTAKING

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Strasser：《Getting and Spending (European and American Consumer Societies in the\Strasser：《Getting and Spending (European and American Consumer Societies in the\Strasser：《Getting and Spending (European and American Consumer Societies in the\auto\Strasser：《Getting and Spending (European and American Consumer Societies in the.md

## THE BOURGEOIS VERSUS THE FORDIST MODE OF CONSUMPTION

Working off American notions about the essential facelessness of markets, ICC literature rarely dwelled on regional or national differences that were structural and cultural rather than income driven, accumulated over time, and the result of the different legacies of earlier commercial-capitalist development.Yet these legacies clearly stood behind the significant differences that in the 1931 report leaped out from the statistical charts yet the text glossed over as mere differences of degree in the interests of conceptualizing a common modernizing project and fostering transatlantic commerce.

Accordingly, U.S. circuits of distribution could be said to reflect a society in which the strategies of mass production industries to widen and deepen markets had early coalesced with the interests of the state, large distributive trades, and consumers to recast distributive chains in order to lower costs, regulate retail demand, and satisfy (and shape) mass consumer tastes. By the turn of the century, what we might call the mass or Fordist model of distribution – at the risk of anachronism since its development antedated by at least two decades that of the Ford factory system – involved the retooling of the whole circuitry of commercial mechanisms, from corporate design and production management to the floor displays oflocal shops. Eventually, the United States's distribution revolution gave rise to new systems of wholesaling and retailing – their pillars, the department store, chainmanagement operations, and mail-order houses. It also generated whole new industries such as advertising, as well as a new administrative science, namely, marketing. The circuitry was completed with the establishment of scores of governmental and private institutions to coordinate and study dis– tributive processes, from the several specialized bureaus of the Department of Commerce and the National Industrial Conference Board to the National Bureau of Economic Research, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the National Department Store Association, a half-dozen major business schools, and numerous corporate marketing departments.

The long-term conditions favoring this circuity's establishment surely date to before the onset of large-scale corporations.The United States's relatively slight dependence on foreign trade pushed business back on developing protected home markets. In that sense, the United States's development contrasted with that of Great Britain, where food imports in the face of declining agriculture sped innovations in distributive systems.12 Unlike Great Britain's free trading elites, though, the dominant political coalitions in the United States were committed to protectionism. Nonetheless, they were generally unsympathetic to mercantilist attitudes toward intrastate and local commerce. Hence the United States was virtually without the structures of monopoly and privilege of old regime Europe, taking the form of guilds, internal trade barriers, and tariffs, or artificial burdens such as tax stamps on postings, newspapers, and other media. Since American cities had never been legally privileged sites of commerce, unlike the bourgeois towns of Europe emerging from feudalism, they lacked the periodic fairs and markets typical of European urban centers. In the absence of a true aristocracy or of a bourgeois culture that aped aristocratic mores, Republican ideology treated merchants less disdainfully than elsewhere.The growing belief that distribution could be organized as rationally and efficiently as production was a striking innovation with respect to views that treated the distributive trades, wholesaling in particular, as parasitical excrescences on productive enterprises, beset by monopolies and privileges, tainted by carnival humbug, and in the hands of peddlers, hucksters, speculators, and the other unsavory denizens of "Jewish"capitalism. Moreover, American business interests quickly acquired the confidence that rationality on the production side could go hand in hand with irrationality on the consumption side; impulse buying, product obsolescence, and ludic subcultures were all to be encouraged – in the interest of a more intense, rapid, and predictable circulation of goods.13

In the United States, by contrast to continental Europe, major innovations in distribution began in the late nineteenth century as large corporations responded to relatively higher wages and urbanization with standardized production lines. Their efforts to secure outlets in turn revolutionized wholesaling practices at the same time as the intensifying competition locally recast the retail trade. Meanwhile, national advertising changed the whole conception of the market, which now came to be identified with marketing: Accordingly, the market embraced a potentially infinite number of consumers, meaning all of those who might be reached with information about the manufacturers' products, their entity being estimated through statistically based marketing“sciences."14

This redefinition of the scale and significance of the market was given enormous impetus not only by the sustained rise in incomes from the turn of the century through the 1920s, but also by mammoth increases in consumer demand propelled by immigration and the neediness of a rapidly urbanizing population. In response to this demand, as early as the Progressive era, we can identify the emergence of a modernizing coalition, formed of larger-scale industrialists, wholesalers, and retailers; consumer organizations; government; and labor, all of whom were more or less interested in unrestricted domestic trade, economies of scale, standardized manufacture, and lower retail prices.

In this context, we can appreciate the huge growth and professionalization of advertising, which, together with novel pricing and display, offered a depersonalized mediation between manufacturers and consumers, at the same time as it appropriated the functions of the traditional intermediaries – local retailers – with respect to both. In other words, oligopolistic firms under pressure to preserve their market shares linked their fortunes to the development of specialized agencies and modern communications technologies to replace the trust and information afforded by local knowledge.15

In continental Europe, by contrast, distribution remained deeply embedded in the bourgeois mode of consumption. With that term, I want to call attention to the consumption dimension of the pyramidal class constellation typical of European societies down through the 1950s. That different classes consume differently is a truism. Unlike in the United States, however, in which the huge and rapid influx of new goods, the social and physical mobility of the population, and rising incomes quickly generated a large middle stratum of consumers, drastically eroding the previous linking of consumption to class, in continental Europe the carefully demarcated systems of“barriers and levels" in consumption persisted down to World War II.16 That the continental European hierarchy of taste and expenditure lasted so long was surely the result of low wages.17 However, the consummate refinement of bourgeois taste and careful codification of cultural power around it were also inherited from old regime classifications of social distinction based on consumption. These were persistently incorporated into business strategies that very early, in view of narrow domestic markets, oriented manufacture to craft production on behalf of quality-conscious elites.18 Even when income differences could be observed to diminish in the interwar years, patterns of household expenditure continued to differ notably, coding rank within the upper and middle classes, segregating the households of craft and small retailers and employees from workers, and setting off urban consumers from the vast semiautarkic peasant world in the countryside.19 Indeed, the persistence of such consumption hierarchies during the interwar period in spite of the growing mass market, some increases in working-class incomes, and the declining fortunes of many bourgeois families suggested that differential consumption habits remained as significant to marking class boundaries as in the pre-World War I era.

The absence of a middle market was strikingly visible in the dualistic structure of the distribution system.The contrast was stunning between, on the one hand, the modernity of the grand department stores and the specialized luxury shops of the major towns and provincial capitals that catered to shoppers in search of the novel and exotic unnecessary and, on the other hand, the traditionalism of the myriad drab retail outlets that provided staples to customers who spent as much as half their income on food. By contrast with the United States, where department stores accounted for about 10 percent and small independent shops for 57 percent of the annual turnover in retailing (the remainder being accounted for by chains), on the Continent, even in the best of times, the former accounted for perhaps 5 percent whereas small retailers contributed from 79 percent (Germany) to 91 percent (Italy).20 The bourgeois mode of consumption was also visible in outlooks toward innovation. Laissez-faire ideologies notwithstanding, the regnant outlooks favored both sheltering national markets from outside competition and protecting acquired positions within domestic markets whether by vulnerable retailers in battle against left-wing cooperatives and national chains or by overbearing big manufacturers manipulating cartel arrangements.

The tensions engendered by the bourgeois mode of consumption were visible in class conflict around distribution.This conflict was manifest in the formation of vigorous left-wing cooperative movements, not to mention the huge hostility to them. It was also evident in the animus against the spread of mass consumption, not just because mass consumption implied redistributive policies, but also because it upset consumption-reaffirming class hierarchies. That struggles over the politics of distribution would figure so prominently in the push to the Right in interwar politics acknowledged the swing position of middle classes whose fortunes seemed so bound up with traditional retailing practices; in France, shopkeepers were still regarded as the pillar of the republic; in Germany, the backbone of the nation.21

## THE CENTRALITY OF THE SMALL RETAILER

If we focus here not on the most innovative players, but on the most traditional, namely, small retailers, it is because they played such a pivotal, if fundamentally ambiguous role in shoring up the bourgeois mode of consumption. On the one hand, they were fated to be losers. Or at least so it appeared from the high mortality rates of single firms and the repeated dire predictions about their imminent demise by liberal and Marxian political economists. On the other hand, small retailers laid claim to being the mainstay of the bourgeois social system, by virtue of their venerable lineage, their proprietorship, and their performance as cultural-economic mediators in the hierarchy of consumption. Although many individual firms were fated to live and die like mayflies (Eintagsfliege), to recall Werner Sombart's disparaging description, the category as a whole displayed a Darwinian tenacity, being constantly replenished by struggling rural immigrants and the urban underemployed.22

That small retailers could claim - or it could be claimed on their behalf– that they were central to the mechanism of bourgeois socialcultural reproduction could resonate as truth if we imagine for a moment the operations of the typical European food retailing establishment of the 1930s.This would have been an unincorporated one family business, owned and operated with help from relatives or from one or two paid workers. Store hours would have been as long as ten to twelve hours daily, but the shopkeeper might reopen well after closing if the customers or their custom were sufficiently important. Clients were mainly from the neighborhood, and they would have known both the shopkeeper and each other. They shopped daily, often using credit, buying necessities almost exclusively.They were indifferent to packaging and, being little exposed to advertising, rarely bought with an eye to brand names. The shopkeepers or their assistants took their order, fetched the articles from behind the counter, measured them out, wrapped them, touted up the prices, and either took cash or debited the sum to the account book. If there were any eccentricity in the orders, on the side either of excess or of privation, it would have been noted by one and all.

All else being equal, the shopkeeper too was a traditionalist. Because his customers were bound to him by ties of community and credit, he had little reason to innovate. Many of his business calculations were intuitive, mistakes in his own favor offsetting errors in respect to his creditors and customers. He would have set prices “irrationally," which is to say that he did not compare them to the “market," namely, to the prices set by his competitors in other localities nor even his own original outlays or the costs of restocking, as turnover was slow and record keeping negligent. In a pricing system with much haggling and discounting, in which owners and clients pretty much agreed on the relationship between price and value, the price system was infinitely and often casually customized.23 In practice, this might mean that the shopkeeper sweetened prices for madame's captivating servant girl, musing about her charms and deferring to madame herself, who kept an eagle eye on the household ledger books. But he extended no favors to the aged and half-deaf widow, and he trifled with the sums charged to the slatternly housewife who entrusted a dim-witted neighbor lad to haul home her groceries.

It is notorious that this solidaristic form of commerce had long been under pressure, and that from the 1880s, if not earlier, the retailing trades had developed an elaborate ideology of defense, in the course of which they clarified their role in the preservation of the class order, craft traditions, and national consumer culture. In Germany, this defense was especially vociferous and organized, the context being disquiet over the precarious status of the Mittelstand, pervasive outlooks that saw society as a fixed natural social hierarchy, and real doubt about whether modern commercial civilization was not wholly antithetical to Germany's status as a Kulturnation, in which the courage of stalwart Helden (heroes) of Prussia's aristocrat past checked the chicanery of parvenu Händler (merchants).24 Over time, it was claimed on behalf of small retailers, they were the part that represented the whole of the middle class. Their preservation was indispensable to the sanctity of the bourgeois order itself.

## THE CRISIS OF THE BOURGEOIS MODE: NEOMERCANTILISM VERSUS REFORM COALITIONS

The Great Depression of the 1930s set the stage for the last struggle around the bourgeois mode of consumption. In the course of this crisis all defenses would be pulled out, most radically and violently in Germany.The ultimate outcome was the elimination of small-scale retailing as the mainstay and signifier of the bourgeois mode of consumption.Thereafter the distribution system would slowly be reshaped around a new middle-class social formation. Its innovators would be an amalgam of modernizers from old firms and entrepreneurs in new endeavors such as marketing and advertising.The circuitry would move from the local and personal to the national and impersonal. More and more, business culture would change its emphasis from the efficiency of the producer to the rationality of the consumer. Distribution, which had once been an appendage of the producer, a central ally of a mercantilist conception of political economy, would move to be the dynamic factor of economic growth and an ally of the consumer.

In this respect, the 1930s were truly crisis years for the old arrangements of distribution and the myriad interests invested in them. With the compression of industrial prices, commercial costs started to show up hugely, inducing experts to investigate prices and costs while agitating consumers with a new awareness of their collective interests. With demand so unpredictable and consumer purchasing power, although apparently rising overall, fluctuating erratically, more and more resources were devoted to service competition. This trend put great pressure on small retailers, who in turn loudly protested the unfair competition of multiple-shop firms and variety chain stores. Increasingly, state policy was uncertain as to whether to support wages and workers by backing more efficient distribution or to support retailers with price maintenance and other protections. Both choices had wide political ramifications, the former being especially risky since the modernization of retailing implied association with left-wing cooperativism, unfettered big business, and the cosmopolitan outlooks identified with the United States and international “Jewish influence."To support the rationalization of retailing also risked losing influence over consumers to unbridled consumption and impersonal market forces.

The powerful coalitions of interest that shaped up around the defense of traditional retailing practices in the mid-1930s thus cannot be dismissed as the last gasp of desperate petty bourgeois shopkeepers, now under the wing of conservative and fascist politicians. The most conspicuous results were laws that directly or indirectly sought to restrict and limit the development of the multiple-shop, variety chain store, and other forms of large-scale retailing. These were introduced in most of the states of western continental Europe, Austria and Germany in the lead. The major exceptions were Italy, where new laws seemed unwarranted because of prior legislation and the slow introduction of new retailing practices, and Sweden, whose evolution was closer to that of Great Britain and the United States.25

Behind this legislation lay the struggle between two outlooks on the modern market: One, the Americanized or Fordist vision, foresaw a whole new nexus of institutions revolving around the rationalized distribution networks of major corporations. This outlook emphasized low unit costs, standardized goods, high turnover, and consumer choice. In the United States it was supported by the New Deal, organized labor, and big business, and consumers were its beneficiaries.The other outlook can be described as neomercantilist. This advocated protected markets within which government and the corporatist organizations of wholesalers and retailers would revamp distribution.This outlook claimed to reconnect craft and customers by improving the quality and range of goods and of the services established to sell them. The coalition behind it included those sectors of big business operating through cartelized distribution systems. It had the widespread support of small retailers and gained backing from the state. It operated at the expense of the consumer.

The latter coalition exploited the idea that European distribution had to be treated as a“social question," the solution to which would be found both in legal protections and a more organized and scientific approach to defending middle-class interests. Arguing against those who highlighted the statistical insignificance of the small retailer to the middle classes and reproached them for their monopolistic pricing practices, supporters spoke of“social utility" and “economies of locality," intangibles such as community goodwill and services such as store credit, repair work, and advice, which were especially important to neophyte consumers and to operation of new consumer durables such as radios and household electric appliances.26

In national policy considerations, arguments in support of the small retailer were secondary to broader arguments that to defend the small retailer was also to safeguard the social order and national identity. Ultimately, autarkic economic policies designed to protect national industries and balance of trade affected consumption as well as production. Late 1930s autarkic regimes, notably in Germany and Italy, contemplated all kinds of restraints on domestic consumption, including curbs on alien institutions like the chain store and bans on luxury imports such as coffee, advertising and shop window signs in foreign languages, and cultural commodities like film and fashion. All of these goods and innovations challenged conventional notions of value, craft, and appropriate consumer behavior.

## THE CHAIN STORE: PRICE, QUALITY, AND CONSUMER SOVEREIGNTY

In the eyes of the neomercantilist coalition, the variety or unit price store was the archdevil. Chain retailing was by no means new in Europe. The older multiple shops, as they were also called, had usually specialized in particular trades, such as food, women's wear, or shoes. In other words, they delivered familiar assortments of goods at familiar prices, only with greater efficiency. By contrast, the unit price store grouped together all variety of expensive merchandise, from processed foods and feather dusters to windup clocks, selling the whole range at one or two fixed prices. As in the five and dime stores in the United States, the prices might range: in Germany from 10 pfennigs to 1 mark, then from 10, 25, 50, 75, to 100 marks; in France, from 1 to 50 centimes up to 3, 25, and 50 francs. In sheer quantity, stores of this type were not especially numerous in the mid-1930s: There were perhaps twelve thousand in all of Europe, including Great Britain. Whereas they accounted for as much as 7 percent of the retail turnover in England, they yielded only 1.3 percent in France, 1.5 percent in Germany, and 0.3 percent in Italy, compared to 23 percent in the United States.2/ Few of these enterprises were actually promoted by U.S. firms. With its 759 European subsidiaries, Woolworth's was the conspicuous exception.28 In spite of its relatively small numbers the chain store became the object of wideranging regulation in all European countries except Britain and Sweden, where the protectionist coalitions proved unsuccessful.29

Since the one-price store was not unlike the department store or other retailing innovations that similarly offered new variety, high turnover, and low prices as a function of economies of bulk buying and low operating costs, one might appropriately ask, Why no such resistance? Like chain stores, of which they were an offshoot, the one-price stores were accused of various unfair practices: cornering manufacturers, cutting wages for employees, selling brand names discounted as bargain bait, and depriving the communities in which they were situated of their rightful share of the market profits. In turn, regulations against them took the form of price maintenance, discriminatory taxes, restrictions on services, and outright curbs on new establishments.

The resistance was motivated by fear of losing the values and identity embedded in earlier forms of commerce.Thus, the most troubling issue for observers was the success, evidenced by the chains' incursions, of modern retailing's strategy of moving downward and outward in terms of class and locality. One-price marketing responded to two major gaps in the distribution cycle that the department store, with its tendency to remain in the major commercial cities and to move to an upscale clientele, had not addressed: One gap was the outlying urban areas and towns under 100,000 people; the other was the gap between quality and price that was satisfied by offering a range of nonbranded convenience goods at low fixed price.30 Previously the institutions of retailing had cleaved to the division between luxury and subsistence, between the “palace of consumption" and the lowly food provisioner. Now, in search of new profits, with capital and know-how from the department stores themselves, large-scale operators appropriated the successful ploys of the department store in the display, assortment, turnover, and pricing of goods. In so doing, the one-price store damaged small businesses by undercutting their position with respect to suppliers and their influence over consumers.

Indeed, small businesses desperately complained about their loss of control over pricing goods. Unable to lower costs or improve services, they responded by seeking regulations to maintain prices. But price maintenance was a hard policy to sustain unless the elasticity of demand was small as it was for staples or in the absence of rival outlets. Moreover, prosecuting violators was difficult. Sometimes efforts backfired; in Catholic, corporatist, and heavily regulated Austria, it was reported that the special tribunals set up to prosecute independent retailers for underselling their competitors only enhanced the defendants' popularity. Not surprisingly, customers bitterly resented that store owners should be sentenced for selling too cheaply.31

The protest against the one-price variety store was directed not just against lower prices but the use of price to establish quality. The changeover from individualized pricing to fixed, clearly marked prices is a momentous one since it demands that consumers and retailers adopt a new understanding of value. In the typical small store stocked with a familiar set range of items, price policy permitted some bargaining, precisely because both merchant and client agreed on estimates of the item's quality, its craftsmanship, and its use. As the quantity of new goods proliferated and new items were offered for sale, customers could not easily determine the relationship between quality and price.32 To orient customers, the one-price store grouped goods according to price categories, the marked price thereby fixing the “objective valuation" of the good. In turn, the housewife, having satisfied the need for staples, was offered a clutter of new goods. She could use her pin money, say ten pfennigs, fifty centimes, or five lire, to choose among them. Lacking other product information, she relied on the posted price to estimate the worth of the object's characteristics. The upshot of this system, it was protested, was to gull ignorant customers into buying “useless" and “bad quality" articles. Its real fault was to undercut the shopkeeper's mastery and to challenge the tenets of a moral economy based on fixed needs for fixed social groups.33

Behind the protest over the shift in power from the personalized shopkeeper to impersonal large-scale retailing, we can discern protests against the disruptive implications of “consumer sovereignty."The term, as originally conceived in American usage, implied recognition of the formal freedom of choice of consumers, made operational by higher income and the intense competition of market agents.34In Europe, social reformers had advanced ideas of consumer agency akin to this concept since the turn of the century. For example, the leading theorist of French cooperativism, Charles Gide, had long advocated that the consumer be king. In a charming word play on Descartes's motto, French cooperativists stressed the centrality of consumption to personhood by placing the slogan Je depense, donc je suis, on the masthead of their journal.35

However, consumer citizenship in the European context emphasized social participation rather than individual freedom, equality of rights acquired through economic redistribution and political organization rather than by means of consumer choices exercised in the marketplace. In any case, the possibility of enhancing citizenship rights by means of increased consumption, according to European views, presumed that consumers shared a common understanding of taste and quality. If this was not an innate characteristic or the result of a shared standard of living, it was readily acquired through the camaraderie of consumer cooperatives and political associations. Consequently, it was with real dismay that reformers discovered that when offered wider choice, consumers who were assumed to satisfy their wants with “the purchase of objects that were unique and individual" showed a“distinct preference for uniformity in necessities but also in taste in general."36 Unguided by any standard but price, modern consumers threatened to forsake not just an economic institution, local retailing, but also a social and cultural legacy that was indispensable to the class order and to community solidarity.

The spread locally of an out-of-control American style of consumer sovereignty, together with the growing internationalization of markets for consumer goods in the wake of World War I, raised the scary uncertainty that the growing taste for everyday commodities wouldn't be satisfied within the confines of the national market. This dread fueled protectionist campaigns to “buy national" as early as the mid-1920s. From the middle of the next decade, Europe's so-called command economies took up the issue of regulating consumer behavior in the interest of economic planning and national security.37 In that context, observers referred to the American experience, not to condemn the idea of consumer sovereignty (as admirers of American free-trade capitalism might expect), but to extol the protectionist impulses that in the United States during the late nineteenth century had inspired the world's first "buy national" campaigns. European consumers had to develop “a national economic consciousness," a French observer recalled. In support, he fulsomely acknowledged the economist Simon N. Patten's insistence on engendering“national habits of consumption" consistent with the U.S. resources and production skills. Most French consumer theorists limited themselves to advocating consumer education, to teach consumers to request the “quality" of “artisan” products in the face of “taste for the standardized, ersatz, product line."38 Some were becoming sharply aware that drives to nationalize consumption standards could degenerate into political outrages.The same French expert who approved of Patten's protectionism cringed at the sight of the placards at the 1934 Nuremberg rallies of the Nazi Party that read, “Tell me where you buy, and I'll tell you who you are. If you can't pass up a Jewish or foreign merchant, you aren't German."39

## POSTWAR STOCKTAKING

The neomercantalist strategies that shored up the bourgeois model of consumption were so deeply implicated in the new order from 1940 to 1945 that Nazi Germany established on the European continent that its final defeat in April 1945 reverberated in every practice with which it was associated – including protected and traditionalist distribution systems.40 In the event, the problem of distribution emerged from the war with a new profile: the sheer destruction of commerce in bombed out urban neighborhoods and wrecked transport and communication systems. The black market and currency fluctuations wreaked havoc with traditional delivery systems as did years of rationing. On top of this, there was pressure to supply occupying armies, destitute civilians, and swelling refugee populations.

The biggest challenge of all sprang from U.S. political and ideological hegemony, which pressed home the intellectual bankruptcy of mercantilist outlooks. In postwar reconstruction debates, protectionism was linked not just to Nazi control, but also to the USSR's closed economy. At the same time, Americanizers advanced a notion of democracy that put consumer choices and satisfaction at the center of reconstruction. Leading European experts visited U.S. retailing organizations and firms in the context of the European Recovery Program (ERP) “productivity missions" and as the American supermarket began to appear to be a feasible model with the development of the Common Market and Europe's “auto-frigo" revolution of the early 1960s. American brands flooded onto the European distribution networks, and in the 1960s, and perhaps sooner, U.S. capital was invested in European retailing operations.41

Nevertheless, although Europeans interested in modernizing distribution networks had become well acquainted with the latest in U.S. techniques and methods, often under programs sponsored by the ERP, significant transformations did not occur until the second half of the 1950s. The huge increase in self-services in 1950s Europe is symptomatic: rising from 1,200 in 1950 to 45,500 in 1960, including 600 supermarkets.42 This rise was especially notable in the land of small shops, Germany, where labor shortages and the rising pay in industry sucked away family and paid employees from the traditional retailers. In 1951 there were still only 39 self-service stores in West Germany. By 1955 there were 203; by 1960, only five years later, their number had shot up to 17,132. By 1965 West Germany had more than 53,000 self-service shops.43

These changes, which have been characterized as amounting to a“commercial revolution," have to be seen in the context of broader changes in the European market, society, and values.The most obvious change was rising income, which must in turn be traced to the enhanced productivity that resulted from technological innovations and economies of scale and scope that would have been unthinkable without the widening and deepening of European markets under the pressure of U.S. free-trade doctrines. In effect, the formation of the Common Market after 1957 caused Europe to look more like the inner circle of the two Europes identified in the ICC's 1931 distribution study.⁴4

State policy was obviously significant to this change, although different legislation seems to have produced not dissimilar results, other factors being equal.Thus the French laws of December 31, 1945, and May 24, 1951, and the emphasis in the Second Plan on promoting consumption carried a strong message on the need to modernize distributive networks. By contrast, West Germany's restrictive Ladenschlussgesetz, the Shop Closing Act of 1956, reflected the fear of Verdrangungswettbewerb, or “displacing competition," that the “social market" of West Germany's Christian Democratic government was supposed to prevent. Overriding the opposition of the self-styled “consumer democrat," Ludwig Erhard, the architect of West Germany's economic miracle, the law was passed with the support of unions, retailers' associations, and conservative Catholics. Whether this legislation testified to a persistent reverence for the small retailer, social Catholic distaste for mass consumption, or the tight labor market of the German economic miracle bears study. Although it was bothersome to consumers, nothing suggests the law curbed the modernization of distribution or the competitiveness of big German retailers. In Italy, retailing continued to be governed by the late 1920s regulations. It is doubtful that this alone appreciably slowed the modernization of retailing. Other factors such as high unemployment and the Italian Republic's casual attitude toward collecting taxes from small entrepreneurs were far more significant in preserving small retailers.45

More generally, we have to look at the vast social and cultural transformations behind the remarkably accelerated spread of mass consumption from the mid-1950s through the 1960s: the extraordinarily rapid rates of population growth composed of high postwar birth rates and immigration; the huge urbanization with its proliferation of new households, the result of rural exodus and“decohabitation"; the new needs and values that were the result of higher incomes, exposure to new products, access to credit, and new gender roles, all of which responded to and reinforced changing class stratification..

When we speak of the transformation of the pyramidal structure of class relations under bourgeois society, what Henri Mendras calls the “middleclass constellation," we need to remember that this entailed a triple change: The first involved the reclassifying of differences within the bourgeoisie proper, as a rentier class was transformed into a professional elite, with a life-style publicized as akin to that of the middle class of cadres.The second change involved the redefining of the relations between the working class and a lower middle class, formed less and less of craftsmen and shopkeepers and more of salaried employees in service occupations. Finally, change entailed the elimination of the peasantry.46 Urbanization was obviously crucial to all of this; it promoted new consumer mores and needs and gave impetus to the new entrepreneurship in distribution, flourishing around the edges of the old town centers and in the provinces away from the capital cities. In France, some of the leading innovators came from the western agricultural regions of Normandy and Brittany, the latter a real backwater until its remarkable modernization in the 1960s.The transformation of the Norman wholesaler Promodès from a regional company focusing mainly on wholesaling into a large diversified international group focusing on retailing was emblematic. The new company joined two rivalrous old family grocery firms, the venerable Duval-Lemonniers of Carentan and the Halleys of Cherbourg, who merged their forces in the early 1960s to go national. In 1962, they opened the first supermarket; in 1964, the first large cash-and-carry self-service; in 1970, the first hypermarket; in 1976, their first stores abroad; in 1979, they went public on the Paris Stock Exchange; and in 1980, they opened their first store in the United States. The scope of this development, the company history aptly records, suggests, "More than a change of size, it is a change of culture" (Plus qu’un changement de taille, c’est un changement de culture).47

With fuller study on, say, changes in family decision making processes, income distribution, and household organization, we shall better capture the cultural dimension of this consumer revolution. Edouard Leclerc, the onetime Jesuit seminarian from Landerneau in Brittany turned apostle on behalf of discount food selling, gives us some insight into the pattern of acceptance and resistance that accompanied his giant success. 48 The first customers for his no-frills food discount centers were distinctly upper class, namely, functionaries, cadres, and bourgeois; all were people capable, as he tells it, of calculating how to improve their standard of living. They had no qualms about shopping around for the best price to cut costs on food in order to save for car payments, keep up mortgages on apartments, and make the down payments on second homes. Evidently, they also had the necessary equipment in the form of modern kitchens (with refrigerators) and automobiles, flexibility to schedule shopping, and ample shopping skills. As for the decor? “They couldn't give a hoot. They don't go into a store to dream, to be blown away. They have what they need at home. The neon lights, music, chrome, mirrors of variety stores (bazars populaires) might still dazzle people who live in slums." Leclerc was confident that the lower classes too would soon follow the upper classes. If we give their initial obstinacy a more sympathetic reading, it appears not at all illogical: Abiding economic insecurity, the physical immobility of those lacking transportation, the traditionalism of female roles, and the conservatism of self-protective subcultures all would have deterred experimentation. If Leclerc simplified the issue, he captured the logic impelling change: “As soon as unskilled workers and agricultural laborers have to pay car installments at the start of the month, they too would learn that ‘a sou is a sou,' that it's far better to shop at the discount center, ugly though it is, than to pay for the smiles and shop windows at the corner grocer."49

