# PART THREE

ANALYSIS   
AND   
COMPARISONS

## Understanding Technological Progress

Why does technological change occur in some societies and not in others? In what follows, I concentrate primarily on the supply side of technological change: whence all those free lunches? Statements such as "necessity is the mother of invention" are clearly nonsense in this context. Human appetites being what they are, necessity is always there; the ability to satisfy it is not. In fact, it would be closer to the truth to say that "invention is the mother of necessity," in that new technological possibilities often give rise to hitherto unrecognized desires.' The "demand" for technology is a derived demand, that is, it depends ultimately on the demand for the goods and services that technology helps produce; there is little or no demand for technology for its own sake. Hence the structure of preferences influences the direction of the search for new technical knowledge, just as relative factor prices (the cost of labor relative to that of capital or raw materials) may affect its factor-saving bias. But did demand determine the overall intensity of the effort, its success rate, the implementation of improvements, and thus the technological creativity of a society?

If technical information is viewed as just another input into the production process, for which producers equate on the margin the efforts involved in producing it and the benefits accruing from it, autonomous shifts in demand would increase inventive activity and thus technologica change. If that were how technological change occurred, technology would be analogous to labor: if demand for a good goes up, producers increase its production by hiring more workers. The question is, of course, whether technology can be "hired" like labor or capital. Over most of human history, technological change did not take place, as it does today, in specialized research laboratories paid for by research and development budgets and following strategies mapped out by corporate planners well-informed by marketing analysts. Technological change occurred mostly through new ideas and suggestions occurring if not randomly, then certainly in a highly unpredictable fashion. Demand conditions may have affected the rate at which these ideas occurred, and may have focused them in a particular direction, but they did not determine whether a society would be technologically creative or not. If technological change was a very cheap lunch, with the benefits typically vastly exceeding the costs of invention, then further increases in demand may not have had much effect. After all, if desire for more goods and services was insatiable, and if in the cases of macroinventions the social benefits typically exceeded the social costs, the "excess demand" for technology was always a fact of life. Thus changes on the margin in demand would have had little effect on the pace of innovation. This is not to say that in the past inventors and inventive activity did not respond to rewards, but rather that these rewards were not necessarily closely correlated with changes in demand. In short, demand factors were not negligible, but the intuition that there was a certain symmetry between demand and supply in the generation of technological progress should be resisted.-

Moreover, by focusing on demand factors in trying to explain the overall level of technological creativity, rather than the direction of innovative activity, there is a danger of circular reasoning. Demand was not an exogenous variable. It is always and everywhere constrained by income. Income, of course, could rise for a variety of reasons, including population growth, trade and specialization, or natural windfalls, such as improvements in climate. But since medieval times, technological change itself has been one of the chief fac tors determining incomes. By 1700, it appears, Europe was already richer than all non-European economies. Technological progress was largely responsible for this gap. It is, then, inappropriate to cite this higher income as a demand factor that encouraged the search for more new technologies. In short, technology determined real income, not the other way around, though feedbacks and other complications did occur. ;

Preferences do matter, of' course. Many costs associated with the adoption of a novel technique must have seemed high to contemporaries, even if they do not appear so in retrospect. Sustained innovation requires a set of' individuals willing to absorb large risks, sometimes to wait many years for the payoff (if any). It often demands an enormous mental and physical effort on the part of' the pioneers. Risk aversion, leisure preference, and time preference are thus of major importance in determining the rate of' innovation of a particular society. However, the costs of the technological "lunch" borne by the inventors and developers are only a part of the total social cost. In some cases, technological changes had powerful environmental consequences such as pollution and deforestation. Not all such changes need be destructive, but insofar as they imply changing nature from its virgin state, they usually involve some cost. Beyond that are the social costs incurred by labor: the obsolescence of skills, the forced migration of' workers, the changing organization of production, and in some cases technological unemployment. Economists tend to believe that most of' these costs are at most temporary phenomena. Yet technological progress is hardly ever Pareto superior, that is, an improvement for everyone affected: there are losers in the process, and while the gainers could compensate them, it is only rarely that they do. The stronger the aversion to the disruption of the existing economic order, the less likely it is that an economy would provide a climate favorable to technological progress.

The total cost of adopting a new technique thus consists of two parts, the private costs paid by the inventors, and the social costs paid by society as a whole. Social costs usually exceeded the private costs, though the latter were not always negligible. Invention usually involved problems that were exceedingly difficult. Hindsight creates a serious distortion in this respect; the technical problems invariably seem easier ex post than ex ante. There was nothing natural and inevitable about technological progress. Most societies experienced some of it, but none of them, except the West, was able to turn it into a sustained and almost self-perpetuating mechanism of' contin uous expansion. Technologically creative societies in the past, as in the present, can be defined as those that generated innovations whose benefits dwarfed the costs of invention and development and thus created a free lunch.

Once an invention was perfected, its benefits may have dwarfed the costs of research and development, but the research was usually long and tedious, and the end result dependent on a combination of luck, brilliance, and perseverance. Moreover, looking for the costs incurred by known (and therefore successful) inventors involves a bias, because for every successful inventor, there were hundreds of failures, whose efforts may not have been less valiant than those of their more fortunate colleagues. In an ex post sense these failed inventors were dispensable. But in an ex ante sense, all major and minor inventors operated in complete uncertainty about whether their projects would succeed, and thus all were part and parcel of technological creativity. The last century has seen an improvement in this regard: the greatest invention of the nineteenth century, the cliche goes, was how to invent. Theory, careful measurement, and accurate instruments were science's gift to technology, and the importance of serendipity has declined.

There is a desire for stability that exists in every society, though its intensity varies. The sentiment "if it ain't broke, don't fix it" is the archenemy of technological progress. Technological conservatism refers to the tendency to adopt a certain technique only because it happened to be used in a previous period. Economists have traditionally dismissed such conservatism as irrational, costly, and thus nonviable. But recent thinking, much of it summarized in Kuran (1988), has revealed that economic theory can and must deal with conservatism. Kuran distinguishes between personal and collective conservatism. The most interesting explanation of personal conservatism is what is known as bounded rationality, the inability of individuals to process and manipulate large amounts of information, thus making it difficult for them to re-evaluate alternatives. Bounded rationality seems particularly pertinent to technological progress, because changes in technique usually involve the evaluation of rather complex information. This does not mean, of course, that techniques are completely fixed, but that relatively small changes involving choices between alternatives that are only marginally different would be biased toward the status quo. On the collective level it is possible for a society to be conservative even when individuals are not. This happens when well-organized interest groups in a society have a stake in maintaining the status quo in the face of' a superior alternative. I shall return to this issue later in this chapter. Technological conservatism produces an economic inertia that seems an apt description of the history of most societies that ever existed. The pervasive influence of the status quo, tradition, custom, routine, and adherence to precedent were powerful obstacles to innovation and advances. When technological progress occurred, it did so in the face of considerable odds.

Technological change is a game against nature rather than against other players, what von Neumann and Morgenstern have called a "Crusoe game." Invention occurs at the level of the individual, and we should address the factors that determine individual creativity.' Individuals, however, do not live in a vacuum. What makes them implement, improve, and adapt new technologies, or just devise small improvements in the way they carry out their daily work depends on the institutions and the attitudes around them. It is exactly at this level tha technological change is transformed from invention, a game against nature, to innovation, a complex, positive-sum game with many players and very incomplete information.5 As C. S. Lewis pointed out, "Man's power over Nature often turns out to be a power exerted by some men over other men with Nature as its instrument" (cited by Pacey, 1986, p. 12). Wealth, however, not power, is the main object of nonmilitary technology.

The physical and social environment is important in determining the actions of individuals, although it is not solely responsible for the outcome. I shall try to show which factors on the aggregate level help determine the propensity of a member of a society to invent and which factors make others want to adopt his or her inventions. Before that, however, it is worth examining some factors that operated, consciously or otherwise, on the minds and actions of individuals in their lonely struggles with the laws of physics, chemistry, and biology.

## LIFE EXPECTANCY

Boulding (1983) asserts that life expectancy is an important factor in determining the level of technological progress. People who live very short lives have little time or incentive to generate new knowledge. In earlier times such new knowledge depended more often than not on trial-anderror processes that were very time consuming, and thus less likely to be engaged in when life expectancy was short. Short (and uncertain) life expectancies also made it less attractive to save in order to buy or construct the capital goods that embodied technological progress. A short life expectancy implies a high subjective rate of discount, that is, a low level of patience and willingness to defer gratification, and almost all technological progress requires an element of abstinence. Closer examination of this reasoning raises some doubt. Life expectancy is an average concept. The thirty years or thereabout, of life expectancy associated with backward societies is an average of' the many people who die in the first years of their life and the remaining whose lives were not substantially shorter than those in the West in the beginning of this century.\`; Moreover, there is little evidence of a rise in life expectancy before 1750 in Europe, and yet technological change was clearly accelerating long before then. Perhaps the effect predicted by the theory was there, but was so small that it is difficult to observe empirically.

## NUTRITION

A more likely determinant of technological creativity is the level of nutrition of a society. It is well known that "hidden hunger," i.e., significant long-term shortfalls in net food intake, does not terminate life or even impair health, but does reduce the level of energy at which the individual operates to create a lethargic and supine personality. Thus, the output of energy is adjusted to the intake, and what is often described as "laziness" is really the result and not the cause of poverty and malnutrition. It is reasonable to expect that in societies in which hidden hunger is rampant, initiative and ambition, necessary for economic progress will be harder to find.

A particularly vicious form of hidden hunger is infant protein deficiency syndrome (IPDS). Levels of protein that are significantly below the minimum required for growth in the first 18 to 24 months of life will permanently cripple mental development. Demographic historians agree that differences in nutritional status led to substantial differences in height, biological maturation, ageing processes, resistance to disease, fecundity, and so forth. There is good reason to suspect that the nervous system and the brain were not immune from these influences. If nutritional deficiency can reduce the average realized intelligence of a population by a significant proportion, its ef fects on technological progress are likely to have been important. To break out of a predetermined work routine, particularly if the previously set technology has been in use for a long time, requires energy and initiative as well as the ability to think clearly on a purely intuitive level. To assess whether an idea works, the innovator needs some notional distinction between a conditional probability and an unconditional probability; that is to say, he or she must be able to evaluate the impact of the change while holding other things constant. This kind of thinking requires a mental experiment that depends on the ability to reason. Brain damage caused by inadequate nutrition irreparably impairs this ability.' Thus it may have come to pass that some societies had a larger supply of intelligence per capita than others not because of any biological differences between races, but because of poverty and ignorance about the nutritional needs of infants.

Did a higher average intelligence matter? The point is debatable. ('.]early, if IPDS was important in the past, it did not prevent the emergence of exceptionally creative and intelligent individuals altogether. The effects of malnutrition were concentrated primarily among the lower ranks of society-slaves, peasants, and laborers. If' technological change, and especially the implementation of new devices in daily routines, required a cooperative effort of management and labor, a more adaptable and intelligent work force may well have helped determine the outcome. Technological progress is not homogenous in this respect. In agriculture, mining, and shipping, most improvements would be aided by a higher quality work force. In manufacturing and services, especially in modern factories and mass production services, such as fast-food chains, discipline, docility, and a willingness to accept mind-deadening routines may be more important. It is possible, as Wright (1987, p. 326) has recently remarked, to devise technical systems that are designed by geniuses to be run by idiots. In the more distant past, before the age of mass production and uniform components, such systems appear less plausible. The age of the peasant and the artisan required intelligence and dexterity by the on-the-spot operators of any technique.

## WILLINGNESS TO BEAR RISKS

The structure of preferences regarding risk also affects it society's ability to produce innovative individuals. Invention and innovation almost always involve some willingness to bear risk. Changing a known and trusted production method, even in marginal ways, involves something of a gamble. In the past, when social safety nets were imperfect or nonexistent, the dangers of failing in a business adventure involving a new technique were far greater than they are today. In agriculture, experimenting with new techniques or crops might well have entailed a real risk of starvation. Moreover, even in cases of success the benefits of invention were limited in an age before mass production. Careers like those of nineteenth- and twentiethcentury inventors-such as George Westinghouse, Charles Hall, or Edwin Land, who turned brilliant inventions into personal fortunes by building corporate empires based on mass production-were simply not available to medieval and early modern inventors. With the expected gains relatively small and the fallback positions of inventors more precarious, it is clear that invention and innovation were more risky in the past than in more recent years.

Economists believe that most individuals are risk averse, but little is known about the determinants of the degree of risk aversion. Some factors that determine the willingness to absorb risk are determined at the level of the economy, such as the existence of institutions that make diversification possible. Underlying the willingness to absorb risk is the shape (curvature) of the utility function, which is in part determined at the level of the individual. Household structure could he of importance here. Heads of extended families will he more cautious, all other things equal, than heads of nuclear families, since more people depend on them. Owners of dynastic family firms regarded themselves as caretakers of businesses that transcended their own lives, and thus may have been more cautious than managers of shorter-lived enterprises. Another possible factor was changes in income distribution, as individuals whose position in society is threatened are more willing to take risks (Brenner, 1983). The opportunities for diversification that large business units make possible, could be of importance here. Yet as long as no good theory exists as to the determinants of risk aversion, we can do little more than speculate.

Willingness to bear risk is but one factor relating the intensity of innovation to uncertainty. In an interesting passage, Schumpeter (1950, p. 74) pointed to an important principle underlying innovative activity under uncertainty. If individuals consistently overrate their chances of success, their behavior may appear risk loving and society could enjoy more technological change relative to a situation in which individuals assess their chances correctly. Such an optimistic bias could offset to some extent the inherent bias to underproduce technological change (because the social benefits typically exceed the private benefits). A large number of important inventors died in obscurity and poverty, indicating that the private returns to a socially useful invention were low ex post, but that the effort was carried out anyway because inventors overestimated the private payof'f' (Nye, 199 I ).

## GEOGRAPHICAL ENVIRONMENT

Once we get beyond the level of the individual's creativity and start to examine some of the social factors in technological change, matters become considerably more complex. The impact of the environment, physical and cultural, on the amount of technological creativity in a given society is a matter of much controversy, in part because the concept of causality is not always made quite clear. If a flower grows in a garden can we "explain" the existence of the plant in any simple monocausal framework? A favorable environment consists of sunshine, water, soil chemistry, and the absence of pests, hail, and destructive children. Yet the real "cause" of the plant's existence is the gardener who sowed the plant. Few of the environmental factors are either strictly necessary or sufficient, and they are permissive rather than causal in a direct sense. In some cases the economic and social conditions function as focusing devices, directing and channeling the creative potential that is already there. All this has led to some confusion, which I shall try to unscramble by examining some key elements in the geographic, social, and economic environment in which technological change occurs.

The relationship between the physical environment and technological change is subtle, though at times the connection has appeared relatively straightforward (Rosenberg, 1976, essays 12-14). For instance, the diffusion of watermill technology that changed the economies of Europe north of the Alps in the early Middle Ages has an ostensible explanation in different climates (Strayer, 1980). Rainy northern Europe has more usable sites, and it may seem natural that when the center of gravity shifted northward in the early Middle Ages, water mills were employed more intensively and, through a learning-by-doing process, became more sophisticated. But such an explanation does not withstand scrutiny. Rainy England soon counted thousands of water mills, whereas rainy Ireland did not. Northern Italy and large parts of Gaul had many appropriate sites for water mills, of which only a fraction were utilized by the Romans. Ronan hydraulic engineering was sufficient to adapt and utilize sites even in places where the flow of water was slow or irregular (Reynolds, 1983). Yet there is little evidence that the Romans made wide use of their hydraulic expertise to improve sites for mills. Water mills would not be of much use in the dry regions of central Asia or North Africa, which is why these areas developed a good substitute, the wind mill. But why, then, did the Asian windmill fail to do for Eastern economies what water mills did for western Europe? Similarly, countries that had abundant coal deposits would become natural leaders in coal use and steam-engine technology. Learning-by-doing or learning-by-using models imply that the likelihood that a technology will be improved rises with the intensity of its use. However, not all technological change can be explained by learning models. It could just as easily be maintained that innovations were stimulated by the search for substitutes, rather than complements. Economies that had no coal would constantly be under pressure to develop more fuelefficient techniques, or engines- that used alternative sources of energy, or to produce goods requiring low energy intensity.

An argument supporting the alleged link between resource availability and use and technological change is provided by Wrigley (1987, p. 15), who argues that productivity soared during the Industrial Revolution because large quantities of energy (that is, coal) were put at the disposal of British workers. Per capita consumption of coal tripled between 1775 and 1830, and thus it may be concluded that Britain's good fortune in being located on top of 'a mountain of coal made the Industrial Revolution possible. After all, in the absence of coal, the timber requirements of a nation such as Britain in the early nineteenth century would have become massive (ibid., p. 79). What Wrigley does not stress sufficiently is that causality may have run not from resources to technology but rather in the opposite direction. Coal consumption increased because technological change increased its efficiency in use. Coal had been available for centuries and used in a variety of industrial processes. During the Industrial Revolution, the techniques used in coal mining itself changed little relative to those that used coal. Improvements in steam engines were, as we have seen, paralleled by advances in waterpower, and coal may have been less crucial than Wrigley has suggested. In the absence of coal, the ingenuity applied to using it would have been directed toward replacing it. Coal-poor regions, such as Switzerland, Northern Ireland, and Catalonia were able to generate substitutes or develop lowenergy product lines.

The history of the adoption of coke smelting in Britain illustrates the difficulties associated with an interpretation in which causality runs from resources to technology. Traditional accounts, such as Ashton's (1924, pp. 8-9) or Clow and Clow's (1956), related the adoption of coke smelting to the rise in the price of charcoal caused by deforestation. Flinn (1959; 1978) has shown, however, that evidence on these prices does not confirm this view. More important, however, is the fact that attempts to substitute coal for timber as a fuel were made in a wide range of processes going back as far as the sixteenth century. In the sixteenth century, as we have seen, this substitution succeeded in a range of commodities: from soap boiling to brewing, fossil fuels were substituted for charcoal long before coking was used in iron smelting. The reason was that the labor costs involved in producing a coal-based fuel were in general lower per calorie than in preparing charcoal. Realizing this, ironmasters experimented with coal as a fuel in smelting furnaces from the mid-sixteenth century. Abraham Darby differed from the many nameless and forgotten other inventors who tried to solve this problem only in that he was successful, in part due to his experience in malting (which had been using coke) and in part because of luck.

Why do searches for substitutes succeed in some cases and fail in others? One of the biggest advantages that Europe had was its large supply of large domesticated animals, which were entirely lacking in pre-Columbian America and Africa, and scarce in most parts of Asia.8 This scarcity may have had deep historical roots: African and East Asian adults suffer from lactase deficiency and cannot digest large quantities of fresh milk (although they can digest milk in the form of cheese or butter). Yet the lack of draft animals did not stop the Amerindians from inventing the wheel; they used it for toys, and then turned their attention elsewhere (Crosby, 1986, p. 43). It apparently never occurred to them to use wheels in devices such as pulleys, gears, and waterwheels. Can we blame the absence of animals for this? Man-pulled or -pushed vehicles existed throughout the Eastern Hemisphere-the principle of the wheel transcends the availability of a specific form of motive power. Where draft animals were scarce, wheels were adapted to humans, and wheelbarrows and rickshaws appear. Moreover, if a society, for some reason, had no access to horses, camels, or oxen, what better incentive could there be to invent techniques that got around this constraint, creating alternative sources of energy (such as windmills), fertilizer, and proteins? Yet pre-Columbian America had little success in generating these technologies, or perhaps it never tried hard. Similarly, deforestation and expensive timber did not stimulate coal mines in China, which British reports found to he primitive beyond belief in the 1870s (Brown and Wright, 1981, pp. 66-67).

Two theories thus coexist regarding the connection between natural resources and technological progress. One holds that abundant natural resources encourage complementary innovations, the other that the scarcity of natural resources, as a result of depletion or pop ulation growth, stimulates the search for substitutes. Neither view implies that natural resources (or their absence) are a necessary or sufficient condition for technological creativity to emerge, but both suggest strong correlations-of opposite signs.' The two theories do not necessarily contradict each other, but they do suggest a misspe- cified model. History displays a wide range of results from the interaction of environment and the economy, and correlation was rarely causation.10 The true exogenous variable in the model, whatever it is, makes the economy technologically creative. Given that creativity, resource endowment will be one of the factors that determines the direction of the search for innovations, operating, in Rosenberg's (1976) term, as a focusing device. Resource scarcities, like demand, are a steering mechanism, not a primum movens, of technological progress; it is the engine that makes the car move, not the steering wheel.

## PATH DEPENDENCY

A more persuasive version of the natural resources argument focuses on spillover effects from previous technologies, which were themselves environmentally determined, thus combining geography and history. A good example of this kind of process is the spillover from mining activities. Mining, of course, was located wherever some desirable mineral resource was found. But miners had to struggle with water, and hence they worked on developing better pumps, leading to more accurate boring machines and other tools, which eventually helped to develop steam- and modern waterpower. Mining required knowledge of metallurgy, chemistry, mechanics, and civil engineering; the convergence of so many different branches of knowledgeempirical and unscientific by our standards as they were before 1800-could not but lead to further technological progress. Agricola, Ercker, Newcomen, Biringuccio, Polhem, Watt, and Stephenson were among the great technological minds whose back grounds were in mining technology. A similar phenomenon can be discerned in late medieval Holland, where location determined an affinity with shipping. Starting off as a nation of fishermen, the Dutch learned one thing from another: shipbuilding led to rope- and sailmaking, to the use of wind-driven sawmills, and to the development of provisioning industries. Its maritime sector created the technologically progressive sectors that depended on it.

This explanation of technological progress may appear trivial to some and false to others. The view that technological change depends primarily on its own past is known as path dependency (David, 1988). A variety of mechanisms for this autocorrelation can be proposed. One of them, due to David (1975), is that technological change tends to be "local," that is, learning occurs primarily around techniques in use, and thus more advanced economies will learn more about advanced techniques and stay at the cutting edge of progress." Thus, societies that have been creative in the past would have a head start on others. Another rationalization of why technological progress depends on past progress is that it creates imbalances and "bottlenecks" in related and complementary processes, which then stimulate further search for innovations. This view, associated with Landes (1969), has been further refined and formulated by Rosenberg (1976), who pointed out that such complementarities operate as "focusing" devices in generating further progress. These theories are plausible, but some unresolved questions remain. One of them, emphasized by Parker (1984, p. 38) is that such a mechanism works only if there are immobilities in the allocation of resources. Otherwise any bottleneck could he readily resolved by reallocating labor and capital to industries in which technology had not been improved. Another difficulty is that it assumes that the supply of new technology is sufficiently elastic for additional search for technical solutions actually to yield the desired results. Any focusing device will be useless unless there actually is some real object to gaze at through the lenses.

For our present purpose, the importance of path dependency for technological change is that some paths lead to more and more progress, while others lead to dead ends. Because it is not possible to predict in advance which paths lead where, what appears in retrospect as technological creativity may have been the result of a past lucky choice, whereas technological backwardness may simply be the price for having bet on a slow horse. In some cases a technological choice that initially appeared superior eventually led to stagnation. One example is the adoption of the potato as the staple crop in Irish agriculture in the eighteenth century. An acre planted with potatoes produced more than three times the calories produced by an acre of grain, and thus the adoption of potatoes appeared an obvious case of productivity growth. Since the eighteenth century, however, the increase in grain yields has been much larger than that of potato yields, so that areas that specialized in potatoes appear to be stagnant. A second example is the invention, some time between 500 B.C. and 100 B.C., of the camel saddle. As a direct result, the camel gradually came to replace wheeled transport in large parts of the Middle East and North Africa (Bulliet, 1975; Hill, 1984h). Although the principle of the wheel remained in use for industrial purposes other than transportation in these economies, the wheel in the ordinary sense of the word disappeared. The localized learning-by-doing effects in transportation technologies using camels were clearly less impressive than in wheeled transport.t2 Camels conserved resources by obviating road construction, but they did not inspire railroads.

In any event, these sequences do not provide a wholly convincing account of technological advance. It is misleading to think that nothing leads to technological progress like technological progress. Examples of successful innovation gradually petering out-as well as sudden "catch-up" phenomena in societies that had previously been left behind (such as post-1850 Germany)-show the inadequacy of these models. Why did the mining regions in southern Germany and England develop far greater technological spillover effects than the mining regions of Sweden, Hungarian Slovakia, or northern Spain? Why were the Dutch so much more adept at sea than, say, the Irish? And why did Portugal after 1500 fail to develop spillover effects similar to those of the Netherlands? To use Lynn White's metaphor, nature-based effects like this can open doors, but they cannot force an economy to walk through them. In symmetric fashion, if a door appears closed because of a previous technological choice, it is always possible to smash the door and cross over to a different technology. Neither nature nor history can lock a society forever in a dead-end technology.

The path-dependent nature of technological change, in which its course is explained mainly by its past, can be extended, though caution must he used in applying these models. The links with the past most be specified rather than assumed. Regions that specialized in clock- and instru►nentmaking may have had a significant edge in technological innovation because clockand instrumentmakers had to be craftsmen of superior ability with considerable knowledge of materials and mechanics. It is therefore not surprising to see many engineers and inventors who were trained as clock- and instrumentmakers during the British Industrial Revolution. Sometimes the prominence of a few great men created a "school" that became selfsustaining and eventually led to overlapping generations of engineers and inventors. The British machine-tool industry in the late eighteenth- and early nineteenth century and the German chemical industry in the nineteenth century owed part of their success to such traditions. Yet many traditions were extinguished or led to dead ends. Clearly, then, technology requires more than its own past to be explained.

## LABOR COSTS

A related hypothesis maintains that high wages and labor scarcity stimulated technological creativity. This hypothesis, known as the Habakkuk thesis after H. J. Habakkuk (1962), maintains that high wages in the United States in the nineteenth century spurred technological progress, and in particular brought about the American System of manufacturing based on interchangeable parts. Much of this literature lies outside the scope of this book, but a few notes on the relationship between high labor costs and technological progress are apposite. The idea that high wages were necessary to encourage technological creativity is based on the false perception that technological progress was first and foremost a process of choice between more or less equivalent alternatives, and that these choices depended on factor prices. Some cases in which such choices had to be made doubtless took place, but they do not describe its essence. High wages would, according to the Habakkuk thesis, stimulate labor-saving inventions. There is no persuasive evidence, however, that technological progress has been predominantly labor saving in the past (von Tunzelmann, 1981, p. 158). MacLeod (1988, pp. 158-181) has analyzed the motives of eighteenth-century English patentees and shown that they overwhelmingly declared the goal of their innovation to save capital or improve product quality, whereas only 3.7 percent declared "labor saving" to be the purpose of the invention. To be sure, the desire to save labor intensified in the eighteenth century, but what was meant thereby was often different from the processes envisaged by Habakkuk. Instead, inventors wished to substitute away from labor to reduce the bargaining power of unions or because they believed their workers to be untrustworthy.

Moreover, biased technological change is a relative concept. A labor-saving innovation means that after the innovation is implemented the capital-labor ratio rises. But in the majority of cases, the absolute amounts of both capital and labor needed to produce one unit of output decreased, even if that of labor has decreased more. The producer, whether independent craftsman or mass manufacturer, will try to reduce costs by as much as possible, regardless of whether the saving is in labor or any other input. Labor costs are still costs, whether labor is cheap or not. Changes that reduce labor requirements, even in low-wage economies, will increase profits and thus be adopted. Furthermore, inventions that produced goods that were easier to maintain and use, better looking, and more durable; that reduced the drudgery and effort of the workers; and that reduced the use of fuel, raw materials, water, and wear-and-tear of tools and equipment were attractive to low-wage and high-wage economies alike. Labor-saving inventions seem to have occurred as often in periods of stable or slowly falling real wages (such as the last third of the eighteenth century) as in periods of rising wages.

To be sure, there are some cases in which the evidence suggests that high wages or labor scarcity due to high mortality or strikes stimulated the search for labor-saving technological progress.' 3 The flip side of this argument is that cheap and abundant labor slowed down mechanization (Samuel, 1977, p. 47). When mechanization required the purchase of massive and expensive capital goods in which the new technology was embodied, the relative prices of capital and labor may well have been a consideration, at least in the short run. But such cases were rare before 1870, and some putative examples of this phenomenon do not stand up when examined closely. For instance, the slowness of technological progress in the British coal gas manufactures in the 1870s and 1880s has been attributed to cheap labor, and when wages in the industry started to rise in the 1880s, labor-saving innovations were allegedly rapidly introduced. A recent paper (Matthews, 1987) persuasively refutes this theory, and shows that new techniques in gas production (such as new sources of power and gravity stoking) became available only after 1885, and probably would have been adopted even had wages remained unchanged. Similarly, it has been suggested that the vallns, the Roman harvesting machine, failed to spread because it was labor-saving and there was no labor shortage in most of the Roman empire (Pleket, 1967). K. D. White (1969) has pointed out, however, that the texts referring to the vallus imply it savings of both manpower and time. More important, perhaps, is that the absence of a labor shortage is not the same as costless labor. As long as labor costs anything, a machine that saved it could increase efficiency.

## SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Was the supply of scientific ideas and knowledge ever a binding constraint on the creation of new technology? Rostow (1975) regards the Scientific Revolution of the seventeenth century as the crucial difference between West and East. Before that, "science did not teach those with access to or control over resources that the physical world could be understood in ways that permitted it systematically to be transformed to their advantage" (p. 31). There was always what could be called it body of metatechnological knowledge, from which technology drew its inspiration, consciously or subconsciously. The classical distinction made by Francis Bacon between inventions that depend on a state of knowledge (scientific or other) and those that could have been made at almost any time is relevant here. Before 1850, it seems, most important inventions, from the verge-and-foliot escapement mechanism to the cotton gin, were of the empirical kind, and the role of metatechnological knowledge was marginal. But appearances can be misleading in some instances: Galileo's theory of machines, as we have seen, was of great importance to all subsequent developments in machine design. Even that most empirical and pragmatic of all inventors, john Smeaton, was inspired by the experimental techniques developed by Newton, in which the partial effects of changes were measured by varying one component while keeping all others constant. Pacey (1975, p. 137) has argued that the Scientific Revolution of the seventeenth century taught engineers "the method of detail," that is, to analyze problems by breaking them down into their component parts, which may be easier to analyze than the problem taken as a whole. Jacob (1988, p. 208) claims that the importance of eighteenth-century science was in teaching manufacturers and merchants to "think mechanically," that is, in terms of understandable and controllable physical processes.

A practical distinction between science and technology is not easy to draw. Gille (1978, p. 11 12), who has examined the nexus closely, suggests a distinction based on purpose: science aims at comprehension, whereas technology aims at utilization. Although Gille feels that science in the West (lid not start to play an important role until the Renaissance, he seems to agree with

Rostow that its decline could lead to the blockage of' further progress. Yet his own survey suggests that correlations between scientific advances and technological progress could as likely involve technology helping science as the other way around. Moreover, any correlation between the two could well be spurious in that both science and technology may well be functions of other social factors. Without denying the importance that scientific insights and practices and some individual scientists had on occasion on the progress of technology during the baroque period and early Industrial Revolution, we have seen that what we call today "scientific knowledge" was rarely a binding constraint on technological progress before 1850. The relationship between scientific and technological progress, as Otto Mayr (1976) has pointed out, has confounded the best minds in both fields. Indeed, an eminent historian of science (Kuhn, 1969, p. 428) has made the startling assertion that there was a negative correlation between the two, because the social conditions that promote science are antithetic to technology and vice versa.

As the work of Musson and Robinson (1969) has demonstrated, British inventors and manufacturers during the Industrial Revolution were in constant contact with scientists. Engineers and mechanics such as Smeaton, Watt, Trevithick, and Stephenson learned from scientists a rational faith in the orderliness of natural phenomena and physical processes; an appreciation of the importance of accuracy in measurement and controls in experiment; the logical difference between cause and correlation; and a respect for quantification and mathematics. In many cases the new knowledge developed by scientists (lid filter down, and in subtle ways affected the questions asked and the solutions sought. For example, steampower would have been unimaginable without the insights of Torricelli and Guericke into atmospheric pressure; the engineering of Smeaton and Maudslay would hardly have been possible without Galileo's theory of mechanics. It was certainly the case that before 1800 there was not much in the physical sciences that would be of direct use to these engineers, but scientific method and individual insights proved both an inspiration and a guide leading to technological breakthroughs. 14

In some cases, clever experiments revealed truths despite incomplete or even erroneous scientific principles. Berthollet, the inventor of chlorine bleaching, thought that chlorine was it compound, not an element. Hot-air balloons were believed by their inventors to be lifted by a lighter-than-air substance given off by the heat. But would the hot-air balloon have been invented without the newly emerging physics of Cavendish, or Giovanni Alfonso Borelli's demonstration in 1680 that it was physically impossible for humans to fly like birds? Metallurgy presents another example of how mistaken scientific principles could lead to correct insights. The nature of' steel had eluded the best minds of European science for centuries. Phlogiston theory, the reigning paradigm of eighteenth-century physics, greatly stimulated interest in the composition of useful materials. Its proposition that steel was a pure form of' iron with phlogiston added to it did not stop the Frenchman Rene Reaumur from publishing, in 1722, it famous book in which he postulated that steel was an intermediate product between cast iron and wrought iron. The Swede 'l'obern Bergman, another convinced phlogistonist, discovered in 1781 that the difference between wrought iron, steel, and cast iron was in the quantities of "plumbago" contained in them. It was soon discovered that plumbago was merely charcoal, that is, pure carbon (Cyril S. Smith, 1981, p. 35-44). By the 1820s the role of carbon in iron and steel was well understood, and without it the advances in steelmaking are hard to intagine.

It is widely agreed that after 1850, the role of science became more important in generating technological progress. But the imaginative, original, energetic, hold, but basically serendipitous, untrained, and unsystematic mind of the eighteenth-century inventor did not disappear after 1850.t5 In fact, this kind of inventor remains important in the twentieth century. As a general rule, it seems likely that in the past 150 years the majority of important inventions, from steel converters to cancer chemotherapy, from food canning to aspartame, have been used long before people understood why they worked, and systematic research in these areas was thus limited to ordered trial-and-error operations. The proportion of such inventions is declining, but it remains high today.

The function of science after 1850 was as much to show what could not work as to show what could. In 1853 the versatile inventor John Ericsson produced a "caloric" engine based on regeneration of the heat produced. The machine was a failure because its inventor failed to realize the basic thermodynamic principle that an engine cannot use the same heat over and over again because the heat is converted into energy (Bryant, 1973). Even the best tinkerer inventors felt increasingly the need to collaborate with persons with a systematic training. Thomas Edison, for example, hired the mathematician Francis R. Upton and the chemist Reginald Fessenden (who later made important contributions to the understanding of the modulation of radio waves) to translate his ideas into rigorous form. Inspired outsiders still played a crucial role in the invention process, and their openness of mind was often essential in the initial breakthrough. In the "development" stage of the process, however, scientific training and systematic work proved increasingly necessary. Inventors who wished to remain active had to become experts themselves or give up (Hounshell, 1975).

## RELIGION

Of particular interest in explaining technological change over the long term is the matter of religion. Of course, religion, especially in the past, was socially determined. Indeed, there have been relatively few episodes in history in which individuals could exercise much choice over their religious beliefs. Once set, these beliefs were a key variable on the microlevel in setting individuals' frames of mind regarding technological change. The literature on the relationship between religion and economic change (or "capitalism") is large and confusing. Here I wish to focus exclusively on its technological aspects.t'' Two important warnings should be stated. First, few, if any, religions are totally opposed to all innovation. The differences were differences of degree, but they were cumulative and in the long term could explain large divergences. Second, religions are themselves to some extent social-choice variables, at least at some critical junctures. Religions might have been chosen and adapted to reflect changing preferences and circumstances. Every society, so to speak, gets the religion it deserves. Yet the historical record suggests that religion was rarely entirely endogenous, and the predominant religion was often determined by military and political events. What people really believed, moreover, was not identical with the dogma of the official churches, and neither economists nor other social scientists have had much success in explaining it.

Precisely because the act of invention is a game against nature, what matters above all for invention is whether beliefs enhance the propensity to change production methods, that is, the willingness to challenge and manipulate the physical environment, what Landes has called the "Faustian ethic," the sense of the mastery over nature and things. Not all technological change is strictly of that type; coinage, new methods in accounting, or improved monitoring of workers would fall outside that definition. But agriculture, manufacturing, mining, hunting, and transportation require an intervention through which the innovator alters nature to suit his or her ends. The willingness to adjust ecology in this way depends on the attitude of the innovator toward the physical world, i.e., religion. For modern Western rrian and woman, whose view of nature (if conscious at all) is that it is there to be manipulated and enjoyed, it seems perhaps commonplace that the binding constraint on technology is knowledge (i.e., the ability to use nature). But this frame of mind, as we shall see, is exceptional in human history, and is mainly derived from the anthropocentric philosophies of Judeo-Christian religions. Mental changes are therefore a natural candidate for the explanation of the technological take-off in medieval Europe, a subject to which we shall return.

Economists have traditionally been leery of menlalztes as a factor in long-term economic development. In the budding literature on the economic rise of the West, such factors have been ignored or curtly dismissed. 17 In part, economists' hostility to religious factors stems from the incompleteness of such theories. Attitudes were a matter of degree, not of absolutes. Non-Western societies have in some cases altered their environment drastically, and inflicted ecological disasters upon themselves (]ones, 1988, pp. 59-61). All economic production involves some manipulation of the physical environment, and all societies have had to play games against nature. Religion affected material attitudes in odd ways: some Judeo-Christian religions, first and foremost Judaism itself, have shown little affinity for technological change, even if they shared the view that God created man as the center of the universe. Greek Orthodoxy and Islam, and at times Western Christianity as well, have shown tendencies toward mysticism and reactionary dogma that thwarted innovation. Moreover, nonChristians, especially the Chinese, have made major contributions to technology. Qualifications and doubts thus abound. Yet even if religion was far from being the sole or even the primary factor, it regains one of the most intriguing forces in trying to explain the European miracle. Technological change as defined here-a sustained, cost-reducing, output-augmenting change in knowledge-took off in Europe after Christianity had taken firm root and has remained for over twelve centuries an economic force of unparalleled and apparently inexhaustible potency.

Religion, economy, and society were often intertwined in ways that defy easy generalization, but that had an evident effect on technological creativity. Indian Brahmanism was created by Aryan conquerors, who developed the caste system to perpetuate their dominance and ensure acquiescence on the part of the lower classes. The taboos, restrictions, and rules imposed by the cast system created a society that was conservative beyond anything seen in the West. In the eternal trade-off between progress and growth on the one hand, and stability and order on the other, Hindu civilization chose a position biased in the extreme toward the latter. ]ones (1988, pp. 1034) cites the caste system as "the limiting case of rigidified institutions" and notes that "personal achievement is excluded in principle." It is, as always, hard to sort out the causality links exactly: was India a conservative society that bred a suitable religion, or was Hinduism responsible for India's backwardness? Hindu doctrine held that promotion to a higher caste was possible through reincarnation if an appropriately resigned and obedient life was led, a fiendishly clever and almost failure-proof incentive system to protect the status quo. The result was that despite their obvious skills in metallurgy, highquality textiles, and hydraulic engineering, the Indian subcontinent does not figure prominently in the history of technological creativity.

Of course, India's backwardness cannot be blamed entirely on religion. India was repeatedly devastated by civil wars and powerful invaders. Yet most creative societies have bounced back within decades after even the most devastating blows. India simply fell behind, and eventually it fell prey to more advanced enemies, first the Mughals, whose use of artillery in the 1520s defeated much larger Hindu armies, and then the British. But it is not the political consequences that ultimately matter; India, where daily life was conducted for millennia at the very margins of subsistence, is a reductio ad absurdum of the notion of an equilibrium, so beloved by economists. Yet this equilibrium was regarded as an arrangement established by the Gods, a perfect world in which everything and everyone had its place, a society in which poverty was holy and action was vanity. In such a world, technological creativity had little chance.

Technology was not the only means by which people sought to affect their natural environment. Magic, astrology, and alchemyfor the most part regarded today as irrational activities-were practiced by people whose scientific credentials leave no doubt as to their "rationality." Isaac Newton was one of the most famous alchemists of all times. The Neapolitan Giambattista della Porta (1536-1605), one of the first to realize the possibilities of steam power, was a fulltime magician and even named his book Magtae Naturalis. The spillover effects of' astrology into astronomy are too obvious to require repetition. It will not do to dismiss magic as irrational, because rationality is conditional on the information available, and without modern science it was impossible for people to know what worked and what did not. The important difference between technology and magic is not that technology works and magic does not. The difference that matters here is that magic does not control nature, it begs favors from it. Rather than exploiting regularities and natural laws, it seeks exceptions to them by taking advantage of an imaginary capriciousness of the universe. Moreover, technology, if it worked, worked for everyone, whereas magic was confined to qualified practitioners. The sorcerer's apprentice had no access to his master's powers. To be sure, magic and alchemy had, at times, positive spillovers to technology, but their importance vanishes with the Enlightenment of the eighteenth century.

## VALUES

As far as collective influences on behavior are concerned, perhaps the most pervasive influence on the propensity of a society to experience technological progress is the hierarchy of values. Economists are accustomed to thinking of human behavior in terms of utility, which is the valuation attached to goods and services consumed, and the conditions in which people live. Beyond this, however, there is a collective set of valuations that determines the relative prestige of various activities or attributes within a society. Although prestige is usually correlated with wealth, it is not identical to wealth. Through the ages, the various activities that conveyed prestige have included, beside the creation of' wealth (economic activity), the military, the arts, worship, sports, administration, learning, and teaching. Different societies have ranked these various activities differently. It seems plausible that the higher labor, production, and the accumulation of wealth are in this ranking, the more susceptible a society is to technological progress. Among the great civilizations of antiquity, the Greeks had an appreciation for sports and learning, whereas the Romans placed the highest value on military and administative ability, and the Jews emphasized worship and later learning and textual exegesis of the scriptures. All of these societies appreciated wealth, but it was as good as or better to be brave or wise than to be rich.

Moreover, wealth could be held in different forms. In some societies, wealth was primarily measured by direct power over people rather than economic power over resources. In some slave and feudal societies, for example, wealth was measured primarily by control over other people.18 Power over people and control over economic resources overlap, of course, a great deal in any society. But they are not identical. A slave society, in which wealth and social prestige were measured by the number of slaves, would be less inclined to adopt labor-saving machinery, which, although more efficient, would make slaves redundant. On the other hand, in a slave society in which wealth was counted in terms of all resources, and in which slaves were held solely because they represented a good way to accumulate wealth, technological change was as likely to occur as anywhere else. To use Hirsch's (1976) terminology, technological progress only increases material goods, while it leaves positional goods (such as social prestige and political power, which are measured strictly relative to others' consumption) unaltered by definition. The more wealth is measured by the consumption of positional goods relative to material goods, the less attractive technological change will look and the lower the prestige that will he associated with economic production.

A relatively low ranking of economic activity in this hierarchy is inimical to technological progress for a number of reasons. First, it channels the creative energies of the best educated and most successful persons into activities that do not increase the productive capacity of the economy. Whether they become priests, philosophers, or generals, they are not likely to be interested in the mundane problems of agriculture, ironworking, or tanning. What we call "production" was stigmatized by Graeco-Roman society as a lower-class activity, possibly associated with slaves, necessary but dirty. Insofar as invention consists of the twining together of hitherto unconnected strains of' knowledge, some pre-existent set of economic objectives is essential. In other words, for an inventor to realize that an idea might be useful to a particular branch of economic production, he or she has to have some prior conception of how production is carried out in the first place.

Second, because productive work was left to an uneducated and inarticulate class alienated from the elite, technological progress faced serious handicaps. In a society in which those who are educated do not work and those who work are not educated, the inarticulateness of the productive classes will thwart the diffusion and adoption of new technology in the unlikely event that it emerges. During most of history, children who received an education were kept away from practical matters. Whether they studied horsemanship, Latin, theology, geometry, or the "Talmud, matters commercial and industrial were rarely part of the curriculum. An invention by a slave or a lowly farmer might occasionally benefit his direct master or landlord, or even himself'. How likely was it, however, to spread outside the immediate neighborhood unless the educated elite took some interest in the details? The exclusion of' large segments of society from the group whose ideas enjoyed some measure of acceptability was, however, not confined to slave societies. For example, the number of known female inventors is very small, although women were deeply involved in most spheres of production. Some cases of women displaying a knack for practical invention are known, but their social environment, which considered mechanical skills a male monopoly, did not permit their talents to develop, and female inventors remained in the shadow of their male partners.\`

Moreover, in sonie cases a new insight evolved from a game or experiment carried out for its own sake. To convert such an insight into technological progress requires a pragmatic bend of mind. Whereas the act of insight occurs at the level of the individual (often subconsiously), the likelihood that the individual will ask how something can he made useful depends on the value that his or her environment attaches to things that are useful as opposed to, say, beautiful or virtuous. Technological progress depends on the extent to which honto creativus was also homo econotnicus. Relative to other societies, Europe approached the new knowledge it generated with a more pragmatic attitude than other societies. Although this pragmatism was made fully explicit only by the seventeenth century, es pecially in the writings of Francis Bacon, it doubtless existed in implicit form long before. Marx's famous dictum that his purpose was not just to understand the world but to change it applies to thousands of tinkerers, mechanics, and engineers who built the windmills, clocks and fully rigged ships of medieval Europe. This pragmatism did not manifest itself in the economic realm alone. As we have seen, the Europeans approached the geographical expansion of the world with much the same attitude. In commerce, war, and politics, what was functional was often preferred to what was aesthetic or moral, and when it was not, natural selection saw to it that the useful won out in the long run. It need hardly be stressed that such pragmatism was never entirely absent in any society. Hierarchies of values are not the stuff of absolutes. But the difference in degree between European and most non-European societies was decisive.

The contempt in which physical labor, commerce, and other economic activity were held did not disappear rapidly; much of European social history can be interpreted as a struggle between wealth and other values for a higher step in the hierarchy. The French concepts of bourgeois gen.Iilhomme and nouveau riche still convey some contempt for people who joined the upper classes through economic success. Even in the nineteenth centuy, the accumulation of wealth was viewed as an admission ticket to social respectability to be abandoned as soon as a secure membership in the upper classes had been achieved.

## INSTITUTIONS AND PROPERTY RIGHTS

The institutional background of technological progress seems, on the surface, more straightforward. Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986) place institutional change at the center of events. They point out that for technological change to be effective and sustainable, the authorities must relinquish their direct control over the innovative process and decentralize it. This creates an important, though insufficient, condition for technological change to occur: the opportunity for the successful innovator to enrich himself. But, as they point out, decentralization was equally important because it meant that search and experimentation were carried out by many independent units, possibly over and over again. This duplication of effort was not the most cost effective way of engaging in technological progress. In fact, it involved much waste. Case after case of unnecessary duplication can be documented, not even counting the huge number of research efforts that were fruitless. But this system minimized the probability of a technological opportunity being missed, as "it reduced the risk that a desirable proposal would be rejected because of a viewpoint peculiar to a single decision maker" (ibid., p. 29). Nelson (1987, p. 9) adds that a pluralist system generates a wider variety of new departures and lets ex post selection separate the wheat from the chaff. Technological progress involves not just uncertainty, but ex ante differences in opinion. There may be more than one way to skin it cat, but only one way is the most efficient. Nelson argues that ex post selection and experimentation is costly and painful, but "given the nature of technological uncertainties, perhaps this is the best we can do" (ibid., p. 120).

The definition of property rights on new technology constitutes another condition for innovators to cash in on technological progress. There are two separate issues here. One is the general question of property rights. It seems widely agreed that if the ownership of assets is insecure, so that they can readily be confiscated or stolen by brigands or by the authorities, economic progress of' any kind is not likely to occur. People will hold their assets in nonproductive, liquid forms, and the accumulation ol' productive capital will be reduced. Landes (1969, ch. 1), Jones (1981), and North (1981) have pointed to differences in security as a key factor in European development. The other issue is the need to secure sufficient incentives to make innovators invest in new technology. Patents, monopolies, grants, pensions, prizes, and medals have provided would-be innovators with the rewards deemed necessary to keep up a high level of inventive activity. Patent systems, however, did not emerge until the fifteenth century, and were firmly entrenched only by the late eighteenth century. Even then, the patent system turned out to be a double-edged sword for inventors, as we shall see.

A patent system may have been a stimulus to invention. but it was clearly not a necessary factor. After all, many inventors were able to capture enough of the increased consumer surplus to make the effort worthwhile even if their inventions were soon imitated. Second, imitation may have been difficult for a variety of reasons, thus creating a "natural patent" that yielded a stream of rents guaranteeing the innovator some return, though it may have represented only a fraction of the social surplus created by the innovation. In a few cases it is quite clear that financia incentives were not it major consideration for the inventor, whose utility function may have included fame, the sheer satisfaction of solving a difficult problem, or even altruism."0 Such cases were unusual, however; the profit motive was probably as strongly present in invention as in any other economic activity, which is to say, it was almost always there, though it rarely operated entirely by itself. It is therefore plausible that societies that rewarded invention were likely to have more of it, but that there may have been more than one way of' rewarding innovators whose activities led to major gains in productivity.

## RESISTANCE TO INNOVATION

A different set of social factors affecting technological change may best be referred to as the political economy of' technological change. Although technological progress is by definition a net improvement to the economy, it is almost always the case that there are some groups whose welfare is reduced because of it, or who at least believe so ex ante. "Technological change shocks the labor market, alters the physical environment, makes existing human and physical capital obsolete, and unambiguously reduces the producer's surplus of the innovator's competitors. In a repeated game, the gainers might have tried to compensate the losers. By its very nature, however, technological change is a nonrepeated game, since an invention is only invented once. Once an invention is made, an inventor often needs protection from those who stand to benefit from the suppression of the invention. The dilemma is sharpened by the fact that the benefits are usually heavily diffused, while the costs are concentrated. Thus the losers will find it easier to organize, and are quite likely to try to squelch technological progress altogether. Resistance to technological change occurred in many periods and places but seems to have been largely neglected by most historians, though Morison (1966, p. 10) views it as "the single greatest matter of importance and interest in this whole process [of' invention]."

Some examples: as early as 1397, tailors in Cologne were forbidden to use machines that pressed pinheads. In 1561, the city council of Nuremberg, undoubtedly influenced by the guild of red-metal turners, launched an attack on a local coppersmith by the name of Hans Spaichl who had invented an improved slide rest lathe. The council first rewarded Spaichl for his invention, then began to harass him and made him promise not to sell his lathe outside his own craft, then offered to buy it from him if he suppressed it, and finally threatened to imprison anyone who sold the lathe (Klemm, 1964, p. 153). The ribbon loom was invented in Danzig in 1579, but its inventor was reportedly secretly drowned by orders of the city council. Twenty-five years later the ribbon loom was reinvented in the Netherlands-though resistance there, too, was stiff-arid thus became known as the Dutch loom. A century and a half later, John Kay, the inventor of the flying shuttle, was harassed by weavers. He eventually settled in France, where he refused to show his shuttle to weavers out of fear." But the prolonged opposition of vested interests against the flying shuttle in Britain was ineffectual. Resistance to new technology was traditionally strongest in the textile trade, but appeared in less expected places as well. In 1299, an edict was issued in Florence forbidding bankers to use Arabic numerals (Stern, 1937, p. 48). In the fifteenth century, the scribes guild of Paris succeeded in delaying the introduction of printing into Paris by 20 years. In the sixteenth century, the great printers revolt in France was triggered by labor-saving innovations in the presses.

These negative reactions to technological progress can only be understood as an attempt. by those with an investment in certain techniques to prevent the decline in the value of their skills. Economies in which the institutional setup protects the inventor from such threats, or in which distributional coalitions, which protect the selfish interests of small groups at the expense of the large majority, are comparatively weak will have a far better chance for technological success. Inventors or manufacturers who perceive that innovating is a thankless and possibly dangerous activity will lose interest, and technological change will peter out.

## POLITICS AND THE STATE

It is difficult to determine what kind of political structure is most conducive to technological progress. A strong, centralized government, secure enough to withstand riots and political pressure from coalitions representing losers, may have been able to resist the pressures exerted by the technological status quo. Yet it is equally plausible that a weak government that succumbed to demands to legislate technological progress away would be powerless to enforce such laws, and thus by default leave the decision to market forces. This dilemma was recognized by North (1984, p. 260) when he wrote that "if you want to realize the potential of modern technology you cannot do with the state, but you cannot do without it either." At first glance, political stability may seem necessary for technological progress. But Olson (1982) has argued that sweeping political changes prepare the ground for economic progress by eliminating reactionary institutions used by pressure groups with a vested interest in the status quo, whereas long-term political stability permits the crystallization of such groups. Monopolistic market structures among the innovating firms (which would be stimulated by a well-functioning patent system) would thus be advantageous in this regard. The more monopolistic the industry, the larger will be the share of social benefits captured by producers at the expense of consumers, meaning that lobbying would more likely be met by successful counterlobby- ing. In a competitive industry, on the other hand, the gains from innovation are passed on to the consumers in the form of lower prices, and the benefits are thus diffuse.

Even apart from protecting new technology from its victims, the state plays a central role in technological change. The ambiguity of this role is inevitable, because "the state" always consisted of layers of authority that were rarely coordinated and often in conflict with each other. A central government might have had different interests and attitudes from local authorities. Nongovernmental organizations such as guilds, trade unions, and chambers of commerce, often exercised considerable influence over the shape of the technology used. The impact of deliberate policy may not always have been the same as intended. For example, some governments, eager to stimulate technological progress, may have actually hurt it by imposing tariffs to protect local manufacturers. In the majority of' cases, however, diffuse power seems on the whole to have been advantageous to technological progress.

It seems that as a general rule, then, the weaker the government, the better it is for innovation. With some notable exceptions, autocratic rulers have tended to be hostile or indifferent to technological change. The instinctive need for stability and the suspicion of nonconformism and shocks usually dominated the possible gains that could be attained from technological progress.,, Thus both the Ming dynasty in China (1368-1644) and the Tokugawa regime in Japan (1600- 1867) set the tone for inward-looking, conservative societies. Only when strong governments realized that technological backwardness itself constituted a threat to the regime, as in the cases of Peter the Great's Russia, post-1867 Japan, and, to a lesser extent, Napoleon's France, did they decide to intervene directly to encourage technological change. When rulers are weak, they are typically unable to halt technological progress, much as they may try. As we shall see, the weakening of central power in Europe following the collapse of the Roman Empire may help to explain the resumption of technological progress after 500 A.D.

Another reason politics matters is that technological change is notoriously subject to market failure, that is, the free market system left on its own is unlikely to produce a desirable level of innovation. This is the result of' the public good property of' new technological knowledge: once created, using it (foes not reduce the supply available to others, and it therefore has it zero marginal social cost. As far as new technology is concerned, therefore, society has found it necessary to supplement the usual market mechanism by additional institutions. In the past, governments have tried to correct the many failures in the market for technological knowledge by organizing exhibitions, awarding monopolies and other rewards for specific inventions, and subsidizing potential inventors by offering them pensions and easy positions in government service. In more recent times governments have taken it upon themselves to create the educational and research environment that they believe is needed to bring about technological change. Governments enforce the rules by which the game of' innovation is played, and they often set them as well.

Politics also matters because the ruling elites, be they emperors, high priests, parliaments, or councils of regents, set an agenda of priorities. If these priorities divert too many resources, and in particular talent and creativity, into nonproductive or destructive uses, economic performance and innovation may be harmed. 't'hus, a string of devastating wars between 1550 and 1650 ruined the technological infrastructure of the most advanced parts of Europe, notably southern Germany, the southern Netherlands, and Bohemia. Moreover, political factors determined whether initiative and ingenuity would be directed toward productive purposes or not. "I'here was nothing automatic about this. Economists have recently emphasized the clangers of the "rent-seeking" society, in which the tax lawyer and the political lobbyist have replaced the inventor and the engineer as the entrepreneur's main instruments towards higher profits. Political maneuvering is a zero-sum game at best, whereas technological change is a positive-sum game. It is the political sphere that determines which game attracts the best players (Baurnol, 1988). One explanation of the decline of Rome has recently been recast in those terms (MacMullen, 1988). Corruption and venality led to a decline in the efficacy of the public goods provided by the government (primarily defense), and diverted energies and talent away from more productive purposes.

Finally, governments set the tone for society's attitudes toward nonconformists. Inventors are by and large unconventional people, who rebel in some way against the status quo. Morison (1966, p. 9) has gone so far as to suggest that invention is something of a hostile act, a dislocation of existing schemes, a way of disturbing comfortable bourgeois routines. Technological progress requires above all tolerance toward the unfamiliar and the eccentric (Goldstone, 1987). As Cipolla (1972, p. 52) put it, the qualities that make people tolerant also make them receptive to new ideas. The factors determining the degree of tolerance toward deviants in any society are not much understood. Persson (1988, p. 57) suggests that the size of the economy is the critical variable here. In small economies the potentially harmful acts of individuals are relatively more important. By that logic, Russia and Spain should have been much more tolerant than the United Provinces and Denmark, and China the most tolerant of all. This obvious historical contradiction illustrates the basic problem with his argument, which is that "size" is not well defined. Was an Amsterdam merchant in 1560 a part of the Amsterdam society, the county of Holland, or the Spanish Empire? Society, like politics, consisted of partially overlapping entities, and the mere fact of being, say, French or Polish may not be enough to determine whether one lived in a tolerant society or not. It was also important whether one lived in a town or the countryside, whether one lived in the diocese of a zealous bishop, and which social class one was born into. This makes Persson's notion of size as a determinant of tolerance impractical for our purposes.

The archenemy of tolerance and pluralism is conformism. The proclivity of individuals to conform to social norms and to force others to do so is deeply rooted in individualistic behavior. Recent work by economists has tried to reconcile it with rational (that is, utilitymaximizing) behavior (Stephen Jones, 1984). Conformism can be explained in two ways. One is that imitating past practices provides an efficient way of learning. The other is that conforming to existing norms is important in being accepted by the existing society. All societies developed to some extent a disapproval of' young members who do not conform to existing practices. Some individuals will nevertheless question accepted tradition, and at that stage the issue of society's attitude toward rebels and deviants becomes crucial. The more hostile this attitude, the more likely conformist attitudes will dominate and the new generations will be just like the old ones, producing technological stasis. Widely observed phenomena such as tradition and social inertia become understandable if' conformism is assumed to be part of human behavior. Natural selection is likely to have favored conformists, since species in which the young did not conform to the established ways of gathering food would not survive. Yet such conformism is precisely what has to be overcome if technological progress is to occur. It is easy to use Stephen Jones's model to demonstrate this result, because in his model (formulated in the context of a workplace, but readily applicable to technological change) the utility of an individual depends on the ability to please and be accepted by other workers, a function of the severity of the disapproval of novelty. What is not quite clear is which factors determine the level of disapproval. Clearly, however, disapproval of nonconformists has historically been high. One student of the history of technology (Cyril S. Smith, cited by K. I). White, 1984, p. 27) sighs that "every invention is born into an uncongenial society, has few friends and many enemies, and only the hardiest and luckiest survive." Whenever religious and intellectual intolerance spread through Europe, as they (lid in the fourteenth century, their advent coincided with a temporary slowdown in technological development.

## WAR

Of special interest to the connection between the state and technology is the question of spillover effects from military to civilian technology. War has always been permeated with technology, and the concentration of effort that the high stakes involved would suggest a positive correlation between military effort and technological suc- cess.23 It has repeatedly been claimed tha military needs stimulate and inspire technological change. Whether in fact innovations in military technology provided substantial benefits in the production of peacetime goods and services so that war can he thought of as an agent of technological progress is far from easy to determine. Some spillover effects are, of course, undeniable. Bessemer's converter grew out of the search for a more effective shell. Wilkinson's boring machine, without which Watt and Boulton would not have been able to manufacture their machines, was designed for cannon." The early blast furnaces of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries were set up in part for the manufacturing of cannon. The invention of firearms led to significant spillover effects in metalworking, such as the development of rotary metal cutters, gauges, metallic screws, and so on (Foley, 1983). Interchangeable parts and mass production in the nineteenth century also had well-documented military origins and were originally known as "armory practice." Yet the military was hardly a milieu that tolerated technological creativity. In his recent book on military technology, Van Crefeld (1989, p. 220) points out that on the one hand the military hierarchy and frame of mind left little room for flexibility and tolerance for innovators, so that "the military represent an exceptionally unfavorable environment for . . . invention." On the other hand, the military is well placed to research, develop, and bring to fruition some ideas about which the civilian sector is hesitant. Yet the examples he provides come from the twentieth century. Before that, the needs of military technology seem t.o have intersected but little with those of civilian production. Innovations in ballistics, the technology of fortification, gunpowder, and military communications had little to contribute to economic welfare. Even in shipbuilding, the increasing specialization of merchant ships and men-of-war after 1500 meant that spillovers were small.

In any event, any suggestion that there is a positive correlation between the bellicosity of a society and its inventiveness must encounter grave skepticism. The wonderful war machines of the Romans, the catapults and the ballistas, (lid not lead to any clear advances in productive technology. Medieval metalworking, which was largely aimed at weapons and armor, (lid not change noticeably: welding, forging, and shaping did not benefit much from any learningbydoing effects. The metallurgy learned during casting iron cannon could have been picked up from casting frying pans or oven grates. In spite of its technologically revolutionary nature at the time it was introduced, gunmaking did not lead to many civilian applications with the exception of hunting, and the machine-tool industry owed more to clocks and instruments than to guns. Civilian uses of explosives were limited; only after 1627 was gunpowder used to blast ore mines in Slovakia, and gunpowder helped build the first tunnel during the construction of the

Languedoc Canal, completed in 1681 (Hollister-Short, 1985). However, not until dynamite was invented was an explosive available that could be employed on a large scale for peaceful purposes. In China, too, gunpowder was rarely used in mines (Golas, 1982). And as we have seen, Huygens's hopes to find a peaceful use for gunpowder in an internal combustion engine remained unfulfilled.

Indeed, it is surprising how little evidence there is that military activity created positive externalities for civilian production given the apparent opportunities. The huge armies of Louis XIV, with their demand for uniforms, blankets, arms, munitions, and supplies, should have been enough to trigger an Industrial Revolution in France. Yet Colbert's factories led to a dead end. Of the most bellicose nations of the century before the Industrial Revolution-Charles XII's Sweclen, Louis XIV's France, Frederick the treat's Prussia-none saw many technological benefits of the expensive wars conducted by their sovereigns. The Industrial Revolution itself was hindered rather than aided by the wars of the time. Brunet's Portsmouth blockmaking machines were too specialized to be of use for much else than naval vessels, and most of' the other positive technological externalities of the Napoleonic Wars have been disputed or shown to have been unimportant (Mokyr, 1985, p. 15). Even in the technology of the organization and disciplining of men, in which military commanders anticipated the needs of modern industry by centuries, the beneficial effects of' military experience are hard to find. Prince Maurice of Nassau and Frederick the Great of Prussia perfected the military drill, but it was not until after 1800 that a disciplined factory labor force was created-without much insight gleaned from military experience.z' During the wars of the Revolution and the Napoleonic era, the French iron industry had to satisfy a vast demand for iron, yet recent scholarship has confirmed that the adoption of new metallurgical techniques in France was slowed down in this period (Wo- ronoff, 1984). Similarly, the American Civil War produced few noticeable spillovers to civilian technology. Mumford's description of war as an "agent of' mechanization" notwithstanding, its technological benefits before 1914 were modest. Moreover, the net effect of war on technological change has to take into account the costs as well; there can be little doubt that the balance here is negative. I see no reason to revise the conclusions reached by Nef (1950, especially pp. 220-21) in his classic work, which argued that it was peace, not war, that was the innovating force in manufacturing, and that war and military preparation did not add conspicuously to the material prosperity of Europe.

The idea that war could have technological spin-offs and thus be in some sense beneficial to the economy is a curiously Eurocentric notion. For the rest of the world, war was an unmitigated scourge. Most of the Eurasian continent was repeatedly invaded and devastated by Mongols or related Asian tribes between 1200 and 1800 (Jones, 1988, pp. 108-15). The military methods of these tribes were so destructive of human and physical capital that they have been blamed for the permanent backwardness of the Middle East and Eastern Asia. India, Persia, and Mesopotamia were the victims of the hordes of Tamerlane. It took some regions decades or even centuries to recover from the most devastating wars. Only those parts of Eurasia that were spared the conquests of Mongols Japan and western Europe-were able to generate sustained technological progress. As Jones points out, the negative impact of these wars could easily be overstated, and the damages were insufficient to explain entirely the divergence of Europe and Asia: some regions that were only lightly touched by the Mongols failed to generate much new technology either. Recovery might in some cases have taken decades, but if it took centuries we may suspect that other factors were at work as well.

Although military needs served at times as "focusing devices," to borrow Rosenberg's term, weapons were more often borrowers of civilian technology than sources of inspiration for it."! In general, military and civilian technology tended to be nurtured from the same sources of technological creativity. Societies that were creative in making clocks, plows, and spectacles were also good at making tri- buchets, guns, and men-of-war. The historical correlation between advances in the production of guns and that of butter does not prove that more or better guns "caused" more butter or the other way around; it could just as well be consistent with an overall increase in capacity that allowed society to have more of both. After all, that is precisely what technological progress is all about.

## OPENNESS TO NEW INFORMATION

Beyond the nature of the state lies a more complex factor that, for lack of a better term, we may call openness to new information. When two previously unconnected civilizations establish contact, technical information is exchanged that may yield potential economic gains to both. Earlier I referred to these effects as "exposure effects." Not all societies were capable of taking full advantage of exposure effects. Human history is full of examples of societies holding others in utter contempt and despising people who looked different, spoke a differ ent language, or believed in a different God. The ancient Greeks and the medieval Chinese shared a loathing for "barbarians," from whom, they thought, they had nothing to learn. Medieval Europe probably felt just as hostile to Islam, but the hatred of the Saracen did not extent to the knowledge and the useful devices that Moslems could produce. Thus, Europe adopted many inventions from Islam, from the lateen sail to Arabic numerals.27 In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when the West had pulled ahead of Islam technologically, the Moslems did not return the favor. In spite of their geographical proximity, the Moslems allowed European innovations to filter in only slowly and selectively. The first book printed in Arabic script appeared in Istanbul in 1729, almost three centuries after the invention of moveable type. The Koran was not printed until the twentieth century, quite a contrast with the great Gutenberg Bibles. Military defeats alerted the Ottoman Empire to the need to keep up technologically with the West, but because the rest of' the economy was so backward, military instructors had to be brought in from the West, which gave rise to resentment among local officials. As Lewis (1982) points out, the Islamic world's ignorance of the West was profound, and contrasts with the keen fascination Western culture had for Islamic civilization.\`2' A saying attributed to the Prophet Muhammad has it that "whoever imitates a people becomes one of them," which was interpreted in the Ottoman Empire as a stricture against Western technology.

The number of inventions Europe is said to have borrowed from other cultures, in particular China, is large. Europeans appreciated useful knowledge regardless of the source; Asian cultures, with the exception of nineteenth-century Japan, did not. In the early Middle Ages, Europe borrowed techniques from other cultures the way an underdeveloped country today emulates the industrialized world. After 1500, as Pacey (1975, p. 189) notes, the exposure effect operated largely through showing Europeans technological possibilities that simply had not occurred to them. Iron suspension bridges, seed drills, and porcelain are examples of Oriental ideas that were taken up by Europeans and subsequently improved and perfected. Europeans had no sense of shame in borrowing foreign technologies, as illustrated by the many products and processes named after their alleged foreign origins. Thus we have Europeans producing chinaware, calicoes, satin, damasks, and Japan (a black varnish); using Arabic numerals; eating turkeys (or d7ndes); and rigging lateen sails. An attempt to close a country to foreign influences, as took place, for example, in Japan and the Islamic world, would never have succeeded in Europe even if' it had occurred to anyone.

As Landes put it (1969, p. 28), "good innovators make good imitators." But in the final analysis good innovators and good imitators are both produced by a society in which material and practical values are held in high esteem. If something works, it does not matter where it came from. When Europeans were exposed to new information, their sense of wonderment was, so to speak, soon replaced by the thought of how to exploit the new knowledge. When they "discovered" the world after 1450, their chief purpose was to acquire wealth, either directly or by way of new information used to produce goods creating wealth. Gold, silver, spices, sugar, tea, and furs were directly imported into Europe; potatoes, tobacco, and maize were successfully transplanted. The test was always: is it useful? can it enrich me (or my king)? 'T'ypical of the Europeans' approach was the great Leibniz, who implored a Jesuit traveling to China "not to worry so much about getting things European to the Chinese, but rather about getting remarkable Chinese inventions to us; otherwise little profit will be derived from the China mission" (cited in Bray, 1984, p. 569). Newton wrote that neither pride nor honor should stand in the way of the principle that the important thing was "to learne, not teach" (Landes, 1969, p. 33). This approach to newly found lands differs radically from that of the Chinese, who toured parts of the world a few decades before Europe's explorations began in earnest. For the Chinese, the purpose of long voyages was to demonstrate the wealth and glory of China to the barbarians by means of lavish gifts, a laudable but ultimately prohibitively expensive policy. No wonder the Chinese terminated their explorations, while the Europeans carried on.

Equally important, the Europeans were willing to learn from each other. Inventions such as the spinning wheel, the windmill, and the weight-driven clock recognized no boundaries. The printing press was no more a German invention than the telescope was a Dutch one or the knitting frame an English one. European shipbuilders often travelled on board ships to see the types of ships in use elsewhere (Unger, 1980, p. 23). From the fourteenth century on, sons of northern European merchants traveled to Italy to study the a rte delta mercadanta, including commercial arithmetic and bookkeeping (Swetz, 1987, p. 12). In spite of" the seemingly high barriers to longdistance communication, technological "news" traveled well and fast in Europe, except, as we have seen, in the case of agriculture. Technologically creative societies started off as borrowers and typically soon turned into the generators and then the exporters of technology. In the seventeenth century, England was regarded as a backward society that depended on foreigners for its engineering and textile industries; by the nineteenth century, the directions were reversed. Modern-day East Asia finds itself in the same position.

Societies also differed in their willingness to challenge the accumulated knowledge of earlier generations and in their tolerance toward "heretics" who did. Some societies, especially Islam and Judaism, eventually developed it notion that earlier sages had already discovered everything there was to discover, and that challenging their knowledge was sacrilegious. Lewis (1982, pp. 229-30) argues that Islamic tradition eventually came to believe that all useful knowledge had been acquired and all questions had been answered so that all one had to do was repeat and obey. From the later Middle Ages on "Muslim science consisted almost entirely of' compilation and repetition." The inferiority complex vis-a-vis earlier generations imposed a constraint on the generation of new knowledge. 29 Lewis points out that in the Islamic tradition the term hiudaa (innovation), acquired the same negative connotation as "heresy" did in the West. A particularly had form of bidaa was imitating the infidel; the only exception allowed was military technology used in it holy war. Whether this conservatism can be blamed for the slowing down of technological progress is not entirely clear. It is possible that both scientific and technological progress ran into a barrier of conservatism that had causes outside religion, and this harrier was reinforced by reactionary religious elements. After all, in its early centuries the Islamic world had been curious and almost obsessive in its thirst for the learning of other civilizations, including technological knowledge. Moreover, new ideas could have emerged under the guise of exegesis.

A different way of looking at the problem was formulated by Ayres ([1944] 1962), who distinguished between the dynamic forces of technology and the conservative forces of ceremony and ritual. These two forces oppose each other in dialectical fashion, and what is required for technological creativity is the right blend of accumulated knowledge of past generations and the ability to shed the stifling burden of past institutions. Ayres speculated that this blend existed in "frontier" societies such as medieval Europe or the nineteenthcentury United States.

Beyond the basic assumptions in each society, the communicability of ideas and experiences was of importance. Europe always had a lingua franca, first Latin, then French-as did the Islamic and Chinese worlds. But beyond the language, trade, and communications that allowed information to flow (in the form of letters and published books), there were shared standards of verifiability and applicability, derived from a common epistemological heritage. A certain methodology accepted by all is necessary, so that results achieved by one scientist or engineer can he accepted by others without having to duplicate everything. The scientific world of Renaissance Europe was truly cosmopolitan, and as we have seen, many of the technological successes of the Industrial Revolution were cooperative international efforts.

## DEMOGRAPHIC FACTORS

One factor that has received support from a small but highly articulate group in recent years is the effect of population change on technological progress. The most influential spokesperson for this approach has been Boserup (1981), who points out correctly that the distinction between invention and the adaptation and adoption of existing technique is blurred. Her main point is that population pressure leads to shifts to more labor-intensive techniques, which will offset and possibly nullify the effects of diminishing returns on income and output per capita. Some of the phenomena discussed in Part 11, particularly in agriculture, may well be described by such a factor-substitution process. But it is also clear that most technological advances involved innovations that saved labor as well as other factors, and were no more due to the pressure of labor on land than the other way around. If Boserup is right and population growth leads to landand capital-saving changes in technology, population decline should be equally conducive to technological change. Mechanization and the machine are by their very nature intended to save labor more than other factors. Whether such factor price-induced biases are confirmed by the available data remains an open question. Boserup's evidence is drawn almost exclusively from agriculture and is often inconclusive. 30 In any event, such theories cannot deal with many of the processes I have described. How could the invention of the telescope, the full-rigged ship, or the knitting frame he explained by population change?

Boserup hints at, but does not fully develop, a second possible link between population growth and technological change. She points out that population density determined the size of the urban sector, and that high urbanization led to externalities in the development of transportation technology. One could well use this idea to develop a full-blown model of scale economies in technological change, as Simon (1983) has done. Several elements of this model make sense. The size of the population determines the supply of potential inventors (though the ratio of actual to potential inventors may be the more important variable here). A larger population creates a larger market for the improved or cheaper good, but this source of scale economies seems soon exhausted for most products: it hardly natters whether one has half 'a million or five million potential customers for a new product. Greater population size will often imply a finer division of' labor and regional specialization. Although these effects might be indirectly associated with technological progress properly, their primary effect is through Smithian growth and not through changes in knowledge. A finer division of labor is often asserted to have strong technological effects as well, but these effects are rarely hacked up with evidence (for a recent example, see Persson, 1988). Economies of agglomeration may have been important.. Inventors interact with and learn from each other, so that larger units with good internal communications would be more conducive to the development of useful ideas that work. Boserup argues that cities played a crucial role in technology outside agriculture and mining. Urbanization may not have been a necessary or a sufficient condition, but from about 1200 on, many of Europe's technological advances increasingly emanated from cities. In towns, greater occupational specialization allowed potential inventors to focus on specific soluble problems. The clockmakers, shipwrights, and specialized metalworkers were largely an urban class. Yet, as we have seen, the urban environment also fostered groups who stood to lose from technological change and tried to thwart it. Craft guilds, originally often the promotors of new techniques, became after 1500 increasingly a conservative force. Moreover, the importance of agriculture and mining, and the rural location of most good waterpower sites limited the actual importance of cities in this regard before the Industrial Revolution.

An original theory connecting population, the physical environment, and the rate of technological change has been proposed by Wilkinson (1973). In this argument, based largely on anthropological evidence, technological change occurs when the ecological equilibrium between population and resources is disturbed. When population growth occurs, maintains Wilkinson, "society will try to find ways of developing its technology to increase the yield from its environment" (ibid., p. 56). Additional power sources, for instance, were "necessary responses to increasingly difficult subsistence situations." The British Industrial Revolution, in his view, was the result of acute resource shortages resulting from the resurgence in population growth in the last third of the eighteenth century (p. 113). The historical evidence simply does not support his interpretations. Britain, a net exporter of agricultural goods until late in the eighteenth century, cannot he said to have been suffering from an acute land shortage. The timber famine, on which Wilkinson bases his argument, never existed, as we have seen. A large proportion of the technological innovations discussed earlier, from the mechanical clock to the marine chronometer, simply had nothing to do with ecological pressures and occurred in societies in which population was in fact more or less stagnant. Above all, Wilkinson fails to explain why in some cases population growth led to matching technological advances that prevented a Malthusian disaster, whereas in others overpopulation led to such disasters.

In what follows, three comparative examples-the growth of technological change in the medieval world compared to classical antiquity; the growth of European technology in the late Middle Ages, Renaissance, and baroque periods, compared with the technological stagnation in China; and the success of Britain as the cradle of the greatest example of technological change of all times, the Industrial Revolution-will illustrate some of the factors affecting technological change.