# CHAPTER EIGHT

## Classical and Medieval Technology

Why did classical society, with its indisputable intellectual superiority, achieve so little by way of technological innovation compared to the crude and illiterate peasants of medieval Europe? To start with, the slowness of technological progress of classical society should not be equated to, or even associated with, economic backwardness or poverty. We know very little about living standards in classical times, but there is no evidence that they were lower than in the Middle Ages or in the early modern period in Europe. Smithian growth, supported by the convenient location of the centers of gravity of classical civilization around the Mediterranean, and by their relative cultural and later political unity, could provide improved living standards. Moreover, technological progress in the West (lid not inevitably lead to permanently higher living standards, because population growth often took the place of increased consumption of goods and services. The best we can do is to note that if' classical society had experienced more technological progress, it could have enjoyed a higher living standard than it did.

Nonetheless, in view of the striking-contrast in the technological creativity of Graeco-Roman and medieval societies, there is something to be explained. It is clear that no single explanation will do, and that the picture is likely to remain blurry. But we can quickly dispose of a few hypotheses. To start with, the notion that somehow the Romans and Greeks attained the level of technology they needed and that no pressure existed to improve is unconvincing.' As Lee (1973, p. 77) notes, the Romans clearly could have made good use of a ship that would sail better to windward. For all their genius in physics and mathematics, the Greeks never improved their agricultural tools, and the Hellenistic astronomers never learned to apply their clever astronomical instruments to down-to-earth uses such as orientation at sea. The inefficient harnessing of horses, the tardy adoption of waterpower, and the backwardness of Roman metallurgy reveal the ancients' weakness on two important technological fronts: energy and materials.

Furthermore, the argument that the physical geography of the Mediterranean environment was not conducive to technological change will not get us very far. True, timber and running water, the building blocks of medieval technology, are comparatively scarce in southern Europe, though wood was certainly more abundant in the Mediterranean area in classical times than it is today. After Julius Caesar, most of western Europe was under Roman control and the empire used resources from Spanish silver to Cornish tin. Moreover, Mediterranean geography as such was not antithetical to technological progress. As we have seen, much of the technological change in medieval and Renaissance Europe originated in Italy and the Mediterranean region.

Another view holds slavery directly responsible for the slowness of technological change. Most slave societies we know of (ancient Egypt was a possible exception) were not particularly conducive to innovation. But then, neither were most nonslave societies. The argument raised by some (e.g., Lilley, 1965) that slaves were simply cheaper than machines seems hollow. It is incorrect to suppose that slave labor is substantially cheaper than "free" labor. True, at times classical civilization was wasteful in its use of slave labor, as in the use of slaves in the processing of lead ore, in which mortality was shockingly high. Yet slaves had to be fed, housed, clothed, and eventually replaced. Examination of the evidence for Roman slavery suggests that the history of slavery seems it-relevant in explaining technological development, and it seems difficult to find a connection between the availability of labor and attempts to conserve it (MacMullen, 1988, p. 18). The existence of slavery can hardly explain the failure to use horses appropriately, the primitive level of metallurgical technique, or the clumsy construction of ships in antiquity.

Was slavery responsible for the low esteem in which practical technology was held? It probably exacerbated it somewhat, but it seems unlikely to have been the sole factor. Early Greek philosophy, Ionian and Pythagorean, carried a distinct pragmatic flavor, only to be superseded by a "divorce between science and philosophy on the one hand and the productive processes on the other" (Finley, 1965, p. 33). This change seems to coincide approximately with the expansion of slavery in ancient Greece (fifth century B.C.).2 Some slaves, however, were educated. Seneca pointed out that most inventions of his time were naturally the work of slaves, as only slaves were interested in such things (cited in Klemm, 1964, p. 23). Slaves occupied positions of management and responsibility. Frontinus, the supervisor of the Roman water supply, was assisted by slave architects, and the sons of freedmen often rose rapidly into the ruling class (Finley, 1973, p. 77). Outside Italy, in any event, slaves were used largely for domestic services by urban elites, rather than for field work or manufacturing.

Yet dismissing slavery altogether as a factor seems premature. Technological change depends on the incentive structure of production. Almost by necessity, slavery implied a relationship of coercion between labor and management. The introduction of new techniques in hierarchical structures requires cooperation between the factors of production. New ideas may come from above or below, but unless management is willing to accept and reward new technical ideas from below, they will come to naught; unless the monitoring of labor is very tight, workers will be able to sabotage ideas implemented from above. Moreover, because the incentive structure for slaves is usually based on punishment rather than rewards, slave labor tends to be simple and routinized (Fenoaltea, 1984). The advantage of routinized and simple tasks is that such tasks reduce the cost of monitoring the workers. Such routinization tended to ossify technology. If slavery dominates the labor market, skilled labor will be in short supply, and it is plausible that a scarcity of technically trained workers makes deviations from the technical status quo more difficult. All the same, there is little evidence that in the ancient world slaves were in any sense less skilled or productive than free workers, or were necessarily at the bottom of the labor hierarchy. Moreover, during the later centuries of the Roman Empire, slavery declined and most of the labor force consisted not of slaves but of free peasants, urban laborers, and craftsmen, sailors, merchants, and so on. If the hierarchical structure of slavery inhibited technological change, why was the free sector not more successful in developing new techniques?

With the decline of slavery during the later empire, other institutions emerged that may have had something to do with the decline of' technological creativity. In an attempt to buy stability and tranquility at the expense of long-term progress, the reforms of Diocletian and Constantine (fourth century A.D.) tied many workers to the occupations of their fathers. Although never as watertight as the Indian caste system, an ascriptive hierarchy in which economic and social status were inherited rather than achieved would naturally inhibit technological progress. De Camp (1963, p. 280) deems these reforms "fatal to technological progress," and asks rhetorically, "what baker's son will fool around with an idea for a bicycle when he is compelled to make bread all his life willy-nilly?" Yet enforcement of these decrees must have slackened as the western

Empire disintegrated, and the disappearance of central authority in the Middle Ages meant precisely that such draconian measures increasingly remained a (lead letter.

It is often argued that slavery reduced the economic prestige of manual labor and deepened the chasm between the educated and the productive class. As Lee (1973) points out, classical antiquity was not inherently different in this from other civilizations, except perhaps in degree. The channels linking the upper classes and the working classes have always been narrow and easily clogged; in antiquity they barely existed. Intellectuals were discouraged by the ruling hierarchy of values from making their ideas useful. In a famous passage, Plutarch praised Archimedes for "regarding mechanical occupations and every art that ministers to needs as ignoble or vulgar, he directed his own ambition solely to those studies the beauty and subtlety of' which are unadulterated by necessity." This statement tells us perhaps more about Plutarch than about Archimedes. Aristotle wrote in his Politics that "no man can practice virtue who is living the life of a mechanic or laborer." The engineering handbook Mechanika is attributed to him, but was probably written by someone else. Many classical scholars have noted the abstract and detached nature of Greek science, where experiments were unimportant because of the presumed separation between abstract reality and its manifestation in the real worl(1.' Classical natura philosophy submitted that the natural world could be understood by rational principles, but the insights were their own reward. Science, when it stooped down to the real world, either created toys and gimmicks for the rich and famous, or confined itself to classification and taxonomy. The technological barrenness of classical natural philosophy must be contrasted with the practical and applied bent that slowly surfaced in medieval science.4

The educated classes of the Roman Empire have come in for even more severe criticism. One recent author (Oleson, 1984, p. 405) has argued that "the typical Roman intellectual and aristocrat, like a child incapable of extensive analysis of his data . . . hedonistic in his dislike of pain, change, or risk, wandered through a dreamlike haze until the opportunity for progresshowever limited-had been lost." This may be an overstatement, but technological progress does require an intellectual and psychological commitment. Few elites through history have satisfied these conditions.

One difference between the agrarian economies of feudal Europe and the economies that preceded them is that the medieval landlords left a considerable portion of the land to their peasants to till as they saw fit. Once the peasant had paid his dues in goods, labor services, and (later) money, he was free to allocate his own labor and that of his family as he saw fit, subject, of course, to the constraints that the village community imposed. This freedom, however limited, meant that the cultivator himself reaped some of the fruits of improved cultivation techniques. To be sure, attempts toward improved cultivation had to face the greed of lord and priest, as well as the inertia imposed upon each cultivator by the quasi-cooperative nature of medieval farming, in which many technical decisions were made jointly by the village community. These long odds notwithstanding, from about 900 A.D. on medieval peasants succeeded remarkably well in improving their techniques, aided by favorable climatic changes that occurred at about this time. It is significant to recall that one of the most important advances in medieval agriculture-the substitution of horses for oxen in haulage-was more pronounced in peasant agriculture than in demesne (landlord-operated) farming (Langdon, 1986, p. 255).

The medieval situation contrasts with that of the classical world as described by Hodges (1970, pp. 179-80), who blames management rather than labor for the technological stagnation of the classical world. In this view, day-to-day management of' workshops and farms was divorced from ownership, and managers were often members of a "very mediocre and often dishonest class," who behaved like bureaucrats, settling into a routine and doing as little as they could to upset the quiet life. Columella, a Roman writer living in the first century A.D., complained in his De Re Rustica that when a rich man bought a farm, he selected from his entourage "the most enfeebled in years and vigor . . . disregarding the fact that this particular job demands not only knowledge, but the liveliness of a man in his prime . . . to cope with its hardships" (reprinted in K. D. White, 1977, pp. 2021). K. D. White himself notes with some astonishment that the great landowners, who in his opinion alone possessed the resources to initiate technological improvements, did little to increase productivity or reduce labor costs even in the face of an increasing shortage of labor (White, 1975, p. 221). This explanation does not apply to public enterprise. Engineers and architects engaged in public projects were under heavy pressure to succeed and enhance the prestige and political standing of their employers. Why did this not happen in the private sector? The competitive process must have worked to some extent in the classical world, in which the market economy was of central importance. The real question is, did competition work well enough to ensure the survival of only the most efficient? And if so, did the competitive process extend to the market for technological ideas?

No simple monocausal theory can explain a thousand years of history. The difficulty is that the weakness of classical civilization was in part its inability to generate altogether new technologies (e.g., horse harnesses, high-quality iron, the mechanical crank, hydraulic oil presses), and in part its unwillingness or inability to find new and imaginative economic applications for the new ideas it did generate. The limited use of the water mill, and the difficulties the Romans had in rigging their sailing ships efficiently, illustrate the slowness with which technology progressed in Roman society. The importance of political centralization obviously increased over time as the Roman Empire grew more powerful. The empire biased the direction of technological change toward the public sector, thus encouraging trade and through it Smithian growth, as well as public sector technologies such as hydraulic engineering and roadbuilding, but at the expense of technological progress in the private sector.

It is often maintained that the empire stressed authority and conformism, at least during the later periods. By Romanizing the upper classes of the barbaric peoples they conquered, the Romans imposed certain common values. These values tended to stress distinctly noneconomic achievements: military, intellectual, administrative, and artistic success were appreciated more than production. Our limited knowledge of classical technology is in part symptomatic of the attitudes of intellectuals of the time. Classical writers rarely concerned themselves with the mundane details of technology; history, poetry, philosophy, and politics occupied them. A distinction should be made between the Greeks on the one hand, and the Hellenists and Romans on the other in this respect. Hellenistic and Roman engineers were more willing than the Greeks to apply the abstract knowledge generated by mathematicians. They used mechanics in the design of war machines and geometry in hydraulic engineering and the layout of towns. Hellenistic and Roman authors were also more willing to write about technical matters.' Yet when these subjects were discussed, it was usually incidental to other matters; by the second century A.D. discussion of technical issues had become rare. As I have stressed earlier, such a chasm between the educated and literate classes on the one hand, and the working portions of the population on the other was in itself damaging.

In a more pluralistic world this ranking of priorities might have been challenged, but as the empire became more powerful and its culture more influential, it became less pluralistic, and for centuries no effective center competed with Rome for power and influence. True, the values we are observing were upper-class values, and may not have filtered down to the masses actually involved in production. In some ways the Roman Empire resembled the Soviet Union today in its conflict between political centralization and technological change. The difference is that the Soviet bloc today is eager to borrow from the West the technological progress it cannot generate itself; Greece and Rome seem to have had little interest in alien technologies.

The influence of the Roman hierarchy of values on non-Romans may provide us with a clue to the comparative technological performance of imperial Rome and the medieval Occident. As I have noted, the Celts were in some respects more creative than the Greeks and Romans. As they fell tinder Roman influence, however, the elites of Celtic society tended to imitate Roman culture and adopt Roman values. Schools taught Latin and classical literature, and Celts found careers in the Roman bureaucracy and army. When the empire split into two, the Roman heritage in the West was increasingly diluted by Celtic and Germanic elements, which may well have given technological creativity a new lease on life. The purer form of classical civilization survived in Byzantium, whose record of technological progress is undistinguished.

The Romans and"the Greeks were comparatively tolerant of de viants and people who believed in other Gods. Such tolerance is in itself a desirable characteristic for the diffusion of new ideas. GraecoRoman religion was, however, heavily animistic and anthropomorphic, and possibly discouraged substantial insults against the environment. Religions that regarded nature as a personal force implied that tinkering with its rules was dangerous and sinful. True, the desire to prevail over the forces of nature lies deep in the human soul, and, as all ancient mythologies show, was shared by pagans. But with the desire came deep-seated fears and guilt feelings that impeded technological progress. The myth of Prometheus, the quintessential manipulator of nature, illustrates this frame of mind well: although the use of fire, indispensable to survival, was accepted, the guilt feeling associated with controlling something that was properly the domain of the Gods was reflected in the awful punishment meted out to Prometheus and the banes of Pandora's box. Moreover, animism, as Lewis Mumford pointed out half a century ago, is the mortal enemy of technological change. If every stream, every tree, every patch of' land is populated by spirits, the environment remains capricious, unpredictable, and uncontrollable. Any attempt to alter it may raise the awesome ire not only of Zeus but of small-time local deities as well. To be sure, the educated philosophers and playwrights with whose work and thinking we are familiar, did not take GraecoRoman religion very seriously. But the uneducated classes, who were actually involved in production and whose beliefs thus matter a great deal, probably continued to believe in these Gods for centuries after the zenith of Greek philosophy.

Such feelings slowly started to dissipate before the advent of Christianity. Over the centuries the influence of pagan religion diminished, challenged by various deistic philosophies. The Stoic philosophers taught that the rational design of the world includes provision for human activities. People, in this view, were the natural caretakers of the world, and rational human efforts make the earth more beautiful and more serviceable for mankind O. D. Hughes, 1975, p. 97). Classical writers such as Pliny and Galen reflect more anthropocentric attitudes. During the later empire, however, belief in the supernatural and mysticism became more influential, and Stoicism declined. Astrology and magic were central to the elaborate rituals of secretive and conspiratorial sects that acquired increasing influence on the religious scene for centuries. Many of these sects were offshoots of Oriental religions. Mysticism and superstition led to a decline in Roman science and philosophy, and it seems logical that they also affected technology. Yet the relationship between classical science and technology was always tenuous, and just as the flourishing of Hellenistic science had few favorable effects on pro duction methods, its decline (lid not itself produce technological stagnation.

Medieval Christianity, as it eventually evolved, reinforced these tendencies. It is absurd to argue that Christianity in its original form was favorable to technological progress. In some views, it was little more than the most successful of these Oriental cults. During its first five or six centuries it had its share of mysticism, asceticism, rejection of material life and wealth, and outright condemnation of labor and all worldly activity.' Yet Western Christianity contained the seeds of future technological progress. Here Lynn White (1978, pp. 217-53) and others have stressed that the way people perceived their relationship with nature and with their creator, and which actions were deemed virtuous and which sinful, determined their technological activism. As White sees it, Western Christianity increasingly developed a view of a rational and calculating God, the designer of a huge intricate mechanism called the Creation, who "commands than to rule the world and to help to fulfill the divine will in it as a creative cooperator with hirn." Christian beliefs began to take it as axiomatic that nature has no reason for existence save to serve mankind. Benz (1966, p. 124), from whom White borrowed the original insight of 'a connection between Christianity and technology, argued that in the technologically creative but deeply religious societies of early medieval Europe, the belief gradually took root that technological efforts were justified by the destiny of man as the image of God and his fellow worker.

Some scholars feel that Benz and White may have overstated the case.7 To be sure, there was always a view in the Latin church that took a more moderate position, advocating a harmonious relationship with the environment and holding mankind responsible for the stewardship of nature (Ovitt, 1986; 1987, pp. 85-87). St. Francis of Assisi rebelled against the exploitation of nature. The Latin church did not always speak with one voice, and the changes that Benz and White discerned were long in the making and encountered stiff resistance, both in Christian dogma and in popular attitudes. But even if White has overstated the case somewhat, a comparison with other religions reveals the importance of Western Christianity in the emergence of Western technology.

Proving causality here is, of course, impossible. It is plausible that the Christian attitudes toward nature were as much a compromise with existing techniques as their cause. But the very essence of technological change is such that some mental change had to occur first. As I have stressed above, invention of any kind is a game against nature, and before anyone undertakes to play such a game certain mental conditions have to he satisfied. Most importantly, the player must have some idea of the nature of the game played and the payoff involved. If nature is perceived as a hostile and jealous adversary, or if the only payoff that really matters is the salvation of the soul, then there seems little point in playing the game at all. But if the universe is subject to logical, mechanical forces that can be controlled and manipulated in ways that do not involve committing a sin, and if it becomes clear that the payoff is a standard of living above the very minimum of subsistence, the first condition necessary for the beginning of technological progress is fulfilled. There is some dispute as to when attitudes began to change. Lynn White (1978, p. 79) would trace the change in attitudes to the centuries before 1000 A.D., while Ovitt (1987, p. 44) is of the opinion that Western values before 1 100 A.D. were static and unreceptive to change. Such controversies are hard to settle because the evidence on attitudes and mentality is vague. It seems hard to imagine that the many innovations before 1100 A.D. were not preceded by any change in outlook even if official Church doctrine lagged behind. Whatever its origins, the belief in a controllable, mechanistic universe in which human beings may exploit the laws of nature for economic purposes, was growing; by the end of the Middle Ages, it had triumphed. Thomas Aquinas recognized that man, created in God's image, held power over the natural world. In the later Middle Ages, God is increasingly depicted as an engineer or an architect in technological terms. Thus, in the fourteenth century Nicole Oresme, bishop of Lisieux, depicted God as having started the world the way a man starts it watch, winding it up and then letting it run on its own (Benz, 1966, p. 252). Pacey (1975) has emphasized that in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, religion led to the building of cathedrals, which had considerable technological spillover effects. Moreover, he points out, innovation is above all an imaginative act, and if medieval religion did anything, it stimulated the imagination. In this view, much of the advanced technology in the Middle Ages was thus the result of noneconomic causes (ibid., pp. 85-86). Pacey may well be right that the Baconian notion, according to which the final objective of all knowledge was not the understanding of the world but its manipulation, was the end result, rather than the beginning, of an intellectual tradition. I see no way, however, in which this hypothesis can be tested. It is beyond doubt that whatever the psychological origins of the spinning wheel, the fully rigged ship, and cast iron, their economic consequences were profound.

A good example of a change in mentality that favored technological progress in the West concerns the attitude of "if God had wanted man to fly, he would have given him wings," enshrined in the legend of Daedalus and cited by no less an authority than Landes (1969, p. 24) as a strong current in Christianity. The rebellion against this view came from within the Church. It is well known that the famous Franciscan friar Roger Bacon wrote prophetic essays in the thirteenth century envisaging airplanes, steamships, and automobiles. It is less well known that. more than two centuries earlier another monk, Eilmer of Malmesbury, directly defied human winglessness by jumping off a tower in a self-made glider. The ill-fated monk broke his legs and was lame ever after. Yet it is significant that Eilmer did not feel he had committed any sin by trying to fly, but blamed his misfortune on his having failed to put a tail on the glider (Lynn White, 1978, pp. 59-73). Eilmer's flight was more than merely the reckless game of a bored eccentric. As White shows, the depiction of Christ's ascension to heaven, at first described as a majestic rise often carried by angels, is pictured in the early Middle Ages increasingly as "almost jet-propelled, zooming heavenward so fast that only his feet appear at the top of the picture, while the garments of his astounded disciples flutter in the air currents produced by his rocketing ascent" (ibid., p. 66).

It is not a coincidence that much of the early development of technology was associated with the regular clergy, i.e., monks. Much has been made of the importance of monastic orders in the emergence of Western technology. The connection between the strict daily schedule that required monks to know the time with some accuracy and the development of the weight-driven clock is well known (see Landes, 1983, pp. 61-70 for a restatement and survey of the literature). But the monastic orders, or at least some of them, went beyond their immediate needs and established a sound if narrow bridge between the educated and the productive classes. In the fourth and fifth centuries, a belief that productive labor was virtuous started to take root. In about 530 A.D., St.

Benedict, the founder of the Bene dictine order, wrote the Benedictine Rule, which earned him the unlikely accolade of being "probably the pivotal figure in the history of labor" (Lynn White, 1968, p. 63). White proposes to explain medieval technology by emphasizing the respect for work and production that the Benedictines were taught. Idleness is the enemy of the soul and to labor is to pray, taught St. Benedict. The transition in attitudes was far from abrupt: at first labor was less a positive virtue than a recommended form of penitence (LeGoff, 1980, pp. 107-21). Eventually, "the concept of penitential labor was supplanted by the idea of labor as a positive means to salvation" (ibid., p. 115). Because monks belonged to the educated classes-indeed were the educated classes for centuries-there is some basis for White's belief that "for the first time the practical and the theoretical were embodied in the same individual . . . the 'monk was the first intellectual to get dirt under his fingernails" (Lynn White, 1968, p. 65). By establishing the moral acceptability of physical labor and production, the Benedictine Rule was the first challenge to the classical notion that identified work with depravity. Benedictine monks had enormous influence on medieval life, playing a major role in education, in agriculture, in land reclamation, and in the techniques of arts and crafts." "The Benedictines established an ethic that would, by the twelfth century, accept productivity and wealth as the natural by-products of labor," writes Ovitt (1986). With time, the example set by the regular clergy spilled over to other writers.\`-' When the Benedictine order became rich and lax in its ascetism, the purist flame was carried on by the Cistercian monks. It took a very long time before labor was secularized, to use Ovitt's term, that is, before the virtuousness of economic production was assessed by Church doctrine in terms of its output rather than in terms of the effects labor had on the virtuousness of the laborer's soul. But that can hardly have mattered a great deal. The main point about producing goods cheaper and better is that they satisfy economic demand, which in the Middle Ages primarily meant satisfying basic physical needs. Better and more shelter, food, clothing, energy, and transport were their own reward.

Ironically, the bestowing of some measure of respectability on physical work led eventually to its replacement. As White put it, "The goal of labor is to end labor." Only after intelligent and educated people roll up their sleeves and engage in physical labor will they get inspirations concerning how human muscles and sweat can be replaced by machines. Mechanical arts, although still far from prestigious, achieved a status of virtue hitherto unknown. The Victorine monks in Paris in the twelfth century included rechanica in their scheme of useful knowledge, challenging no less an authority than St. Augustine in the process. In the West, first organs, then clocks, became part of the religious ritual: machinery was no longer sinful. The Cistercian monks, who devoted every monastery to the Holy Virgin, did not fear that the creak of waterwheels would offend her: some of their abbeys had four or five mills. The "cultural climate," to use White's term, that the Latin church created in the West, helped transform the environment in which technological change operated. In this cultural climate artisans and scholars began to find a common ground and establish communications. As a result, people involved in technology began to write. 'l'heophilus, the author of the first important surviving medieval text on technology, wrote in the 1120s. Villard cfe Honnecourt, who lived in the early thirteenth century, left a set of designs probably intended for teaching. In the later Middle Ages and the Renaissance, the literate and working classes were no longer totally disjoint, and the boundaries between the two began to break down. The importance of contact between the educated and the producing classes for technological progress seems too obvious to need additional emphasis.

The thirteenth and fourteenth centuries gave rise to craftsmenscholars, such as Roger Bacon and Richard of Wallingford. With the advent of the printing press and the custom of writing in the vernacular instead of in Latin, the opportunities for people with technological knowledge to communicate with others grew rapidly. The great engineering and medical treatises of the Renaissance were the culmination of a tremendous change that occurred in Europe. The roots of this change are by now widely understood to be medieval, though once again the dating is a matter of dispute.

Cultural environment and mentahte cannot by themselves account for the spectacular expansion of medieval technology. We must come to grips, for instance, with the failure of the Byzantine part of Christianity to generate anything like what the West produced. Blaming the differences on the more contemplative and mystical bend of Eastern monasticism, as Lynn White does, may seem special pleading, for it fails to explain the fact that other Judeo-Christian religions eventually developed characteristics like xenophobia and conservatism that stifled technological creativity.

In its original form Islam was as receptive to technological prog ress as Western Christianity, but, as we have seen, it started to become less so around the twelfth century. The great Islamic philosopher and theologian al-Ghazali (Algazel) (1058-1111) concluded that science and technology were incompatible with Islam and attempted to reconcile mysticism with their religion, at a time when Western theologians were making Christianity more rational and compatible with classical science. Once more, correlation does not prove causality here. But it is telling, for example, that Moslem captains in the Arabian Sea whose dhows had trapezoid lugsails that could be maneuvered against the wind, preferred nonetheless to wait for the monsoons. According to an old Arab proverb, "No one but a madman or a Christian would sail to windward" (Landstrom, 1961, p. 213).

One difference between East and West, heavily emphasized in the writings of economic historians, was that the West was politically fragmented between more or less autonomous units that competed for survival, wealth, and power. Long before the states system emerged, Europe was a pluralistic and diverse society in which many political units jealously guarded their independence from each other. Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986, pp. 60-62) link European pluralism to feudalism, arguing that feudalism ensured the political decentralization needed for pluralism. The demise of feudalism and the rise of the state did not destroy pluralism in Europe (though it might well have endangered it for a while, as, for example, when Philip 11 tried to stamp out heretical movements in the Netherlands). In other places (such as Japan) feudalism did little for technological creativity, whether it led to pluralism or not.

The struggle for survival guaranteed that in the long run rulers could not afford to be hostile to changes that increased the economic power of their realm because of the real danger that an innovation or innovator would emigrate to benefit a rival. Technological improvements made abroad were pursued and imitated, foreign artisans were tempted and bribed to immigrate. Regimes that did not follow this course, such as Spain and the Ottoman Empire, fell behind and lost their economic and political power. Comparatively tolerant states, such as England and the Netherlands, became the cutting edge of economic progress and acquired political influence out of all proportion to the size of their populations. Competition between states stimulated innovative activity directly through government intervention. States following mercantilist policies in seventeenthand eighteenth-century Europe offered prizes to inventors who solved technical problems and enticed foreign engineers and craftsmen to immigrate to their countries. Thus, competition among the different states was important not only for the creation of new techniques but also for the absorption and diffusion of ideas generated elsewhere. This, of course, was precisely where classical civilization was weakest.

The economist's intuition frequently leads to a comparison of the political fragmentation of Europe with the competitive market model. Because economic competition leads to efficiency, political competition is assumed to do the same. The analogy is misleading because economic competition is usually assumed to be a costless mechanism, whereas political competition leads to expensive military buildups and destructive warfare. Where political fragmentation may have been decisive is in allowing Europe to escape the trap of what I shall call Cardwell's Law. Cardwell (1972, p. 210) has pointed out. that "no nation has been (technologically) very creative for more than an historically short period."'(' As stated, Cardwell's Law is no more than an empirical regularity, and a crude one at that. The definition of a "nation," let alone that of a "short" period, is ambigious. What is more, Cardwell gives us no inkling as to the possible economic and social reasons his law might be true. Yet if we accept it as an empirical regularity, Europe's advantage becomes clear. Europe always consisted of many nations. The technological center of gravity of Europe moved over the centuries, residing at various times in Italy, southern Germany, the Netherlands, France, England, and again in Germany. Political fragmentation did not inhibit the flow of information from technological leaders to followers in Europe, and so it came to pass that the technology used in Europe always eventually settled on the best-practice technique in use regardless of where it had been invented. Jones (1981, p. 124) put it eloquently: "Books might be burned and scientists tried by the church, machinery might be smashed by mobs, entrepreneurs banished and investors expropriated by governments, but Europe as a whole did not experience technological regression. The multi-cell system possessed a built-in ability to replace its local losses . . . and was more than the sum of its parts." Furthermore, political pluralism in Europe-first under feudalism and later under dynastic states-made nonconformist thought and behavior more acceptable than it was in large empires, even if it was not always easy. In medieval and Renaissance Europe, scientists, engineers, philosophers, and religious nonconformists challenged conventional wisdom, taking advantage of the states system to protect themselves against reactionary authorities.

The price that Europe paid for political fragmentation was, of course, war. As I have argued earlier, war's gross positive effects on technological progress were limited, and its net effects, taking into account both benefits and costs, were surely negative. Political competition did not inevitably lead to war any more than competition between firms inevitably leads to illegal actions between them. Perhaps the best of" all possible worlds was one of peaceful threats without major conflagrations, as characterized Europe between Waterloo and Serajevo. Insofar as war accompanied political fragmentation, it was a price paid, not a benefit enjoyed. In any case, political unification did not necessarily mean peace, as Chinese history suggests.

One of the more perplexing dilemmas confronting the historian interested in the political economy of technological change is that the effect of political competition on technological progress is inherently ambiguous. Nations that worry about their political standing in the world are more likely to be subject to the "Sputnik effect," the discovery that a society has fallen behind in technological terms and is consequently threatened. From Peter the Greats Russia to

Meiji Japan to the United States after the launching of the first Soviet satellite, nations have embarked on efforts to advance the techniques they employed primarily for political reasons. Some measure of competition between states is therefore healthy for technological progress. Unlike economic competition, however, political competition may degenerate into military expansion, war, and destruction, which negate any possible beneficial effects of political competition. There is thus clearly a subtle optimum point between the advantages and the hazards of competition between states.

Political fragmentation was thus not a sufficient condition for technological progress. In some cases (the city-states of ancient Greece, Islamic Spain, and the fragmented political units of medieval India come to mind) political decentralization led to more destruction than innovation. As in microeconomic theory, then, competition in and of itself does not guarantee efficiency. Nor was pluralism a sine qua non, since some progress obviously did occur within imperial Rome and imperial China. And yet in Europe, provided the units were able to preserve their independence and were not crushed by the economic burdens of defense, political fragmentation guaranteed that no single decision maker could turn off the lights, that the capriciousness or piety of no single ruler could prevent technological advances and the economic growth they brought.