CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo, Delhi, Mexico City Cambridge University Press The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York www.cambridge.org Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521357265 ## © Cambridge University Press 1986 This publicationis in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press. First published 1986 First paperback edition 1988 11th printing 2013 ## Printed and bound in the United Kingdom by the MPG Books Group Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication data Main entry under title: The social life of things. Includes index. 1. Commerce – Social aspects – Addresses, essays, lectures. 2. Economic anthropology – Addresses, essays, lectures. 3. Commerce – History – Addresses, essays, lectures. I. Appadurai, Arjun. 1949– GN450.S63 1986 360'.3 86-19529 British Library Cataloguing in Publication data The social life of things: commodities in cultural perspective. 1. Economic anthropology 2. Raw materials I. Appadurai, Arjun 306′.3 GN450 ISBN 978-0-521-35726-5 Paperback Cambridge University Press has no responsiblity for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for external or third party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.