## Contributors ARJUN APPADURAI is Associate Professor of Anthropology and South Asian Studies at the University of Pennsylvania. He is the author of Worship and Conflict Under Colonial Rule (1981). C. A. BAYLY is Fellow of St. Catharine's College, University of Cambridge, and Smuts Reader in Commonwealth Studies. He has published The Local Roots of Indian Politics: Allahabad, 1880–1920 (1975) and Rulers, Townsmen and Bazaars: North Indian Society in the Age of British Expansion, 1770–1870 (1983). LEE V. CASSANELLI teaches in the Department of History at the University of Pennsylvania. He is the author of The Shaping of Somali Society: Reconstructing the History of a Pastoral People (1982). WILLIAM H. DAVENPORT teaches anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania, where he is also Curator for Oceania at the University Museum. He has done field research in Jamaica and the Solomon Islands and historical research on pre-European Hawaii, and has published extensively on all these areas. PATRICK GEARY is Associate Professor of History at the University of Florida. He is the author of Furta Sacra: Thefts of Relics in the Central Middle Ages (1978) and Aristocracy in Provence: The Rhone Basin at the Dawn of the Carolingian Age (1985). ALFRED GELL teaches social anthropology at the London School of Economics and Political Science. He is the author of Metamorphosis of the Cassowaries: Umeda Society, Language and Ritual (1975). IGOR KOPYTOFF of the Department of Anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania is coeditor (with Suzanne Miers) of Slavery in Africa: Historical and Anthropological Perspectives (1977) and author of Varieties of Witchcraft: The Social Economy of Secret Power (forthcoming). ## Contributors WILLIAM M. REDDY is Assistant Professor of History at Duke University and is the author of The Rise of Market Culture: The Textile Trade and French Society, 1750-1900 (1984). COLIN RENFREW is Disney Professor of Archaeology, University of Cambridge, and Fellow of St. John's College. He is the author of Problems in European Prehistory (1979) and Approaches to Social Archaeology (1984). BRIAN SPOONER teaches in the Department of Anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania. He is the author of Ecology in Development: A Rationale for Three-Dimensional Policy (1984).