## 22. The Question of Validity “A good profession will not represent itself as able to render services outside its demonstrable competence." —American Psychological Association Much of the material in this book, especially that relating to the probing and manipulating of consumers, is based on the findings and insights of motivational analysts, with their mass-psychoanalytical techniques. Some of the conclusions they reach about our behavior are so startling that readers are often justified in wondering just how valid their probing methods are anyhow. In merchandising circles there has been over-acceptance and over-rejection of these methods. Some of the blasts at M.R.—particularly from those with rival persuasion techniques—have been withering. Certain marketers still felt that offering a premium was far more effective in promoting sales than all this hocus pocus about depth. The director of marketing for the Pabst Brewing Company told the Premium Industry Club sadly that “the psychologists have become the oracles of the business. Double-domed professors and crystal gazers are probing the minds of buyers. They are attempting to prove that sales are controlled by the libido or that people buy merchandise because subconsciously they hate their fathers." Actually, he said,“Customers like premiums and like to get something for nothing. There's a little larceny in all of us. ...“ During the mid-fifties many ad men filled the air above their Madison Avenue rookeries with arguments over the question of validity and potency of M.R. Researchers, too, joined in by cannonading each other all through the fall of 1955 and early 1956. The fireworks were touched off by Alfred Politz, who had two years earlier announced himself available for motivational studies but who had built up a very large organization based on more traditional methods. He began by expressing great faith in the value of psychological probing in depth, but added that because of the need for interpreting findings and the fact that M.R. was still in its infancy, “a great deal of pure unadulterated balderdash has been passed off on gullible marketers as scientific gospel."He charged that the motivation analysts were taking the Madison Avenue folks for a ride with their “pseudo science” and were being well received because they offered simple answers and “Madison Avenue doesn't like anything heavy or complicated." Later he charged that some of the M.R. outfits were using as interviewers unemployed actors, not trained scientific workers. And one of his bristling aides contended that “you can't judge from a psychiatrist's couch how a consumer will behave in a dime store." The better, more sensible way to judge, he explained, is to recreate as closely as you can the buying situation. His firm does this by maintaining a “Politz store." The main target of the Politz cannonading was widely assumed to be the mountaintop castle of Ernest Dichter and his fast-growing Institute for Motivational Research. The institute retorted by calling Politz's criticism an “emotional outburst” and added: “It might be of interest to research the motivations of some of the recent heated attacks on motivational research by individuals with vested interests in alternative research techniques." Others in the social science field pointed out that some of the researchers were sometimes prone to oversell themselves—or in a sense to exploit the exploiters. John Dollard, Yale psychologist doing consulting work for industry, chided some of his colleagues by saying that those who promise advertisers “a mild form of omnipotence are well received."In the same breath, however, he stressed that M.R. is not a fad and will not disappear, provided that advertisers and agency people were willing to concentrate on improving its performance. Burleigh Gardner, director of Social Research, made another telling point about the uses being made of M.R. One of the movement's main problems, he said, is the fact “many people make superficial use of it, largely as a talking point for their agency or company. And almost every market-research firm, he said, is quick to say, "We do it." As the controversy over M.R. first became heated in the early fifties the Advertising Research Foundation set up a special Committee on Motivation Research, as I've indicated, to appraise the situation. Wallace H. Wulfeck, the chairman, after surveying many of the ventures into M.R., began taking a middle ground. He said that those who attacked M.R. as “fakery" were just as wrong as those who claimed it worked "miracles." He stressed that M.R. must be approached with caution as it is still experimental, but he seemed completely confident that M.R. techniques, when perfected, would become standard procedures in market research. I will set down here, briefly, some of the more serious criticisms made against M.R. as a valid tool (at least as it has been used) along with evidence indicating its values. Here are four of the major complaints made against M.R. and its practitioners. 1. Overenthusiastic supporters have often implied it is a cure-all for every marketing problem and challenge. Actually, of course, it is false to assume that there is any single or major reason why people buy—or don't buy—a product, A host of factors enter in, such as quality of the product, shelf position, and sheer volume of advertising. In this connection it should be noted that many of the findings of M.R. about a product, while perhaps fascinating, are not particularly useful to marketers. Researcher Albert J. Wood pointed out to the American Marketing Association: "Unless all advertising is to become simply a variation on the themes of the Oedipus complex, the death instinct, or toilet training we must recognize that the motives with which we deal should be the manipulable ones.... The manufacturer has no way of compensating the consumer for the fact he was insufficiently nursed as an infant." (Others might dispute this last assertion by pointing out that some of the products valued for the oral gratification they offer definitely make insufficient nursing in infancy a manipulable motivational factor.) Researchers point out that the intensity of our subconscious motivational influences has a clear bearing on the usefulness of a subconscious factor to a manipulator. As Professor Smith points out: "The fact that a given product is thought of favorably, or regarded as a sex symbol, or reminds respondents of their mother has limited value unless we know something about the intensity of the feeling it creates and whether this feeling is apt to be translated into the desired practical reactions at the consumer level." Most of the analysts themselves when pressed or when talking causally drop remarks indicating their awareness that M.R. is far from being a one-and-only answer, at least as yet. For example: Mr. Cheskin conceded: "Sometimes I think we can go in too deep." The psychological director of a large research firm said: "We still are in the very beginning, with more promise than delivery." The chief psychologist of another research firm cautioned: “You've got to be able to take this thing with a little grain of salt." The research director of an ad agency deeply involved in M.R. (it has made nearly a hundred motivational studies) said: "Motivational research is not the whole answer. In 20 to 30 percent of our investigations we don't find anything useful at all." Even Dr. Dichter and his aides occasionally drop cautionary remarks, as when he said, "M.R. is still far from an exact science"; and an aide pointed out that people make buying decisions on both rational and irrational bases. The market-research director of one of the nation's largest psychological firms said: "Even the best techniques are only adding a little bit to our understanding of why people do what they do." Professor Smith in his book surveying the M.R. field summed up by saying that the best way to look at M.R. is as "a plus factor." 2. Another charge made against some of the motivational analysts is that they have lifted diagnostic tools from clinical psychiatry and applied them to mass behavior without make certain such application is valid. This aspect of M.R. has bothered Dr. Wulfeck, of the Advertising Research Foundation, as much as any other. Some of the clinical techniques such as the Rorschach ink-blot test are not infallible even when used on an individual basis with clinical patients.'There is always room for error at least in interpreting the meaning of a given ink blot, or interpreting an answer given in a sentence-completion test. When conclusions are drawn about mass behavior on the basis of a small sampling of test results there clearly is a chance for error. Individuals vary considerably in their motivational make-up. In the minds of most objective observers the size of the sample used in any given piece of motivational research is crucial. Unfortunately motivational testing is expensive. A good deal of time must be spent by a skilled practitioner with each subject if there is to be a real exploration in depth. Thus there is a temptation to keep the size of the sampling small. As Dr. Wulfeck pointed out in late 1954, however, "The question of the size of sample is of considerable importance." At that time he said that the largest sample he had encountered in the depth approach was two hundred. And he added: "Is that enough?" (Since then Louis Cheskin, of the Color Research Institute, has stated that the smallest sample he uses for a national brand test is six hundred persons.) 3. A further aspect of motivational research that bothers many people is that results depend too much on the brilliance and intuitiveness of the individual practitioner. Little has been achieved as yet in standardizing or validating testing procedures. Dr. Wulfeck's group has, as one of its aims, the determination of the validity or non-validity of various M.R. techniques. One such testing, he advises, has been under way at Columbia University recently, with the help of foundation money. The validity of sentencecompletion tests for M.R. use is being scrutinized. Alas, that was the only attempt being made in 1956 to validate M.R. procedures. Dr. Wulfeck pointed out sadly that while merchandisers spend millions of dollars on campaigns based on M.R. insights it is hard to get companies to support research that merely validates research techniques. “People who have the money to finance this kind of research," he said," are more concerned with the solutions to everyday problems than they are with trying to find ways to improve our methods. Some scientists are disturbed by the fact that projective tests—by their very nature—typically are not subject to statistical proof. They feel more comfortable if they are dealing with a method that gives its answers in terms that can be counted up statistically. The way a person responds to a depth interview, for example, can't possibly be toted up. The same applies to the ink-blot tests. Psychologist William Henry, however, contends that traditional researchers overstress this need for statistical proof. He says: “There are comparatively few quantitative studies that demonstrate statistically the value of either the Rorschach or the T.A.T. (two projective tests). Yet I don't know one clinician—and I know many who have worked with these instruments—who doesn't feel on the basis of his general psychological training that he gets far more reliable information from these tests than he does from those instruments that have the respectability of the statistical psychologists' approval conferred upon them. Some of the depth approaches are more subject to “scientprocedures than others. Mr. Cheskin likes to insist that his probings, based on association and indirect preference tests (where the subjects aren't even aware they are being tested), are more reliable than so-called depth interviews. (His old rival Dr. Dichter was a pioneer of the depth interview.) Cheskin says that the kind of M.R. he uses is “as pure a science as physics, chemistry, or biology." Most of Cheskin's work is with package testing. He pointed out that he tests one factor at a time, such as name, color, shape, images, etc., and only after this tests them all together. And before he even tests a package in the field it is subjected to ocular-measurement lab tests that determine eye movement, visibility, readability. As for the depth interview, he says the person being tested, even though in depth, knows he is being interviewed and so sets up defense mechanisms and rationalizes his answers at least to some extent. Also, he added, the results in depth interviewing depend on the “skill of the interviewer." Actually the skill of the interviewer is not the only area for error. As an executive of the Psychological Corporation pointed out, equally trained research experts can look at the same projective test results and come up with different interpretations. Further, there is evidence that some of the researchers have played fast and loose with their test results. Emmanuel Demby, an executive of Motivation Research Associates, has pointed out that criticism is justified in certain situations. Those he specifically cited were where the findings reported by the researchers are self-serving; of if all the substantiating data on which the judgment is based is not provided to the client; or “if the report is written before all tests are in, as has happened in a number of cases." He, too, added however, that the depth approach to consumer behavior was “a fact of modern life." 4. Finally, it is charged that the findings of the depth probers sometimes are not subjected to objective confirmation by conventional testing methods before they are accepted and applied. The big danger, as one critic put it, is to call “the initial idea a conclusion." Business Week, in its analysis of M.R. procedures, concluded that any study of behavior that “aims at some degree of scientific certainty is likely to have two steps: first, a pilot study——a fast informal survey of the subject to get the feel of it. Second, a rigorous, careful investigation to find out whether the conclusion really stands up, and under just what conditions it is true. For many advertising problems a shrewd suspicion of the facts is plenty good enough. So advertisers motivation studies are likely to stop with the first step." Some of the researchers, it should be added, do rigorously test their M.R. findings by conventional methods before accepting them as fact. One of the pioneer motivational workers, Herta Herzog, director of creative research at the huge McCann-Erickson ad agency, now reaches her conclusions in four stages. First, she uses conventional research methods to spot likely prospects for the product in question. Second, her staff depth-probes three to four hundred of them. Third, the findings of the probing are tested by a more conventional “structured" questionnaire on a large group of people (up to three thousand). Fourth, when ads have been draw up based on the M.R. findings, they are tested on selected consumers in various areas of the United States to see if the M.R.-inspired conclusions are correct. By 1957, the thinking of the most responsible practitioners of motivational research seemed to be that M.R. is most useful as a starting point, or as a clue spotter, and that the findings of M.R should be validated by other methods whenever possible. Even its critics agree that M.R., has an important place in market research at the idea-gathering or hypothesis stage. Some merchandisers contended that even the un-validated ideas and clues the analysts can offer are immensely valuable. Business Week opined: “Any copywriter . .. could produce better ads if he had talked to a dozen or four hundred customers first than if he had contented himself with batting bright ideas around the table at Twenty-One." The research director of a food company who often consults with Ernest Dichter told me he likes to get “Ernst" just talking about a problem such as cake mix. Sometimes this can be as helpful as a formal survey. "If he sparks one good idea, it's worth at least \$2,500 to us," he explained. However, not everyone in the merchandising field accepts Dr. Dichter's findings as infallible, but Tide in a 1955 article stated that even his informed guesses were “brilliant." The president of National Sales Executives,Inc.,likewise pointed out that the findings of the social scientists are valuable in two ways: “First, the probers often come up with answers that, when tried, have worked. Second, even if recommendations haven't panned out exactly as hoped, they have lifted managements out of mental ruts." Perhaps the most compelling evidence that motivation research must be taken seriously, at least by the public being probed and manipulated, is the fact that merchandisers themselves still are taking it very seriously indeed. More and more are basing campaigns on it. Tide stated in its February 26, 1955, issue: "In ten years motivation analysis will be as common as nosecounting. By 1965, if the present trend continues, few national marketers will launch an advertising campaign or introduce a new product without first conducting a thorough study of consumer motivations."This, in fact, can already be said of one of the nation's largest advertising agencies. Every single account now gets a motivational run-through! These same marketers are the kind of people who would abruptly kill off a million-dollar TV program without a qualm if its rating dropped a few points. They would not use M.R. if they had any better tool for persuading us to buy their products (In 1956 survey maker A.C. Nielsen, Jr., revealed a survey finding that in general marketing executives in the past have been right or substantially right only 58 percent of the time!) Executives have concluded that the depth approach, whether they like it or not, can provide serious answers they can't afford to ignore. In late 1954 Printer's Ink asked its Jury of Marketing Opinion what its members thought of motivational research. Sixty-four answered the questionnaire. Of them thirty-two said they were using or have used motivation research. The journal concluded: “Most of those who have tried M.R. like it." As to specific testing methods, here are the number who said they had used each: <table><tr><td>Depth interviews Panel reaction</td><td>27 12</td></tr><tr><td>Group interviews</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>Projective techniques</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Word association</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Thematic apperception</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Attitude tests</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Sociodrama</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Rorschach</td><td>1</td></tr></table> (There seems to be some confusion or duplication in those responses because the Rorschach, for example is one of several projective techniques.) To sum up, while there was considerable argument about various probing techniques there is little argument that the depth approach in general is here to stay. Advertising Age quoted an economics professor at the University of Illinois as stating: "Few today question the value of psychiatry or of psychology in explaining behavior patterns.' This, of course, does not mean the M.R. practitioners are dead right or even mostly right in each case. M.R. is a new and still inexact science. Dr. Wulfeck says it is about as far advanced as public opinion polling was in the early thirties—in short far from infallible. A great deal must still be done to refine, standardize, and validate procedures and train qualified practitioners. Dr. Wulfeck is confident that as more work is done the tools will become more precise. Business Week pointed out that M.R. practitioners were already achieving indisputably solid results. It cited as an example the work being done at the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan. The center's psychological research, it said, “is providing a continuing, trustworthy measurement of consumer attitudes that shape the course of business. This measure is already an important indicator of the business climate." (The Federal Reserve Board is guided by it to a large extent.) The alternative to the depth approach, in the words of a research analyst for Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, "is to fly by the seat of your pants." Business Week's study of M.R. summed up the situation in this emphatic way: “Today's emphasis on people's motives, the search for a new science of behavior, is more than just a fad. Far from blowing over, you can expect it to keep getting more important—because it meets business needs arising from a real and important change in the American society over the past two or three decades." Then the report added this hopeful or ominous comment—depending on your viewpoint: “It seems rather likely that, over the course of time, the present studies will develop into something considerably more elaborate, more rigorous. That will happen if business men get accustomed enough to psychological techniques to want to use them on something besides advertising themes." That was written in mid-1954. As I've indicated, businessmen and others are now seeking to apply these potent techniques in mind-molding projects far removed from the merchandising of products. As the use of the depth approach, despite its fallibilities, has met increasing acceptance and spread into other fields, the moral implications of its increased use need to be faced. ## 23. The Question of Morality “The very presumptuousness of molding or affecting the human mind through the techniques we use has created a deep sense of uneasiness in our minds."——W. Howard Chase, president, Public Relations Society of America, 1956 What are the implications of all this persuasion in terms of our existing morality? What does it mean for the national morality to have so many powerfully influential people taking a manipulative attitude toward our society? Some of these persuaders, in their energetic endeavors to sway our actions, seem to fall unwittingly into the attitude that man exists to be manipulated. While some of the persuaders brood occasionally about the implications of their endeavors, others feel that what is progress for them is progress for the nation. Some of the depth marketers, for example, seem to assume that anything that results in raising the gross national product is automatically good for America. An ad executive from Milwaukee related in Printer's Ink that America was growing great by the systematic creation of dissatisfaction. He talked specifically of the triumph of the cosmetics industry in reaching the billion-dollar class by the sale of hope and by making women more anxious and critical about their appearance. Triumphantly he concluded: “And everybody is happy." Others contend that the public has become so skeptical of advertising appeals that its psyche is not being damaged by all the assaults on it from the various media. (On the other hand, it can be pointed out that this growing skepticism was a major reason ad men turned to subconscious appeals. They wanted to bypass our conscious guard.) Business Week, in dismissing the charge that the science of behavior was spawning some monster of human engineering who was “manipulating a population of puppets from behind the scenes, contended: "It is hard to find anything very sinister about a science whose principal conclusion is that you get along with people by giving them what they want." But is "everybody happy"? And should we all be "given" whatever our ids “want"? Certainly a good deal can be said on the positive side for the socially constructive results that have come from the explorations into human behavior arising from the persuader's endeavors. The merchandisers in their sales appeals to us have gotten away from some of their crude excesses of old and are more considerate of our wants and needs, even if those needs are often subconscious. Edward Weiss, the executive, made this point when he said that social knowledge was helping ad men to “forget about the gimmicks and to concentrate on the real reasons why people buy goods."We've seen how the merchandisers of beer and other predominantly middleclass products have become more realistic in their messages. Likewise a food packer became more sensible in his selling as a result of a depth study. He had been offering a free trip to Hollywood as a prize to persons who sent in the best fifty-word statement “Why I like . . . ."This brought in lots of statements but very little stimulation of sales. A depth study of housewives showed why. Married women with two children and a husband working weren't interested in going to Hollywood, free or otherwise. Who'd take care of the children and cook for the husband? An analysis of people sending in the statements showed they were mostly teen-agers who had never done any food shopping in their life! The use of the insights of the social sciences in dealing with company personnel has likewise—where not accompanied by "social engineering"—brought some enlightened policies and constructive changes. Advanced Management reported that one large company now carefully interviews researchers and other responsible newcomers to find the conditions under which they feel they work best. Do they like to work alone, or with a group? Do they like their desk in a corner or in the middle of their cubicle? Do they like to work on one project at a time or have several going simultaneously? This management, in short, tries to manipulate the environment to suit the individual, not vice versa. On the other hand, a good many of the people-manipulating activities of persuaders raise profoundly disturbing questions about the kind of society they are seeking to build for us. Their ability to contact millions of us simultaneously through newspapers, TV, etc. gives them the power, as one persuader put it, to do good or evil “on a scale never before possible in a very short time." Are they warranted in justifying manipulation on the ground that anything that increases the gross national product is “good” for America; or on the ground that the old doctrine “Let the Buyer Beware” absolves them of responsibility for results that may seem to some antisocial? Perhaps the supporters of optimism-generation in both business and government can make an impressive case for the need to preserve public confidence if we are to have peace and prosperity. But where is it leading us? What happens, actually, to public confidence when the public becomes aware (as it gradually must) that the leaders of industry and government are resolutely committed to a confidence-inspiring viewpoint, come hell or high water? How can you know what to believe? It is my feeling that a number of the practices and techniques I've cited here very definitely raise questions of a moral nature that should be faced by the persuaders and the public. For example: What is the morality of the practice of encouraging housewives to be non-rational and impulsive in buying the family food? What is the morality of playing upon hidden weaknesses and frailties—such as our anxieties, aggressive feelings, dread of conformity, and infantile hangovers—to sell products? Specifically, what are the ethics of businesses that shape campaigns designed to thrive on these weaknesses they have diagnosed? What is the morality of manipulating small children even before they reach the age where they are legally responsible for their actions? What is the morality of treating voters like customers and child customers seeking father images at that? What is the morality of exploiting our deepest sexual sensitivities and yearnings for commercial purpose? What is the morality of appealing for our charity by playing upon our secret desires for self-enhancement? What is the morality of developing in the public an attitude of wastefulness toward national resources by encouraging the “psychological obsolescence” of products already in use? What is the morality of subordinating truth to cheerfulness in keeping the citizen posted on the state of his nation? The persuaders themselves, in their soul-searching, are at times exceptionally articulate in expressing their apprehensions and in admitting some of their practices are a “little cold-blooded."One of them, Nicholas Samstag, confessed in The Engineering of Consent: “It may be said that to take advantage of man's credulity, to exploit his misapprehensions, to capitalize on his ignorance is morally reprehensible—and this may well be the case. . . . I do not quite know." The June, 1954, issue of The Public Relations Journal contained a remarkable venture into soul-searching by a Hawaiian public-relations man, Kleber R. Miller. He said, "What I wish to pose here is ... whether the public-relations practitioner realizes the depths of the moral considerations involved," in some of his activities. He said the principal assumption is that the public-relations practitioner will be able to create on any desired scale “a climate of opinion and emotion that is most favorable to the cause of the client he represents.... The public-relations man is continually faced with the question whether the end justifies the means."Mr. Miller went on, "What degree of intensity is proper in seeking to arouse desire, hatred, envy, cupidity, hope, or any of the great gamut of human emotions on which he must play."He made this penetrating point: “Öne of the fundamental considerations involved here is the right to manipulate human personality." Such a manipulation, he went on to say, inherently involves a disrespect for the individual personality. It seems to me that both the Advertising Research Foundation and the Public Relations Society of America might well concern themselves with drawing up realistic up-to-date codes defining the behavior of ethically responsible persuaders. Such codes might set up ground rules that would safeguard the public against being manipulated in ways that might be irresponsible and socially dangerous. The social scientists and psychiatrists cooperation with the persuaders in their manipulative endeavors face some uncomfortable moral questions, too. Their questions perhaps are more perplexing. They have a workable rationale for explaining their cooperation with, say, the merchandisers. After all, they are, in their depth probing, broadening the world's available knowledge concerning human behavior, and they can explain that knowledge which is not put to use is lost. In this they could quote Alfred North Whitehead, who pointed out that knowledge doesn't keep any better than fish. Still, there was this disturbing fact that some of them were being used by the manipulators. Printer's Ink devoted a special feature to the way social scientists “can be used” in merchandising problems. One point it made: “Use mostly those social scientists who demonstrate a knowledge and appreciation of business problems. Beware of those who don't. Many can be exceedingly naïve and unscientific in their approach to advertising. Perhaps the most uncomfortable aspect of the situation for the scientists was stated by an ad executive writing under a pseudonym for The Nation. He said: "Social scientists in the past have paid attention to the irrational patterns of human behavior because they wish to locate their social origins and thus be able to suggest changes that would result in more rational conduct. They now study irrationality—and other aspects of human behavior—to gather data that may be used by salesmen to manipulate consumers. In their efforts to be cooperative with the persuaders the scientists also showed some tendency to accept assumptions that definitely were dubious. In 1953 a leading advertising researcher concluded that Americans would have to learn to live a third better if they were to keep pace with growing production and permit the United States economy to hit a “\$400 billion gross national product in 1958." (Actually it shot past the \$400 billion mark in 1956.) To find how Americans could be persuaded to live a third better Tide put the question to “quite a few of the leading U.S. sociologists."The response of Professor Philip J. Allen, of the University of Virginia, was particularly interesting. He mapped out a “systematic program by which it could be achieved, and stressed that his scheme would require: Sufficient financial backing for regular utilization of mass media, constantly to communicate the desired objectives to the “common man."New values can be deliberately created, disseminated, and adopted as personal and collective goals highly desirable of achievement. But the concerted effort of the major social institutions—particularly the educational, recreational, and religious—must be enlisted with the ready cooperation of those in control of the mass media on the one hand and the large creators of goods and services who buy up time and space for advertising their “wares” on the other. . . By utilizing the various tested devices, our modern genius in advertising may alight upon simple phrases well organized in sequence and timing, and coordinated with other efforts geared to realize the “grand design." But there are required a host of laborers with plenty of financial backing. In mapping out his “grand design" for making us all more dutiful consumers he accepted, without any questions that I could note, the basic assumption that achieving the one-third-better goal was worth any manipulating that might be necessary to achieve it. One of the experts consulted, Bernice Allen, of Ohio University, did question the assumption. She said: "We have no proof that more material goods such as more cars or more gadgets has made anyone happier—in fact the evidence seems to point in the opposite direction." In strikes me that it would be appropriate for the Social Science Research Council and such affiliates as the American Psychological Association to develop codes of ethics that would cover the kind of cooperation that can be condoned and not condoned in working with the people-manipulators. The American Psychological Association has a guidebook running 171 pages (Ethical Standards of Psychologists) that covers more than a hundred problems and cites hundreds of examples of dubious behavior, but there is barely a mention in the entire manual of the kind of cooperation with depth manipulators I have detailed. The A.P.A. does state: "The most widely shared pattern of values among psychologists appears to be a respect for evidence combined with a respect for the dignity and integrity of the human individual."That is an admirable statement and might well be spelled out in terms of permissible and nonpermissible behavior in the field of commerce. Beyond the question of specific practices of the persuaders and their associated scientists is the larger question of where our economy is taking us under the pressures of consumerism. That, too, is a moral question. In fact, I suspect it is destined to become one of the great moral issues of our times. Industrialists such as General David Sarnoff contend that trying to hold back, or argue about, the direction our automated factories are taking us is like trying to hold back the tides and seasons. He feels it is pointless even to talk about the desirability of the trend. Some demur. The advertising director of a major soup company commented: “If we create a society just to satisfy automation's production, we will destroy the finest value in our society."There were also signs that some segments of the public itself might be less than grateful for the outpouring of goods our economy was bestowing upon us. In the mid-fifties Harper's published two articles taking a dim view of our worldly riches. One by economist Robert Lekachman, entitled "If We're So Rich, What's Eating Us?" recounted the outpouring of goods and said, “All these good things, worthy of universal exultation, have caused instead a chronic case of economic hypochondria. And Russell Lynes, in his bitter-funny article “Take Back Your Sable!" put in a good word for depressions, not the evils they produce but the climate: “A climate in many respects more productive than prosperity, more interesting, more lively, more thoughtful, and even, in a wry sort of way, more fun." Dr. Dichter has been quick to realize the essentially moral question posed by the across-the-board drive to persuade us to step up our consumption. His publication Motivations stated in April, 1956: We now are confronted with the problem of permitting the average American to feel moral even when he is flirting, even when he is spending, even when he is not saving, even when he is taking two vacations a year and buying a second or third car. One of the basic problems of this prosperity, then, is to give people the sanction and justification to enjoy it and to demonstrate the hedonistic approach to his life is a moral, not an immoral, one. 'This permission given to the consumer to enjoy his life freely, the demonstration that he is right in surrounding himself with products that enrich his life and give him pleasure must be one of the central themes of every advertising display and sales promotion plan. On another occasion Dr. Dichter pointed out that the public's shift away from its “puritan complex" was enhancing the power of three major sales appeals: desire for comfort, for luxury, and for prestige. The moral nature of the issue posed by the pressures on us to consume is pointed up by the fact religious spokesmen have been among the first to speak out in criticism of the trend. The minister of my own church Loring Chase (Congregational in New Cannan, Conn.), devoted his Lenten sermon in 1956 to the problem of prosperity. The self-denial pattern of Lent, he said, “stands in vivid contrast to the prevailing patter of our society, which keeps itself going economically by saying to us, You really owe it to yourself to buy this or that." He described the national picture provided by our economy of abundance and stated: "Over against this . . . one feels a certain embarrassment over Jesus' reminder that ‘a man's life does not consist of the abundance of his possessions . . .."He concluded that “the issue is not one of few or many possessions. The issue is whether we recognize that possessions were meant to serve life, and life comes first."The Protestant publication Christianity and Crisis contended that the next great moral dilemma confronting America would be the threat to the “quality of life" created by abundance of worldly goods. It conceded that if we are to have an expanding economy based on mass production we cannot deny the necessity of mass consumption of new goods, and “for this advertising is obviously essential. Yet there is a dilemma," it explained. "We are being carried along by a process that is becoming an end in itself and which threatens to overwhelm us.... There is a loss of a sense of proportion in living when we become so quickly dissatisfied with last year's models." The profound nature of the dilemma was clearly drawn, however, when it added: “This is not to criticize those who make the products in question or those who promote and sell them. They and all of us who consume them are caught up in the same whirl. This whirl is so much the substance of our life that it is difficult to get outside it long enough to look at it and ask where it all leads us." Theologian Reinhold Neibuhr likewise took note of the dilemma by pointing out that the problem of achieving “a measure of grace" in an economy of abundance was very perplexing. And he added that “we are in danger ... of developing a culture that is enslaved to its productive process, thus reversing the normal relation of production and consumption.' This larger moral problem of working out a spiritually tolerable relationship between a free people and an economy capable of greater and greater productivity may take decades to resolve. Meanwhile, we can address ourselves to the more specific problem of dealing with those more devious and aggressive manipulators who would play upon our irrationalities and weaknesses in order to channel our behavior. I concede that some pushing and hauling of the citizenry is probably necessary to make our \$400 billion -a-year economy work, with lures such as premiums and thirty-six-months-to-pay. But certainly our expanding economy can manage to thrive without the necessity of psycho-testing children or mind-molding men or playing upon the anxieties we strive to keep to ourselves. America is too great a nation—and Americans too fine a people—to have to tolerate such corrosive practices. We still have a strong defense available against such persuaders: we can choose not to be persuaded. In virtually all situations we still have the choice, and we cannot be too seriously manipulated if we know what is going on. It is my hope that this book may contribute to the general awareness. As Clyde Miller pointed out in The Process of Persuasion, when we learn to recognize the devices of the persuaders, we build up a “recognition reflex." Such a recognition reflex, he said, “can protect us against the petty trickery of small-time persuaders operating in the common-place affairs of everyday life, but also against the mistaken or false persuasion of powerful leaders...." Some persons we've encountered who are thoroughly acquainted with the operations of the merchandising manipulators, I should add, still persist in acts that may be highly tinged with illogicality. They admit to buying long, colorful cars they really don't need and sailboats that they concede probably appeal to them because of childhood memories (if the Dichter thesis applies). Furthermore, they confess they continue brushing their teeth once a day at the most illogical time conceivable from a dental-health standpoint—just before breakfast. But they do all these things with full knowledge that they are being self-indulgent or irrational. When irrational acts are committed knowingly they become a sort of delicious luxury. It is no solution to suggest we should all defend ourselves against the depth manipulators by becoming carefully rational in all our acts. Such a course not only is visionary but unattractive. It would be a dreary world if we all had to be rational, right-thinking, non-neurotic people all the time, even though we may hope we are making general gains in that direction. At times it is pleasanter or easier to be nonlogical. But I prefer being nonlogical by my own free will and impulse rather than to find myself manipulated into such acts. The most serious offense many of the depth manipulators commit, it seems to me, is that they try to invade the privacy of our minds. It is this right to privacy in our minds—privacy to be either rational or irrational—that I believe we must strive to protect.