The example of “La Grolla” raises the question of what distinguishes the PO from a ritual object. The difference becomes clear when we think of the probably best-known ritual object in Western culture: the chalice. Although visually significant, I would argue that the chalice does not show a disruption of function. Instead, mindfulness is caused by the ritual context. If it was not the context but the object, how could some Christian groups use an ordinary glass to the same effect of causing mindfulness? Or how could a trophy cup, which shows a striking similarity to a chalice of the same period, be used in an entirely different and secular ritual?<sup>33</sup>

In summary, the comparison has shown that it is possible to distinguish the category of PO, and to identify its characteristics of mindfulness in relation to a modification of function. Therefore, different levels of mindfulness can be achieved (i.e., mindfulness of the interaction with the object and/or of interaction with other people through the object).

## The Significance of the Category of Performative Object for Design

In the following, I discuss two examples from product and digital interaction design, respectively, to show the wider significance of the concept of performative object for design. In terms of design products, only a few outstanding projects could be identified outside the domain of “digital interaction design” that start addressing the product’s consequences for human social interaction. One such exception is the bench “Come a little bit closer.” It is a product of the Droog Design group<sup>34,</sup> <sup>35</sup> and was designed by Nina Farkache in 2001. The bench consists of a steel frame. The top surface is made up of glass marbles, which act as ball bearings and on which the actual seating surfaces “float.” Because the seating shells are not fixed to the frame of the bench, but glide on the ball bearings, the design allows users to physically move closer without changing seats. The design plays with people’s habitual behavior in public places, which is to keep a certain distance from people whom we do not know, and therefore to sit down at opposite ends of a public bench. Through its design, the bench allows and symbolically suggests decreasing spatial distance if, in a waiting situation, the wish emerges between the strangers to decrease social distance and to engage in conversation. In this way, the bench questions and makes us mindful of our perception and behavior towards other people in public spaces. Concerning the interpretation of this object, while without the knowledge of the concept of PO, we would be able to appreciate the design for its clever and witty solution. But knowing about the category of the PO, we now are able to understand and explain its underlying conceptual and functional mechanism. This means we can relate the underlying behavioral concept (people keep distance) to specific functional elements of the object (seating shells are not fixed [disruption] but glide on the ball bearings [thematization]). With this understanding of how conceptual ideas and physical phenomena link, both the social significance of POs, as well as the scope for potential application of POs in design, should become clear.

With the last example, I want to reemphasize the social significance of POs. I have chosen this last example from digital interaction design because, recently, there have emerged several institutions or project groups with an interest in exploring interaction design in a wider sense (e.g., D&AD<sup>36</sup>, the Interactive Institute in Sweden, or Ivrea<sup>37</sup> Institute for Interaction Design in Italy). In this arena, we find remarkable approaches such as “Brainball,” an interactive game for two people which has been developed by the Interactive Institute with the objective of increasing relaxation.

“Brainball” consists of a headband with electrodes that reads a player’s brain activity using an electroencephalogram (EEG). Two players sit opposite each other at a table, each wearing a headband. In the middle of the table from one short end to the other is a clear plastic surface with a small steel ball rolling on top of it. When either of the players presses the “start” button, the ball rolls away from the person who is most relaxed and toward the other player. The only way for the other player to defend is to become more relaxed. When the ball reaches one end, the game is over.<sup>38</sup>

This object combines the subversion of function and the aspirations for social impact, which we have seen in the previous example, to maximum effect. What makes it special is that the player can only move the ball when more relaxed than his/her counterpart. Thus, this game turns common expectations and behavior in the most unexpected way “upside down,” and the fundamental nature of the issues raised becomes explicit. In this example, the effect seems particularly striking because the action (of moving the ball) can only be accomplished when actually achieving the “new” attitude (of becoming more relaxed), which additionally and dramatically reveals the psychology of the participants. Questions arise such as: “Can we feel relaxed on demand in order to win?” or “Do we lose the aim to win when we are relaxed enough that we might be able to win?” or “Do we even have to give up the wish to win in order to achieve the necessary state of relaxation?” thus revealing what is at stake. This is not just another object— another function—but essentially questions what we understand by function, by how things work. With regard to the object, it questions our outcome-related thinking, and directs it towards process-related thinking (which Langer proposes with regard to achieving mindfulness<sup>39</sup>). This, in turn, questions the understanding of how one relates to the other participant, because the ordinary belief that more determination is needed to succeed no longer works. This shows that the subversion of function can be employed to question essential issues, such as our understanding of relating to others through competition.

It seems that, in this sense, POs can have ethical implications that impact our social values, our interactions and interrelations, and thus on society as a whole. It also seems that the concept of the PO is applicable in a number of different design situations. Although I have only been able to deal with a small number of examples, with a primary focus on the drinking vessel, I have been able to include a small variety of other examples from digital and non-digital design. Thus, the last example from digital interaction design raises expectations of a fertile field for application.

## Conclusion

This is a report of a larger study. Therefore, it was only possible to provide a summary of the main concepts and argument. The outcome and contribution of the study is that we can define the characteristics of POs (i.e., mindfulness as caused by a modification of function) and that we can distinguish POs as a separate category of definable design objects by means of these characteristics. We also can project the consequences for both society and designers. With regard to society, the aim of the PO is to shift consumption towards a more mindful (i.e., socially-reflective approach), thus transforming the role of the user or consumer into that of the participant. The implication for the designer lies in a change in the design process, which requires starting the process with the observation of social situations and behaviors.

This study offers a number of possibilities for further research into the concept of the PO. It provides the theoretical basis for empirical testing, including the design, development, and empirical evaluation of POs. Future research may further be concerned with the application of the concept, for example, its application to interactive design might be of particular relevance. Research into its application also may be concerned with changes in the design process, and with ethical issues which arise with regard to the responsibility of the designer. Finally, in the longer term, a study might seek to assess the benefits for society concerning sociability and community.