# ALEXANDER LIBERMAN: ON OVERCOMING AESTHETICS Véronique Vienne Alexander Liberman, the legendary editorial director of Condé Nast Publications (CNP), always insisted that magazines had to be readable. Readable? The magazines he supervised during his fifty-plus-year career at CNP—Vogue, Glamour, House & Garden, Vanity Fair, and others—had distinctively crowded, messy layouts; page after page incorporated jumbled-up montages of text and images. Forget about curling up quietly to read the articles. Liberman's signature look was much too lively to invite contemplation. A word to the wise: Liberman, now eighty-six and living in semiretirement, never bothered reading a manuscript before laying out a story. Once, when I was art director of Self magazine, he caught me actually reading a piece I was working on. With the authority of a man thirty years my senior, he reprimanded me severely for wasting time on the job. Magazine readers must get a feel for a story before reading it, he explained. It's best if art directors don't get involved with the text. My role, he said, was to communicate ideas—not illustrate words. He summoned to my office the editor in charge. She scurried in, holding the culprit—a hard copy of the edited manuscript—against her chest. She was asked to put it aside and pitch her story aloud to Liberman. Whether dealing with fashion, beauty, health, food, or travel, CNP articles were scripted to have a dramatic plot line. Always polite and suave, Mr. Liberman, as we called him, rebuked her whenever she looked at her notes. He was not about to be text-driven. With a series of questions, he tried to unveil the reader's emotional relationship with the article. “Are you saying that vitamins are bad for you?" he asked. "If that's so, rewrite the headline." While listening to the editor, he began to build a new layout from scratch, his hands moving almost magically over the drawing board. "I don't search, I find," he liked to say, paraphrasing Picasso. Headlines, quotes, sidebars, photographs, dummy text, and pieces of colored paper came together in less than three minutes. I had to hold my breath, literally, not to disturb this impromptu collage. As soon as Liberman declared that he was done, he made it clear that my responsibility was to hold the elements in place with tiny bits of transparent tape—and God help me if I straightened anything in the process. David Carson, whom I hired in 1990 as a pasteup assistant, remembers trying to copyfit Liberman's montages with the final text. "It was surreal," he now says. He had to treat Liberman's fragile piles of scrap paper as if they were works of art. He thought it was all pretty silly. “At the time I didn't know who this guy was," says Carson. “Now, looking back, I get the feeling that he has been undervalued and underappreciated as a graphic designer." Although the two never spoke, I can't help but wonder if Carson was not influenced by the old man's serendipitous approach to the page. And Liberman was right: the magazines he designed were highly “readable." Condé Nast publications are compelling because they trigger in readers an instant sense of identification with what's on the page. A glance is all one needs to grasp the sum total of what the editors are thinking about. These are magazines that one doesn't need to decipher in order to read.“Clarity and strength of communication is what interests me," says Liberman.“I hate white space because white space is an old album tradition. I need to be immersed in the subject matter." Unfortunately, few of Liberman's collaborators were ever able to read him as effortlessly as readers were able to read his layouts. From 1942, when Liberman, then thirty, was named art director of Vogue magazine, replacing the formidable Mehemed Fehmy Agha, to 1994, when he announced that James Truman, the thirty-five-year-old editor of Details, would be his successor, he has kept everybody mystified with abrupt decisions and unexpected turnarounds. “The creative process is a series of destructions," he was fond of saying. For him, the creative process was also a series of dramatic dismissals. Great editors got the ax under Liberman's watch: Diana Vreeland, Grace Mirabella, and Louis Oliver Gropp, to name just a few. And countless great art directors, as well: Priscilla Peck, Lloyd Ziff, Dereck Ungless, Ruth Ansel, and Rip George. To this day, the mere mention of Liberman's name can set off a heated discussion between designers and editors who have worked with him. People who have been fired by him are sometimes said to break into hives. Others relish the opportunity to tell some particularly amusing story. Because of him, there is an instant sense of community among ex-CNP employees. Commenting on Liberman's “absurdly hip” collage approach, design critic Owen Edwards today says: "When I worked with him, I always thought he was dead wrong—which only shows how dead wrong I was." Liberman had a knack for astounding and confusing people around him—and his attempts to explain his design philosophy were more alienating than reassuring. “You are not quite vulgar enough, my dear," he once told me before scrapping one of the spreads I had designed for Self. Eager to please—no one was ever immune to his old-world charm—the next day I presented a revised, Fleet Street-inspired layout. Such a look of contempt I had never endured. “Simply lurid," he said, before walking out of the room. Liberman was not a teacher. Although very articulate, he could never find the appropriate words to share his vision with others. Looking back, I believe that his inability to communicate with his design associates was due to the fact that his ideas were so radical, he couldn't begin to describe them. He used an antiquated vocabulary that dated from the days of Gutenberg to introduce a way of thinking that foreshadowed the revolution of the information age. Although Liberman dismissed computers as “too slow," ten years before the introduction of the Macintosh, he was already designing pages as if they were interactive screens, with layered rather than linear narratives. Liberman was no stranger to revolutions, cultural or otherwise. Born in Kiev, Russia, in 1912, he remembers the first days of the Bolshevik upheaval. His father, a powerful forestry manager, prospered under Lenin's regime. His mother, an out-of-work actress, created a children's theater to keep starving urchins off the street. But in this climate of anarchy and social chaos, young Alex, a sensitive and difficult child, was displaying troubling behavior. His parents were afraid he was turning into a delinquent. In 1921, with Lenin's permission, Liberman was shipped to school in England where he was forced to learn manners. A quick study, he acquired, at age ten, the genteel demeanor and slight British accent that would later become the trademarks of his elegance. After Lenin's death in 1924, the Libermans left Russia and settled in Paris. Alex was transferred to a chic French private school where he made valuable friends among the sons of the aristocracy. But the turning point for him was visiting the 1925 Paris Arts Décoratifs exhibition. He was just thirteen, but the discovery of Art Deco, then called Moderne art, was “one of the most important events of my life," he said later. From then on, the concept of modernity became something of an obsession to him: “Alex tried and tried to get everyone to be modern—his idea of modern," notes Lloyd Ziff, who was art director at House & Garden, Vanity Fair, and Traveler in the 1980s. But he notes that the way Liberman worked, juxtaposing photographic and typographical elements, was more reminiscent of Russian Constructivism than of French Art Deco. Liberman's early career in design was somewhat erratic. A bleeding ulcer kept interrupting his attempts to find an enjoyable line of work. He studied painting with Andre Lhote, architecture with Auguste Perret, and was briefly employed by Cassandre. In 1933, he got a job at VU, a Parisian weekly, and one of the very first news magazines to use reportage photography. There, he befriended Lucien Vogel, the editor, and met photographers who would help him define his taste for photojournalism: André Kertész, Robert Capa, and Brassai. In the late 1930s, after a brief marriage to Hilda Sturm, a German ski champion, he fell deeply in love with Tatiana du Plessix, niece of Stanislavsky and a striking Russian beauty who was then married to a French aristocrat. Hitler's invasion of France in 1940 forced their fate: Tatiana's husband was killed while trying to join de Gaulle in England. Liberman escaped to New York with Tatiana, soon to be his wife, and her daughter, Francine. In New York, Liberman was quickly hired by Condé Nast, who was impressed with his experience with photojournalism at VU. Back in 1931, Clare Booth Luce had submitted to Nast, her boss at the time, the prototype for a weekly picture magazine called Life. He had rejected it. Now Life was a raging success, and Nast was sorry he had missed the opportunity to start a breakthrough publication. When Liberman proposed, during his job interview, to inject some reportage into Vogue, Nast loved it. From that day on, Alex Liberman thought of himself as a journalist—a super editor with visual understanding. He never liked the title of art director and was relieved when, in 1962, he was appointed editorial director of all Condé Nast magazines. O1 an T During his career at CNP, Liberman carried a grudge against art directors. Their title, he felt, was misleading. He didn't want them to be artists, but managers of the image of the magazine. He understood his role, and the role of all editorial designers, to be what we call “brand managers" today. Unfortunately, the notion of brand was still in its infancy, so Liberman never got full use of it. What a pity. He would have loved to wrestle with concepts such as “perceived quality,” “brand equity,” and “visual territory." Instead of rewriting the art director's job description, Liberman spent five decades fighting the idea that editorial design was an artistic endeavor. He went out of his way to undermine art directors in front of editors. With remarks like, “This layout is utterly provincial, wouldn't you say," or, “Remember: you are not a scarf designer, you are a journalist," he could reduce some of the most talented designers to tears. In the hallways of Condé Nast, you could easily spot the art directors: they were the walking wounded, the folks wearing neck braces. While at Self, I, too, became afflicted with a frozen shoulder, tension migraines, and lower back problems. Editors who attended the daily public floggings of art directors would look at their shoes in embarrassment—but, internally, they were rubbing their hands. Liberman can be credited with weakening the authority of editorial art directors in the United States. He trained three generations of editors to belittle the opinions of their visually oriented coworkers. Today, every publication in America has at least one editor who once worked at CNP and refers to QuarkXPress and Photoshop users as “my art people. Liberman didn't consider art direction an art because he was, in his spare time, an amazingly prolific painter and enterprising sculptor—always working on a large scale. He led two distinct lives. Careful to cultivate a Clark Kent, charcoal-gray-suit persona by day, he would become an ambitious abstract expressionist by night. His wife, Tatiana, called him Superman. “Art is the violent expression of resentment against the human condition," he told Barbara Rose, the author of a monograph on his work as an artist. Rose was under the impression that Liberman kept that resentment a private matter. “Alexander Liberman, the artist, is deeply suspicious of taste," she wrote in 1981. “Alexander Liberman, the editorial director of CNP, is, above all, a man of taste." Rose was misinformed. With each passing year at CNP, Liberman showed less and less patience with issues of taste. He became committed to banishing forever “the vision of loveliness” that he had inherited at the beginning of his tenure at Condé Nast from Josephine Redding, Marie Harrison, Edna Woolman Chase, and Jessica Caves, Vogue's early editors. Diana Vreeland set him free. “Laying out a beautiful picture in a beautiful way is a bloody bore," she once said. Like him, she treated the magazine as a series of collages, wantonly pasting together her models' body parts to get the “perfect whole." Liberman was impressed. “I put legs and arms and heads together," she said. “I never took fewer than two ribs.” When I first encountered Liberman, in the late 1970s, Diana Vreeland had been replaced by Grace Mirabella, and the Vogue art department, where I worked as a pasteup assistant, was run by Rochelle Udell. The magazine layouts were deliberately untidy, to differentiate Vogue from its competition, Harper's Bazaar, the absolute leader in design and visual innovation. Still under the influence of its renowned art director, Alexey Brodovitch, Harper's Bazaar was a thorn in Liberman's side. But he did what a good brand manager would do: instead of trying to play catch-up with Harper's Bazaar, he carved out a new niche for Vogue. As soon as he did, circulation began to rise dramatically. And advertisers loved being associated with a smart fashion publication that embraced the spirit of the Pepsi Generation. Like David Carson did fifteen years earlier, I spent long hours in the Vogue art department, trying to fit type around Liberman's photomontages. Meanwhile, in his studio at home, the “Silver Fox," as some editors now called him, was throwing paint by the bucketful on huge canvasses, working as fast as possible to try to bypass the mental process, which he believed could only produce preconceived and banal solutions. In 1989, I jumped at the opportunity to work with him again, this time at Self. By now, the seventy-seven-year-old Liberman had dropped all pretense of good taste. Although he had retained his suave, David Niven look, I was told that he was fiercer than ever. And indeed, soon after I joined CNP, Anthea Disney, the editor who had hired me, was unceremoniously fired for not following Liberman's directions. In no position to assert myself to the new editor, Alexandra Penney, I decided to look at the situation as a chance to resolve the Liberman mystery once and for all. I galvanized my staff and made it clear to Liberman that my entire art department was at his service. For the next six months, we were on a roll. As soon as the great man would walk into the room, we were poised in battle formation: one assistant was at my side with scissors, knife, and loupe; another was posted next to the color copier; a third was assigned to the phones, keeping the lines open in case Liberman got a call. I had two “runners” ready to spring into action to either fetch an editor, find a color swatch, or alert the photo department. Helen Maryles, the youngest designer, was on tape duty. I will never forget the sight of her, standing next to Liberman, palms open, fingers extended, with tiny pieces of transparent tape stuck to the ends of all ten digits. In his biography, Alex, written by Dodie Kazanjian and Calvin Tomkins, Liberman says: “If ever I have done what I'd call my own layouts, it's at Self." The pages he designed then and there were a debauch of bold type and cut-paper blocks of colors, a look reminiscent of the papiers découpés technique Matisse favored at the end of his career. Liberman had met him briefly in 1949, when the painter was in his late seventies—still mentally alert and youthful in spite of age and poor health. Now, Liberman had a chance to emulate his favorite artist. The Self layouts were an unmitigated homage to the author of “The Dance." For the first time ever, Liberman was doing "art” at the office. He did concede to his biographers that at Self there was “not much difference in the psychological process between a composition on canvas and arranging material like this on a page." So this was it. In a long career dedicated to overcoming aesthetic considerations, the Self experiment represented a brief, but fleeting, moment of reconciliation between Clark Kent and Superman— between the art director and the artist. But it had to happen. The advertisers hated the "new” Self. The readers didn't get it, either. The magazine had lost its sacrosanct “readability.” I was fired—and rightly so.“Seduction is a trap one has to get beyond," Liberman once said. Mark my words: beware of artists—they'll get you in trouble.