# ADVERTISING: THE MOTHER OF GRAPHIC DESIGN Steven Heller The word “advertising," like “commercial art," makes graphic designers cringe. It signifies all that sophisticated contemporary graphic design, or, rather, visual communications, is not supposed to be. Advertising is the tool of capitalism, a con that persuades an unwitting public to consume and consume again. Graphic design, by contrast, is an aesthetic and philosophical pursuit that communicates ideas. Advertising is cultural exploitation that transforms creative expression into crass propaganda. Graphic design is a cultural force that incorporates parallel worldviews. Advertising is hypnotically invasive. Graphic design makes no such claim. Though graphic design as we know it originated in the late nineteenth century as a tool of advertising, any association today with marketing, advertising, or capitalism deeply undermines the graphic designer's self-image. Graphic design history is an integral part of advertising history, yet in most accounts of graphic design's origins advertising is virtually denied, or hidden behind more benign words such as “publicity” and “promotion."This omission not only limits the discourse, but misrepresents the facts. It is time for graphic design historians, and designers generally, to remove the elitist prejudices that have perpetuated a biased history. In Layout in Advertising (Harper Brothers, 1928) William Addison Dwiggins, who coined the term “graphic designer” in 1922 to define his own diverse practices of book, type, lettering, and advertising design, wrote that, “for purposes of argument ‘advertising' means every conceivable printed means for selling anything."This suggests that advertising is the mother of almost all graphic design endeavors, except for books and certain journals. In fact, the majority of commercial artists from the turn of the century until fairly recently—from anonymous “sho card” renderers to celebrated affichistes—were engaged in the service of advertising of one kind or another. Despite the common assertion that graphic design began with seventeenth-century Italian printing, modern graphic design is the result of the transition in the late nineteenth century from a product to a consumer culture. The move from producing (or bartering for) goods to buying mass-produced consumables created a need for printed advertising that quickly developed into a huge, dedicated industry. Dwiggins's manual is not the only one to assert that graphic design was invented to put “an advertising project into graphic form." Jan Tschichold's Die neue Typographie, also published in 1928, was a seminal handbook for the practitioners of Gebrauchsgraphik, or advertising art. This book and Tschichold's subsequent Typographische Gestaltung (1935), which became the basis of the modern canon, were focused not on some idealistic notion of visual communications in an aesthetic vacuum, but on dynamic new possibilities for advertising composition in an archaic and cluttered print environment. In The Art Director at Work (Hastings House, 1960), Arthur Hawkins, Jr., describes how such ideas influenced American advertising design: “As competitive pressure squeezed the innocence out of advertising, [art directors] became rougher and tougher. They were usually paste-up boys . . . who had picked up a certain facility with a 6B pencil. Somehow, they discovered Gerbrauchsgraphik magazine and the Bauhaus School. Their future was paved with Futura." By the 1920s graphic design was synonymous with advertising design. In Germany, France, and Italy, agencies and consortia extolled the virtues of the well-designed advertising image. Lucian Bernhard and others associated with the Berliner Plakat group, under the management of printing salesman and advertising agent Ernst Growald, invented artful ways to identify and announce new products. Even the cultural avant-gardes—Futurism, Dada, Surrealism—created design forms for advertising that expressed their particular visions and ideologies. Russian Constructivism's most notable graphic achievements were advertisements for films and products. The “Productivists” Alexander Rodchenko and Lasar El Lissitzky developed ways of composing typecase design elements on an advertising page that eventually influenced layout trends in capitalist nations. In Germany, the Ring, a close-knit association of radically modern designers including Kurt Schwitters, Willi Baumeister, and Piet Zwart, attempted to sell to an expanding industrial clientele a “new advertising” based on the New Typography. For the avant-garde, producing advertising for technologically progressive corporations, which, incidentally, often sponsored artistic innovation, was such a modern idea that they proudly referred to themselves as “artists for industry” or “advertising engineers." Since advertising was at once the medium of progressive graphic expression and a growing industry, many of the most influential graphic design trade journals of the late 1920s and 1930s had names with advertising in their titles: De Reclame (the Netherlands and Germany), Werbung (Germany), Publicité (France), Pubblicità d'Italia (Italy), and Advertising Arts (United States). Even those trade magazines that focused on printing and other aspects of commercial art featured many articles on advertising. ## Icons of Progress "Today it is difficult to recapture the intoxicating feeling of aesthetic possibility that once surrounded national advertising," writes Jackson Lears about the American experience of the 1920s (Fables of Abundance, Basic Books, 1995). “But for a while, especially during the early years of the courtship, it seemed to many artists as if advertising embodied exhilarating energy, rather than merely impoverishment of spirit." As the modern movements sought to redefine the place of art and the role of the artist in society, advertising was seen not only as a medium ripe for reform, but as a platform on which the graphic symbols of reform could be paraded along with the product being sold. Within this scenario, layout (or craft) was replaced by graphic design as an artistic endeavor, the engine of style. Lears points out that during this period, advertising art “became detached from the product to which it referred. Advertising design' became a value in and of itself, without reference to the sales that design was intended to generate." Design still served, but was no longer a slave to copy-driven campaigns. American advertising agencies gradually shifted their preference from “capitalist realism," or unambiguous if mythic representation, to surrealistic imagery which imbued the commodity with a fantastic aura. Refrigerators floating in space signified the abstract notion of progress as well as the fantasy of an ethereal, modern home. Industry became the totem of the American century and advertising extolled its monumentality through modern and moderne graphic forms. As in the Soviet idealization of the industrial state, factories, smokestacks, and gigantic bearings and gears were heroicized as icons of progress. Advertising not only sold, it told a tale about America's aspirations. American advertising had traditionally been dominated by hard-sell copy, and the shift in emphasis from words to art and design did not occur overnight. But it did change precipitously thanks to Earnest Elmo Calkins, founder of the Calkins & Holden advertising agency in New York. Calkins became interested in design reform in about 1908 and instituted his new ideas by engaging some of the most widely admired magazine illustrators, including James Montgomery Flagg and J. C. Lyendecker, to render ads for common products. Later he led the field in the introduction of modern art (Cubism and Futurism) into advertising. He wrote profusely in trade journals and design and poster annuals and was a frequent contributor to London's Commercial Art annual. In articles in general magazines, such as one titled “Beauty the New Business Tool" (Atlantic Monthly, August 1927), Calkins expounded on the need for dynamic new design to help communicate the marketing innovation which became known as programmed or forced obsolescence. Calkins, whom Jackson Lears calls the “apostle of taste" and "corporate connoisseur of artifice," introduced the consumerist idea that all products—from coffee tins to automobiles—should regularly shed their surface style as an inducement to consumers to toss out the old and purchase the new. This pseudoscience of style engineering—a kind of designbased behavior modification—forced American industrial design to shift from its quaint Victorian ornamentalism to machine-age Modernism, and so encouraged the retooling of American industry. As Terry Smith states in Making the Modern: Industry, Art, and Design in America (University of Chicago Press, 1994), “Advertising's parentage of U.S.-type industrial design is traceable not only to their common economic purposes but to the histories of the individuals who shaped the design profession. Most .. . spent the 1920s as advertising artist-illustrators. Joseph Sinel, John Vassos, Raymond Loewy, and Walter Dorwin Teague are the outstanding examples." These pioneering practitioners are rarely cited in graphic design histories. Likewise Calkins, who is arguably the single most important figure in early twentieth-century American graphic design, makes no more than a few cameo appearances in such significant accounts as Philip B. Meggs's History of Graphic Design, Richard Hollis's Graphic Design: A Concise History, and R. Roger Remington and Barbara J. Hodik's Nine Pioneers in American Graphic Design. Yet thanks to Calkins's promotion of European modern and modernistic design, along with his invention of the creative team of copywriter and designer, graphic design grew by leaps and bounds as a service to advertising in the late 1920s prior to the Great Depression. During the 1930s it developed into a field with its own integrity, canon, and luminaries. Though Calkins did not invent contemporary design standards, he codified them and urged their adoption. Advertising design influenced modes of editorial and institutional design until the Second World War; afterward, editorial design surpassed advertising in originality. ## Graphic Design as Art The 1950s saw the beginnings of a schism between graphic and advertising design. Modern graphic design veered from mass advertising toward corporate and institutional communications and evolved into a rarefied practice decidedly more sophisticated than advertising design of the same period. Some advertising artist/designers were celebrated for individual achievement, but as Terry Smith writes, “advertising designed primarily by an individual artist was becoming rare enough in the United States to be remarkable, exceptional, and expensive." Over time such advertising luminaries as did exist—E. McKnight Kauffer and A. M. Cassandre being the prime examples—were detached from the history of advertising and made into heroes of graphic design. A kind of sociocultural stratification began to distinguish the advertising designer from the graphic designer. Today, a common view among advertising people is that graphic designers simply “do letterheads," while graphic designers scorn their advertising counterparts for being ignorant about type. Job or class distinctions have driven a wedge between graphic designers and advertising designers and graphic design history has perpetuated the schism. While cultural scholars, consumer theorists, and media critics have done considerable work on the social, political, and psychological role of advertising in American culture, their writings are rarely cited in graphic design literature, as if issues of consumerism and marketing have no bearing on the “art" of graphic design. This omission can be traced back to formal prejudices. ## The Formalist Lens If advertising is the function, then graphic design is the form. As Dwiggins pointed out in Layout in Advertising, “The advertising piece is not an end-product; it is an intermediate step in a process. The end-product of advertising is not [design]—it is sales." Yet selling is an ignored aspect of the story contemporary graphic design historians choose to tell—after all, graphic designers are not salespeople but form-givers, which is perceived as a more culturally significant activity than being a mere advertising huckster. The problem is that an advertisement must be analyzed as a collaborative endeavor involving considerably more than just its graphics. So to avoid having to admit that graphic design has a subordinate role, the historical discourse has built up around graphic design as a formal endeavor. As if in art history, graphic designs are removed from their contexts, placed on pedestals, and examined under the formalist lens. Like the annual design WYSIWYG competitions in which work is judged entirely on how it looks, graphic design history more often than not focuses attention on style, manner, and structure rather than on the success or failure of a piece of work in the marketplace. The audience, which is rarely considered in formalist critiques of fine art, is likewise ignored in favor of aesthetic and sometimes philosophical or ideological considerations. This not only denies the public's role, but the client's as well. In the first important historical text published in America, A History of Graphic Design (Van Nostrand Reinhold, second ed., 1992), Philip B. Meggs skirts the role of advertising. In his discussion of graphic languages in a chapter entitled “A New Language of Form," he writes: “A spirit of innovation was present in all the visual arts, ideas were in the air, and by the end of World War I, graphic designers, architects, and product designers were energetically challenging prevailing notions about form and function." Where in this litany does the advertising designer fit? In the chapter entitled “The Modern Movement in America," which should focus on the advertising designer. Meggs asserts, “graphic design in America during the 1920s and 1930s was dominated by traditional illustration. However, the modern approach slowly gained ground on several fronts: book design, editorial design for fashion and business magazines catering to the affluent, and promotional and corporate graphics." By subsuming advertising under the term “promotional graphics," Meggs presents an inaccurate picture of the forces that brought about Modernism's ascendancy. In the chapter “The New York School," he further snubs advertising when introducing New York City, the advertising and publishing capital of America: "New York City assumed [the role of Paris] during the middle twentieth century. It may have been that these cultural incubators nurtured creativity because the prevailing climate enabled individuals to realize their potential. Or, the existing climate may have been a magnet that attracted individuals of great talent." In Meggs's otherwise painstaking historical account, advertising is portrayed not as the mother of graphic design, but as a midwife. While scant attention is given to the economic forces that forged the practice, certain key individuals who were nurtured by advertising are highlighted. Thus discussion of advertising is used merely to push the great master narrative along until the individual emerges from the birth canal as a graphic designer. The problem is not that advertising cannot be read from a formalist viewpoint, but that history demands that its function and outcome be equally scrutinized. This turns the focus away from graphic design, and in order to refocus attention on their discipline graphic design historians tend to treat advertising simply as a matter of surface. For instance, when one of Alexey Brodovitch's advertisements for the New York department store Saks Fifth Avenue is put under the historical/critical microscope, we learn about the typeface, lettering, and illustration, but not about how it functioned as a piece of advertising in a newspaper. Does consideration of its function diminish its artistic—or graphic design—value? By referring to it as “advertising,” does the work shrink in stature from a paradigmatic piece of graphics to kitsch? In Nine Pioneers in American Graphic Design (MIT Press, 1989), R. Roger Remington and Barbara J. Hodik marginalize Brodovitch's early advertising design when they write that he “increasingly specialized in poster design between 1925 and 1930 and devoted himself to experimentation with new techniques with the goal of producing intelligible images through good graphics." The fact that the posters under discussion were advertisements is overshadowed by formalistic concerns in such statements as: “He learned how to simplify the subject through analysis of the Purist painters. His posters for Martini, now in the Museum of Modern Art in New York, are among the major products of this fruitful period." Nowhere do the authors acknowledge this work as advertising, even when they report that Brodovitch was invited to create a program in advertising design at the Philadelphia School of Industrial Design. With rare exceptions, when advertising is included in graphic design history, it is as an incidental part of the consideration of individuals and artifacts. In my own Graphic Style: From Victorian to Post-modern (Harry N. Abrams, 1988), the advertising artifact is treated merely as a vessel for style, not as a model from which to examine functional attributes. Remington and Hodik do, however, take a step toward integrating advertising and graphic design in their selection of Charles Coiner, art director of the Philadelphia-based ad agency N. W. Ayer, as one of their pioneers. Coiner brought modernity to America's oldest advertising agency, introducing fine art to the repertoire and hiring some of America's leading graphic designers, such as Leo Lionni and Alexey Brodovitch, to conceive and style print ads. The authors give him full credit for his contribution to his firm's success: “Ayer clients received forty-one awards during the first nineteen years of exhibitions by art directors . . . Ayer pioneered the production ofbeautiful' ads through campaigns for Cannon Mills, Caterpillar Tractor, Climax Molybdenum, French Line, Marcus Jewelers, DeBeers Diamonds, and Capehart." Yet their text—the only contemporary study of this significant advertising pioneer (a profile appeared in Portfolio in 1950)—reads more as a list of achievements than an analysis of advertising's, and by extension Coiner's, role in the larger culture. Advertising is used as a backdrop to his endeavor rather than a lens through which consumer culture can be explored. Despite Coiner's inclusion, advertising remains marginalized. Yet Nine Pioneers provides a key insight into how graphic design began to break from advertising during the war and how advertising designers emerged as creative forces afterward. “During the war, very few goods were available for consumer purchase. Advertising had nothing to sell. When the war ended, the scene changed dramatically to a buyer's market. Designers finally had the opportunity to express their ideas in the spheres of advertising and communications." That wartime austerity offered other creative challenges to the advertising industry that were consequential to graphic design is conveniently overlooked. Of the histories discussed here, only Richard Hollis's Graphic Design: A Concise History (Thames and Hudson, 1994) openly addressed the role of advertising. “In the 1930s, it had been art directors who had established graphic design, mainly in advertising and magazine layouts." Hollis concisely argues the importance of the “New Advertising"—the integrated design—and concept-driven campaigns of the late 1950s and 1960s. He focuses on the key art directors—Paul Rand and Gene Federico—and campaigns such as Doyle Dane Bernbach's for Volkswagen, explaining this work as important because it made the spectator active, not passive. But Hollis's brief discussion avoids the broader implications of advertising, focusing instead on iconoclasts who are soon positioned in his narrative as graphic design exemplars. This is the inevitable paradox of graphic design history. Since advertising is marginalized, the few acknowledged advertising design leaders must somehow be presented as graphic design leaders. For instance, the majority of work by Lou Dorfsman, the former art director of CBS Radio and Television, is institutional and trade advertising, through which he not only set new typographic standards, but increased business. Though the success of his ads is sometimes cited anecdotally in references to his career, Dorfsman is usually presented as either a typographer or an art director, rarely as an advertising man. Likewise Herb Lubalin, the art director of Suddler & Hennesy before branching out into editorial and type design, is routinely discussed as a typographic pioneer who, incidentally, broke new ground in pharmaceutical advertising. Analyzing such figures' design as a milestone in the marriage of typo and image avoids the stigma of it being advertising. Gene Federico and George Lois, both of whom owned ad agencies, are presented as creative forces who transcended the advertising field. Federico was a great typographer, Lois a brilliant art director, and for the purposes of design history they achieved their status in spite of their profession. ## Unheroic Artifacts Graphic designers have distanced themselves from advertising in the same way that children put as much space as possible between themselves and their parents. And, indeed, graphic design did develop its own characteristics. American advertising was originally copy-based and unresponsive to design, and though reformers like Calkins (and later Bill Bernbach) encouraged the seamless integration of works, pictures, and design, the copy, slogan, and jingle have been the driving forces. From the turn of the century, would-be journalists and novelists were recruited as copywriters, giving the field a certain faux literary cast. Eventually, advertising developed its own stereotypical professionals, who even today are distinct from graphic design professionals. The tilting of the scales toward the copy-driven “big idea" is one reason why advertising histories veer away from extensive analysis of graphic design. Another issue is quality as defined by the two fields—a great advertising campaign may not be exceptional graphic design, while a superb piece of graphic design may mask a poor advertising campaign. The history of advertising is more interested in how Marlboro cigarettes tested a variety of trade characters before stumbling on the Marlboro Man as a symbol of manliness. While graphic design appears negligible in the cultural analysis of this campaign, understanding the relationship of this symbol (which is graphic design in the broadest sense) to the larger mythology provides insight into how the American myth was perpetuated. As important as this long-running campaign is (and not just as an example of politically incorrect thinking), it has never been analyzed in graphic design history for its symbolic connotations. Though the Lucky Strike package designed by Raymond Loewy and the Eve Cigarette package designed by Herb Lubalin and Ernie Smith are featured as design artifacts, the advertising campaigns that sold the designs have been ignored. Graphic design historians are prudishly selective in what they discuss. They base decisions on ideal formal attributes—what is inherently interesting from a design perspective. They write as though consumerism is wicked—us (the canon) versus them (the mass) underscores graphic design history. Yet by eliminating advertising, design history loses rich insights into visual culture. One of the touchstones of inclusion in graphic design histories is whether or not a work broke the stranglehold of commercial convention. Paul Rand's advertisements for Orbachs, for instance, have become part of the canon not because they were effective advertising, but because they assaulted antiquity. But this criterion is not the only way to read advertising design. Like some of the European Modernists before him, Rand introduced principles of modern art into advertising, bringing the rarefied avant-garde to ordinary citizens. In Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity, 1920–1940 (University of California, 1985), Roland Marchand describes the mainstreaming of the avant-garde as a significant marketing ploy that both introduced and made it frivolous. This important aspect of graphic design history can only be told if certain unheroic artifacts are included in the narrative. To refer to or reproduce only billboards, posters, and other aesthetically acceptable tokens of advertising is not enough. In the 1930s the distinction between advertising art and graphic design was virtually nonexistent. While typography was often written about as a separate aesthetic field, it was also addressed in terms of its function in advertising. Moreover, whether discussing a book jacket, record sleeve, poster, brochure, magazine, or any other form of graphic endeavor, the word “advertising” was not regarded as derisive. Today, advertising is not totally ignored—many trade magazines cover it—but it is rarely integrated into the broader analysis of graphic design. While certain aspects of advertising—marketing, demographics, and other pseudosciences—are less important to graphic design history, considerably more consumerist theory, media criticism, and even perceptual psychology would be useful in understanding the form and function of graphic design through the advertising lens. Likewise, aesthetic theories can be applied through the lens of design to put a visually bereft advertising history into clearer focus. During the past decade there have been calls to develop new narratives and to readdress graphic design history through feminist, ethnic, racial, post-structuralist, and numerous other politically correct perspectives. There are many ways to slice a pie, but before unveiling too many subtexts, it is perhaps first useful to reconcile a mother and her child. Advertising and graphic design have more in common than the postmodern trend for vernacularism (or the aestheticization of timeworn artifacts) reveals. Advertising and graphic design are equally concerned with selling, communication, and entertaining. To appreciate one, the other is imperative. But more important, if graphic design history does not expand to include advertising and other related studies, it will ultimately succumb to the dead-end thinking that will be the inevitable consequence of being arrested in a state of continual adolescence.