# THE FIGURE OF THE ARTISAN: ARTS AND CRAFTS IDEOLOGY N AMERICA THE WORK ETHIC HAS ALWAYS BEEN A touchstone of national morality. The contemporary cant about “lagging productivity"is only the most recent example of a long tradition of upper-class complaints about shiftless workers—now translated from the language of republican moralism to the jargon of social science. Yet there has also been a minority tradition extending from Henry David Thoreau to Studs Terkel, joining a wide variety of critics who have sensed the benumbing busyness of modern work and have tried to locate alternatives. The revival of handicraft at the turn of the century partook of both these traditions; it was meanspirited and largehearted, suffused with upper-class forebodings and utopian aspirations. Its contradictions mirrored more than the tensions in the national mythology of work; they also reflected the social and cultural confusion of the late nineteenth century. In work-obsessed America, it was not surprising that the recoil from overcivilization generated a critique of modern work. Despite shopworn paeans to the nobility of toil, a number of sensitive observers began to see that labor in industrial America was being degraded as never before. In the factories and bureaucracies of organized capitalism, even the more fortunate workers were being reduced to the status of machine tenders or paper shufflers. Contrary to Daniel Bell and other present-day prophets of “postindustrial society," the rationalization of economic life did not primarily promote new skills; more often it destroyed old ones. Even before Taylor introduced “scientific management," the drive for maximum productivity and control led managers to divide labor into repetitive, minute tasks. Individual workers could neither envision the larger purpose of their labor nor exert much control over their working lives.1 For white collar clerks and professionals there was a further problem. Despite their relative security their work seemed strangely insubstantial. The new bureaucratic world of work often fragmented their labor and reduced their sense of autonomy: more important, it isolated them from the hard, substantial reality of things. Among the middle and upper classes, the transformation of work reinforced difficulties pervading the wider culture; the splintering sense of selfhood, the vague feelings of unreality. Yearning to reintegrate selfhood by resurrecting the authentic experience of manual labor, a number of Americans looked hopefully toward the figure of the premodern artisan. His work was necessary and demanding; it was rooted in a genuine community; it was a model of hardness and wholeness. Or so it seemed. The revival of handicraft originated and flourished primarily among the educated bourgeoisie—the class most troubled by the crisis of cultural authority during the late nineteenth century. To be sure, industrial workers from agrarian or craft backgrounds often clung valiantly to traditional skills and resisted modern work discipline. But they did not selfconsciously resurrect an ideal of craftsmanship as an antidote to modern ills. They did not have to; craftsmanship was their birthright.² Arts and Crafts ideologues, on the other hand, came usually from among the business and professional people who felt most cut off from “real life" and most in need of moral and cultural regeneration. These people believed they were part of an “Arts and Crafts movement," but that phrase encompassed a wide variety of social types and reform enterprises. Craft ideologues ranged from the aloof patrician Charles Eliot Norton to the flamboyant former soap salesman Elbert Hubbard. Their activities varied even more widely: organizing communes dedicated to the “simple life" of craftsmanship and subsistence farming, making and marketing craft goods, lecturing and writing on the craft ideal, arranging craft exhibits, or simply collecting objets d’art. The “Arts and Crafts movement" was less a cohesive social phenomenon than a catchall polemical phrase. Despite their differences, Arts and Crafts spokesmen had much in common. Most came from an educated and relatively affluent background; most shared the world view of America's metropolitan bourgeoisie at the end of the nineteenth century. Though their differing personal circumstances led to various angles of vision, their cultural criticism stemmed from common concerns, addressed similar themes, and led to closely interrelated consequences. It is possible to view their underlying unity of outlook as an ideology—a collective mode of consciousness shaped to the actual or imagined needs and interests of a social group under particular historical circumstances, designed not only to legitimize a version of reality but also to mobilize action.³ In forming that ideology, craft leaders were partly influenced by indigenous social circumstances and cultural traditions. Like many others among the educated bourgeoisie, they felt that their class had become enervated and vulnerable to social upheaval. To make moral sense of this situation, they drew heavily on Puritan and republican tradition—particularly the deep distrust of urban “luxury"and the faith in the ennobling powers of hard work. And to focus their identities as reformers, they drew on another resource as well: the ethos of evangelical reform which had infused republican moralism with missionary zeal during the antebellum era, spawning innumerable utopian communities and benevolent societies designed to mitigate social chaos by promoting self-improvement. The individualist and idealist assumptions of the republican tradition and its evangelical variant played a dominant role in shaping the antimodern stance taken by the craft leaders. Yet American craftsmen were also affected by several varieties of European antimodernism: the pastoral doctrine of the “Simple Life" preached by Leo Tolstoy and the British poet Edward Carpenter; the decentralized communitarianism of the anarchist Prince Kropotkin; and above all the critique of labor under modern capitalism developed by the British polemicists John Ruskin and William Morris. For a number of American craft leaders, exposure to the ideas of Ruskin and Morris was the catalyst for their embrace of the Arts and Crafts ideal. The two Britons were widely cited in Craft publications; their antimodern aphorisms were essential components of many American craft polemics. Before turning to American Arts and Crafts ideology, it is worth looking briefly at Ruskin and Morris in their British context. The fate of their ideas and of the movements they inspired suggests some interesting comparisons between British and American antimodernism. Ruskin was the key forerunner, the antimodern Jeremiah. Beginning with The Stones of Venice (1853), he juxtaposed the creative improvisation allowed the medieval craftsman at work in the irregular Gothic style with the superhuman demands made by the Renaissance architects who insisted on recapturing classical symmetry. In Ruskin's view, the Renaissance rage for order led ultimately to the regimentation of the modern factory system, where mechanization and minute subdivision of labor had reduced the worker to “a heap of sawdust." By splitting the population into “morbid thinkers and miserable workers," the factory system created a situation that was both morally and socially dangerous. Warning that revolution was imminent, Ruskin argued that medieval cathedral builders (unlike modern factory hands) remained satisfied with their material lot because they found joy in their labor. Ruskin's class fears mingled with his moral convictions and led him to propose voluntaristic remedies. He exhorted affluent Britons to boycott machine-made goods, sought to spread enthusiasm for manual labor by leading Oxford undergraduates on road-mending expeditions, and, in Unto This Last (186o), urged fatherly benevolence from captains of industry as well as minimum welfare guarantees from a paternalistic state. Finally he tried to re-create a microcosm of medieval society in his St. George's Guild. The Guild epitomized the quixotic quality of Ruskin's reform. It was to be a miniature feudal kingdom on twenty acres of wooded land, but Ruskin's encroaching mental instability doomed his sporadic organizational efforts.4 Despite his failure at reform, Ruskin's antimodern critique had intellectual consequences. Most importantly, it shaped the antimodern vision of William Morris. Morris read Ruskin while he was an undergraduate at Oxford in the 185os. The experience led him from the dreamy aesthetic medievalism of the university to a career as a reformer of mid-Victorian taste who designed neomedieval furniture and textiles for wealthy clients —and ultimately to a second career as a socialist agitator whose efforts were still animated by an antimodern impulse.“Apart from the desire to produce beautiful things,"Morris wrote in 1894, “the leading passion of my life has been and is hatred of modern civilization."5 Convinced by the 188os that Ruskin's schemes were pathetically inadequate, Morris sought to wed his mentor's antimodernism with Marxian socialism. Unlike Ruskin, Morris admitted the violence and exploitation in medieval society. But he argued that the medieval guilds were communal islands of“production for use," resistant to feudal and capitalist oppression alike. And he further insisted that the abolition of medieval despotism had exacted a fearful price: for the vast majority, intellectual and political liberty had been vitiated by industrial slavery and aesthetic impoverishment. In modern England, capitalism's “ceaseless creation of wants" and the excessive division of labor had produced a nation of “wretched lopsided creatures." Abandoning the elitism of Ruskin's critique, Morris kept its moral core—the insistence on the worker's right to joyful and useful labor. That insistence separated Morris from the Fabians and other leading British socialists. With unerring accuracy he foresaw one of the central failures of the socialist Left in the twentieth century: he warned that bureaucratic state socialism promised only a “quasi-socialist machinery"of improved administration, rather than a humane socialist community. Distrusting the preoccupation with efficiency in all bureaucratic systems, Morris could direct his fire at the stifling overorganization common to both capitalist and socialist versions of modern industrial society.⁶ In Britain, the antimodern visions of Ruskin and Morris suffered at the hands of their audiences. Ruskin's social criticism was widely scorned as the product of mental imbalance and approaching senility. His admirers preferred to remember him as a benevolent arbiter of mid-Victorian taste. Morris's critique, on the other hand, was not so much dismissed as distorted and diffused. Many of the British were inspired by Morris's earlier design work to promote the revival of handicraft, but this British Arts and Crafts movement largely ignored his career of socialist agitation. By 1888, Morris was attacking the movement for its “empty grumbling about the continuous march of machinery over dying handicraft" and its "various elegant little schemes"for encouraging public appreciation of handicraft—none of which touched the heart of the matter, the degradation of work. In the minds of most craft revivalists (and indeed of the British generally), Morris shed his revolutionary mantle and became the patron saint of nostalgic aestheticism. And even for those seeking to transcend aestheticism, Morris's critique became diffused among the Simple Lifers, vegetarians, and dress reformers who clustered in the backwaters of the British Left, organizing “rustic gatherings" and entertaining fantastic visions of social regeneration through the abandonment of corsets and mutton. The Arts and Crafts crusade against the “crinkum-crankum" spread by Victorian taste somehow attracted the crinkumcrankum of Victorian society.7 Meanwhile, the mainstream of socialist thought flowed away from Morris, following the route charted by the Fabians Beatrice and Sidney Webb. The Webbs envisioned a technocratic society run by enlightened managers who were devoted to the disinterested service of the community. Criticizing capitalism's excesses, they clung to the positivist faith in the link between material and moral progress, anticipating an “inevitable" transition from corporate capitalism to bureaucratic state socialism. Ultimately most British socialists (whether intellectuals or rank and file) accepted the Webb view, ignored Morris's warnings, and became enmeshed in the “quasisocialist machinery" of Labour Party politics.8 Yet antimodern sentiments survived and sustained important intellectual and social developments. The desire to reintegrate a fragmented sense of self led to many more plans to promote satisfying labor in an “organic" community of face-to-face relationships. One can see that desire in manifestoes like A. J. Penty's The Restoration of the Guild System (19o7), as well as the guild socialism of G. D. H. Cole, the distributism of Hilaire Belloc and Gilbert Keith Chesterton, and the organicist cultural criticism of T. E. Hulme and F. R. Leavis. Whether egalitarian and secular (like Cole's), or hierarchical and religious (like Chesterton's), all these visions of community sought to create islands of wholeness in a fragmented capitalist society. Outside of intellectual circles, the influence of the British antimodern impulse was vaguer but longer lasting. A distaste for the ugliness spread by industrial capitalism, a nostalgia for a “green and pleasant land"—these sentiments have survived throughout the twentieth century. Originating in aristocratic court literature but later widely popularized, persistent pastoralism has united' Tories and Labourites, helping to dull popular enthusiasm for unrestrained capitalist development. In Britain, the antimodern critique personified in Ruskin and Morris's medieval artisan lost much of its force but survived.9 The same was true of the American craft ideal, but here the picture was messier from the beginning because the American craft leaders were neither as articulate nor as clearheaded as Ruskin and Morris. Drawing on a wider variety of cultural resources, the American critique seemed eclectic and muddled by comparison to that of the British forerunners—though not by comparison to that of their disciples. American craft leaders were hampered from the outset by their class interests and anxieties, their individualist and idealist assumptions about the nature of social reform, and above all by their own underlying ambivalence toward modern culture and its progressive creed. These difficulties loomed larger as the craft movement spread, ultimately transforming it from a critique of modern culture to a new kind of accommodation. In the public realm the craft revival revealed its accommodationist bent by sponsoring manual training in public schools as a safe mode of socializing the rebellious working class. But accommodation meant more than devising new forms of social control; it meant evaporation of the hopes of the craft leaders for a truly alternative culture. Afflicted by the spiritual uncertainties of their age, ambivalent in their antimodern dissent, American craft leaders quickly lost sight of religious or communal frameworks of meaning outside the self. Like many of their British counterparts, they allowed their quest for wholeness to center on the self alone. The ideal of joyful labor, when it was not submerged by aestheticism, became a means of personal revitalization rather than a path to renewed community. In part a reaction against therapeutic self-absorption, the revival of handicraft ultimately became another form of therapy for an overcivilized bourgeoisie. By World War I, the craft ideal had largely been reduced to a revivifying hobby for the affluent: the nervous businessman would return refreshed to the office after a weekend of puttering at his basement workbench. In subsequent years and especially since World War II this therapeutic approach to manual labor has spread from the comfortable bourgeoisie throughout much of the American population. "Do-it-yourself' projects have provided innumerable Americans with a sense of autonomy and a chance to confront the substantial reality of material things. For people whose working lives seem beyond their control and permeated by the barrenness of a bureaucratic civilization, this is no small achievement. Yet it perpetuates the fragmentation decried by Ruskin and Morris: the split between work for pay and work for joy. Despite this accommodation, the American craft ideal has also preserved its critical edge. The communal efforts of the Arts and Crafts movement, however disastrous in the end, were part of a continuing tradition that looked backward to antebellum utopians and forward to the agrarian communities of the New Deal era and the 196os. Seeking the "hard reality" of life on the land, these communitarian ventures have sometimes borne eloquent witness against the stifling complacency of an overstuffed and overorganized society. And besides promoting this popular protest, Arts and Crafts leaders also served as the intellectual ancestors of decentralist intellectuals in our own time—-men as diverse as Paul Goodman, Lewis Mumford, and E. F. Schumacher, who have had to remind us once more of the deadening effects of rationalization and the desperate need for creative, useful labor. The American craft revival, in other words, displayed the characteristic antimodern blend of accommodation and protest. To begin exploring the complex fate of the craft ideal in America, we need to look first at the movement's leaders. A disparate lot of educators, designers, and visionary entrepreneurs, they shared a common perception that America had become somehow overcivilized. But the way they defined overcivilization depended on their various social and personal circumstances.