First American Edition Copyright Â© 1986 by Cameron Books All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States by Pantheon Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally published in Great Britain by Thames and Hudson Limited, London, in 1986. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Forty Adrian, 1948- Objects of desire Bibliography: p. Includes index. 1. Design, Industrial-Great Britain-History. I. Title. TS57.F67 1986 ISBN 0-394-50792-4 745.2'0942 Manufactured in Great Britain 85-12477 In writing this book, I have been fortunate in the help that many people have given me so freely. In particular, I would like to thank Hazel Clarke, Francis Duffy, Anthony D. King, Caradoc King, Pat Kirkham, Rodney Mace, John North, Dorothy Ogden, Rozsika Parker, Michèle Roberts, Helen Smith, Robert Thorne, Clive Wainwright and Deborah Weiner for their help, advice, suggestions, information and criticism. My greatest debts are to my colleague Mark Swenarton and to my wife Briony Fer, both of whom read much of the book in draft and were frank and constructive in their criticisms. While I was writing, both gave more encouragement than I could ever have asked for, and although I must take the responsibility for the book's arguments and ideas, it owes more to them than they may know. The arduous task of assembling the illustrations for the book was made much easier through the helpfulness of a number of archives, firms and museums: in particular, I would like to thank Lynn Miller of the Wedgwood Museum at Barlaston, Jim Gibson of Twyfords Ltd, Stoke-on-Trent, Ivan Sparkes of High Wycombe Museum and Tony Coulson of the Open University. The manuscript of this book was completed in 1980 and uses research published up to that date. Despite the interval that has elapsed, I believe that the arguments and ideas of the book remain valid and sustainable.