Introduction \*Anthony J. Coulson, A Bibliography of Design in Britain 1851-1970, London, 1979, gives a good indication of the range of British design literature available. Nearly every object we use, most of the clothes we wear and many of the things we eat have been designed. Since design seems to be so much a part of everyday life, we are justified in asking exactly what it is, what it does, and how it came into existence. In spite of all that has been written on the subject, it is not easy to find the answers to these apparently simple questions.\* Most of the literature from the last fifty years would have us suppose that the main function of design is to make things beautiful. A few studies suggest that it is a special method of solving problems, but only occasionally has design been shown to have something to do with profit, and even more rarely has it been seen as being concerned with the transmission of ideas. This book developed out of my realisation that, especially in its economic and ideological aspects, design is a more significant activity than has usually been acknowledged. Particularly in Britain, the study of design and its history has suffered from a form of cultural lobotomy which has left design connected only to the eye, and severed its connections to the brain and to the pocket. It is commonly assumed that design would somehow be soiled if it were associated too closely with commerce, a misconceived attempt at intellectual hygiene that has done no good at all. It has obscured the fact that design came into being at a particular stage in the history of capitalism and played a vital part in the creation of industrial wealth. Limiting it to a purely artistic activity has made it seem trivial and relegated it to the status of a mere cultural appendix. Just as little attention has been given to design's influence on how we think. Those who complain about the effects of television, journalism, advertising and fiction on our minds remain oblivious to the similar influence of design. Far from being a neutral, inoffensive artistic activity, design, by its very nature, has much more enduring effects than the ephemeral products of the media because it can cast ideas about who we are and how we should behave into permanent and tangible forms. Since 'design' is a word that will figure large in this book, it is as well to state at the outset what it means. In everyday speech, the word has two common meanings when applied to artefacts. In one sense, it refers to the look of things: saying 'I like the design' usually involves notions of beauty, and such judgements are generally made on that basis. As will already be clear, this book is not about the aesthetics of design. Its purpose is not to discuss whether, say, William Morris's furniture designs were more beautiful than those displayed at the Great Exhibition of 1851, but rather to try to discover why such differences existed at all.