\*Brandon, p. 117. victim of the prejudices against the domestic use of the sewing machine. To make the sewing machine a desirable piece of equipment for the home, the manufacturers tried various approaches. The first was reducing the price of the machines, in which the pioneers were Willcox & Gibbs, who invented a very simple mechanism that sewed with a single-thread chainstitch and sold for only fifty dollars, half the price of the Wheeler & Wilson model. As prices came down, manufacturers also began to sell the machines on hire purchase, to put them within reach even of households that could not afford to pay someone else to do the sewing. Singer was the first to introduce a hire purchase scheme, offering machines for a five dollars down payment, with monthly instalments of between three and five dollars. Their sales quadrupled within a year.\* There were still the machine's unwanted industrial associations to be overcome: how were people to be convinced that it was suitable for the home when they thought of it as belonging in workshops and being operated only by working-class girls? One response was intensive advertising. Manufacturers took every opportunity to convince the public of the machine's appropriateness for the home: for instance, they had sewing machines illustrated in domestic settings, as in the fashion plate of 1867 that featured a Wheeler & Wilson machine. Singer's own publicity made much of the machine's advantages to domestic life. One of their early publicity booklets announced: Fashion plate, September 1867, illustrating the Wheeler and Wilson machine, suggesting it as appropriate to the home.