\*Quoted in G.R. Cooper, p.34 \*G.R. Cooper, pp.46-53. A Place for Anything but Work elegant form; a machine decorated in the best style of art, so as to make a beautiful ornament in the parlor or boudoir... To supply this public want, we have just produced, and are now preparing to receive orders for, "Singer's New Family Sewing Machine".'\* Singer had identified the problem of the design of the domestic sewing machine and seen that the solution was to make it 'exclusively' domestic and distinct from all industrial models; this was done, as the brochure states, by the application of beauty and art. However, while Singer and other manufacturers knew they had to make their domestic models unlike industrial machines, they seem to have been unsure of what appearance would be suitable to ornament the parlour or boudoir. In the late 1850s and early 1860s, a plethora of new designs for sewing machines were launched in the United States, as every manufacturer tried to produce something that would conform to the market's idea of what was appropriate to the home. Some of the designs were obvious novelties: incorporating animals or cherubs, they were intended to appeal through their idiosyncrasy. Almost all were distinguished by some degree of ornament and by lightness of construction.\* In practice, though, the sewing machine so rapidly proved its domestic value that, after a few years, it was no longer necessary to devote much effort to making it look different from its industrial counterparts. The designs began to be broadly similar, although the domestic models were usually distinguished by a larger amount of gilded ornament. Nevertheless, for a short time, manufacturers had deemed it extremely important to design a domestic machine that would be regarded as an entirely separate species from the industrial version. It is obvious enough that factories are the result of the industrial revolution, but we rarely think of homes, as we know them today, as a creation of the same revolution. Previously, most production and commerce had been carried on in the homes of the craftsmen, merchants or tradesmen concerned, and a house was understood to be a place that incorporated both work and the habitual activities of living: eating, sleeping and so on. However, once productive Right: Handloom weaver, making Donegal in a cottage in Bunerana, c. 1915. A late survival in rural Ireland of the once normal condition of the home, where production took place alongside domestic life. Left: Cherub sewing machine, 1858. In the rush to develop domestic sewing machines a large variety of ornamental machines, such as this, were marketed in the late 1850s.