\*E.P. Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class, Harmondsworth, 1968, pp. 393-398. \*For recent evidence see J.H. Goldthorpe, D. Lockwood, F. Bechhofer & J. Platt, The Affluent Worker in the Class Structure, Cambridge, 1969, pp. 101-103. \*Mark Rutherford's Deliverance, London, 1888, pp. 250-251. (First edition, 1885.) work was removed to factories, offices or shops, the home became exclusively a place for eating, sleeping, raising children and enjoying leisure. It acquired a new and distinctive character, which was vividly represented in its decoration and the design of its contents. Those who went to work in factories subordinated themselves to the rules and directions of managers and overseers for the duration of the working day; unlike domestic craftworkers, they had, for example, no freedom to decide when they worked, or for how long. Part of the intention in building factories had been to provide an instrument for the management of the workers, which led to their reputation for oppression.\* Similar changes in the lives of workpeople took place in trade and commerce, where expansion obliged merchants and brokers to employ men in the subordinate jobs of book-keeping and recording and invoicing transactions. From the beginning of the nineteenth century, these activities increasingly happened outside the merchants' own houses, in places exclusively devoted to work - counting-houses or offices. The rise of both factory and office turned work for a large number of people into an activity that was characterised by being done for a wage, in a place specially devoted to it, under the supervision of the employer. Not only did the factory and the office cause work to become physically separate from home, but the oppressive conditions also encouraged people to keep the two separate in their minds. Giving the home positive virtues made it into a haven where some of the self-respect that was lost in the workplace could be recovered. Keeping home and work apart has remained important, and a great deal of feeling has been invested in the separation.\* There are plenty of ways in which people signify the distinction, for example by wearing different clothes at home and at work. A particularly vivid illustration of the strength of feeling in keeping the two apart in the nineteenth century was given by the fictional character of Mark Rutherford, a clerk in a particularly unpleasant office: 'Another stratagem of defence which I adopted at the office was never to betray to a soul anything about myself. Nobody knew anything about me, whether I was married or single, where I lived, or what I thought upon a single subject of any importance. I cut off my office life in this way from my home life so completely that I was two selves, and my true self was not stained by contact with my other self. It was a comfort to me to think the moment the clock struck seven that my second self died, and that my first self suffered nothing by having anything to do with it. I was not the person who sat downstairs and endured the abominable talk of his colleagues and the ignominy of serving such a chief. I knew nothing about him. I was a citizen walking London streets; I had my opinions upon human beings and books; I was on equal terms with my friends; I was Ellen's husband; I was, in short, a man.' For employees like Mark Rutherford, the detachment of home from work made it possible to retain some self-esteem. But for employers, managers and entrepreneurs, whose work was not oppressive or alienating, the distinction that was established between home and work arose from rather different motives. In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, entrepreneurs 100