Interior, 7, Chesterfield Gardens, London, photographed in 1893. The nineteenth-century bourgeoisie turned the home into a palace of illusions, which encouraged total dissociation from the world immediately outside. \*Discussed more fully by W.E. Houghton, The Victorian Frame of Mind, New Haven, 1957, pp. 341-348, and R. Sennett, The Fall of Public Man, Cambridge, 1977, p.20, and chapter 8. \*W.Benjamin, 'Louis-Philippe or the Interior' in Charles Baudelaire, a Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism, London, 1973, pp. 167-169. had generally chosen to live near their factories: Sir Richard Arkwright's house at Cromford in Derbyshire was close to his mill, and the Crossleys at Halifax lived within sight of their factory. However, by the later nineteenth century, employers increasingly built their villas and mansions in different neighbourhoods from their factories and offices. Their wish to separate home from work has generally been explained by the argument that many entrepreneurs and professional men found the world in thich they worked increasingly brutal and deceitful. While participating in it, they felt it necessary to find some way of experiencing and expressing the moral virtues and honest emotions that they saw being submerged in the commercial world. The home, therefore came to be regarded as a repository of the virtues that were lost or denied in the world outside. To the middle classes in the nineteenth century, the home stood for feeling, for sincerity, honesty, truth and love. This representation of the home involved a complete dissociation of all things good from the public world, and of all things bad from the domestic world. It was to turn the home into a place of unreality, a place where illusions flourished.\* These conditions of the artificial exclusion of all 'bad' feelings from the home combined with enforced intellectual idleness provided, as Sigmund Freud and Josef Breuer were to observe in the 1890s, the climate for 101