Domestic hysteria. In an environment where illusions flourished and where women had nothing to do, hysteria became a familiar complaint. From Mrs Ellis, The Mother's Mistake, London, 1860, p.57. \*See especially the remarks on the case study of Anna O. in S. Freud & J. Breuer, Studies in Hysteria, Standard Edition of the Complete Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. II, London, 1955, pp.22, 41. \*L. Davidoff, The Best Circles, London, 1973 and P. Branca, Silent Sisterhood, London, 1975. \*R.& A. Garrett, Suggestions for House Decoration, London, 1879, p.56. \*News of the World Better Homes Book, London, n.d. [c.1953], p.4. hysteria, one of the most common malaises of nineteenth-century bourgeois women.\* To make the home so totally virtuous required much hard work, and the Victorians adopted various strategies to satisfy their illusions. They set up special codes for behaviour at home, and special roles were given to certain actors, principally women. Some of these aspects of nineteenth-century domestic life have been discussed in Richard Sennett's book The Fall of Public Man, and the process of evolving special roles for women has been written about by various historians, among them Leonore Davidoff and Patricia Branca.\* One of the most important of the strategies to be evolved was the development of special standards of taste and design for the home. Underlying all these standards, whether in the choice of furnishing style or in the artistic harmonies of the colour scheme, came the basic requirement that the environment should kill all associations with work. Writing in 1879 about the furnishing of drawing rooms, Rhoda and Agnes Garrett explained: '. . . out of the laudable desire to exclude all work-a-day thoughts and objects, the modern drawing room too often displays a tawdry and theatrical style of decoration and furniture . . .'\* Their underlying assumption, that the home should be the antithesis of the environment of work, has been a recurrent theme in advice to home decorators (not that people have needed reminding, so generally has it been taken for granted). For example, a book on home decorating published in the 1950s began with the following words: 'A tastefully planned home provides a wife with a gracious background and a haven for a husband where business worries can be temporarily banished.'\* One method of making home as unlike work as possible has been to construct in it the antithesis of environments in which work has habitually taken place. Out of the desire to make the home everything that the office was not has come a regular interaction between the designs of furnishings for each. Until well into the twentieth century, offices were austerely furnished in utilitarian colours with hard surfaces, and people sought to make their homes colourful, soft and plushy. Recent attempts to introduce some of the comforts of the home into offices have made the 102