\*On the High Tech Style, see J. Kron & S. Slesin, High Tech, London, 1979. \*Baldwin Brown, Young Men and Maidens, A Pastoral for the Times, London, 1871, pp. 38-39, quoted in Houghton, p.345. distinction less clear cut. It is in this context that some designers have taken the perverse step of imitating the hard, metallic finishes of industrial environments for domestic interiors in a style that has become known as 'high-tech'.\* It seems unlikely, however, that this style of domestic furnishing will ever appeal to more than the tiny professional and commercial élite whose choice of imagery related to the factory seems mainly determined by their wish to distinguish their homes from those of the working class, which remain furnished as the antithesis of the workplace. However, the pursuit of an antithesis does not, on its own, provide a model to be followed in the design of domestic interiors: 'not an office' or 'not a factory' are not themselves descriptions that provide any useful source of imagery for the home. What is the appropriate scenery for a place of non-work? One source of examples and imagery can be traced in the metaphors and similes that have been used for the home. The Victorians frequently described their homes as like heaven, and so, for example, we find a mid-nineteenth century sermon inspiring women 'to strive to make a home something like a bright, serene, restful, joyful nook of heaven in an unheavenly world.'\* While the analogy of home with heaven made sense in that both were expected to be free from production and strong in virtue, it was of little practical use Interior of a house in Hampstead, London, designed by Michael Hopkins, completed 1977. Details, finishes and furnishings derived from industrial enviroments are the basis of 'high-tech' but the interference with the home's customary image as a 'no-work' place has limited the popularity of the style. 103