Home as a Sign of Character \*Elsie De Wolfe, The House in Good Taste, New York, 1913, p.5. to the home decorator how was heaven furnished? In Victorian art and literature, heaven bore a tautological resemblance to the ideal of domestic life. In the nineteenth century, the most available source of imagery for a place free from work was the homes of the aristocracy, who were perceived by the bourgeoisie to live a life of idleness. Many middle-class homes in Britain, Europe and America until the 1860s strove to imitate aristocratic taste, though generally that of the past rather than the present; contemporary aristocratic taste allowed little scope for illusion, whereas that of the past was less inhibiting. In her book, The House in Good Taste, published in 1913, Elsie de Wolfe wrote: 'We take it for granted that every woman is interested in houses that she either has a house in course of construction, or dreams of having one, or has had a house long enough to wish it right. And we take it for granted that this American home is always the woman's home: a man may build and decorate a beautiful house, but it remains for a woman to make a home of it for him. It is the personality of the mistress that the house expresses. Men are forever guests in our homes, no matter how much happiness they may find there.'\* These were truths that had already been commonplace in Anglo-Saxon culture for at least half a century: women were identified with the house, and were expected to deal with domestic furnishing, which would become an expression of their personalities. Just why these should have become such usual assumptions is worth considering. As a metaphor for a woman's body, the house is an image long established in poetry, mythology and the unconscious: it was, for instance, one of the more potent symbols for female sexuality picked on by Freud in The Interpretation of Dreams. It is hard not to ignore this metaphorical meaning of the house in the quote from Elsie de Wolfe, particularly in its last sentence. The correspondence of house and body affects each, and establishes an identity between them; among its effects is the supposition that a woman is under an obligation to care for her house as she cares for her body. This psychological explanation for the identification of women with houses is not specific to modern society and could be expected to apply in all cultures. However, the material conditions of modern society have made women's association with the home especially strong. Middle-class women in the nineteenth century were effectively excluded from all forms of work, domestic or otherwise, with exceptions made only for single women, who could work in a very few occupations, for instance as governesses or nurses. The enforced idleness of married women was a reflection of the wealth and success of their husbands: rather than consuming leisure themselves, the men consumed it through their wives and daughters. That women should consume leisure vicariously for men was not the reason put forward at the time for their exclusion from work, but is one that has been supplied since by Thorstein Veblen in his Theory of the Leisure Class. The usual nineteenth-century justification was unsuitedness: women were thought to have 104