\*J. Ruskin, Sesame and Lilies (first published 1865) in Collected Works of John Ruskin, edited by E.T. Cook & A. Wedderburn, vol. XVIII, London, 1905, pp. 121-122. \*Rozsika Parker, The Subversive Stitch, London, 1984. \*Mrs Ellis, The Mother's Mistake, serialised in Family Friend, new series, vol III, 1854, p.2. \*J. Ruskin, letter to The Times, 25th May 1854. qualities that made them unfitted for work. Thus, John Ruskin wrote in his lecture "˜Of Queens' Gardens', 'The woman's power is not for rule, not for battle and her intellect is not for invention or creation, but for sweet ordering, management and decision.'\* However, the very same characteristics were thought to make women suited to the management of the home. The innocence attributed to women might have been out of place in the deceitful world of business, but their supposed virtue and purity fitted them perfectly for the ordering of cookery, servants and children. Their alleged sensitivity to beauty was also of special value in the home, even though, until the late nineteenth century, its only outlet was in needlework and the embroidery of upholstery, hangings, covers and pictures, through which women were expected to express their feminine and individual qualities. Before the 1860s, the choice of domestic furnishings seems to have been primarily a male activity, as was suggested by the opening of a novel published in 1854, The Mother's Mistake. A recently married couple go round the house which the husband has furnished, and he asks his wife, 'Is this not sufficient?' to which she replies, 'You have done all, and more than all, I could have imagined, to make me happy.'\* However, from the 1860s, the choice of domestic decoration and furnishing became an accepted and even expected activity for middle-class women, a good subject for their sensitivity which had hitherto found an outlet only in needlework. The domestic manuals of the last quarter of the century usually assumed that women would be responsible for the choice of decor and furnishings. In many cases, the activity must have been a welcome escape from enforced idleness; it was no doubt out of a desire to find occupations for women that some manuals encouraged them to undertake the decorating themselves, even to the extent of papering and painting rooms. The many late nineteenth-century handbooks gave a wealth of detailed advice on domestic decoration from which certain principles can be deduced. After making the home as unlike the husband's place of work as possible, the second general principle, as mentioned by Elsie de Wolfe, was that the interior should express the personality of its occupants, especially that of the lady of the house. The idea that domestic decor expressed personal character comes out of a general nineteenth-century fascination with appearances. The more reserved people were in public, the more they were driven to study the minutest clues of each other's appearance and possessions for signs of their true character. For example, John Ruskin's judgement of the shallowness and unworthiness of the man and woman in Holman Hunt's painting 'The Awakening Conscience' was based upon his observation of the furnishings, of which he wrote: ... there is not a single object in all that room - common, modern, vulgar... but it becomes tragical, if rightly read. That furniture so carefully painted, even to the last vein of the rosewood - is there nothing to be learnt from that terrible lustre of it, from its fatal newness; nothing there that has the old thoughts of home upon it, or that is ever to become part of a home?'\* By the late nineteeenth century, it was principally women whose characters were revealed by the choice of furnishings. The pressures 105