\*S. Bayley, In Good Shape. Style in Industrial Products 1900 to 1960, London, 1979, p. 10. The second, more exact use of the word 'design' refers to the preparation of instructions for the production of manufactured goods, and this is the sense meant when, for example, someone says 'I am working on the design of a car.' It might be tempting to separate the two meanings and deal with them independently, but this would be a great mistake, for the special quality of the word 'design' is that it conveys both senses, and their conjunction in a single word rightly expresses the fact that they are inseparable: the way things look is, in the broadest sense, a result of the conditions of their making. History, as I use it here, is concerned with the explanation of change, and the subject of this book is therefore the causes of change in the design of industrially-made goods. In other aspects of human existence that have been studied by historians - politics, society, the economy and some forms of culture the theories that have been developed to explain change appear highly sophisticated compared to those employed in the history of design. Such a poor showing has come about largely through the confusion of design with art, and the consequent idea that manufactured artefacts are works of art. This view has been fostered by the collection and display of manufactured goods in the same museums as painting and sculpture, and by much that has been written about design. Thus, in a recent book, the statement "˜Industrial design is the art of the twentieth century', seems calculated to obscure all the differences between art and design.\* The crucial distinction is that, under present conditions, art objects are usually both conceived and made by (or under the direction of one person, the artist, whereas this is not so with manufactured goods. Both conceiving and fabricating their work allows artists considerable autonomy, which has led to the common belief that one of art's main functions is to give free expression to creativity and imagination. Whether or not this is an accurate view of art, it is most certainly not true of design. In capitalist societies, the primary purpose of the manufacture of artefacts, a process of which design is a part, has to be to make a profit for the manufacturer. Whatever degree of artistic imagination is lavished upon the design of objects, it is done not to give expression to the designer's creativity and imagination, but to make the products saleable and profitable. Calling industrial design 'art' suggests that designers occupy the principal role in production, a misconception which effectively severs most of the connections between design and the processes of society. When it comes to explaining change, the confusion of design with art has led to a theory of causation which is as common as it is unsatisfactory. In many histories of design, change is accounted for by referring to the characters and careers of individual artists and designers - Chippendale's furniture designs might be said to differ from Sheraton's because Chippendale and Sheraton were different people, each with his own artistic ideas. It is when we try to identify the reasons for these differences that we run into difficulties, which become more acute when we consider not simply the work of individuals but the appearance of whole classes of goods involving a multitude of designers: why, for example, was office equipment designed in the 1900s universally different in appearance from that produced in the 1960s? Putting this down to differences in artistic temperament would be ridiculous. 7