\*F. Power Cobbe, 'The Final Cause of Woman', Woman's Work and Woman's Culture, edited by Josephine Butler, London, 1869, pp.10-11. \*Emily Post, The Personality of a House, New York, 1930, p.3. on women to take part in this bourgeois charade were considerable. So close had the identification between woman and the house become that a woman who failed to express her personality in this way was in danger of being thought lacking in femininity. In an essay published in 1869, Frances Power Cobbe wrote: 'The unhomeliness of the homes . . . of women in whom the feminine element is lacking is pitiable . . . The more womanly a woman is, the more she is sure to throw her personality over the home, and transform it, from a mere eating and sleeping place, or an upholsterer's showroom, into a sort of outermost garment of her soul; harmonised with all her nature as her robe and the flower in her hair are harmonised with her bodily beauty. The arrangement of her rooms, the light and shade, warmth and coolness, sweet odours, and soft or rich colours, are not like the devices of a well-trained servant or tradesman. They are the expression of the character of the woman . . . A woman whose home does not bear to her this relation of nest to bird, calyx to flower, shell to mollusk, is in one or another imperfect condition. She is either not really mistress of her home; or being so, she is herself deficient in the womanly power of thoroughly imposing her personality upon her belongings.'\* In the light of such attitudes, it is easy to see why women felt compelled to pursue the ideal of individual personal expression in home furnishing. So commonplace did the principle become that it has been repeated endlessly in books on home furnishing ever since. Thus, Emily Post wrote in her book, The Personality of a House, published in 1930: 'Its personality should express your personality, just as every gesture you make or fail to make - expresses your gay animation or your restraint, your old-fashioned conventions, your perplexing mystery, or your emancipated modernism - whichever characteristics are typically yours. "The house that does not express the individuality of its owner is like a dress shown on a wax figure. It may be a beautiful dress - may be a beautiful house - but neither is animated by a living personality.'\* As domestic environments have come to be regarded as signs of the occupants' characters, people have gone to great lengths to present a satisfactory account of themselves. The advice supplied in handbooks and magazines on home decorating has been based heavily on the assumption that furnishings indicate personality, while the furniture trade has taken great advantage of the fact that its customers are buying what is regarded as an image of themselves. Bereft of other ways of expressing their personalities publicly, people have been driven to catalogues of domestic furnishing to find a persona. Homes that lack signs of individuality are usually regarded as dead, which is often a criticism of schemes designed by professional interior decorators; it is to avoid such deadness that some designers lay great emphasis on the need for personal collections of ornaments and often leave spaces in their schemes for displaying them. There is a paradox in the pursuit of individuality in home furnishing, for while most of the authorities on domestic decoration have insisted that every home must distinctively express the 106