The Ideal Home: from Beauty to Efficiency \*'Happy Homes' in Family Friend, new series, vol. II, 1853, p.66. Over the last two centuries, homes have changed considerably, most obviously in their appearance. It is important to recognise that the changes have not only been physical, for homes, as well as being made of bricks and mortar, melamine and foam rubber, are also made of ideas. Perhaps the most important change within the last century in the ideas constituting the home has been the shift from its role as a source of moral welfare to one of physical welfare, represented in visible terms by its turning from a place of beauty into one of efficiency. The metaphorical connection of home with heaven made it easy for the Victorians to look upon home as a moral haven: innocent, uncorrupted and raised above the deceits of the world. This elevation to celestial status gave support to a very widespread middle-class desire to make the home superior to all other institutions. The earnestness and evangelical zeal with which this opinion was promoted suggests that it was relatively new and, at the time, far from universally held. This would account for the fervour with which The Family Friend, a magazine devoted to the virtues of domestic life, wrote as follows in 1853: 'In how small a compass lie all the elements of man's truest happiness. . . A marriage contracted with thoughtfulness and cemented by a pure and faithful love, when a fixed position is gained in the world and a small fund has been accumulated . . . a dwelling comfortably furnished, clean, bright, salubrious and sweet . . . a small collection of good books on the shelves - a few blossoming plants in the window some well selected engravings on the walls... these are conditions of existence within the reach of everyone who will seek them - resources of the purest happiness, lost to thousands, because a wrong direction is given to their tastes and energies, and they roam abroad in pursuit of interest and enjoyment which they might create in abundance at home.' With such propaganda, the nineteenth-century bourgeoisie sought to elevate family life to an unprecedented importance. One explanation for so much being made of the family can be found in the retreat from the public modes of life of the eighteenth-century coffee houses, theatre, and pleasure gardens, where strangers had engaged freely in conversation on all subjects; home became the only place in which authentic behaviour and feelings could still be displayed. Further explanation for the emphasis on the family lay in the belief that a good home might be a beneficent moral influence upon its inhabitants, as was more or less universally accepted by the Victorians. The sanitary reformer Dr Southwood Smith, quoted in Recreations of a Country Parson, published in 1861, made the principle clear: A clean, fresh, and well-ordered house exercises over its inmates a moral, no less than a physical influence, and has a direct tendency to make the members of the family sober, peaceable, and considerate of the feelings and happiness of each other; nor is it difficult to trace a connexion between habitual feelings of this sort and the formation of habits of respect for property, for the laws in general, and even for those higher duties and obligations the observance of which no laws can enforce. Whereas, a filthy, squalid, unwholesome dwelling, in which none of the decencies common to society. . . 108