\*Recreations of a Country Parson, London, 1861, p.299. \*The 1851 Religious Census had drawn attention to the low church attendance in towns. See General Register Office, Religious Worship in England and Wales, London, 1854. \*W.J. Loftie, A Plea for Art in the Home, London, 1879, p.96. \*J. Sherer, 'The Management of the Home', Family Friend, 5th series, vol. III, no. 3, March 1867, pp.201-203. are or can be observed, tends to make every dweller in such a house regardless of the feelings and happiness of each other, selfish and sensual. There was a strong body of opinion that wanted to go much further than this and make the home not just a place where respect for law and property was learnt, but also the source of religious sentiments. In an age greatly concerned by the decline of religious practices, the family seemed to offer a context in which faith could be preserved. The analogy of home with heaven was therefore attractive, for it implied a sanctity lacking in other institutions and provided assurance of the survival of religion despite the neglect of regular churchgoing.\* But how were faith and sanctity to be represented in the home? Cleanliness and orderliness were not enough on their own; it was argued that only the cultivation of beauty would arouse the higher feelings. Preaching the power of beauty, the journalist W.J. Loftie wrote in 1879 about the homes of the poor: 'A few bare walls hung with pictures, a few flowers in the window, a pretty tile on the hob, would, in my opinion, do more to keep men and women at home, and to promote family love, than libraries of tracts and platforms full of temperance lecturers.'\* Everything that the Victorian middle class said about beauty in the dwellings of the poor applied with just as much force to their own homes. Beauty was consistently attributed a moral value in addition to its purely aesthetic significance. An article in The Family Friend in 1867 emphasised the moral value of beauty not only in the home, but in the wife as well: 'One of the grandest points to be attended to, in making a home happy, is to make it attractive. The husband should do his best to render it comfortable and attractive to the wife, as she should to the husband and children... Beauty, as one of the most powerful characters with which the Supreme Being has impressed the most prominent objects of his creation, is one of the most essential elements of the attractiveness of human life in every condition. Therefore, it is not to be so lightly esteemed as some parents would seem to consider it in giving moral instruction to their children. . . It is not, however, merely in his wife that a husband should look for and expect beauty within the walls of his own dwelling. It should, as far as possible, be made to appear in everything with which he is surrounded. . . The influence of such a disposition of things in soothing the appetites with which the outward life of man is assailed, would hardly be believed, if not witnessed.'\* For all the emphasis on the moral significance of beauty, there is no suggestion here of what form beauty might take; it was assumed that the readers knew for themselves. Nevertheless, what the Victorians thought of as beautiful did not remain constant. For the early part of the century, the homes of the aristocracy, with their connotations of freedom from work, had provided the main standard of beauty, but in the 1860s and 1870s ideas began to change and new, specifically middle-class models were developed. The rather heavy, sub-Renaissance look of early Victorian furnishing was replaced by a somewhat plainer style under the impact 109