## ZRRA Art furnishing. An example of the new 'moral' furnishing of the 1880s. The construction of the furniture is plainly visible, and upholstery is kept to the minimum. From Mrs Orrinsmith, The Drawing Room, 1878, p.57. \*Mrs Orrinsmith, The Drawing Room, London, 1878, pp.1-2. of the religious revival in the mid century and of the design reformers associated with the Arts and Crafts Movement. In the new taste of the 1870s, the early Victorian style was characterised as particularly ugly. In her book The Drawing Room, published in 1878, Mrs Orrinsmith described such an interior: 'Who does not call to mind the ordinary lower middle class drawing room of the Victorian era? The very headquarters of commonplace, with its strict symmetry of ornament and its pretentious uselessness. All things seem as if chosen on the principle of unfitness for any function; everything is in pairs that can possibly be paired. The cold, hard, unfeeling white mantelpiece, surmounted by the inevitable mirror, varying in size only with the means of the householder, totally irrespective of any relation to the shape or proportions of the apartment; the fireplace a marvellous exhibition of the power of iron and black lead to give discomfort to the eye. At the window hang curtains in the harshest folds, trimmed with rattling fringes. On the carpet vegetables are driven to frenzy in their desire to be ornamental. On a circular table (of course with pillars and claws) are placed books - too often selected for the bindings alone - arranged like the spokes of a wheel, the nave being a vase of, probably, objectionable shape and material. Add a narrow ill-curved sofa, and spider-legged chairs made to be knocked over, dangerous as seats even for a slight acquaintance, doubly so for a stout friend - and all is consistently complete.'\* 110