\*N.Cooper, The Opulent Eye, London, 1979, pp. 171-177; and A. Callen, The Angel in the Studio, London, 1979, pp. 171-177. The reaction against such taste was, at least initially, restricted to the fashionable minorities of the art furnishing movement and devotees of the Queen Anne style, and involved a well-developed philosophy of design in relation to morality. The intention was to establish a form of beauty that corresponded approximately to the moral virtues that the aesthetic reformers believed should be represented in the home. From the 1860s onwards, the design and furnishing of domestic interiors received a greater degree of attention than before, which was reflected partly in the increasing number of books on interior furnishing published in both Britain and America. Among the best known were Charles Eastlake's Hints on Household Taste (1868), Colonel Edis's Decoration and Furnishing of Town Houses (1881), the 'Art at Home' series of books edited by W.J. Loftie in the late 1870s, Mrs Haweis's The Art of Decoration (1881), Mrs Panton's Suburban Residences and How to Circumvent Them (1896), and R.M. Watson's The Art of the House (1897). In the United States, there were C. Cook's The House Beautiful (1878), Edith Wharton and Ogden Codman's The Decoration of Houses (1897) and Elsie de Wolfe's The House in Good Taste (1913). Not only were many of the authors women, which was significant given the general belief that women were especially suited to home furnishing, but many also practised as professional interior decorators. For example, Rhoda and Agnes Garrett, authors of Suggestions for House Decoration (1879), one of the titles in the 'Art at Home' series, worked professionally as interior decorators and ran a school of interior decoration. Mrs Panton wrote a weekly advice column on home furnishing in The Lady's Pictorial in the 1880s and 1890s as well consulting privately, while Edith Wharton and Elsie de Wolfe both acquired considerable reputations as practising interior designers in New York.\* The arrival of professional interior decorators indicated a new attitude towards home furnishing. Since the eighteenth century, interior design and decoration had generally been carried out by firms of upholsterers, whose business was both in making furniture, or having it made, and in supplying the whole ensemble of domestic furnishing. In the late nineteenth century, there was a reaction, particularly from the middle-class intelligentsia, who deplored the failure of the trade to provide furniture and decorative schemes which met the moral and aesthetic standards of beauty they expected in their homes. Although there were hardly enough independent interior decorators to influence the decor of most homes directly, these individuals did have a considerable effect on the fashion in furniture: it was partly because of them that "˜art furniture' came to be widely manufactured in the 1880s. The general principles of art furnishing were to reduce the amount of furniture and to create more space in rooms. Heavily upholstered furniture was eschewed in favour of wooden-framed chairs and settees with loose cushions. Sombre furnishings, gilding and such colours as crimson were banished in favour of paler tones and white-painted joinery work. Rugs on wooden or parquet. floors were preferred to fitted carpets. Throughout, an air of casualness and informality was aimed at, with symmetry in furnishing schemes being discouraged. Finally, and most important of all, shams and deceits were forbidden: furniture which disguised the way it was made, or the materials of which it was made, was 111