Sitting Room, 'Glen Roy', Wake Green Road, Moseley, Birmingham, photographed in 1890. A partial application of the principles of art furnishing. regarded as dishonest and therefore to be avoided. Often, the application of these principles led to results that were not as different from earlier Victorian interiors as one might have expected. The first of the two illustrations of art furnishing shows a sitting room photographed in 1890. While it reveals signs of art furnishing principles in the design of the mantelpiece and the painted woodwork of the fireplace and surrounding panelling, as well as in the two William Morris wallpapers and the William Morris carpet, the room still contains much that belongs to an earlier era of Victorian taste. The profusion of furnishings and ornaments, and the upholstered chairs with tasselled fringes are alien to the declared principles of art furnishing, although they were often found in interiors that were said to be beautiful. The second illustration, of a London drawing room designed a few years later, shows a very much purer application of the principles of art furnishing. There seems to be altogether more space in the room, an effect achieved by having less furniture, fewer ornaments and the white-painted ceiling and wall-panelling. The only patterns are those of the furniture covers and of the wallpaper on the frieze, and although these are bold, they both have white grounds and are sufficiently similar to give the room an air of harmony. The attraction of a scheme like this, which would have made it seem beautiful at the end of the nineteenth century, was that it conformed to the Christian virtues that it was believed that domestic life should demonstrate. No material imitates something that 112