Drawing room, Rosslyn Tower, Putney, photographed in 1907. Furnished in the best turn-ofthe-century taste, conforming to the principles of art furnishing. \*R.W. Edis, 'Internal Decoration', in Our Homes and How to Make Them Healthy, edited by S.F. Murphy, London, 1883, p.356. it is not, and, it would have been said, each part makes sense in relation to the whole. Furnishings which obeyed such criteria of beauty were, it was argued, bound to have a good moral influence upon the members of the household. As Colonel Eddis had warned of the dangers of 'dishonest' design: 'If you are content to teach a lie in your belongings, you can hardly wonder at petty deceits being practised in other ways... All this carrying into everyday life of "the shadow of unreality" must exercise a bad and prejudicial influence on the younger members of the house, who are thus brought up to see no wrong in the shams and deceits which are continually before them.'\* Throughout the late nineteenth century, beauty was the principal means by which the home was to fulfil its purpose as a place of sanctity. Among its characteristics, beauty included comfort and the satisfaction of the aesthetic senses, but above all it meant the representation of the moral virtues of truth and honesty. In the responsibilities attributed to women in the home, it was the pursuit of beauty that was emphasised most strongly for the sake of its moral effects upon the members of the household. The home of the twentieth century followed that of the nineteenth in certain respects, such as the physical and emotional separation from the place of work, but differences in appearance and organisation revealed some major changes in underlying values. The relative importance attached to the various rooms was 113