Dining room of a house in Hampstead Garden Suburb, designed by Robert Atkinson, early 1920s. In a much smaller house, this interior shows some of the changes in taste characteristic of the 1920s. With plain printed walls, the most minimal joinery, and little upholstery, the room is not 'decorated' in the sense apparent in the earlier interiors, apart from the grate and mantelpiece. From C.H. James & F.R. Yerbury, Modern English Houses & Interiors, London, 1925, plate V. no longer the same for instance, kitchens came to receive far more attention than they had before, and drawing rooms rather less. These changes were symptoms both of new social realities in the twentieth century, such as the growth of a middle class without servants, but they were also an indication of the new ideas about what constituted a home. Most importantly, the nineteenth century view of the home as a stronghold of beauty and spiritual virtue was replaced by the idea that the home's main function was as the source of physical welfare and health. Although it would be wrong to suggest that cleanliness and child-care had not mattered in the nineteenth-century home, they had never been more than subsidiary to the moral functions of the dwelling in the responsibilities of wives and mothers. In twentieth-century literature about the home, preoccupations with motherhood, children and hygiene replaced instructions about needlework and the Christian virtues; in practice, this was signified by the reversal of roles between drawing room and kitchen as the core of the house. The change took place on both sides of the Atlantic in the first two decades of the twentieth century. Just how different the home had become by the 1920s and 1930s can be seen in the following quotation, taken from a book on household management published in the 1930s. It describes the house in terms that would have been utterly unfamiliar fifty years before: 'The home is by far the most important institution in the lives of the British people. It is a centre of interest, not only in the immediate family life, but equally in the wider hustling world of trade and commerce, for its influence is far-reaching and allembracing. 'For the average British man and woman, each day begins and 'For the average British man and woman, each day begins and 114