\*The Home of Today, published by Daily Express Publications, London, n.d. [c. 1935], p.7. ends in the family centre. The influence of a happy, harmonious home is therefore a national asset. 'The early-morning family contact will have its reaction on business life throughout the day; the return to the home at night will bring rest and peace and a laying aside of worries and cares. 'Psychologically as well as physically, the home is the centre of recreation and relaxation. The powerful influence of a well-run home is therefore a matter of national importance and must be recognised and encouraged as such. Never before has there been such a demand for well-built, scientifically planned houses. A new consciousness of home-making has been born. Men and women are equally enthusiastic. Together they study houses, plans and schemes of decoration; together they devise ways and means of owning homes of their own; and their interest is fostered and encouraged by manufacturers and designers of home equipment and household utilities. For indeed a modern, well-equipped home is a worthwhile possession, whether it consists of three rooms or thirty. It gives a sense of security and comfort and intimacy essential to real family life. 'Contributions to home service come from world-wide sources. Each year almost each month - science brings some new discovery to the home. Ether waves are utilised for the preservation of food; wireless waves are made to boil water for the household; invisible rays protect the home from unwelcome intruders; and many other such wonders are rapidly being included in everyday household services." This passage contains a number of important assertions, the most notable being that an efficient, well-run, harmonious home is a national asset. It is also stated that attitudes towards the home are influenced by the manufacturers of domestic equipment, a significant view in the light of the rapid growth of such industries in the inter-war years. In addition, the ownership of a home is seen as a necessity for real family life (which is important in the context of the steady increase of owner-occupation as a form of tenure throughout this century). Finally, it is suggested that all the problems of domestic life can be solved by the application of science, an attitude that was to have important effects upon the character and appearance of the domestic environment. All this creates a picture of the home that is not too far from that widely held today. The idea with the most far-reaching effects was the proposition that the quality of the domestic environment had a major influence upon the physique and health of the nation. In European countries and in America, this idea took root around the beginning of the twentieth century. In Britain, the immediate cause was widespread concern about the apparent physical deterioration of the race and about the threat of a declining population. The dangers had been highlighted by the discovery that one in four army recruits during the Boer War was physically unfit for military service, and by the evidence of a high rate of infant mortality. Revealed at the height of colonial activity and imperial expansion, these facts presented an issue of major national importance, for they suggested that the British would be able neither to defend nor to populate their empire in the future. The causes of poor physique and of the high rate of infant mortality were thought to lie principally in the domestic sphere. 115