\*P. Steadman, The Evolution of Designs, Cambridge, 1979, discusses the problems of biological analyses at length. \*M. Girouard, Sweetness and Light, Oxford, 1977, p.1. Historians of design have often tried to get around the problem by attributing the changes to some sort of evolutionary process, as if manufactured goods were plants or animals. Changes in design are described as if they were mutations in the development of products, stages in a progressive evolution towards their most perfect form. But artefacts do not have a life of their own, and there is no evidence for a law of natural or mechanical selection to propel them in the direction of progress. The design of manufactured goods is determined not by some internal genetic structure but by the people and the industries that make them and the relationships of these people and industries to the society in which the products are to be sold.\* Yet while it is easy enough to say that design is related to society, the precise way in which the connection occurs has rarely been dealt with satisfactorily by historians. Most histories of design and of art and architecture have treated their subjects as largely independent of the social circumstances in which they were produced. Recently, though, it has become fashionable to refer to the 'social context' or the 'social background'. For example, Mark Girouard, in Sweetness and Light, a book about the nineteenthcentury 'Queen Anne' style of architecture, begins by describing the critics' reception of the style, and continues: 'Both the fury and the rapture seem surprising until one examines its background, out of which it appeared with something approaching inevitability. "Queen Anne" flourished because it satisfied all the latest aspirations of the English middle classes.'\* These remarks are followed by a few pages of generalisation about nineteenth-century society, after which Girouard proceeds to describe the work of the 'Queen Anne' architects almost entirely in architectural terms. Such cursory references to the social context are like the weeds and gravel around a stuffed fish in a glass case: however realistic these may be, they are only furnishings, and taking them away would have little effect on our perception of the fish. The use of 'social context' is rarely more than an ornament, allowing the objects themselves still to be regarded as if they had an autonomous existence where all but purely artistic considerations are trivial. To historians, the great attraction of the 'social context' has been to save them the trouble of having to think about how objects are related to their historical circumstances, and statements as imprecise as Girouard's 'something approaching inevitability' abound in other histories. The casual use of 'social context' is particularly deplorable in the study of design, which by its very nature, brings ideas and beliefs up against the material realities of production. In this book, therefore, the history of design is also the history of societies: any account of change must rest upon an understanding of how design affects, and is affected by, the processes of modern economies. One of the more elusive aspects of these processes is the part played by ideas, by what people think about the world they live in. Design, I believe, features large in this particular realm, and its role can be clarified, albeit in a somewhat mechanical way, by reference to Structuralist theory. The Structuralists argue that in all societies the troublesome contradictions that arise between people's beliefs and their everyday experiences are resolved by the 8