\*F. Maurice, 'National Health: A Soldier's Study', in Contemporary Review, January 1903, quoted in A. Davin, 'Imperialism and Motherhood', in History Workshop, no. 5, Spring 1978, p.16. \*Described by Davin. \*A. Ravenhill, 'Some Relations of Sanitary Science to Family Life and Individual Efficiency', in Household Administration, edited by A. Ravenhill & C.Schiff, London, 1910, p.252. As Major General Frederick Maurice wrote in an influential article, 'Whatever the primary cause . . . we are always brought back to the fact that... the young man of 16 to 18 years of age is what he is because of the training through which he has passed during his infancy and childhood. "Just as the twig is bent the tree's inclined." Therefore it is to the condition, mental, moral and physical, of the women and children that we must look if we have regard to the future of our land. . . Mr Barnett in Whitechapel . . . found that the health and long life of the Jews, whose women did not go out to work, compared most favourably with that of the Christian population, the women of which worked without adequate regard to their function as mothers. It does not follow that a stereotyped copying of the habits of the Jews would be desirable, but it may explain and justify the view of the Emperor of Germany that for the raising of a virile race, either of soldiers or of citizens, it is essential that the attention of the mothers of a land should be mainly devoted to the three Ks - Kinder, Küche, Kirche.' Although the General's explanation overlooked the much more relevant factors of malnutrition and poverty, the view that defective mothering was the root of the problem was widely shared. A variety of measures were introduced to improve the physique of the race, among them free school meals, school medical inspections and attempts to improve housing conditions, but the greatest emphasis of all was placed on improvement in standards of motherhood and domesticity. Schools of motherhood were set up to teach young mothers how to carry out their responsibilities better, and basic lessons in hygiene and domestic work were given to girls in schools. Parents were encouraged to see their responsibilities in a new light; a book on household administration, published in 1910, stated: 'The burden of responsibility or the privilege of promoting progress. . . rests with those people who propose to be or already are parents. . . Parental care and intelligent home management are thus intimately concerned with the physical evolution of the race, as well as with its moral development. They must, therefore, assume an increasing rather than a diminishing importance if the full development of potentialities is to be insured in the rising generation, and racial progress promoted. Any proclivity to depreciate the dignity or to undermine the influence of these institutions must be carefully examined and, if necessary, sternly repressed.'\* Underlying statements like this were the beliefs that the family was the basis of the nation, and that the duty of improving its condition rested on parents, particularly mothers. Whether or not the training in motherhood had any practical effect upon welfare, the widespread political concern with standards of domesticity laid a heavy responsibility upon individual families. The people likely to have been most affected by the propaganda about health and welfare and to have been made the most sensitive to the need for efficiency and hygiene, were those at school during the first two decades of the century, the adults of the inter-war years. It is not surprising, then, that the pursuit of hygiene in the home reached its most vivid expression in the 1920s and 1930s. Take, for example, the illustration of a bathroom from a sanitary ware manufacturer's 116