Twyfords bathroom suite no. 44, 1935. In the twentieth century, the importance of kitchens and bathrooms increased in relation to drawing and dining rooms. The bathroom suite design reflects this change, and the value attached to hygienic appearances. TWYFORDS FEATURES-The most popular suite. ordinary exposed type with feet. table is a most useful addition. Panelled corner bath in enamelled iron much easier to keep clean than the Pedestal lavatory adds to the attractiveness of the outfit and the pottery dressing Toilet is not included but can be added if space permit. No. 44 Twyfords Bathroom Suite Comprising- No. 321/1 Corner Bath Minimum size of bathroom 70x70 (15x215 </m) page 107 619P/1 Pedestal Lavatory 31 ..1550/1 Dressing Table 58 1031 Towel Rails (2) 125 1020 Soap and Brush Tray 121 1056 Soap Tray 118 1057 Tumbler Holder 986 Tumbler -1059 -1050 -962 Mirror 117 Bathroom Chair 58 Towel Rail 125 catalogue of the 1930s where the design's stress on hygienic considerations was calculated to appeal to the consumer. No bathroom has to look like this; indeed, bathrooms before and since have not. But here, the white enamel bathtub and basin, the tiled walls and the chromium fittings, all with hard, bright finishes, made a virtue of cleanliness. This imagery of hygiene corresponded to, and indeed reinforced, the consumers' belief that physical cleanliness and efficiency were among the worthiest of aspirations. If the pursuit of domestic hygience was one arm of the campaign for greater national efficiency, another was the more effective use of domestic labour. By making domestic work less laborious, it was argued that it would be carried out better and with less waste of physical effort. One side of this policy was to make housework a systematic job, an approach encouraged by schools of housecraft 117