## Freedom and Constraint at Home and by groups like the Good Housekeeping Institute and Better Homes in America, and signified by the title of 'domestic science' for what was otherwise known as housework. Alongside this went the introduction of mechanical appliances to lighten the load of domestic chores. In Britain, the development of these products was closely related to the structural change in the economy away from exporting industries and towards those making consumer goods for the home market. That such industries were able to build up a demand for domestic appliances owed something to the pressure that was being placed upon people to achieve greater efficiency in their homes. It is clear from the advertising for domestic appliances that manufacturers took advantage of the heightened sense of domestic responsibility. Increased efficiency was also expressed in the design of furnishings and of houses themselves: the 'labour-saving house', a cliché of the 1920s, was not only a response to the perceived shortage of servants, the so-called 'servant problem', but also to the demands of national efficiency. The recurrent features of the labour-saving house- hot and cold running water on all floors, dumb waiters and no dust-catching mouldings - were all means of reducing domestic work and so of enabling more human resources to be devoted to the major problem of physical welfare. By the 1950s, many of these features, as well as the values they represented had become normal and part of the accepted standards of domestic design. The 'fifties interior illustrated was not entirely the creation of its occupants or their architects, in spite of all that has been said about the importance of individualism in domestic furnishing. In the pursuit of efficiency, in the lightweight furnishings, the easily movable rugs, the flush doors and recessed cupboards, the interior conforms to a set of outside standards that were intended to make the home the basis of the nation's welfare. In this sense, flush doors, for example, introduce a set of political values into the home: what is considered to look best in the home is what enables the housewife to fulfil her role of caring for children and workers most efficiently. However reasonable and acceptable this might seem, it must be stressed that this idea did not originate within the home and so conflicts with the principle that the appearance of the home should express individual personality. The extent to which individualism in the home is an illusion is brought out by the similarity of the interior to other fashionable interiors of its date. Its appearance was determined by the contemporary standards of taste, and by what was available in the shops to buy. However much people may wish to pursue an entirely original treatment in their interiors, they invariably find themselves constrained by the market. For all the illusion of freedom at home, the things people spend their money on are fixed by what the economy provides for them to spend it on; the standards and mores that they maintain at home are to some degree determined by the obligations and beliefs that are thrust upon them - there is a sense in which they are actors playing out roles into which they have been cast by the economy. This is not a new phenomenon: an article in the Cornhill Magazine in 1864 described the experience of an imaginary couple in furnishing their home: