\*The Fashion of Furniture', Cornhill Magazine, vol. IX, March 1864, p.339. Sitting-dining room, house at Oulton Broad, Suffolk, designed by architects Tayler and Green, 1954. An excellent example of the best taste of the 1950s. Plain brick, quarry tile, plaster and plywood veneer are the main finishes; mouldings and skirtings are minimal; the amount of furniture is small, and as much of it as possible is fitted. But was this simplicity a product of the taste of individuals, or of received notions about the proprieties of domestic life? 'But the interior of the house is a field in which his taste, or his wife's taste, may find full scope. That they have a taste probably neither of them doubts for an instant. Let us grant the fact for argument's sake, and then watch how they exercise it. At the furniture warehouse, they are in the upholsterer's hands; at the china-shop, they are as easily talked over by the obsequious vendor of wine glasses and dinner plates. The carpet merchant leads them by the nose. . .'\* Yet, even if it is actually impossible for people to be free agents in furnishing their homes, the wish to be so is extremely strong. The special value attributed to homes is summed up in the statement, 'Home is where I can do what I want when I want.' To anyone doing a routine job under the supervision of a manager or an overseer, home takes on great importance as the place where it is possible to make choices and to have some self-esteem. Hence the value of individualism in home furnishing: it becomes a sign of being capable of independent thought and emotion, of having a life apart from the millwheels of the economy. The conflict of the desire for individuality with the constraints of the economy and of dominant ideas thrives in the furnishing of domestic interiors. Every choice, every decision about the decoration of the home is a new episode in the same drama: the conflict is always there and never resolved. It is the fact that the home is both a factory of private illusions and a catalogue of ready-made tastes, values and ideas that makes all design for the home so extraordinarily revealing about the conditions of modern life.