6. Design in the Office \*On the relationship between office buildings and management theory see F. Duffy, 'Office Buildings and Organisational Change', Buildings and Society, edited by A.D. King, London, 1980. The Sociology of Office Work In modern industrial societies, the majority of people work in factories and offices, places that have acquired quite unmistakeable design characteristics, above all because of their nature as instruments of management. Not only has the design of the buildings and of their internal organisation been arrived at to suit the purposes of the managers, but so too has the design of the interiors and of all the furnishings and equipment.\* Whether in the factory or the office, design has been used to represent ideas about the nature of work and about the behaviour expected of people doing it. It is the presence of such ideas in the design of working environments and equipment that makes it easy to see why similar forms for objects, furnishings and decor would not have been welcome in the home. This chapter concentrates exclusively on design in offices during the last century. Over that time, the changes in office environments have been more pronounced than those in factories, and the ideas that management has tried to represent to office workers through design have been more various and more complex. Design in offices has been used to resolve, or at least calm, anxieties and conflicts that have been set up by the introduction of new theories of management and by uncertainties about the status of office work in relation to other occupations; in both cases, the results have been much more successful than the open exercise of authority. Over the last century, clerical workers, who make up the majority of those employed in offices, have formed an increasing proportion of the total occupied population. Nevertheless, their status and rewards have deteriorated. In Britain, until the last quarter of the nineteenth century, clerks were almost all men, many of whom enjoyed quite a high status through regular contact with their employers, by the trust that was often placed in them, and because their wages were generally not less than those of the most skilled of the working class and could be very much more. But though clerks had a degree of respectability, they rarely earned enough to live up to the standards considered appropriate to the middle class. This was one of their most common grievances, to which the employers' customary reply was that middle-class respectability was an additional benefit of being a clerk and, far from requiring a higher salary, was in itself a form of reward (though one that cost the employer nothing). Underlying this dispute was the ambiguity of the clerk's status: was he or was he not middle class? Notwithstanding his modest wages, the clerk was not seen by the working classes as one of their number. But equally, the 120