\*The sources of this account of clerical work in the nineteenth century are F.D. Klingender, The Conditions of Clerical Labour in Britain, London, 1935, chapters 1 and 2; D. Lockwood, The Black Coated Worker, London, 1958, chapter 1; and G. Anderson, Victorian Clerks, Manchester, 1976. 'Elbowing Him Out.' The arrival of women in offices, shown in this cartoon of 1900, did much to depress the status of male clerks. From The Shorthand Writer, 1900. \*Klingender, pp. 58-98; and Lockwood, pp.72-94. secure and established middle class of employers and professional men did not see him as belonging with them. The uncertain standing of the clerk accounted for much of the social discomfort experienced by the fictional Mr Pooter in George and Weedon Grossmith's The Diary of a Nobody and has survived to some extent to the present. In insurance offices and banks, the clerks were better paid and had higher status than their counterparts in business counting houses, railway companies and solicitors' offices. Clerks in the superior category were generally involved in the whole sequence of office work and have thus been compared to industrial craftsmen before the division of labour, as they were responsible for all the stages of a transaction and were able to control the rate at which they worked. The lower category of clerk was usually responsible for fewer stages and had less control over the way he worked. The disparity between the two categories was acknowledged by contemporaries and meant far more in social terms than the differences in the grades of clerical workers today. By the turn of the century, office work and its status had changed in various ways. As the quantity of trade increased rapidly, offices had to expand and employ a higher proportion of clerks to senior staff, thus reducing the clerks' chances of contact with their employers. With the introduction of education for all from 1870, the number of potential clerks increased, as middle-class children no longer had a monopoly of reading, writing and arithmetic, the basic skills of the clerk, and working-class children could compete for office jobs. The introduction of the typewriter in the 1880s brought women into offices to operate it, and, from the 1890s, their number grew so rapidly that by 1911 women constituted a quarter of all clerical workers. Their presence further increased the labour supply and, because women had lower status than men in any occupation and worked for lower wages, further depressed the status of clerical work. In the early twentieth century, the amalgamation of many banks, insurance companies and merchant houses again increased the size of offices and consequently the proportion of clerks in them; the chances of personal contact with employers became even less. The combined effect of these changes was to make the clerk's job seem more lowly, and even the distinction between superior and inferior clerks was eroded, leaving them all merged into the same general class. As their social position declined, so, too, did their earnings compared to those of other workers, notably manual workers whose relative incomes increased over the first half of the twentieth century, a development that accelerated during and immediately after World War II. By the 1950s, many factory workers were earning more than office staff.\* Roughly simultaneous changes took place in the United States in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, although the decline in the relative wages of clerical workers was much more pronounced, since the wage differential between clerks and manual workers had originally been much greater. The erosion of the status of clerks was more noticeable in the United States than in Britain because the changes that were made in the organisation of offices happened on a more comprehensive scale, and rather earlier, in America. As the scale of office business increased, it became subject to the principle of division of labour that had already been