The Time Clock, 1911. This American advertisement implied that office and shop floor staff alike should be subject to the same timekeeping routine. From The Factory, January 1911. \*On the history of clerical work in the United States, and the introduction of scientific management into offices, see H. Braverman, Labor and Monopoly Capital, New York & London, 1974, chapter 15. \*For the history and development of scientific management, see Judith A. Merkle, Management and Ideology, Berkeley, 1980. Points out your Unprofitable Employes Most employes mean to be on time. If they come late one morning they in tend being on time the next; but exper ience shows that it is the same old story over and over again with the tardy ones. The only way to make employes appreciate the value of lost time is to let them pay for it themselves. With an INTERNATIONAL TIME RECORDING SYSTEM you can stop losses through late coming and early leaving--and you can do even more: You can sift out the etherent employes from the inefficient, because late-coming and early-leav ing are twin brothers to mefficiency: the habitual late-comers and early-leavers do not work so well as those who come at the appointed hour and work until quitting time. International Time Recording Systems are fairest to the employe because they make him his own time-keeper. He is protected against any injustice in figuring time. His record is always ac cessible for verification when he calls for it. International Systems are preferred over all others at the ratio of mine to one-that is, 90% of all the time recorders now manufactured in this country are Internationals. Tell us what your present time-keeping system is we'll suggest a better one with International Time Renders Ask for literature. Our corps of time-keeping experts is at your service. The two-colored ink ribbon device, by which the records of late arrivals are automatically printed in a different colored ink, has been held by the United States Court to be covered by our patents and therefore can only be furnished by this company. The International Card Time Recorder Punctuals in Blue Lates and Irregulars in Red The International Dial Recorder Punctuals in Green Lates and Irregulars in Red INTERNATIONAL TIME RECORDING COMPANY LONDON OFFICE International Time Recording Co. 151 City Road, London, E. C., England of New Terb Lock Box 970 ## BERLIN OFFICE International Time Recording Co., . b. H. Endicott, N. Y. 135-136 Alexandrinenetr, Berlin, S. W. Germany applied in factories. From the beginning of the twentieth century exactly similar processes of management and rationalisation began to be applied in offices: clerks were divided into departments, each of which carried out one stage of the work process, and every clerk in a department did the same work. With departments connected only by the flow of work, the American office of the early twentieth century came to resemble a factory, at least in its organisation. The clerical worker, instead of being the equivalent of a craftsman, with responsibility for the whole of a transaction, lost this control over his work, and became no more than a process worker. Perhaps the most potent sign of the clerk's reduction to the level of a factory worker was the appearance of the time clock in offices in the first decade of the century.\* The departmentalisation of large offices seems to have become general both in America and in Britain in the early years of the century and it opened the way for the application of the techniques of scientific management, that had been developed in America and were later adopted in Europe.\* The history of scientific management goes back to the 1880s, when Frederick Taylor began his studies of factory work. He realised that wasted movements, misdirected effort and badly designed tools and equipment prevented most workers from operating with maximum efficiency. If these things could be overcome and the worker could be taught to operate in the most efficent way, his output (and the firm's profits) would 122