\*One of the first manuals recommending scientific management in the office was Walter D. Scott, Increasing Human Efficiency in Business, New York, 1911. \*W.H. Leffingwell, Scientific Office Management, Chicago, 1917, p.5. Adjustable Desk for Typists, c.1918. The caption to this illustration explained 'To work standing for short periods of time is found to relieve fatigue. With the chair and desk raised, the change from a sitting posture can be made almost instantly.' From L. Galloway, Office Management. Its Principles and Practice, New York, 1919, pp.192-193. increase. Taylor assumed that there was an optimum method for each job and that the task of managers was to discover 'the one best way', record the time it took and set it as the standard rate. For the Taylor system to work, the labour process needed already to have been divided into stages, for it depended on perfecting each worker's handling of a single task; Taylor believed that a worker who had to perform too many tasks would never reach the optimum rate at any of them. Taylor's work had become known in the 1900s, although his first popular work, The Principles of Scientific Management, did not appear until 1911. By then, manuals on the scientific management of offices were already being published in the United States.\* Scientific management set out to reduce each clerk's work to a single task, such as opening the mail, unpinning the remittance or invoicing the order, so that each could be studied with the aim of reducing it to its essentials, which could be carried out using the minimum of time and movement. Truly amazing results were promised: correspondents who had previously managed with difficulty to handle 20 letters per hour through the day found themselves able without strain to deal with 60 per hour, while the rate of opening letters was increased from 100 to 300 per hour when the process had been analysed and the correct method taught to the clerk.\* Scientific management was said to make workers happier through the discovery that they could work more efficiently, although the primary motive was to get more work out of office staff for the same or very little more pay. Managers were advised to cultivate friendly relations with their staff, to drop casual hints about how much more work one was managing to do than another, to chart the production of each worker and offer gold stars to those who exceeded the weekly norms, and to set up, in a spirit of healthy fun, office competitions to see who could achieve most in a week. A similarly indirect approach went towards the interest that scientific managers took in workers' health and welfare: fatigue was widely acknowledged to be a cause of poor work and was accounted for by such doubtful physiological theories as the buildup of toxins in the body. Its elimination would maximise efficiency Figure 20. (a) Adjustable Desk Stenographer Sitting The dish and her are pwet ja as she prefers Figure 29. (b) Adjustable Desk-Stenographer Standing To work standing for short periods of time is found to relieve fat gue With the chair and desk raised, as shown above the change from a sitting posture can be made almost instantly