\*L. Galloway, Office Management, New York, 1919, p.75. Below: High-backed roll-top desk in use in an American office, c. 1900. The desk in the centre allowed the clerk privacy and some freedom in how he organised his work. Right: Roll top pedestal desk. The standard late nineteenth century desk, with a large amount of filing space. From Montgomery Ward & Co. catalogue, 1895, p.609. and therefore profits. At the same time, though, the reduction of fatigue could be calculated to appeal to the worker; new designs of furniture and equipment were introduced to office workers as improving comfort rather than profit. Because, for example, it was recognised that changing position at work helped to reduce fatigue, a special desk and chair were designed, the main virtue of which was that the typist would waste a minimum amount of time changing from one position to another. Scientific management continued the erosion of the office worker's status, which had already been undermined by the division of labour. Even management theorists acknowledged what had happened. One of them wrote in 1919: 'Much of the routine of the office employee resembles in one respect that of the factory.'\* By 1920, the organisation of work in large, scientifically managed American offices had become indistinguishable from that in many factories, though with a different product in the shape of words and numbers written on pieces of paper. The development of the office desk and of other office furniture and equipment needs to be seen against this background of the deteriorating status of the clerk and the pressure from management to increase efficiency. The standard nineteenth-century clerk's desk had a high back with pigeon-holes and drawers in it, and sometimes a roll top. The supporting pedestals contained drawers down to floor level. The other common pattern of desk had a sloping top to support ledgers, at which the clerk could work standing or sitting. A clerk seated at a high-backed desk could see his work in front of him and a little to either side, but he could not see ahead beyond his desk, nor could anyone else see what he was doing without coming to look over his shoulder. Such a desk assumed that the clerk was responsible for its contents, and for his work; it represented a small private domain, perhaps with a roll top that could be closed down at any time to secure its privacy. From his desk, the clerk could collect and deliver office papers as his own pace of work required them to be moved around, and he could file papers as he chose in the drawers and pigeon-holes. Such a desk encapsulates the responsibility, trust and status given to some clerks. To the supporters of scientific management, the desk had great significance as the main piece of equipment