YWA¶MO MANUZZA WALLI TWARMOD 30223MALIJA EXTIMLI Clerks in a London Insurance Office, c. 1900. The flat-topped desks with racks for ledgers gave the clerks some privacy and autonomy at their work. \*J.W. Schulze, The American Office, New York, 1913, p.62. \*Schulze, p.63. used by the clerical worker, and it was the first item in the office to be redesigned in the interests of greater efficiency: 'The desk is the most used piece of furniture in the office. The office employee is at it constantly. The highest type of working efficiency in a desk is obtained when the desk itself is so constructed and so arranged that it doesn't in the slightest degree interfere with the progress of a person's work, but on the other hand aids it in every possible way.\* First the pedestal bases of the desk were replaced by legs, so that there was a clear space of eight to ten inches between the bottom drawer and the ground. This was to make cleaning easier and prevent the harbouring of dust and germs, an improvement equally in the interests of employer (because it might reduce the working time lost through sickness) and employee, to whom it offered better health. The other change in design was the elimination of the high back with pigeon holes and the roll top. 'The chief objection to the roll top is that it becomes a receptacle for important papers which are forgotten... Most papers that are filed in the pigeonholes should be placed in the files where they are accessible to everyone who needs them... Moreover the unnecessary height of a roll-top desk cuts off valuable light and air.'\* The loss of filing space in the desk mattered little in the organisation of the office, because the division of labour had made filing a separate activity, with its own department; individual clerks were no longer responsible for filing and storing the papers they worked on. Scientific management had a general, at times pathological, hatred of desk storage space and saw any cavity in the desk as providing an opportunity to hoard vital documents and obstruct the flow of paper through the office. Thus the typical clerk was left with a flat-top desk, with at most six drawers in it. The transformation is illustrated by the new design adopted by the Equitable Assurance Co. during the 1910s. It was described as follows: "The desk finally selected for the use of employees engaged in routine duties is little more than a table with three shallow drawers ... 125