invention of myths. These conflicts arise just as often in advanced societies as in primitive ones, and myths flourish equally in both. In our own culture, for example, the paradox of the existence of rich and poor and of the great inequality between them in a society that maintains a belief in the Christian concept of the equality of all is overcome in the story of Cinderella who is sought out and married by the prince, proving that despite her poverty she can be his equal. Cinderella is a fairy story and thus remote from everyday life, but there are plenty of latter-day variants (e.g. secretary marries boss) which enable people to think that the paradox is unimportant or non-existent. Stories have been the traditional means of conveying myths, but in this century they have been supplemented by films, journalism, television and advertising. In his book, Mythologies, the French structuralist critic Roland Barthes set out to explain the way myths work, and the power they have over the way we think. Taking a wide variety of examples ranging from the language of guidebooks to the imagery of cooking in women's magazines and the reporting of weddings by the press, Barthes showed how these apparently familiar things signify all kinds of ideas about the world. Unlike the more or less ephemeral media, design has the capacity to cast myths into an enduring, solid and tangible form, so that they seem to be reality itself. We can take as an example the common assumption that modern office work is more friendly, more fun, more varied and generally better than office work was in 'the old days'. The myth serves to reconcile most people's experience of the boredom and monotony of office work with their wish to think that it carries more status than alternatives, such as factory work, where there is no pretence about the monotony. Although advertisements for office jobs, magazine stories and television serials have been responsible for implanting in people's minds the myth that office work is fun, sociable and exciting, it is given daily sustenance and credibility by modern equipment in bright colours and slightly humorous shapes, designs that help make the office match up to the myth. For entrepreneurs, the utilisation of these myths is necessary to commercial success. Every product, to be successful, must incorporate the ideas that will make it marketable, and the particular task of design is to bring about the conjunction between such ideas and the available means of production. The result of this process is that manufactured goods embody innumerable myths about the world, myths which in time come to seem as real as the products in which they are embedded. Design's extensive influence and complex nature make it far from easy to deal with historically. The number of industrially made artefacts is infinite, and even the most insignificant seeming design can prove on analysis to be extraordinarily complicated. Rather than making a vain attempt to be comprehensive, I have set out to suggest how the history of the design of any manufactured article might be approached, the kinds of question that could be asked and the answers that the study of its design might yield. Although I have discussed a great variety of articles in the course of this book, many of them in some detail, my choice has inevitably been somewhat arbitrary, and there are many cases where another article would have illustrated the argument equally well. Indeed, it would be true to say that the book could have contained a different set of designs and yet retained its argument intact.