With the disappearance of the roll top, the clerk lost the ability to make his or her desk private: work was constantly exposed to view, and the top of the desk was expected to be in such good order that anything could be found at a moment's notice. In the interest of efficiency, clerks were to be taught to arrange the contents of their desks according to a prescribed system: 'Desk system should be taught to all the clerks, and close watch kept until they have thoroughly learned it. To ascertain just how well they are proceeding, suddenly ask for an eraser or a ruler, or some other item that is not in constant use, and see how long it takes to locate it. If it cannot be located at once, without the slightest loss of time, the lesson has not been learned.'\* Even the drawers were to conform to the system: they should be used in the way that had been established as the most efficient 126 The Modern Efficiency Desk for clerical work, designed for the Equitable Assurance Co., U.S.A., c.1915. From L. Galloway, Office Management. Its Principles and Practice, New York, 1919, p.89. \*Galloway, pp.89-90. \*Leffingwell, 1917, p.11. \*Leffingwell, 1917, p.208. FFIT Figure 16. The Modern Efficiency Desk This desk is little more than a table with three shallow drawers. This makes it impossible for clerks to stow away and so overlook papers. The center drawer holds the employee's tools and the side drawers his stationery. The advantages of a desk of this simple type are that clerks cannot stow within it papers which will be later overlooked. As there is no room for placing current work in the drawers, any tendency to defer until tomorrow what can be done today is nipped in the bud. The simplicity of this equipment reflects the celerity with which business is conducted today. The desk is no longer a storage place - nor even ornamental - but a tool for making the quickest possible turnover of business papers.\* The new design signified the change in the nature of clerical work. Taking away the high back meant that the clerk no longer worked in a private space: the chief clerk or supervisor was able to see whether he or she was working at maximum efficiency. Equally, though, the clerk could more easily see what was going on in the rest of the office (which might or might not be an inspiration to harder work) and talk to those at neighbouring desks. However, conversation in the office was a subversion of the principles of scientific management, interrupting concentration, and most employers made silence the rule in their offices a rule that managers were advised to explain to employees on the grounds that silence in the office would reduce fatigue.\* In some offices, partitions were built between the desks to make conversation impossible, but they defeated the object of better supervision unless the overseer constantly patrolled the office.