\*Schulze, p.64. \*Galloway, p.90. Partitions in an American typing office, c. 1915. The partitions ensured that the typists would not be distracted by gossip and chatter. From W.H. Leffingwell, Scientific Office Management, Chicago, 1917, p. 140. and, since each clerk in a department would be doing the same work, the best arrangement would be equally applicable to all. Once a standard system had been fixed, with, say, the top left drawer for unfinished work and the top right for stationery, the office manager was periodically to inspect the desk drawers to see that it was being followed. In one office, the clerks were awarded points for, among other things, the condition of their desks.\* One reason why desk systems were considered necessary was that the clerk no longer brought work to and from his desk. The movement of papers was handled instead by a messenger, whose efficiency depended on his being able to locate unerringly the papers to be collected on each desk. With messengers or even (in some cases as early as 1915) mechanical conveyor systems for files, the clerk worked only at his desk and no longer had any control over the pace of work. The responsibility and trust given to the nineteenth-century clerk had entirely disappeared: the clerk now worked to a tempo imposed by management at a desk which had been designed and organised to prevent its being in any way a private space. The change in desk design in America during the 1910s both reflected, and was to some extent responsible for, the change in the status of the clerk from craftsman to proletarian - the employer was buying not only his or her time, but also the right to supervise every movement. Even if not all desks were actually used so rigorously, they were marketed as if they could be. The rationally designed desk, 'trained down to fighting trim', provided an image of efficiency to office managers, and the mere presence of 'scientific' desks in an office was a sign of aspirations towards efficient management.\* In British offices, where scientific management never achieved quite the same ruthlessness, the reformed desks adopted in the 1920s, might have created an impression of efficiency, but the extent of the reorganisation of work was probabl less drastic. The impression of efficiency was, of course, greatest if all the desks in an office were the same, or at least designed according to the same system. American office managers were encouraged by the scientific management experts to believe that the standardisation of furniture would have good general psychological effects, as well as improving overall efficiency; it suggested well-ordered methods and demanded of the employee the same care and regard for order: 'Various kinds of shapes, and irregular arrangements of desks, suggest on the other hand that there is no general scheme of supervision that is in harmony with a well-founded principle. There are Mechanical Conveyor for Files, c. 1925. The conveyor removed the need for clerks to leave their desks. From W.H. Leffingwell, The Office Appliance Manual, 1926, p.381. 127