\*Schulze, p.72. \*Leffingwell, 1917, p.20. \*Leffingwell, 1917, p.72. \*Schulze, p.63. \*Galloway, p.91. so many different ways of doing the same thing that each employee feels he is more or less called upon to "improve" upon the methods used by everyone else.'\* Standardisation extended down even to the pens with which the clerk wrote. It was argued that there was no need to have a large supply of different pens to suit the handwriting idiosyncrasies of individual clerks, but that one style of nib would be more economical, and anyone could learn how to use the standard nib within a few days. Thus, even in handwriting, the most individual and personal characteristic left to the clerk, non-conformity was to be eliminated on the grounds that it was inefficient. In theory, scientific management should have been applied with equal force to all grades of office workers. In practice, though, exceptional reasons were found to justify executives having different tools and materials from clerks, although their basic activity in time and motion study terms sitting reading or writing at a desk - was exactly the same. While clerks had dip pens, the executive was justified in having the much more prestigious fountain pen, 'because he is often called upon to write in all parts of the office, where an inkwell might not be handy,' and so was excused the uniformity imposed on the clerk.\* Similarly, the reasons for the redesign of the clerk's desk should have applied with equal force to the executive's desk: filing had eliminated the need for storage, and efficiency demanded that the desk be no larger than was needed for writing on. This was where the principles of scientific management came into conflict with the need to maintain and demonstrate status, a conflict in which 'scientific' principles seem to have been defeated every time. Executives' desks continued to be distinguished from clerical desks in size, capacity and appearance. In their recommendations for executive desks, the management experts emerged with contradictory statements on all three factors. On the size of desks, one writer notes: 'It will be found that for most purposes a 48"³ desk without a center drawer, or with two drawers on either side will be found sufficient. Only in the case of employees charged with executive duties should it be necessary to use large desks.'\* It would seem that the only explanation for this necessity was one of status, as the executive's desk was not for storing documents, and indeed executives were severely warned against the dangers of allowing this to happen. In another office management manual, under an illustration of an extremely capacious desk for the executive, are the following remarks: 'Whatever the form of executive desk adopted, the test of its usefulness is based on its effectiveness as a working tool and not its use as a store house . . . At best, any type of storage system is a passive agent in business, and when the executive's desk takes on this function, it shows that his activities are not in harmony with the modern methods of business.'\* The efficiency experts acknowledged that the drawers of the executive's desk would normally be empty, but they did not dare suggest doing away with them altogether, as was done much later and under different conditions. The rolltop desk, which had been 128