АЗИЗО ЯЗОДИАМ 3TAVIR Figure 17. Standard Double-Pedestal lat-Top Desk A type of desk widely used by xecutives providing free working surface and ample drawer rouri for necessary storage purpos American executive's desk, c. 1915. The type of desk recommended by scientific management for executive use. From L. Galloway, Office Management. Its Principles and Practice, New York, 1919, p.91. Top right: Roll-top desk used by an executive in precisely the way scientific management objected to. From The Factory, September 1912. Below: Flat-top desk with folding cover, c. 1935. A compromise solution to preserve confidentiality without allowing the desk to accumulate papers unnecessarily. From V.E. Jackson, Modern Office Appliances, London, 1936. banished from the clerical office, continued to be preferred by many executives on the grounds that it was useful for protecting confidential papers from inquisitive eyes. In spite of the threat of disorder posed by such desks, the office manuals of the 1910s accepted their use by executives, albeit with disapproval; indeed one compromise solution was developed, a flat-top desk with a roll-top cover. Similar considerations applied to the use of finish, ornament and fittings to distinguish executive desks from clerical desks. Whatever a neo-Georgian desk might do for the prestige of the user, its greater expense, its unnecessary number of drawers and the additional mouldings that acted as traps for dust and disease would have been anathema to the theorists. Scientific management was no less partial in the advice it offered on office chairs. Clerks clearly needed the best design of chair for desk work and this was said to be swivel-based, with a wooden CONSTRUCTrips Right: American tabulating machine office, c. 1915. The woman is sitting on a wooden chair of the kind approved for clerical workers. From W.H. Leffingwell, Scientific Office Management, Chicago, 1917, p.108. 129