Manager's desk of ornate design, U.S.A. mid 1920s. From W.H. Leffingwell, The Office Appliance Manual, 1926, p.734. \*See Braverman for further discussion. saddle seat and a slatted wooden back. If this was actually the chair that best minimised fatigue, it should have been thought equally appropriate for executives' use as well. Executives, however, were recommended to have cane seated chairs, which were said to be superior to wooden-seated ones; status debarred clerical workers from enjoying the same benefits. It was through inconsistencies like this that scientific management revealed itself to be much less than the science it claimed to be, and not so much concerned with overall office efficiency as with changing the character of clerical work.\* Specialised Furniture in the Office \*Leffingwell, 1917, pp. 147-149. Once office work had been rationalised to the extent of allocating particular activities to each department and giving its clerks an identical work routine, there became a case for designing specialised furniture for the various functions. If the desk was thought of as a tool, then each clerical job needed its own tool. From about 1910, specialised desks were designed in increasing variety. One of them was the tub desk, with a top that was not a flat surface, but consisted of a range of trays for filing cards. However, it was in the development of typists' desks and chairs that specialised furniture received most attention. Partly because typing was a new form of office work and partly because it was women who did it, typing was treated from the start as a specialised activity, and typists tended not to perform other functions in the office. In the United States, patents for typing desks appeared in considerable numbers in the 1880s and 1890s; there was lull in applications after the turn of the century, but an increasing number of patents were registered from 1910 until the mid 1920s, when the number again fell off. The second phase of interest in typing desks was closely connected to the introduction of scientific management into offices. Typing had a particular attraction for the scientific managers, because the rate of work could be measured so easily. The techniques for recording typists' output included stroke counters on the machine to record each character typed, and, as typists soon discovered the advantage of using the space bar instead of the tabulator, squared transparent overlays from which the number of square inches of typed material could be read off. Characteristically, even the time required for the supervisor to carry out this action was recorded, and a standard rate was established of six sheets a minute.\*