Right: The purpose-designed typist's chair was developed through the study of posture. Note the way such studies perceive the worker as a mechanism. From W.H. Leffingwell, Office Management, 1927, p.413. Far right: to factory furniture. From W.H. Leffingwell, The Office Appliance Manual, 1926, p.740. Right: Gestetner duplicating machine, c. 1930. An overtly industrial piece of equipment. From Design, no.40, p.12. sitting posture that had been undertaken in factories. The new chairs were closely based on those designed for factory use: they were made of steel, with adjustable, upholstered seats and backs. Although they were efficient and comfortable, they looked unmistakably industrial. The widespread use of steel for office furniture on the grounds that it was more durable than wood (a questionable argument, since it was true of the material but not of the finish, which was easily scratched or chipped) had the effect of making the office more and more closely resemble a factory. To the theorists of scientific management, this association had great attractions, for it provided visible proof that their methods and analysis applied universally to all kinds of work, regardless of the social pretensions of the workers. The industrial appearance of office furniture and equipment in the inter-war years was not, as has been suggested, the result of an absence of design, or of the failure to conceive of any alternative image, but rather expressed a deliberate intention to associate office and factory. Far right: Powers printing tabulator accounting machine, c. 1935. This equipment could easily be mistaken for a machine tool. 132