Office Equipment \*An extensive selection of interwar office equipment is illustrated in Vincent E. Jackson, Modern Office Appliances, London, 1936. \*Klingender, pp.86-98. Powers-Samas accounting machine office, mid 1930s. But for the clothes of the clerks, there is nothing to distinguish this office from a factory. With the exception of a few articles like dictating machines and telephones, most office equipment before 1940 was overtly mechanical and industrial in appearance. The appearance of the British Gestetner machine, as produced until the early 1930s, was typical: its general form was the result of primarily mechanical considerations, its mechanism was exposed, it was supported on a tubular frame structure and was painted black. This description would equally well fit most other items of office equipment made in Britain and America in the 1920s and 1930s; addressing machines, typewriters and mechanical accounting machines were equally mechanical in appearance.\* There would be little reason to comment on them were it not for the fact that almost all items of office equipment underwent such a major change of image in the late 1940s and early 1950s as to leave little doubt that the original form of these machines was neither 'neutral' nor derived unthinkingly from factory tools and equipment. While the designs may have been determined partly by technical considerations, they nevertheless presented a strong set of associations that, by the 1950s, manuacturers were very anxious to discard. While levels of employment were low, as they were in Britain and the United States in the 1920s and 1930s, offices had little difficulty in attracting staff. In the early 1930s, London employers were able to cut wages, sometimes by as much as half, and many clerks lost their jobs altogether.\* In such conditions, no clerk was likely to make complaints about the work environment. Employers had little interest in making their offices appear other than highly utilitarian, which could be seen as the product either of indifference or of the desire to express efficiency. The early 1930s London accounting machine, office illustrated below, with its heavy industrial-looking machines and plain decor, is distinguished from a factory only by the clothes worn by the clerks. Management aims did not affect the design of all office machines in the same way. The appearance of some, including typewriters and adding machines, changed in a uniform way, but others, like dictating machines and telephones, acquired particular images, for reasons peculiar to their functions.