\*Business Equipment Topics, vol. LXXVIII, no.4, August 1931, pp.7-8. Raymond Loewy from the model shown on p. 132. From Design, no.40, 1952, p. 13. \*R. Loewy, Never Leave Well Enough Alone, New York, 1951, pp. 83-84. Below: Monarch portable typewriter, 1932. A low-priced portable designed for mass sales. From Business Equipment Topics, 1932. Right: Smith-Corona portable typewriter, 1932. A lightweight machine, clearly directed at the domestic market. From Business Equipment Topics, November 1932. to which the marketing response was that even in the home their proper use was in business correspondence and that typewritten letters to bank managers and the like would achieve better results than handwritten ones.\* The industrial appearance of the machines themselves, which made them seem unattractive in the home, was overcome by redesigning them in a more appropriate form. In practice, there were two approaches to marketing portable typewriters. One was to produce the cheapest possible machine, however ugly it might be, and sell it on its low price. The more common alternative was to produce an attractive object, which cost very little more, especially as the manufacturers were aiming at a very large volume of sales. The machines made by Smith Corona in America from the early 1930s, and Olivetti in Italy from the mid 1930s are good examples: they were slim, cased in a single casting which ran around the keyboard, and finished in light colours instead of the customary black of office machines. The neat and elegant result succeeded in making the portable typewriter a popular object for home use. It was not until later that similar restyling was applied, for rather different reasons, to office typewriters. A very few office equipment manufacturers in the 1930s redesigned their products in a way that anticipated the general changes of the 1950s. Such a firm in Britain was Gestetner, which had made a typically industrial-looking duplicating machine in the 1920s, but in the early 1930s employed Raymond Loewy to redesign it. His new design effectively demechanised it by enclosing the mechanism in a casing. Loewy described the design as a 'face-lift' job, in which he arrived at 'a form which enclosed everything that could be enclosed'.\* Interestingly, it was a face-lift that survived and continued to be used, with a few more wrinkles removed, for Gestetner duplicators until the 1950s. Although Loewy may not have been aware of it at the time, one reason for the continued success of his design lay in its recognition that the operator was not interested in seeing how the machine worked and would very much rather not have known that it was a machine at all. When the typewriter was introduced in the 1880s, shorthand was the available and obvious method to use for taking down the spoken word to be turned into typescript. Shorthand and typing were at once acknowledged to be complementary skills, both of which were necessary for the typewriter to be of real use in the office. Distributors wanted for the "MONARCH PIONEER" wanderd keyboard a At the lowest price in history for a Real Typewriter .... Unlimited Sales Possibilities 135