\*V.K. Chew, Talking Machines, London, 1967, pp. 14, 26. \*Schulze, p. 36. \*W.H. Leffingwell, The Office Appliance Manual, 1926, p.344. From 1888, however, shorthand skill was threatened by Edison's development of the phonograph and its application as a business dictating machine. The promoters of the early phonograph believed that it would have a very limited appeal in the house, because it was expensive, its sound reproduction was mediocre, and there were problems in the quantity production of pre-recorded wax cylinders to play on it. It was seen as having a much more promising future as an office dictating machine. Edison's system was to rent phonographs to businesses through concessionary companies, which were set up in the United States in 1888, in Britain in 1892, and in Germany in 1894. The phonograph, though, did not turn out to be a success in the office; it was resented by stenographers, and it was too expensive and insufficiently advanced to offer any real savings in the office. Some office phonographs were supplied in elaborate ornamental cabinets, which were presumably part of an attempt to overcome the opposition of office staff and convince them that it was a prestigious piece of office equipment. Such attempts must have had little success, as all the Edison subsidiary companies had stopped promoting the phonograph as a dictating machine by the end of the 1890s and had turned to other markets for it.\* Interest in the dictating machine was revived in the 1910s with the arrival of scientific management, which was attracted to shorthand-typing as an occupation in which it seemed that the separate tasks might advantageously be divided. All the time that a stenographer was taking down shorthand, her typewriter and her typing skills were idle, which the theorists saw as an offensive waste. The dictating machine made it possible effectively to separate the two tasks. Experiments in US government offices were quoted to show that the average cost of producing a letter could be reduced from 4.3 cents to 2.7 cents if dictating machines were used.\* Such examples encouraged some businesses to install dictating machines, which were certainly common in large American offices by the 1920s. The American machines were marketed in Britain and Europe, where they seem to have been less common. The dictaphone enabled the typist to devote all her time to typing, while the executive could dictate at any time that suited him. These inducements, with their cost savings, did not make the dictating machine a popular instrument with either shorthandtypists or executives. Special pleading by the office efficiency experts suggests that they realised how unpopular the dictating machine was, yet wanted to convince people of its value. The arguments put forward in its favour were not financial ones, but were to do with the quality of work. The dictating machine was alleged to encourage inspirational thought and closer concentration, and even improve letter-writing style: 'The dictator is guaranteed certain privacy of thought with the machine acting as a sort of silent, untiring stenographer, with no human failing or variableness with which to reckon. Moreover there is an absence of the human factor element which often intrudes itself between dictator and stenographer, and by reason of a peculiar sensitiveness on the part of the dictator prevents the best expression of his thought . . . Men who formerly dictated stilted letters . . . have been taught by the dictating machine to express themselves lucidly.'\* 137