\*W.H. Leffingwell, Office Management, Chicago and New York, 1927, p.465. Dictaphone dictating machine, early 1930s. This was the machine used by the executive; the cabinet has the form and finish of a piece of furniture, and can be closed to conceal the machine. From V.E. Jackson, Modern Office Appliances, London, 1936, p.274. Such exaggerated praise was intended to overcome executives' worry that dictating machines would make relations in the office impersonal. Shorthand-typists had much stronger reasons for hostility, as one of their two skills was being eliminated and they were left working continuously at their typewriters, often in a typing pool where their rate of work was checked by a supervisor. Underlying all the special pleading in favour of dictating machines was the knowledge that it was not 'an entirely unknown occurrence for dictator and stenographer to engage in conversation entirely unconnected with the business in hand.'\* The chance of cutting out time-wasting gossip made dictating machines highly attractive to office management experts. An additional attraction, and a further reason for hostility from both executive and typist, was that each wax cylinder was accompanied by a card on which the time of dictation and the time of typing had to be recorded; by looking at this, the office manager could find out the speed of production of each letter without having to watch his staff at work. The dictating and typing of a letter, which shorthand had kept as a personal affair controlled by two people, was made by the dictating machine into an impersonal process open to the scrutiny and control of the office manager. Dictating machines in the 1920s and 1930s were very different in appearance from other office machines. They were boxed in cabinets with more obvious style to them than any other piece of office equipment, and the quality of the finish was high. The dictating machine was one of the few office machines used personally by executives, and it therefore needed a superior appearance to fit in with the other furnishings in his office and to avoid damaging his status by making him appear a machine minder. The machine needed to be at his service, rather than vice versa. In any case, the really efficient executive would need to have a dictating machine in his home. 'By placing a machine in his home, [he] may dictate Transcribing machine, in use by a typist, mid-1920s. Unlike the executive's machine, this showed no attempt to disguise its mechanical aspects. From W.H. Leffingwell, The Office Appliance Manual, 1926, p.336. 138