IDISON Edison Voicewriter, magnetic tape dictating machine, 1953. Scrupulous attention to the form of this machine made it suitable for use anywhere. From Design, no.83, 1955. \*Schulze, p.37. \*Manual of Modern Business Equipment: Dictating Machines, 2nd edition, 1962, p.22. overflow work, or ideas that come to him.'\* In order not to affront all the ideas of the separation of home from work, the machine's appearance had to reach the standards of home furnishing. On the other hand, the typist's transcribing machine was an obviously utilitarian piece of equipment. The conditions of clerical employment at the time made it unnecessary to appease shorthandtypists with stylish design to compensate them for the loss of one of their skills. Apart from being unpopular, dictating machines were cumbersome, the quality of the voice reproduction was not good, and they needed the attention of an office boy to reshave the wax cylinders. These disadvantages discouraged much further extension of their use in the 1930s and 1940s. It was not until the 1950s that the introduction of the magnetic tape recorder provided a technically satisfactory machine that was small enough to be easily portable. Nevertheless, the machine still served the same function, and there was every reason for it to be just as unpopular as its predecessor. Realising the large potential market for an efficient dictating machine, several manufacturers employed top designers to style their products, which were therefore closer to contemporary standards of high quality design than other office equipment. The Edison Voicewriter, designed by Carl Otto and marketed from 1953, was widely admired, but other makes were no less highly styled. The great advantage of the miniature tape machine was that it was portable and could be used not only in the office, but anywhere it could be plugged in. (Battery-powered models introduced a little later had no significant limitations on where they could be used.) Outside the office, dictating machines were most often used in cars or in executives' homes, where they raised the same problems as the original dictating machines and portable typewriters. If the meaning of home, as a place distinct from work, was to be preserved, dictating letters at home for later typing in the office was inadmissible. Yet advertisements for dictating machines in the 1950s did suggest that manufacturers expected them to be used in homes - hence the adoption of a domestic image, with smooth plastic casings, pastel colours and delicate controls, which gave dictating machines more affinity with portable radio sets than with other office equipment.