Dictating machine advertisement, England, 1955. As well as the 'a child can do it' copy line, the advertisement implied that dictating machines were likely to be found in homes. From Office Magazine, February 1955. ## MY Y name's Johnny and I'm six. I haven't really got an Agaphone and this isn't my desk But the Agaphone's so easy even I can use it. It doesn't matter if I press the wrong key nothing goes wrong. and if I whisper into it I can hear what I've said all over again as loud as anything My Daddy says the Agaphone is easy to use and he likes it because it saves him lots of time Sometimes he brings it home with him when he's busy and sometimes he uses it in his car. Miss Brown that's Daddy's secretary likes the Agaphone too She says she always gets away on time now and is never late for a date whatever that is If you're as important as my Daddy. I think you should get an Agaphone Agaphone Small, Sound, Simple M. & L. HAYCRAFT LTD. ST. STEPHEN'S HOUSE (Adjoining Scotland WESTMINSTER, LONDON SWI Yard). Telephone WHitehall 9618 9 Up to an hour's dictation with the spools of wire held in a foolproof maga zine. Can be used for con ference recording. Time control enables dictation to be automatically located for playback. Signalling de vice warns the secretary of remarks, instructions, etc., which are not to be transcribed. Key controls are simple and positive. Small and compact. Hand some appearance. Oper ates on any voltage or can be used חד a car. Domesticating the Office: Post-war Office Design During the 1950s and 1960s, not only did almost every item of office equipment undergo radical change in design, but so too did the entire environment of the office. In many cases, offices began to resemble the contemporarily-furnished homes of the wealthy. The decisive cause of this new image was the change in the market for clerical labour. On both sides of the Atlantic, the steady growth of the service sector of the economy created an increasing demand for clerical workers, while relatively full employment placed offices in direct competition with factories for the same labour. Factory employers tended to respond to these conditions by paying higher wages, but office employers chose in general not to compete on wages, and instead to rely on the greater respectability and 'pleasantness' of office work to attract people who might otherwise have gone into factories. The wage differential between industrial and clerical jobs was gradually eroded, so that by 1968 in Britain, the median earnings of women office machine operators were only 3% above those of semi-skilled factory machine operatives, while in the United States the median earnings of clerical workers had by 140