\*Great Britain, Department of Employment, British Labour Statistics Historical Abstract, 1886-1968, London, 1971, Table 68; Braverman, p.297. \*L. Bruce Archer, 'Honest Styling', Design, no. 108, 1957, p.38. \*Jon M. Shephard, Automation and Alienation: a Study of Office and Factory Workers, Cambridge, Mass., 1971, p.63; see also Braverman. Data processing in a Manchester office, mid 1970s. Although this is called an office, the conditions of work differ little from those of a factory. 1971 actually fallen below those of all other urban occupations except service workers.\* Although there had ceased to be any distinction between office and factory work in their material rewards, there was, however, a major distinction established in the images attached to the two kinds of work. To some extent, this had been achieved through devices such as the relabelling of all clerical jobs as 'secretarial work', but the major cause of the different perception of office work was the radical transformation of the physical environment of most offices. The overtly industrial references of pre-war offices were discarded as wholly unsuitable for the new labour conditions and replaced by a different set of references. Not only did the style of management change, but so too did the ambience, the style of the furnishings and of the equipment. As one industrial designer observed during the 1950s, the main object of office equipment styling became 'to identify the machine as an appliance for the office rather than the factory'.\* Explicit though it was as an aim, finding a suitable image for the office presented considerable problems in practice, particularly since the actual changes taking place in the work of the office were tending in many cases to make it more rather than less like a factory. Automation, and especially computerisation, are often said to have liberated office staff from dull and repetitive work but those advances have not affected all office workers in the same way. Management and executive staff have certainly benefited by the introduction of computers, which can provide them with more recent and more comprehensive data and necessitate their spending less time on interpreting it before making their decisions. But computers have also eliminated a wide middle range of clerks whose job was to prepare business data. In their place, computers have created a heavy demand for clerks to process the data into a form in which it can be used by a computer.\* This group of workers, data processors and key-punch operators, are mostly women and work at a task more monotonous and repetitive than the preparation of ledgers ever was. Because punched cards are an easily visible and quantifiable product, the efficiency of each operator can be watched closely and standards of output set. The work is almost identical to that in many factories and is carried