IBM offices, Segrate, Italy, c.1980. The quality of furnishings, finishes and physical environment in the modern 'landscaped' office is inifinitely superior to that in most office workers' homes. \*Braverman, p.366. out under a similar régime, often in buildings in the industrial zones of cities or their suburbs, or in provincial towns, since corporations have realised that there is no need for their data to be processed in high-rental central business districts. Thus two of the attractions of office work - the metropolitan environment and the chance to mix with other sorts and ranks of office workers - are lost: in location, as well in the conditions of work, much data preparation has become like factory work. The key punch operator has no knowledge of the process in which she is involved beyond what goes on in front of her, and her rate of work is set to a standard created initially by the scale of the investment in the capital equipment. The similarity between this and factory work has been acknowledged by employers as well as employees: "The vice president of an insurance company, pointing to a room filled with key-punch operators, remarked: "All they lack is a chain," and explained himself by adding that the machines kept the "girls" at their desks, punching monotonously and without cease. And the workers themselves are under no illusions about their "white-collar" jobs: "This job is no different from a factory job except that I don't get paid as much," one operator in a large farm equipment office said.'\* Accompanying such jobs have been found all the signs of stress, proneness to sickness and dissatisfaction that are normally associated with assembly-line workers. Computer operations represent office work at its most factorylike, while most clerical work is still concerned with the production of writing on pieces of paper. In the hands of an executive's personal shorthand secretary, who also makes appointments and 142