\*See Interiors Second Book of Offices, edited by J. Pile, New York, 1969; and S. Mullin, 'Some Notes on an Activity', Planning Office Space, edited by F. Duffy, C. Cave & J. Worthington, London, 1976, pp. 16-21 (subsequently referred to as Duffy Cave & Worthington). \*F. Duffy & C. Cave, 'Bürolandschaft, an Appraisal', in Duffy, Cave & Worthington, pp. 68-77; and F. Duffy, 'Bürolandschaft '58-'78', Architectural Review, vol. CLXV, no.983, January 1979, pp.54-58. receives visitors, office work can still be seen as a craft, made meaningful by the personal contacts between people. But the growing tendency in large corporations and government offices has been to eliminate the personal secretary, a position that is regarded as an inefficient use of labour, and to replace her by centralised typing services, so that the executive never dictates to anything but a tape recorder, and the typist never types from anything but a tape. The complete division of labour dreamed of by efficiency experts of the early part of the century has over the last twenty years increasingly become a reality. The striking fact is that while office work itself has become more and more impersonal, the environment of offices has become infinitely more pleasant. Lighting levels and standards of heating and ventilation are now better than most office workers will have in their own homes, while the layout and furnishing of offices and the design of equipment have all been improved to a very high standard. Even if the work made the place seem like a factory, the environment was designed to prove that it was an office. An indication of the significance attached to the office environment in attracting staff is the appearance from the late 1950s of the phrase 'modern office' in advertisements for clerical jobs in London evening papers. Since the 1940s, two important developments in the layout and design of offices have affected working conditions. One was the 'landscaped' office, the other was the 'personalising' of office space. Office landscaping was developed in Germany in the late 1950s as an alternative to the regular rectilinear grids of desks favoured by scientific management theorists. 'Scientific' principles still applied in office landscaping, in that the layout was determined by work flows, though these no longer followed the straight lines that had been assumed to be correct before. Supposedly more efficient than the grid layout, the landscaped office also made distinctions between staff invisible. It gave the impression of obliterating hierarchies; only a trained eye could distinguish between the desk of a manager and that of a clerk.\* Landscaped offices were generally furnished to a very high standard, carpeted throughout, and fitted with furniture which demonstrated taste and style, as well as being efficient. For a manager anxious to prevent his staff from feeling that they had become a clerical proletariat, the landscaped office was a valuable innovation. The egalitarian appearance of the landscaped office brought with it an assumption that good personal relationships among staff mattered, as executives and clerks worked on the same floor in informal contact with each other. Instead of hierarchical layout and imposed silence, the landscaped office allowed the organisation of space to be determined not just by the dynamic of the worker's movements, but partly by his or her own choice, in which relationships with other people in the office might be a factor. In this way, the landscaped office proposed a different standard of behaviour, as the impersonality that had compelled people to wear a mask at work was replaced by a norm based on personal 'openness' and on the understanding of others as individuals. It looked like a place where people got on well together and enjoyed each other's company; since a large proportion of clerical staff in the post-war world consisted of married women looking for relief from the isolation of domestic life, this message carried a strong 143