1. Images of Progress The 'Beaufort' radiogram, 1932. Most early radio cabinets used the forms of traditional furniture. From The Cabinet Maker, 27th August 1932. For all its benefits, progress can be a painful and disturbing experience. Our reactions to it are often ambivalent: we want the improvements and comforts that progress provides, but when it forces upon us the loss of things we value, compels us to change our basic assumptions and makes us adjust to the new and unfamiliar, we are inclined to resist it. What is described as progress in modern societies is in fact largely synonymous with the range of changes brought about by industrial capital. Among the benefits are more food, better transport and a greater abundance of goods. But it is a peculiarity of capitalism that each beneficial innovation also brings a sequence of other changes, not all of which are desired by all people so that, in the name of progress, we are compelled to accept a great many distantly related and possibly unwanted changes. The steam engine, for example, brought greater efficiency to manufacturing and greater speed to transport, but the making of it helped turn master craftsmen into wage labourers and caused towns to grow in size and unhealthiness. The idea of progress, though, includes all the changes, desirable as well as undesirable. The success of capitalism has always depended upon its capacity to innovate and to sell new products. Yet, paradoxically, most societies in which capitalism has taken hold have expressed resistance to the newness of things, a newness that was as evident in eighteenth-century England as it is in developing countries today. What is it, then, that has made people in Western societies prepared to accept new products, in spite of the changes they threaten? Since any successful product must have overcome resistance to novelty, it appears to be an axiom that the products of industrial capital aim to create acceptance of the changes they bring about. Among the ways in which this acceptance is won, design, through its capacity to make things seem other than they are, has been most important. Design alters the ways people see commodities. To take an example of this process, we can consider the design of early radio cabinets. When broadcasting began in the 1920s, the first wireless sets were crude assemblies of resistors, wires and valves. Manufacturers quickly realised that if they were to sell radios for people to put in their living rooms, they had to develop a more sophisticated approach to design. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, three basic types of solution were evolved, each one of which presented the same commodity, the wireless, in an entirely dif ferent way. The first was to house the radio in a cabinet which imitated a piece of antique furniture, and so referred to the past. The second was to conceal the radio within a piece of furniture