Centraal Beheer offices, Apeldoorn, Holland, in 1978. The interior of this building was a bare shell, and staff at all grades were encouraged to decorate their workspaces themselves, and even provide their own furnishings if they wished. taste, often through the display of works of art on the walls or shelves. Some office designers have gone further and attempted to extend the licence to express individuality to less exalted staff by encouraging them to furnish their space with objects and pictures of their own. The most famous and extensive version of this principle is incorporated in the Centraal Beheer at Apeldoorn in Holland, designed by Herman Hertzberger. But even in more ordinary offices, the same principle can be seen in the posters, plants, photographs and mascots that staff bring in to decorate and personalise their work spaces. Even if any of these things would have been permissible in the scientifically managed offices of the inter-war years, the interiors were certainly never photographed showing them. Sticking up a poster or watering the plants would have deprived the firm of a few seconds of the clerk's time and, in any case, the expression of individuality was wholly against the 'scientific' principles. An office that could insist that all clerks should use the same style of pen nib and, if necessary, change their handwriting, would have been unlikely to approve of such overt displays of individuality as having pictures around the office. The change from this state of affairs was deliberate and was the result of developments in the theory of management. Its origins were a series of experiments done between 1927 and 1932 by the Harvard Fatigue Laboratory at the Hawthorne Works of the Western Electric Co. to find ways of reducing fatigue and increasing output among a group of six women assembling telegraph relays. The researchers started by introducing breaks and rest periods into the day and changing the work schedules. They found that each new experiment produced better results than the last. In the twelfth experiment, they reintroduced the original working 146