\*The Hawthorne experiments are described in E. Mayo, The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization, New York, 1933, chapter 3, and in more detail in F.J. Roethlisberger & W.J. Dickson, Management and the Worker, Cambridge, Mass., 1943, in which the principles of the 'Human Relations' school of management are also outlined. day, and output rose yet again, to a level that was higher than at any previous time during the experimental period. Puzzled by these results, the researchers were driven to conclude that the organisation of working, on which scientific management had placed so much emphasis, was not important and that the key to the constant increase in output was connected to the relationship that had built up between the researchers and the workers, as well as in the strong personal attachments that built up amongst the six women, who came to see themselves as a special and privileged group. During the twelfth experiment, the researchers had started to interview the women in some depth about their attitudes to work, and their social life and opinions; this special attention was thought to be connected to the good results being obtained. The Hawthorne experiments and a later experiment on lighting levels for office workers showed that the study of the work of individuals in isolation, as practised in scientific management, was far less important than the study of the workers as part of a social group. The 'Human Relations' school of management that developed out of the Hawthorne experiments emphasised the importance of the worker's relationships with other employees and with management, and was responsible for the changed attitudes towards office environments.\* It had been found at Hawthorne that the women liked having a say in how the experiments were run. The lesson of this for management was that employees who had some influence on the organisation of their work would produce better results. Hence, workers who could influence the appearance of their surroundings could be expected to do better than those in offices of which the appearance and decoration were dictated by the management. On the other hand, an office in which the management had little control over the environment would fail to provide a corporate image, and would look inefficient. The Human Relations principle of management therefore set up some tension in the running of offices, between the need to promote the social relationships of office staff and the need to present a uniform image to indicate efficiency and constancy in the conduct of business. In resolving this and other conflicts in the organisation of offices, post-war furniture design played an important part. With relatively full employment in the three decades after World War II putting clerical workers in a seller's market and encouraging them to change jobs frequently or move to factory work, employers chose a strategy of enhancing the respectability of office work and of making it seem unequivocally middle class rather than offering significantly higher wages. If the characteristics of factory work were routine, servility to the machine and rigorous efficiency, maintained by intensive supervision, the office was to be shown as fundamentally different in its apparently relaxed style of work, the absence of routine, the egalitarian relations and the subservience of machines. Nothing can describe the intended atmosphere better than the word 'friendly' which appeared so ubiquitously in advertisements for office jobs from the 1950s. Even so, office hierarchies had to be preserved to avoid a descent into anarchy and chaos. The entire operation of bureaucracies and administrations depends upon knowing who is responsible to whom; without this certainty, the mainspring of the office would be lost. It was therefore important that the attractive appearance of office egalitarianism should remain no more than an appearance, 147