Post-war Desks and Equipment Office desk manufactured by Herman Miller, designed by George Nelson, 1949. This executive desk was the precursor of many office desk designs for the next thirty years. although for it to have any useful effect, it had to be reasonably convincing. It was the capacity of office landscaping to contain this apparently insoluble contradiction in office work, between apparent egalitarianism and actual hierarchies, that made it so attractive as a system of design. The same ideas were represented in the design of office furniture in such a way as to make them seem not in the least contradictory, but entirely harmonious and compatible. In the context of the plain and utilitarian furniture manufactured in Britain during the post-war years, the desks that were customdesigned for senior staff in prestige offices were very much an exception. They followed high standards of contemporary domestic taste and were finished in light-coloured hardwoods, with rounded corners and legs, while the accompanying chairs were upholstered in brightly coloured materials. The intention was to break away from the drabness of pre-war prestige executive offices, which had usually been furnished in dark-coloured period furniture. This furniture was not produced in any quantity and was purely for managers and senior executives in a few image-conscious offices. The quantity production of prestige furniture for offices began in the United States in the 1950s. The first and best known firm to do this was Herman Miller Inc., which in 1949 commissioned George Nelson to design a desk. The result, a minimal desk on a round-section chromed tube frame, has provided the form for a great many later designs. The original desk, however, was for executives and not for universal office use; it still preserved for the time being the distinction between executive and clerk. The extension of the smart, modern image to all ranks of staff can be explained partly by the demands of apparent egalitarianism and partly by the development of open-plan offices in which diverse