THE NIS BALL HO Offices of the Liverpool Echo, with the Herman Miller Action Office screen-mounted system, c.1975. Screen-mounted furniture, which enabled hierarchies to be visibly restored in open offices, became increasingly common after about 1970. \*I owe this explanation for the development of screen-mounted furniture to Francis Duffy. \*J. Manser, 'New Thinking in Office Furniture', Design, no.236, 1968, pp. 16-18. It was the need to protect office hierarchies that was responsible for another major change in office furniture design in the 1960s: the introduction of screen-mounted furniture systems. Particularly as offices began to depend heavily on a new group of high-status but non-management professionals, the computer programmers and analysts, the openness of the original landscaped offices began to be broken up into partitioned cubicles formed by the screens.\* While the uniformity of the design of a 'system' marketed by an individual firm maintained the apparent integrity of the organisation, the partitions allowed hierarchical divisions to be re-asserted. The other changes in office desks have been less concerned with their image than with their use as a functional tool, involving their size and their relation to work routines. The enormous rise in rents, particularly in London, over the last twenty years has made office space a very costly commodity; unnecessarily large desks caused wasted space and were an expense to be avoided. The British Civil Service, which occupied much more office space in London than any other organisation, realised that very large savings could be made by economising on desk sizes. The range designed by the Ministry of Public Buildings and Works in the late 1960s aimed to make worktops the smallest convenient size for a single task; if a clerk needed more surface area, more units could be added, creating surfaces in sectors around him or her, a more economical use of the area than that given by a single large rectangular surface. The addition of more standard units, rather 150