Ministry of Public Buildings and Works prototype clerical desk, stage 1, 1968. The design economised on space and, to prevent personal filing, dispensed with drawers altogether, relegating storage to separate open units. than the provision of different sorts of furniture, could also be used to indicate differences in hierarchy - always a problem in the status-conscious bureaucracy of the Civil Service. In the new clerical desks designed in the 1960s, such as the Ministry of Public Buildings and Works prototype, concealed storage space was reduced to the absolute minimum, usually one or at most two drawers, exclusively for stationery. (The MoPBW prototype design had no drawers at all.) All other storage was moved to exposed racks or shelves. This made private storage of papers and files by individuals virtually impossible, so that the desks ensured that the Civil Service practice of forbidding personal filing at all grades was observed. Nevertheless, office workers do need space for personal possessions, shopping, and so on. The first prototype of the MOPBW system provided a cage holding wire shelves, which, by being open, made it impossible to hide files in them. The wire racks, which also left the clerks' personal belongings on public display, were very unpopular, and later versions of the system gave them enclosed shelves, a compromise between office efficienc and the clerks' desire to retain some privacy in the office. The MOPBW clerical desks were purpose-designed objects fitted to the functions of a clerk: although much more attention was given to their appearance, they had close affinities with the purpose-designed clerical desks of the early part of the century. However, as desks for specialised kinds of work, they conflicted with the idea that distinctions between office ranks should be minimised. Although there were still similarities between the appearance and finish of clerical and executive desks in the new Ministry of Public Buildings and Works, prototype clerical desk, stage 2, 1968. Objections about the lack of personal storage space in the stage 1 design led to a compromise with an open shelf beneath the top. 151