Executive Desk, Gordon Russell Series 80, 1977. Storage has been entirely detached from the desk and placed in an optional independent unit, leaving a table with the finish of a domestic dining table. \*D. Rowntree, 'Desk and Chair: Basic Tools of Urban Life', Design, no.105, 1957, pp. 16-21. ranges of office furniture generated out of the study of work functions and marketed from the mid-1960s, there were some very big differences in form. In particular, the traditional executive's desk, which had served the combined purposes of storage, status symbol and defensive bulwark, was replaced in several ranges by a rectangular or round table with no storage facilities whatever. While this represents a victory for management science by finally wresting filing from even management and top executives, and also indicates the greater importance of small meetings in the modern executive's work, the designs did mark a change in image. The desk had become an object with wholly domestic associations and was in some cases quite indistinguishable from a contemporary domestic dining table. The same applied to chairs: back in 1957, Diana Rowntree wrote: "There is difficulty in defining the difference between executive and dining chairs.'\* Although table-like desks might seem to contradict the principles of generating furniture forms out of work studies, this was not entirely so. In all cases, the designers were as much concerned with image as with utility, and the image that mattered for the executive was personality, which has been consistently conveyed by reference to domestic environments, for, in contemporary Western society, home life is the only effective signifier of personal authenticity. We can see evidence of this in the way that politicians have to publicise details of their family lives, and in the ubiquitous framed photographs of wife and children, positioned on the executive's desk so that not only he but also his visitors can see them. Office equipment also went through radical changes in appearance in the 1950s. Office typewriters, which had changed little in appearance since the last century, underwent a similar redesign to that which had already been given to some portable machines. From about 1950, almost all office typewriter manufacturers gave their machines light-coloured, all-enveloping steel cases which concealed the mechanism and attempted to give some elegance to the overall proportions. Some manufacturers had anticipated this general change, notably Olivetti, who had employed Marcello 152