Advertisement for Adler Typewriters, 1960. Advertisers stressed the change that the new designs were intended to bring about in typists' self-image. From Office Magazine, September 1960. Below: Olivetti Lexicon 80 typewriter, designed by M. Nizzoli, 1945. Olivetti was the first manufacturer to make the standard office typewriter into an object of high style. Bottom right: Remington Standard typewriter, 1950. Light colour and a faired casing gave the machine some elegance. Nizzoli to redesign their office machine, the Lexicon, as early as 1945. According to the advertising, the typewriter ceased to seem like a machine and became instead an instrument on which the typist, rather than being a mere operative, could reveal her talents in a virtuoso performance. If part of the point of being a secretary or a typist was not to be seen as a manual worker, then it was clearly important that typewriters should not look like machines, but should convey a more respectable and less oppressive image. The apparent demechanisation was made more complete in electric typewriters. Although they were in production from the 1930s, electric typewriters did not come into widespread use in America until the early 1950s and in Britain until the late 1950s. Although the electric typewriter is a more complex machine than the manual version, it is less mechanical for the operator, as it responds to the most sensitive touch: it has more of the qualities of an instrument than any manual typewriter. In their styling, electric typewriters have received more attention than manual ones. The most famous electric typewriter, the IBM Executive, with its fixed platen, had the least resemblance to a machine, while its two-tone finish and rounded form, the result of Eliot Noyes's design consultancy to IBM, make it closer to table-top art. More recently, a new image for high technology, one which is unconnected with the industrial world, has been established. Technological design for space exploration has provided a new set you are the artiste Your touch on the keys, your virtuosity produce the accomplished results which ensure your Chief's applause" and i universal ovation! ADLER IS THE INSTRUMENT OF YOUR CHOICE Constructed with the supert technical skill and craftsman ship that ensures your com plete confidence at the over ture" and "finale" of each working day it is therefore no