Above: IBM Selectric Typewriter, designed by Eliot Noyes, 1961. Even greater attention was given to electric typewriter design than to that of manuals. Right: Olivetti 'Summa Prima' adding machine, 1960. The blue plastic case was a contrast to the black metal covers of the pre-war machines. From Design, no. 144, p.60. \*Ettore Sottsass Jr interviewed by Stephen Bayley in BBC 'Horizon' programme Little Boxes, 1980. of references, so that, for example, a black finish on a machine no longer signifies factory conditions, but high prestige and sophistication. Business machine manufacturers almost universally stopped using black finishes in the 1950s, but the recent reappearance of black for typewriters, such as Olivetti's Lexicon 83, and other equipment suggests that the meaning of the colour is no longer what it was. Duplicating machines, adding machines, addressing machines and even staplers have all received cosmetic treatment, normally by being enclosed in pressed steel or moulded plastic covers and given bright or light colours. Advertising has played less and less on the cost-cutting, labour-saving aspects of the machines and has emphasised instead what a pleasure it is to work in the company of such attractive objects. All this has minimised the effect of working in a factory and increased the sense of being engaged in an enjoyable activity. That designers themselves were aware of the changes in meaning that they were being called upon to create was revealed by the remarks of the Italian designer Ettore Sottsass Jr about his design for the Olivetti typist's chair, of which he said in an interview: 'I thought that it can be a little bit humoristic, to get away from this idea that the secretary has to sit on a mechanism. So that's a little bit a Mickey Mouse object. . ." The falsity of the illusion about office work has nowhere been greater than with the computer and its progeny, the microprocessor and the word processor. Although the computer has been responsible for some of the dullest and most monotonous work in the modern office, it has received more attention from stylists than any other machine and has attracted the most glamour. So successful has the packaging of the computer been that it has spawned a whole aesthetic, which has been applied to many domestic products, most of which, like the washing machine, have no connection with the computer beyond the incorporation of a 'programme'. The success of computer styling has not been confined to the extent of its influence, but has also created great commercial ben-