\*These developments are described more fully in A. Forty, 'Wireless Style. Symbolic Design and the English Radio Cabinet 1928- 1933', Architectural Association Quarterly, vol.4, no.2, Spring 1972, pp.23-31. \*Some ideas about Utopian imagery were suggested by W. Benjamin in 'Paris-the Capital of the Nineteenth Century', reprinted in W. Benjamin, Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism, London, 1973, pp. 155-177. The Radio 'Easy Chair', 1933. A few manufacturers went for outright disguise by incorporating their sets in other kinds of furniture. From The Cabinet Maker, 25th February 1933, p.417. that served some entirely different purpose, like an armchair. The third, which became more common as people became familiar with radio and found it less disturbing, was to place it within a cabinet designed to suggest that it belonged to a future and better world. Each design transformed the original, 'primitive' wireless out of all recognition. The three approaches evident in these radio cabinets, the archaic, the suppressive and the Utopian, have recurred so often in industrial design that they might be said to form a basic grammar or repertory of design imagery.\* Where twentieth-century design happens to have been dominated by the Utopian images, eighteenth-century manufacturers relied heavily upon the archaic model in their efforts to overcome resistance to innovation\*. To describe design as an activity that invariably disguises or changes the shape of what we take to be reality runs contrary to many present-day platitudes about design, in particular the belief that the appearance of a product should be a direct expression of the purpose for which it is used, a view embodied in the aphorism 'Form Follows Function'. The logic of this argument is that all objects with the same use should look the same, but this is patently not the case, as a glance at, say, the history of ceramics will show: cups have been produced in an endless variety of designs. If the only purpose of a cup was to