\*Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, trans. F. Etchells, London, 1927, pp. 114-115. \*Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger, Harmondsworth, 1970, p.12. well as the visible evidence from the objects themselves, this judgement is borne out by the statements of designers. Among the most famous expressions of the beauty of cleanliness was Le Corbusier's 'Manual of the Dwelling' in Vers Une Architecture, published in 1923. The manual set out the requirements that clients should demand in their houses, and it began: 'Demand a bathroom looking south, one of the largest rooms in the house or flat, the old drawing-room for instance. One wall to be entirely glazed, opening if possible on to a balcony for sun baths; the most up-to-date fittings with a shower bath and gymnastic appliances. 'An adjoining room to be a dressing room in which you can dress and undress. Never undress in your bedroom. It is not a clean thing to do and makes the room horribly untidy 'Demand bare walls in your bedroom, your living room and your dining room. Built-in fittings to take the place of much of the furniture, which is expensive to buy, takes up too much room and needs looking after. 'If you can, put the kitchen at the top of the house to avoid smells... 'Teach your children that a house is only habitable when it is full of light and air, and when the floors and walls are clear. To keep your floors in order eliminate heavy furniture and thick carpets. In Le Corbusier's own architecture of the 1920s, the imagery of hygiene was as important as that of machines, and it had an equally significant place in the work of countless other designers. However, unlike the rather exclusive aesthetic principles of design professionals that were based, for example, on abstract art or on machines, the principle of cleanliness has been not only shared by the uninitiated public, but has also been accepted enthusiastically as the basis of beauty in preference to other criteria. Although cleanliness has a direct and scientifically proven relationship to health, this is not its only significance. As categories, cleanliness and dirtiness are almost as subjective as beauty and ugliness. The value of these definitions, which exist primarily in the eye of the beholder, is that they provide us with a means of sorting out our experience and of imposing order upon the world. A classic definition of dirt is that it is matter out of place: dirt is the label we attach to what we perceive as disorder, a state that is often regarded as threatening. Some semblance of reason is given to our apparently irrational fears by labelling dirt and disorder as unhygienic and the source of disease, a connection which is by no means always proven. According to the anthropologist Mary Douglas, who has discussed these matters at length in her book Purity and Danger: 'In chasing dirt, in papering, decorating, tidying, we are not governed by anxiety to escape disease, but are positively re-ordering our environment, making it conform to an idea. There is nothing fearful or unreasoning in our dirt avoidance: it is a creative movement, an attempt to relate form to function, to make unity of ## experience.'\* Evidently it is not purely a matter of personal taste, but is something derived from our culture. The process by which societies, as 157