## Dirt, Disease and Anxiety. distinct from individuals, have established criteria of cleanliness is clearly complex and will repay historical as well as anthropological investigation. There is good evidence that, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, people in Europe and America began to find dirt more alarming and to be increasingly anxious about cleanliness. Dirt could assume a terrifying character that it had never before had. But in spite of all the discussion about hygiene that took place in the early part of this century, it is impossible to say whether a greater dislike of dirt actually caused people to become cleaner. There is only the vaguest of objective evidence about standards of cleanliness at different times in history. The single fact that Louis 'Lysol' Advertisement, 1918. Advertisements for disinfectants and cleaning products are one indication of greater anxiety about hygiene in the early twentieth century. From Ladies' Home Journal, April 1918, p.110. Чулов FINI Do you live in a haunted house? There is a haunted house in almost every community. Its spooky character awes and frightens the children; grown-ups shun it on dark nights. There is another kind of haunted house, the germ-haunted house, that shelters a menace which is far from imaginary, which is dangerously real. Is your home germ-haunted? It is, and so is every home that is not regularly disinfected. Germ-breeding places exist in buildings of all kinds, large and small. Civilization has a long way to go before it can eliminate these sources of disease; but science has shown the way to eradicate their dangers. Disinfection has changed Panama from a pest-hole to a health resort. The terrible ravages of yellow fever in Havana were once regarded as beyond remedy. Disinfec tion has made the scourge only a memory. Lysol An Mast Aushape and Dialidedant OUR SIGN IN OUR ROND- John & Fink In armies, disease no longer kills more men than bullets, thanks to rigorous disinfection. The safest refuge from disease is in a hospital where, surrounded by disease, you are safe-again thanks to disinfection. If it is possible to perfectly disinfect great areas and immense buildings, it is both possible and easy to perfectly disinfect the germ-breeding places in the home. Army disinfection is compulsory. In cur cities it is optional, hence neglected by those who refuse to believe in germs-and their danger-because they cannot see them. Epidemics are born of dirt and ignorance. Do your share to offset the baleful effects of this ignorance. Don't let the neglect of others endanger the health of your family. Disinfect your home regularly and thor oughly with Lysol. How to Banish the Ghost Lysol Disinfectant annihilates all germ-life at the instant of appli cation. Great hospitals rely upon its powerful disinfecting qualities. Boards of health and physicians urge its use. Get a bottle today, mix a little of it with water, and use the solution regularly in garbage cans, toilets, sinks, and drains. Use it in scrubbing-water, in dark, sunless corners, and in summer, wherever flies gather. Germ-life is impossible where Lysol is used regularly. Lysol is economical; a 50c bottle makes 5 gallons of powerful disinfectant-a 25c bottle makes 2 gallons. Sold in 25c, 50c, and \$1.00 bottles. Lysol is invaluable for personal hygiene. Lyvel Shaving Cream Containa Lys, and will grin wing brush pply yu Price 25 Samples Free Lysol Toilet Soap Bend your name Contains pol, and thereby Free LEHN & FINK, INC.. Sure on Lynd 103 William Street, New York Lysol Disinfectant 158