\*Douglas, pp. 146-147. XIV is alleged never to have washed in his life now seems so extraordinary that some change must have taken place in accepted standards of personal hygiene. Equally, the widespread introduction of baths and bathrooms into houses from the late nineteenth century, while it may not have made people any cleaner (for it is not evidence that they washed more often), was a sign that they cared more about cleanliness. Many other changes point to the same conclusion. Thus, the widepread replacement of browns and reds by white in interior decoration from the end of the nineteenth century at least in part reflected a wish to see greater cleanliness in the home, but again, it does not indicate that life was objectively any cleaner. Although it is probably impossible to give conclusive reasons why cleanliness came to matter so much more in the early twentieth century, some ideas are suggested by Mary Douglas. In Purity and Danger, she expresses the idea that anxieties about pollution arise when the external boundaries of a society are threatened, or when the lines defining the internal relationships in a culture are threatened, or when dangers arise from internal contradictions within the morality of the culture.\* If we follow her theory, we might expect the rapid social change and disintegrating social boundaries that came with the increasing political power of the working class to be behind the middle-class preoccupation with bodily, domestic and public cleanliness in the early part of this century. Even if it is impossible to prove that the fetish for hygiene was caused by bourgeois fears of losing social and political authority there are enough signs of strong class prejudice in the movement for greater hygiene to suggest some relationship. It seems not implausible that a regimen of cleanliness and order should have been adopted by the middle class as a means of resisting social upheaval and of providing some psychological security against it. From the 1890s, almost everywhere in Europe and America, steps were taken to improve habits of hygiene. The pressure for reform was strongly middle-class in character, coming from professionals and social reformers. Their attention extended into many departments of life, from dress to methods of dusting, from the problem of alcoholism to the feeding of infants, from sexual practices to the design of dwellings; home, shop, factory, school, railway carriage and street all received meticulous consideration. The reformers seem to have succeeded, without great difficulty, in persuading the majority of the middle class to share their belief that hygiene and health lay at the root of all social problems. The initial aim in improving standards of hygiene was to reduce the number of deaths from infectious diseases. In this respect, the campaign of the 1890s and early 1900s was a continuation of the public health movement of the 1840s and 1850s, but although the motives were the same, the means of achieving them had changed. In the mid century, public health reform had concentrated on sanitary improvements that involved state or municipal action: the improvement of drainage and water supply, and the demolition of slums. By the 1890s, better water and drains had significantly reduced the incidence of typhoid and cholera, but other diseases, particularly tuberculosis, occurred, if anything, more frequently, while the high rate of infant mortality was a universally recognised problem. It was to these problems that health reformers turned their attention in the 1890s.