\*On schools of motherhood, see A. Davin, 'Imperialism and Motherhood', History Workshop Journal, no.5, Spring 1978, pp. 9-56; on schools of household management, see A. Moll Weiss, Les Ecoles Ménagères Ã L'Etranger et en France, Paris, 1908; Heller describes the various measures introduced in Switzerland to educate the public in higher standards of cleanliness. A system of teaching hygiene to Boy Scouts is described by E.Y. Tilley, Healthy Man Badge for Boy Scouts, Glasgow, 1923. In the mid nineteenth century, the most widely accepted explanation for the occurrence of disease had been the miasmatic or zymotic theory, which attributed it to a process of spontaneous combustion that was supposed to occur in foul, stagnant air. According to this theory, the best way of preventing disease was to make sure that there was constant ventilation everywhere. By 1890, however, the zymotic theory was in the process of being superseded in scientific circles (though not yet more widely). The work of Louis Pasteur and Joseph Lister in the 1860s had established the basis for a germ theory, and in the early 1880s, the bacilli of typhus, cholera and tuberculosis were identified. The discrediting of the zymotic theory meant that fresh air and ventilation were no longer the prophylactics that had been supposed. Health reformers therefore transferred their attention to anything that might carry germs: to flies, dirty clothing, unwashed hands and, above all, to dust; everything that might be described as dirt was now linked with the transmission of disease. Because most of the newly identified carriers of disease were beyond the scope of state or municipal action, there was no means by which direct public intervention could bring about lasting improvements. As cleanliness of houses and bodies depended upon individuals, the only means of reform was through education. Up to this point, there was nothing in the movement for hygienic reform that a reasonable person could disagree with. It is only in the means employed to establish the new standards of hygiene that the controversial nature of the movement becomes apparent. From the 1890s, a wide variety of measures were introduced to encourage a more responsible attitude towards the prevention of disease. Schools began to teach hygiene, schools of motherhood were established, notices prohibiting spitting were displayed in public places, organisations like Women's Institutes and the Boy Scouts spread propaganda about cleanliness, and health visitors were added to the staff of local authorities and public health departments to carry the message of hygiene into people's homes.\* The whole movement was strikingly middle class in outlook. Health and hygiene may have been matters for all classes, but the way in which the reformers treated the issues was entirely different for the working class and for the middle class. The reformers were concerned to teach the working class new habits and new ways of life, without which they believed that all other attempts at social reform, whether in housing or education, would be negated by the continuing likelihood of epidemic diseases. Apart from the obvious humanitarian impulse, the middle-class interest in the hygiene of the proletariat also reflected the material consideration that less illness and death amongst the working population would increase the abundance of labour and therefore lead to greater wealth. Beyond these conscious and rational motives, there was perhaps an unconscious desire to teach habits of order and cleanliness to the working class in order to establish some control over the way of life of a part of society by which the bourgeoisie felt threatened. By contrast, the presentation of hygiene for the middle class was more of a voluntary affair, often associated with vitality, relaxation and sport. In campaigning for improved standards of cleanliness, the reformers used one or both of two sets of arguments. One appealed to reason and was based upon scientifically proven facts about 160