Housewifery Lesson, Morden Terrace School, London, 1908. From 1882, all London schoolgirls were taught domestic work. This is a practical exercise in cleaning and polishing. disease and bacteria. The other was wholly emotive and relied on arousing feelings of anxiety and guilt about dirt. On the whole, the arguments based upon scientific logic were less effective than those which appealed to emotion, mainly because the rational arguments fell foul of prejudices about social class, whereas the emotive arguments did not. Ultimately, however, none of the arguments rivalled design as a means of implanting the idea of the importance of cleanliness. Only when advertisers, designers and manufacturers began to make use of the imagery of hygiene did the general public fully assimilate the lessons which the hygienists had been teaching. One area on which the reformers had concentrated was the teaching of hygiene in schools, and something of the flavour of their campaign can be found in the way that domestic subjects were taught in London schools around the turn of the century. From 1882, all girls in London Board Schools had been given some instruction in basic cookery and housework to equip them for domestic service (their most likely occupation upon leaving school) as well as to prepare them for future marriage. Because existing school buildings lacked adequate accommodation for teaching domestic subjects, special centres were built, and the amount of teaching was increased during the 1890s. A formal syllabus was drawn up for a three-year course in cookery, laundry and housewifery that was introduced in 1898. It emphasised that the theoretical aspects of these subjects were to be taught and that girls should learn the scientific principles underlying the activities 161