\*Final Report of the School Board for London, 2nd edition, revised, London, 1904, p.122-126. \*M.M. Burgess, Health, London, 1914, p.53. \*Joint Committee, School Board of London, City and Guilds of London Institute, and the Drapers' Company, 'Manual Training Classes: Theoretical Examination in Housewifery, 21 January 1893', (SBL 1423, Greater London Council Records Office). \*See Heller; Moll Weiss, 1908. as well as merely the practice of them.\* Nevertheless, in spite of the emphasis upon scientific knowledge, it is clear from the textbooks and examination papers that much of the teaching was very dogmatic and designed to condition the girls in responses for which there could be no 'scientific' justification. Among the exact information about the nutritional value of foods and the causes of diseases in one textbook, the following passage occurs in a section entitled "The Evils of Disorder': ... nothing conduces to peace and ease of mind more than tidy surroundings. Disorder can only be avoided by daily routine and the deliberate determination not to have the routine interfered with unless in exceptional cases, as illness. If the time which should be spent in washing or turning out a certain room is passed with a gossiping neighbour, the whole of the day's work will be upset and the work of one day will be put on to the next.' In the girls' examinations, the mixture of scientific detachment and emotional conditioning is particularly apparent. Fairly typical were the following questions from an 1893 examination on the theory of housework: -What is the proverb about cleanliness? -Describe how you set to work to clean a bedroom, and give any reasons for the order in which you set about doing so. -In dusting a room, how do you make sure that the dust is really removed? -Of what substances does dust usually consist? -Why is it unwholesome, and in what diseases would it be dangerous to breathe the dusty air?\* Similar domestic economy curricula were introduced around the same time in other countries.\* In most cases, there was the same combination of social values and moral responses taught without distinction from scientific and rational principles.