Opposite: Learning to bathe an infant, Childeric Road School, London, 1908. The lesson is being given on a doll. Equipment for laundry lessons hangs on the wall behind. \*Dr J. Héricourt, L'Hygiène Moderne, Paris, 1907, pp. 171-173. In practice, the logic of the hygienists often conflicted with their social prejudices. On the basis of scientific rationalism, there was an optimum hygienic solution for every aspect of life, whether dress, housing or working environments; strictly adhered to, the hygienists' principles should have made these equally applicable to all classes, but the general determination of the bourgeoisie to preserve visible signs of class distinction meant that these principles were almost invariably compromised. One example of inability to overcome class prejudices was in railway carriages. Because these were potentially unhealthy places, their design and furnishing came under severe criticism from hygiene reformers, as in the following passage written by a French doctor in 1907: 'Varnished wood, hardened leather, with rounded angles in the corners to prevent dust traps that defy cleaning, are what one ought to find in cabs, buses and railway carriages. 'But custom, perpetuating the traditions of apparent luxury . . . has decided otherwise. . . The seats and furnishings of carriages are in cloth or velvet; and as if these materials were not enough to retain dust, they are luxuriously upholstered in such a way as to multiply the corners inaccessible to cleaning done with even the best will ... 'Certainly there would be no comfort in these first class carriages for the well-to-do without, for example, thick carpets; but these only aggravate, by their dangerous filthiness, the general insalubrity of the surroundings. 'It is enough on a clear, sunny day to observe what happens in a carriage on the entrance of a passenger, and especially of a lady passenger, to get an idea of the dirtiness of such a carriage, said to be luxurious. 'Each step of the passenger on the carpet, each movement, whether putting down the suitcase, or sitting down, is the occasion for a cloud of dust to arise from the surface touched . . . 'And as it must be supposed that convalescents with contagious skins, people with colds, flu, and above all tuberculosis are lodged in these compartments, one can easily deduce the qualities of the air that are going to nourish, for a greater or lesser length of time, the newly arrived passengers.'\* Ideally, the improvement of railway carriages would have meant the replacement of all dust-retaining surfaces and materials by wood, linoleum, American cloth or leather. However, the difficulty in applying the hygienists' principles was that in all European countries railway companies provided different classes of passenger accommodation. (In the United States, railways had originally operated with only one class, but the widespread introduction of Pullman cars in the late nineteenth century meant that in practice they also had two classes.) Railway policy was to provide progressively more uncomfortable accommodation in the lower class carriages to discourage those who could afford expensive tickets from buying cheaper ones. The result was that, although first class was the most comfortable, it was also the least hygienic, while the spartan seats and bare floors of the third and fourth classes met the hygienists' requirements most closely. Here it was possible to keep the floors uncarpeted and to cover what upholstery there was in American cloth rather than conventional upholstery fabric. First class accommodation, 163