Neo-Classicism: an Antidote to Progress \*The reactions of some eighteenth-century artists and writers to industrialisation are described by F.D. Klingender, Art and the Industrial Revolution, revised edition, London, 1968. Opposite: Radio Cabinet Design, 1932. The alternative, and eventually most popular, solution to radio set design was to use 'modern' forms, suggesting a product belonging to the future. From The Cabinet Maker, 17th September 1932, p.522. Manufactured goods have varied in appearance, not because of the immorality or wilfulness of their makers, but because of the circumstances of their production and consumption. In order to make sense of design, we must recognise that its disguising, concealing and transforming powers have been essential to the progress of modern industrial societies. Reactions to progress are most revealing when a society first experiences its effects. In Britain, the development of capital and industry reached a noticeable scale for the first time in the latter part of the eighteenth century. Most of the people who recorded their views about the changes that were taking place were those most closely involved, and, not surprisingly, they were generally enthusiastic and only rarely mentioned their misgivings about the negative effects. Scientists like Joseph Priestley, political economists like Adam Smith and entrepreneurs like Matthew Boulton, James Watt and Josiah Wedgwood shared the view that progress was a beneficial process that would continue indefinitely. However, such people formed only a very small part of the middle and upper classes of eighteenth-century Britain, and their point of view was distinctly radical. There is also evidence of strong contrary views. Thus Dr Johnson, recognising that men were no longer savages, acknowledged that progress had occurred in the past, but believed mankind had already reached its most advanced state and saw no place for further progress in the present or the future. Nevertheless, Dr Johnson, and others who shared his view, showed much curiosity about the changes taking place around them, about the new factories and about the men who ran them. The main industrial districts of the late eighteenth century - Birmingham, Manchester, the Coalbrookdale iron works and the Staffordshire potteries were visited regularly by travellers, regarded as being among the greatest sights in the land and frequently depicted by artists. Yet despite their curiosity, not all were enthusiastic about what they saw. One eighteenth-century traveller who recorded his opinions was the Hon. John Byng, later Viscount Torrington, who undertook a series of tours through England and Wales between 1781 and 1794. He never intended his journals, which have been published as The Torrington Diaries, to appear in print, and the honesty of the opinions makes them very valuable to the historian. Although Byng was an extremely conservative, indeed reactionary character, he went out of his way to visit the new industrial centres, invariably disliking them when he arrived. In 1792, he wrote of Aysgarth in the Yorkshire Dales: 'But what has completed the destruction of every rural thought, has been the erection of a cotton mill on one side, whereby prospect, and quiet, are destroy'd: I now speak as a tourist (as a policeman, a citizen, or a statesman, I enter not the field); the people, indeed, are employ'd; but they are all abandon'd to vice from the throng... At the times when people work not in the mill, they issue out to poaching, profligacy and plunder - Sr. Rd. Arkwright may have introduced much wealth into his family, and into the country; but, as a tourist, I execrate his schemes, which, having crept into every pastoral vale, have destroy'd the course, and beauty of Nature; 13