Twyfords, J7 Bathroom, 1911. Conforming to the view that bathrooms should meet higher standards of hygiene, sanitary ware manufacturers started to make all their baths freestanding in the early 1900s. From Twyfords 1911 catalogue. \*Harmsworth's Household Encyclopaedia, vol. I, 1923, p.240. TWYFORDS absolute hygiene were expected in them. As Harmsworth's Household Encyclopaedia put it, "There is no room where cleanliness and neatness are more necessary No bath should be fixed except in such a way that every part, underneath or at the sides, can be easily got at and cleaned. Woodwork, whether as a rim to the bath or as a casing around it, is to be avoided at all costs... These strictures were reflected in the design of baths, which from around 1900 were no longer installed with cabinetwork around them, but stood free on legs. In early twentieth-century Britain, the possession of a bath, in a bathroom, was regarded as a major sign of middle-class status. Somerset Maugham wrote in 1922 that 'the matutinal tub divides the classes more effectively than birth, wealth or education.' However, baths were by then already beginning to appear in working-class homes in Britain. The new houses subsidised by the State from 1919 all had baths, many with separate bathrooms. The baths were generally of white-enamelled cast iron, standing on legs virtually the same utilitarian, hygienic objects as were being installed in middle-class homes. By 1930, fixed baths were sufficiently common in workingclass homes to have lost their exclusively middle-class image. However, attempts were made to preserve the bath as a mark of class distinction. One way of doing this was through myths about the uses to which baths were put (the British coals-in-the-bath myth had variants in other countries in Switzerland, it was rabbits in the bath), and the other was through the middle class seeking a new image for its own bathrooms. In the new designs for fittings that appeared around 1930, baths and washbasins were often coloured and their extremities were concealed behind panels, walls were tiled, and a whole range of matching accessories was supplied to make a harmonious bathroom. Unlike the bathrooms of previous decades, and those supplied in workingclass houses, which had an ill-assorted assembly of fittings, the 167