Twyfords bathroom suite, The Adamant, 1935. By the 1930s, hygienic all-white bath fittings were considered too like the bathrooms in state housing to be attractive to the middle classes, and manufacturers introduced coloured fittings in suites of co-ordinated design. \*This discussion of bathrooms is based on M. Swenarton, 'Having a Bath', in Leisure in the Twentieth Century, Papers given at the Second Conference on Twentieth Century Design History, London, 1977, pp. 92-99. new bathrooms were designed as a complete ensemble and emphasised comfort and beauty as well as hygiene. These bathrooms enabled their owners to see them as different in nature and even in function from those in working-class homes, thus preserving something of the value of the bath as a mark of class difference in the face of the hygienists' logic that every home should have one.\* Because rational, scientific arguments presented such difficulties, the hygienists turned increasingly to methods that exploited guilt. However, before guilt could be brought into play, cleanliness had to be transformed from a physical problem into a moral one. Attempts to do this through education tended to be clumsy, and at times ludicrous. Thus, an English school textbook, Fighting Dirty, by Ernest Hood, published in 1916, set out to present hygiene in an amusing and simple manner. Its premise was that the allies of disease, which were dirt, flies, breathing through the mouth, spitting, impure air and darkness, could be identified with the forces of evil. Through the allegory of warfare, hygiene was presented as a constant battle, with the body as a fort always in danger of attack by enemy germs (represented in the illustrations by German soldiers). Only by constant vigilance against the forces of disease could the body survive and be victorious. The hygienists built up anxiety about cleanliness by teaching that every trace of dirt was a potential source of disease. This easily accepted notion was misleading since dirt and disease are not strictly comparable: dirt is a personal value, not an absolute, whereas disease and germs do have a verifiable physical existence. Once dirt was identified with disease, nothing short of absolute cleanliness could pass as satisfactory. In a book on household management published in France in 1906, Augusta Moll Weiss wrote about the housewife's duty to cleanliness: 'An object may be said to be clean when it is free from all stains and all dust. To struggle against dust, to remove it, whether from the surface of the body, from furniture or clothes, whether by cleaning the floors or renewing the atmosphere, is to do the work 1