\*A. Moll Weiss, Le Livre du Foyer, 2nd edition, Paris, 1912, p.11. \*R. Schwartz Cowan, 'Two washes in the morning and a bridge party at night: the American housewife between the wars', Women's Studies, vol. III, no.2, 1976, p. 151. See also R. Schwartz Cowan, 'The "Industrial Revolution" in the Home: Household Technology and Social change in the Twentieth Century', Technology and Culture, vol.XVII, no. I, January 1976, pp.1-23; and 'Microbes and Housework', chapter 5 of B. Ehrenreich and D. English, For Her Own Good, 150 years of advice to Women, London, 1979. of the hygienist, fulfilling one of the most essential tasks of the housewife. The desire for material order must end up becoming a sort of reflex action, and even more the desire for cleanliness must end up becoming a real need. Disorder and lack of cleanliness should cause a sort of suffering in the mistress of the house.'\* Put in these terms, the condition of total cleanliness was comparable to a religious state of grace, and just as unattainable. Yet, within twenty or thirty years of the publication of Moll Weiss's book, her attitude towards cleanliness had become widely accepted. Housework and cleaning did gain enormous emotional significance, while every trace of dirt and every impure smell became grounds for guilt and anxiety. As R.S. Cowan has written, 'cleaning the bathroom sink was not just cleaning, but an exercise for the maternal instincts, protecting the family from disease.'\* The slightest deviation from perfect cleanliness was a cause for social anxiety, since the invisible passage of germs could put the health of the family, companions and even the entire nation at risk. It seems most unlikely that a few hours a week of school time, plus a few books and magazine articles could have been responsible Clean your refrigerator with Old Dutch every week. This is of ut most importance, especially in the summertime when foods spel so canly-o many health troubles are caused by food contaminated en an unclean refrigerator Old Dutch safeguards your refrigerator with Healthful Cleanliness an important health protection Advertisement for Old Dutch cleanser, 1928. Advertising took up the gospel of hygiene and preached it more effectively than the rational arguments of hygienists. From Ladies' Home Journal, July 1928, p. 39. Old Dutch Cleanser Chases ## B The most important thing you can put into your refrigerator is Healthful Cleanliness. You need it to keep food pure and wholesome. The surest way to keep the refrigerator nitary, fresh and sweet is to clean it regularly with Old Dutch Old Dutch is a natural cleanser whose basc ingredient, "Seismotite," is of distinctive character and efficiency. Through the microscope you see it as thousands of flaky, flat-shaped particles. There is nothing else like it for removing dirt. With the visible uncleanliness it takes away impurities you cannot see Old Dutch chases all dirt, none is left behind! Old Dutch doesn't scratch. This drawing of a highly magnified Old Dutch particle shows how these particles, like tiny erasers, remove the dirt by a clean weep without scratching, Safest for all cleaning be c it contains no grit Old Dutch Chaves Grit scratches. This drawing of s highly magnified gritty particle shows how grit scratches. Scrunches not only mar the beauty of surface, but are lodging places for ders and often dangerous impurities. Avoid harsh, scratchy gi Dirt-Protects the Home 169