## Healthy Design: Images ## of Cleanliness for such widespread hygiene fetishism. There must have been other reasons, and amongst the possible causes we should consider the effects of design and advertising. From about 1920, the design of a very disparate range of articles and complete environments began to embody ideas of cleanliness, while the advertisements for the same products warned of the consequences of neglecting health and cleanliness which ranged from emotional rejection by loved ones to social ostracism, illness, death and national downfall. The design of the products themselves embodied the same message of obligatory cleanliness. In an appliance like Loewy's 'Coldspot' refrigerator, the pristine whiteness and seamless finish ensured that the slightest stain would clamour for instant removal. The Coldspot's appearance, like that of innumerable other appliances and artefacts, was a continual reproach to slovenly ways, an object lesson in cleanliness. In a world filled with such images and forms, ponderous and time-consuming instruction in the virtues of domestic cleanliness ceased to be necessary. As design has not always been used to convey ideas about standards of cleanliness, it is worth investigating how this function has been developed. The belief that design, rather than, say, prayer, custom or morality, might contribute to health originated in the eighteenth century with attempts to find ways of reducing mortality in prisons and hospitals. Observing that patients nursed in draughty barns and tents stood more chance of recovery than those nursed WALES' AMERICAN SCHOOL CHAIRS. No. 1. ## å®‰å®‰ "‹These chairs are plain and substantial. Each chair is based upon a single iron pedestal, which is secured to the seat of the chair at the top, and to the floor of the school-room at the foot. The center-piece of the chair-back descends directly into the foot of the iron pedestal, intersecting the back of the seat as it passes, in such a manner as to form a back stay, thereby producing in the chair, as a whole, the greatest possible degree of firmness and strength. Ne No. 2. American School Furniture, c. 1850. The child's health and posture determined the designs: the chairs were graded in size so that there was always a chair just the right height for the child's feet to rest on the floor without the muscles of the thighs pressing on the front edge of the seat. The backs were to rise above the shoulders, and the chairs were fixed close to the desk so that the back was always supported. From H. Barnard, School Architecture 5th ed., New York, 1854, p.350. No. 2 represents an improved school desk for two scholars.