Sideboard, designed by R.W. Edis, made by Jackson & Graham Ltd., 1884. Exhibited at the International Health Exhibition, this piece demonstrated Edis's ideas about hygienic furnishings by fitting close to the ceiling and standing off the floor. From S.E. Murphy, Our Homes and How to Make them Healthy, 1883, p.345. \*Robert Edis, 'Healthy Furniture and Decoration', Health in the Dwelling, vol. I of International Health Exhibition Literature, London, 1884, pp.287-365. about environments, artefacts and clothing: hygiene rivalled comfort, utility and taste in people's assessment of what they saw. Thus, for domestic use, plain tableware and glass were to become commonplace and regarded as beautiful. Some of the earliest evidence of the view that hygiene should be a factor in domestic design is contained in Charles Eastlake's Hints on Household Taste, published in 1868. Among later books, Colonel Robert Edis's Decoration and Furniture of Town Houses (1881) mentioned features of domestic furnishing that might affect health and recommended loose rugs rather than fitted carpets, leather rather than velvet upholstery, and tableware in simple shapes for ease of cleaning. Three years later, Edis was involved in the International Health Exhibition in London, at which a great variety of public health issues were brought to light. A major theme of the exhibition was the design of healthy houses and their contents. Edis's interior designs were displayed by the furnishing firm of Jackson and Graham, and his paper on 'Healthy Furniture and Decoration' was published in the exhibition literature.\* Edis condemned anyhing that might harbour dust; he recommended fitted furniture and warned against carving and mouldings, the accumulation of useless ornaments and the use of fluffy, dust-retaining fabrics. His designs for the exhibition included fitted furniture with tops that reached to the ceiling to avoid dust traps, and several pieces that stood on legs to make it easy to dust underneath. Edis's ideas about furnishing were fairly representative of progressive taste in the 1880s, and others shared his preference for simplification in the interests of hygiene. Of all the items of furniture discussed, few received as much attention as the bedstead. Because the sleeper would be oblivious to the condition of the air, the greatest risks to health were thought to occur in bed. In the late nineteenth century, it was bedrooms in which hygiene was thought to matter most and in which dust-retaining surfaces and materials were to be most strenuously avoided. Because the strictest application of these principles was required in bedsteads, the simplest designs were favoured. Under no circumstances were there to be