\*E. Ewing, Dress and Undress, London, 1978, p. 119. For suspender designs, see British Patents: 19,956, 9th April 1900; 7,155, 24th March 1902; 351, 6th January 1903; 12,884, 4th June 1907. \*S.M. Newton, Health, Art and Reason, London, 1974. any drapes, and the preferred materials were polished oak, cast iron or brass. Iron bedsteads, which had been in production since the 1830s, had always been popular because of their cheapness and non-absorbency (which meant that they would not harbour noxious miasma), but the fact that their spare form would not collect much dust brought them new popularity in the 1880s and 1890s. By the end of the nineteenth century, much of the more avantgarde furniture incorporated hygienic features, such as the minimum of relief ornament, but the reasons were primarily moral and aesthetic. Only after about 1910 did hygiene begin to be a widespread determinant in the design of furniture and other artefacts. This was nowhere more apparent than in office furniture; office desks stood on legs to make cleaning beneath them easier, and one of the main arguments for steel furniture in offices was the ease with which it could be cleaned. In the 1920s, the pursuit of absolute cleanliness appeared also in the more advanced designs for domestic furniture. Chromed steel and glass were welcomed not just because of their associations with machines, but also because they could easily be kept clean, and, above all, could look absolutely spotless. Another area much affected by notions of hygiene was dress. This had been discussed by health reformers and doctors since the early nineteenth century, when tight-lacing had been much criticised, but it received much greater attention in the 1880s and 1890s. The new theories of healthy costume coincided in many respects with the avant-garde taste for 'artistic' dress in the 1890s. Healthy costume aimed to avoid all constriction: stays and corsets were not to be worn, nor were shoes and boots with pointed toes, and it was recommended that all clothing should be suspended from the shoulders, not from the waist, thighs or knees. (The introduction of the liberty bodice in 1908, following a run of patents for shoulder suspenders, made it possible to put this principle into practice).\* Some dress reformers specified that clothing should be light, not more than seven pounds in weight, and there were views on the best materials to use.\* Oak Bedstead, c. 1880. Beds with drapes were much criticised for their unhealthiness, and plain iron or oak bedsteads greatly preferred. This one, in oak, was recommended as simple enough to be copied by any village carpenter. From Lady Barker, The Bedroom & Boudoir, 1878, p.32.