Above: 'Aesthetic' Dress, 1894. This fashion was justified partly because everything hung from the shoulder, and there was no constriction of the chest or waist. From Aglaia, no.3, Autumn 1894, p.6. Right: Fashion Drawing, 1925. At least part of the popularity of the waistless line of the 1920s was that it was 'healthy', compared to the tight-laced fashions of the previous decades. From Vogue, June 1925, p.7. As with the other kinds of design influenced by hygiene, the principles put forward at the end of the nineteenth century did not have much effect on dress at the time. Rational dress was never worn by more than a tiny aesthetic and socialist minority, and it was not until the 1920s that concepts of hygienic dress widely affected women's clothing, and the accumulation of propaganda against the evils of corsets and tight-lacing (demonstrated by diagrams of deformed rib cages) provided a justification, if not an explanation, for the 'twenties style of loose-fitting, waistless clothes that very obviously hung from the shoulder. Another effect of the desire for greater cleanliness was the development of a multiplicity of preparations, appliances and gadgets - not just domestic plumbing, baths and washbasins, but also deodorants, washing-machines and vacuum cleaners. The history of the vacuum cleaner is a good example of the commercial applications of the phobia against dirt, and of the way appearance and styling were affected by the imagery of hygiene. Natural and Deformed Rib Cages, demonstrating the dangers of tight-lacing. From M.M. Burgess, Health, 1914, p.105. A   
B A. NATURAL CHEST. B. CHEST DEFORMED BY TIGHT CORSETS. 174