QUENMEN 24 Baby Daisy hand-operated bellows vacuum cleaner, 1908. The suction pipe connected to the plate at the side. One of many manual vacuum cleaners marketed around 1900. \*The main sources on the history of the vacuum cleaner are Siegfried Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command, New York, 1948, pp. 548-549, 582-595; and S. Giedion, 'Vacuum in the Home', Technology Review, January 1947, pp. 157-160. In his book, Giedion discusses many other aspects of the mechanization of hygiene and cleanliness. Héricourt, p. 153. The vacuum cleaner was first conceived in the United States.\* In 1860, a patent was taken out for a machine that both brushed and sucked dust, and within the next few years a number of similar devices were patented, although none was put into commercial production. It was not until the 1890s that the first vacuum cleaners were put on the market. By this time, there was good reason for wanting a device to replace the duster and broom: the fear of germladen dust had begun to settle in people's minds, reinforced by strong propaganda against the evils of dry dusting. For example, a French doctor wrote in 1907: 'Dry sweeping and dusting are homicidal practices: they consist of taking dust which has been lying on the floor and on the furniture, mixing it in the atmosphere, and causing it to be swallowed and inhaled by the inhabitants of the house. In reality, it would be preferable to leave the dust alone where it was.'\* People were taught to sweep with used tea leaves to catch the dust and to dust only with a damp duster. It was logical, then, to develop instruments to remove the lethal dust without making it enter the atmosphere. Early vacuum cleaners from around the turn of the century were hand or foot operated, and must have been laborious to use and rather inefficient. Even so, the very large number of designs suggests that manufacturers found a strong demand.