\*The Torrington Diaries, edited by C. Bruyn Andrews, London, 1934, vol. III, pp.81-82. \*The Torrington Diaries, vol. III, p.92. P.J. de Loutherbourg: detail from Coalbrookdale by Night, oil painting, 1801. The great industrial enterprises, like the Coalbrookdale iron works in Shropshire, were a source of fascination and wonder to eighteenth-century travellers and artists. why, here now is a great flaring mill, whose back stream has drawn off half the water of the falls above the bridge. 'With the bell ringing and the clamour of the mill, all the vale is disturb'd; treason and levelling systems are the discourse; and rebellion may be near at hand." A few days later, he was gratified that when he asked a man 'if the cotton trade did not benefit the poor?' the man replied, "The worst thing in the world in my opinion, Sr., for it leaves us neither stout husbandmen, nor modest girls; for the children bred in a cotton mill, never get exercise or air, and all are impudent and saucy.'\* Since Byng found manufacturing industry so abominable, one cannot but ask why he repeatedly visited industrial towns. Yet his curiosity seems to have been as strong as his dislike, an attitude that was very common in his time. Byng's real interest was in antiquities. He toured the country looking for relics of the past and wishing that he had lived before the country had been covered with fast turnpike roads and the land enclosed. Byng's taste for antiquities was shared by many of his contemporaries, but while Byng, true to his Toryism and patriotism, preferred English antiquities, others hunted avidly for Greek and Roman remains. The interest in classical antiquities was part of the neo-classical movement, which had developed in the 1750s and 1760s, and which dominated European taste in the late eighteenth century. Neo-classicism aimed to regain for art and design the purity of form and expression which was felt lacking in the rococo style of the first half of the eighteenth century, but which was identified in the products of Greece and Rome. Much of the inspiration of neo-classicism came from the discovery of Herculaneum in 1738 and of Pompeii in 1748, and Italian tours to study classical remains at first hand became part of artistic education. It also became