Mobile Compressed Air Cleaner, France, 1903. Operated by companies who offered a cleaning service, the machine was parked in the street outside. Although this machine worked by compressed air, blowing dust into the bag, others worked on a vacuum. From La Nature, 5th December 1903, p.24. Far more efficient than the manually operated bellows cleaners were the machines with a power-driven vacuum pump. These were developed simultaneously in England and France from about 1902. Powered either by electricity or by paraffin engines, they were large and were operated by companies who hired them out with a team of operatives. They were used principally for large buildings, such as department stores and theatres, but they were also occasionally hired by individuals for domestic cleaning. An alternative to the mobile vacuum plant was a permanent installation with an outlet leading to each room. Systems of this kind were installed in the Frick Building in New York in 1902 and shortly afterwards in the House of Commons in London; permanent installations for domestic use were advertised in the United States, although their cost must have restricted them to the very wealthy. Around 1905, several individuals began quite independently to develop small, portable electric-powered vacuum cleaners, which could be used regularly by a domestic servant and would be relatively cheap. A succession of patents were take out from 1908 for such machines, and by 1909 there was an electric-powered vacuum cleaner on the market in the United States, with revolving brushes and a fan to create suction. Development continued rapidly, and by 1914 there were several models on the market in Britain, some working by suction alone, while others also had revolving brushes. By 1916, the period of rapid development was over, and the American Hoover Suction Sweeper Company started to manufacture a design that remained basically unchanged for the next 176