\*C. Frederick, Scientific Management in the Home: Household Engineering, London, 1920, pp. 156ff. Below: Advertisement for portable electric vacuum cleaners, 1914. These were among the first effective domestic vacuum cleaners. Note that it is a servant using the lower machine: at its price, only the upper middle class would have been able to afford the machines. From M. Lancaster, Electric Cooking, Heating, Cleaning etc., London, 1914. Right: Hoover 700 vacuum cleaner. This machine, marketed throughout the 1920s, was similar in form to the model introduced in 1916. twenty years. Several other companies went into production with designs of their own around the same time. In selling vacuum cleaners, manufacturers were quick to emphasise their hygienic properties. The arguments for vacuum cleaners as labour-saving appliances were not particularly convincing: Christine Frederick, an American household efficiency expert, had shown in 1920 that vacuum cleaners saved little time, though they did the job more effectively.\* Consequently, it was as instruments of hygiene that vacuum cleaners were generally advertised. The advice that Christine Frederick (who had become a marketing consultant to domestic appliance companies) gave to the British electrical goods industry in 1927 on how to sell vacuum cleaners was to stress their hygienic qualities and to use the familiar anxiety-inducing arguments to drive the message home. Having explained the faults of old-fashioned cleaning methods, she continued: "The principle behind all new cleaning methods is not scattering but absorption of dust. This new principle is exemplified in the many dustless and specially treated dustcloths and mops, but reaches the height of perfection in the electric suction cleaner. This electrical appliance, whatever the specific model, extracts dust, holds it, absorbs it, actually removes it. Thus we see that the use of a vacuum cleaning method is based on an entirely different method and a much higher standard of room and home Revolution in House Cleaning. THE 1914 SURPRISE. Since the body of this book went to press, we have introduced two new Models of Electic Suction Cleaners, the "ECONO" and the "CLEVELAND," that form the last word in domestic home cleaning ECONO Electric Vacuum Cleaner The "ECONO" Model has been designed to meet the requirements of those who des re a smaller lighter and cheaper machine than our famous "SANTO," which it resembles in appearance Only 18 in high and 11 in in diameter, weh only - lbs UNIVERSAL MT R AUTOMATI I UNRICATION METAL SUCTION HOSE Gulf I Ove Months Price Complete with Accessories, £15 158. The CLEVELAND" Model is the Lightest, Cheapest and Simplest electric of on the Market 1   
a the retallard Cleaner ery part Stan and el and 126 15s. Com; les A ENTRES 36s. Cra CLEVELAND Weiner HOOVER