4 hours of leste your day Welcome the Eureka Man \- he brings new standards of home sanitation Advertisement for Eureka vacuum cleaner, 1928. The copy to this advertisement played on the dangers of dirt and suggested that as well as taking matter (dirt) out of the home, it brought something (hygiene) to it. From Ladies' Home Journal. October 1928, p.209. \*Electrician, 30th September 1927, pp.396-397. cleanliness. It is based in fact on a very superior principle of hygiene: freedom from dust and germs, and ultimate disease. 'Now we have found the "universal ideal" behind the vacuum cleaner! We see that it is much larger, much more far reaching than asking the housewife to exchange a hand broom for a power sweeper. It is asking her to accept a higher, safer, more desirable health standard for her entire family. What housewife could refuse to accept such an offer, and even skimp and save if need be, to purchase the device that would bring more health into her home? If the facts are put before her in this vivid and commonsense way, any housewife will recognise the dangers which scattering dust, soot and germs mean in the household, particularly in the household with children.'\* Although it was easy for salesmen and advertisers to emphasise the benefits to health and hygiene offered by vacuum cleaners, the design of the machines themselves did little to convey this impression to customers. The pistol grip of the Electrolux model marketed during the 1920s bore the symbol of the rod of Aesculapius, but the iconography was probably too subtle to have meant much to most customers; what was required was much more dramatic visual evidence that the vacuum cleaner did what it was said to do. Most of the early models were designed in a spirit of technological rationalism, in which each of the elements - motor, fan, nozzle and dust bag was clearly identifiable as a separate part, as was the case with, for example, the Orion. An 178