Handle of Electrolux vacuum cleaner, c. 1928. The butt bears the rod of Aesculapius, symbol of medicine and health. Croydon 16:77-11 Vacuum cleaner, c. 1925. In the design of most early electric vacuum cleaners, there was no attempt to conceal the different parts of the machine. Hotpoint 500 vacuum cleaner, 1937. In this machine, the aluminium casing of the brushes was continued to form a cover for this motor, which can be seen underneath occupying exactly the same position at the rear as it had in earlier models. The extended aluminium shell over the motor was purely for styling reasons, and added to the weight and cost of the machine. exception to this pattern was the standard Hoover model, in which brushes, fan and motor were encased within a single form. Around 1935, the appearance of vacuum cleaners began to change dramatically. The immediate reason for these changes was that manufacturers were anxious to increase sales, and were making use of the recent discovery of motor car manufacturers that consumption could be encouraged by the introduction of new designs to make old models seem obsolete. In the new designs of vacuum cleaners, the protuberances of the earlier machines disappeared, and the works were encased in smooth, sleek shells of cast alloy. In the Hotpoint 500 of 1937, for example, the mechanism was almost unchanged from earlier models, but the casing which shone with cleanliness, concealed the untidy works from view. In the same spirit, Hoover had employed the industrial designer Henry Dreyfuss to redesign their basic model. After twenty years, the original Hoover model no longer looked different enough from the designs of other manufacturers, and it was extremely heavy and cumbersome to use. The new model 150, introduced in 1936, used magnesium alloy castings and moulded bakelite to make it considerably lighter, while its low streamlined form distinguished it from competitors and, with its smoothness, increased its appearance of hygiene. Dreyfuss himself emphasised that he had tried in the design to tie up all the parts in one harmonious