\*K.O. Tooker and F.L. Pierce, 'The Hoover One Fifty', Modern Plastics, vol. 14, November 1936, pp.32-33. Hoover 150 vacuum cleaner, 1936. This design by Henry Dreyfuss, superseding the 700 model, was an attempt to 'clean up' the form, as well as make the machine lighter. whole. Most subsequent vacuum cleaners have reworked the basic design principles of the Hoover 150: lightness (much helped by the use of plastic components) and cleanliness in appearance. There had been little technical development in domestic electric vacuum cleaners since their introduction around 1910, but the visual change in them was so great that the early designs now seem quaint and archaic. New designs were introduced partly to bring down the price of the machines by reducing the costs of material and components, and partly because the lighter machines were more marketable. Once there was no opportunity for technical development, manufacturers turned to appearance and styling as a means of competing with their rivals, adopting imagery calculated to reinforce the message already being put across by their advertising and salesmen. In some cases, the pursuit of new imagery in the designs caused manufacturers to contradict their other aims. The Hotpoint 500, for example, used rather more metal than earlier models, and as a result was actually heavier. Such are the paradoxes of design. A similar story of the commercialisation of cleanliness could be told with many other products: washing-machines, gas and electric cookers, and detergents. In every case, the product was designed, developed and marketed with the object of creating opportunities for greater cleanliness, an aim to which no reasonable person could possibly take exception. It was precisely the reasonableness of the aim, often conveyed so well by the design, that made it so effective as a marketing technique, for it put people under a compulsion to buy the product. It would be wrong to suggest that the development of an aesthetic based upon cleanliness has been a one-sided affair, promoted exclusively by manufacturers, for the image of cleanliness has been sought just as earnestly by consumers. The idea that cleanliness might be beautiful took hold with such force that every new product that purveyed an appearance of hygiene was felt by consumers to be fulfilling a genuine need: far from being hard to adapt to, cleanliness was an aesthetic that satisfied many desires. On the whole, commerce had more success than the hygienists themselves ever had in realising higher standards of cleanliness. Health education in schools, and in schools of motherhood, was a cumbersome instrument of reform, and the paternalistic class attitudes it incorporated made it as likely to prejudice people against greater hygiene as to convince them of its necessity. Much more effective were new products and appliances, particularly when these were designed in an aesthetic which appealed so strongly to people. Vacuum cleaners, soap powders and washing machines all created new opportunities for higher standards of cleanliness