Advertisement for cleaning fluid, 1929. Ultimately, it was advertisers and manufacturers rather than health reformers who most successfully taught the public to worry about hygiene. From Ladies' Home Journal, May 1929, p.246. Sally Blane, 1929 Wampas Baby Star and "Starlet" of the R. K. O. Studios, Hollywood, finds it so easy to remove spots with Energine that she sees no good reason to ask for help. Beauty Must be Spotless That's why Energine is used almost exclusively and in large quantities by those who have charge of the costly movie wardrobes. Energine leaves no ring-no clinging odor-simple directions now on every can. A very small amount on a cloth removes spots quickly, easily, completely. ENERGINE THE PERFECT DRY CLEANER CLEANS PERFECTLY SILK GLOVES, LACES AND ALL FINE FABRICS THE CUMMER PRODUCISCO ## m Energine cannot pos sibly injure the most delicate skin or daintiest fabric because it is pure -contains no acid, alkali or caustic. Energine, used constantly, main tains the original appearance and prolongs the wear of finest garments. For twenty-five years Energine has been used successfully by millions of people who have learned that nothing takes its place. Energine removes dirt and grease spots from every kind of fabric dresses, hats, scarfs, suits, coats, neckties, gloves and shoes. Druggists everywhere sell Energine 35e for 10 oz. can. 60c for a 20 oz. size. Slightly higher prices abroad. Insist on Energine! No substitute does as well. Largest Selling Cleaning Fluid in the World LEAVES NO RING OR ODOR ENERGINE THE PERFECT CLEANING FLUID and made neglect of cleaning all the more blatant and inexcusable, particularly as they were backed up by norms of design that made every stain and speck of dirt stand out. Although it was the hygiene reformers who had wanted to identify dirt as a cause of suffering that could be alleviated only by cleaning, it was commerce and manufacturing industry that turned the idea into reality. 181