## 8. Electricity-the Fuel of ## the Future Though they serve the same function, there is all the difference in the world between the two electric cookers illustrated opposite. The Magnet, manufactured in 1914, is a massive cast-iron structure, ornamented with polished mouldings; today, it looks more like a safe than an electric cooker. The top, also of polished iron, has two boiling plates and a grill plate set into it; beneath, there is an oven. The only means of controlling the temperatures of the plates and the oven is by three-way switches, which reduce the current to a half or a quarter. By comparison, the English Electric cooker, manufactured in 1961, is a flyweight. Made of stoveenamelled, pressed-steel panels with rounded corners, the cooker depends for its visual qualities on smoothness and whiteness and on the neatness of the joins. The boiling rings are of a type that heats up rapidly, while the oven and one of the rings have thermostatic switches that can be preset to any temperature. Above the rings is an illuminated control panel with rather more extensive instrumentation than was offered on the Magnet. Arguments about hygiene do to some extent account for the visual and technical changes between the two cookers, but they are by no means the full explanation. A historian of technology might attribute the differences between the two cookers to technical developments in the fifty years between the dates of manufacture: the invention of more efficient means of converting electricity into heat, of better switching mechanisms, and of new methods of forming metal. What this account does not explain is why the inventions should have been made in the first place, or why they should have been applied to the design of electric cookers. Technical innovations do not happen of their own accord: they occur only when somebody sees that there is advantage to be gained from them, and they are applied only when it is in someone's interest to do so. Certainly they cannot be explained simply by reference to the advance of scientific knowledge, an approach represented in the 'march of progress' view that is found all too often in histories of technology. The essential changes are not only that the English Electric cooker was made by different manufacturing methods and incorporated new technology, but that it embodied a set of ideas that were not to be found in the older cooker. To understand those ideas we need to turn to the history of electricity itself. Between the dates of these two cookers, and particularly between the two world wars, electricity production in Britain grew substantially. The growth in demand came predominantly from domestic consumers, who turned to electricity not only for lighting but also for heat, for cooking, for cleaning carpets and for 182