Electricity Supply in Britain \*The main sources of information about the history of electricity supply in Britain are H.H. Ballin, The Organisation of Electricity Supply in Great Britain, London, 1946, and L. Hannah, Electricity Before Nationalisation, London, 1979. Below: Magnet electric cooker, 1914. A massive appliance with only rudimentary controls. Right: English Electric 2034 electric cooker, 1961. Designed by the Design Research Unit. A more compact cooker, with a clean finish and thermostatic controls washing and ironing clothes. These new uses were encouraged by the marketing efforts of the electricity supply industry, which profited from the extra revenue and took a great interest in the development of appliances. In Britain, electricity was first generated for sale in 1881.\* The pioneer public supply, at Godalming in Surrey, was used exclusively for lighting, but the enterprise did not survive for long. The Electric Lighting Acts of 1882 and 1888 established legal arrangements for the production and supply of electricity, and by the early 1890s, a number of supply undertakings were selling electricity. Because the Acts had made it illegal to export electricity across local authority boundaries, the undertakings were all local, and the majority of them were run by municipalities. Almost the entire demand for electricity resulted from lighting, whether for the streets, for public and commercial buildings or for homes. The cleanliness and brilliance of electricity compared with gas made it easy to develop the demand. It soon became clear, though, that the sale of electricity exclusively for lighting caused serious problems in the economics of production. As the demand for lighting is limited to the hours of darkness, particularly the evenings, the necessary generating capacity remained idle for a large part of each day. To explain the relationship between the actual demand and the potential demand that could be serviced, Colonel Crompton, the engineer for the Kensington Court power station, introduced the term