\*United Kingdom Department of Energy, Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics, 1980, Table 73, p. 103. Building Domestic Load \*Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (JIEE), vol. XXIV, 1895, p. 10. 'load factor' in 1891. This is the ratio between the actual amount of electricity supplied during a period of time - a day, week or year to the amount of electricity it would have been possible to supply at maximum output throughout that period: in theory the highest load factor would be 100%, which would be virtually impossible to achieve in practice. At present, the British national load factor is just below 60%.\* The load curve for the Kensington Court station showed that even in December, the month of greatest demand, the load factor was only about 20%, a level that was typical of stations supplying electricity for lighting alone. Such low load factors concerned the industry because of their effects on the economics of production. There are two components in the cost of producing electricity: the running costs of fuel and wages, and the capital costs of the plant, generating sets and supply cables. Until recently, the capital cost has been the larger of the two, and it continues regardless of the amount of electricity generated. To meet all its customers' demands, an electricity supplier has to install sufficient generating capacity to meet the peak load, even though the plant may have to stand idle for long periods when there is no demand. In the Kensington station in 1890, with an annual load factor of only 13%, the plant was idle 87% of the time. Had the industry ever developed a satisfactory method of storing electricity generated outside the peak, the uneven demand would not, of course, have been a problem. Low load factors wasted capital and made the electricity that was produced extremely expensive, as the entire cost of the plant had to be covered by a very small total sale of electricity. Unlike ordinary commodities, for which the cost could be reduced by increasing the demand and selling more, increased demand for electric lighting would only make the situation worse, since the increase would invariably occur at the peak and require still more generating capacity. The answer to the problem lay in improving the load factor by building up a demand for other uses of electricity throughout the day. The search for alternative uses was to become a major theme in the history of electricity supply. In his presidential address to the Institute of Electrical Engineers in 1895, Colonel Crompton outlined some of the ways in which the demand for electricity could be diversified. Principal among the possible uses of power were factories, traction for trams and trains, and cooking, heating and other domestic purposes. 'We not only desire to have the output of our generating station more evenly distributed throughout the 24-hour day, so as to fill up the valleys and reduce the peaks of our daily diagram, but we also wish to improve the summer diagram as compared with the winter one... 'The great disparity between our winter and summer loads is due to our geographical position, and will always exist so long as the major part of the energy we supply is for lighting purposes, and the obvious remedy is to encourage its use for motive power and for heating and cooking; and to me at the present time it appears a far easier matter to educate the public to the advantages of using electricity for heating than to induce them to use motive power to any considerable extent. For this reason I have persist ently advocated the perfecting of electric heating and cooking appliances.'\* 184