Load factor curve, Kensington Court Power Station, over 24 hours. The thick line was for 6th November, 1890; the thin line for 2nd December, 1890. From Proceedings of the Institute of Civil Engineers, vol. cvi, 1891, p.7. 1522 30 40 50 60 80 80 100 110 120 10 20 30 40 SO 60 70 80 90 100 110 1 The initiative for domestic applications of electricity thus came from the supply side of the industry, and although domestic use took several decades to reach the scale Crompton had envisaged, it continued to be much discussed by electrical engineers. Contrary to Crompton's anticipation, the industrial and traction uses for electricity were the first to develop and, by 1900, were already beginning to bring about an improvement in load factors. For several reasons, domestic load increased much more slowly and, even in 1914, was still negligible. The high price of electricity and the considerable cost of wiring a house restricted the clientele to the well-to-do, and even those who could afford the expense were dissuaded for such reasons as incomprehension and fear of electricity, and the fact that it compared badly as a form of domestic energy with gas, which was much more widely available. However, the domestic use of electricity was so attractive to supply engineers because of its likely effect upon load factors that it was well worth their while to try and overcome the drawbacks. Both industrial and traction loads had the disadvantage that they had their own peaks, the industrial load during weekday mornings and afternoons, the traction load on weekday mornings and evenings. Although they helped produce a very much more even load curve than lighting on its own, neither use produced much demand for electricity at night or at weekends. Worse still, industrial and traction uses combined with lighting to produce an even higher peak load in the late afternoon of winter weekdays. Domestic demand for electricity was expected not only to add a more even load throughout the day and the week, but also, if anything, to peak at times when other demand dropped. Electricity consumed when people got up in the morning and cooked their breakfasts would precede the peaks of traction and industrial power, while the midday dip in industrial power would be filled by the cooking of lunch; cooking and heating in the evenings and at weekends would also occur outside periods of industrial demand. Electric fires used for occasional heating on cool summer evenings would help fill the seasonal drop in demand, but were not expected to add to the winter peak, since it was anticipated that electricity would always be too expensive to use for continuous heating. 185