Benjamin West: Etruria, oil painting, 1791. West's painting of Wedgwood's factory transforms it into a scene in the ancient world. \*Hugh Honour, Neo-Classicism, Harmondsworth, 1968. fashionable for cultured aristocrats from all over Europe to travel to Rome to view, purchase and, in cases of extreme enthusiasm, excavate classical antiquities.\* Whether the objects of the search were classical or English antiquities, the motives were similar. The study of the remains of the past provided inspiration for how the present could be. The paradox of eighteenth-century taste - that an age which was so fascinated by progress was at the same time devoted to the study of the far distant past - was expressed in all the artistic products of neo-classicism. These were not slavish reproductions of antiquity: they used imagery and forms from the past but were intended to express modern sentiments. Sometimes the effects seem perverse and contradictory. Dr Johnson described contemporary life in poems which closely imitated those of the Roman poet Juvenal in form. New buildings, such as the country houses of the late eighteenth century, made use of the forms and motifs of antique architecture but had internal planning and organisation designed to serve decidedly modern purposes. To popularise the scientific knowledge of the day, the physician and scientist Erasmus Darwin did not use the plain language of science, but wrote a classical epic poem, The Botanic Garden, which was published in two parts in 1789 and 1791, and was a great popular success. Darwin deliberately described science in classical metaphors and images: the power of the steam engine, for example, was described in a long and elaborate metaphor as equivalent to the strength of Hercules. The result now seems perverse and artificial, but the popularity of the poem 15