\*See especially the following papers and the ensuing discussions: W.R. Cooper, 'Domestic Electricity Supply (including Heating and Cooking) as Affected by Tariffs', JIEE, vol. XLII, 1908-09, pp.26-48; H.W. Handcock and A.H. Dykes, 'The Present Aspect of Electric Lighting', JIEE, vol.XLIV, 1909-10, pp.57-73; H. Gray, 'Electric Heating as Applied to Cooking Apparatus', JIEE, vol. XLVII, 1911, pp.249-263; T.P. Wilmshurst, 'Commercial Aspects of Electric Cooking and Heating', JIEE, vol. LI, 1913, pp. 180-194. During the years 1905-14, a great deal of attention was given by supply engineeers to the potential of domestic demand and its likely effects upon the load factor, and to the development of appliances, without which there could be no domestic consumption of electricity. Cooking and space heating, both heavy consumers of current, were thought to provide the most promising means of building up domestic load. Engineers who believed in the future of domestic demand (and by no means all of them did) recognised that to attract consumers to electricity, cookers and heaters needed to be reasonably efficient and, above all, to demonstrate a superiority over gas.\* Anticipating a rapid growth in domestic consumption, a number of entrepreneurs began to make electrical appliances in the years before 1914. Most of the appliances were produced by handcraftsmanship, and as there were many manufacturers and few domestic consumers, it is likely that only minimal quantities were made of any design. By 1914, however, an enormous variety of "Magnet" Electric Heating and Cooking Appliances. CAREFUL attention to even the most minute details in design and manufacture has resulted in the "Magnet System being universally recognised as the "best of all Electric Heating and Cooking Apparatus All "Magnet" Kettles, Irons, etc., are fitted with easily replaceable heating elements. "Magnet™ Electric Fire. Panel Type H1910 77/6 "Magnet" Electric Fire. Rod Type Radiator and Hot Plate. ## H1950 H2160 ... 110/- Hot Plate detachable and provided with a separate switch. 80/ Electric potato peeler, 1914. Although clearly made for the catering trade, this and other electric-powered machines were recommended for domestic use. From M. Lancaster, Electric Cooking, Heating, Cleaning, etc., 1914, p.286. "Magnet Electric Kettle. Useful alike in Drawing Room or Kitchen. H5308 2-pint 21/ (Polished Copper). H5309 3-pint ... 27 (Polished Copper). Can also be supplied Nickel-Plated. "Magnet" Domestic Iron. H5840 4 lbs. H5842 6 lbs. 12'6 15/- If supplied complete with three yards flexible Cord and Adaptor. 1 each extra on above prices. Advertisement for Magnet electrical appliances, 1914. This shows the very extensive range of small electrical appliances already available by 1914. From M. Lancaster, Electric Cooking, Heating, Cleaning, etc., 1914. Magnet™ Electric Toaster. Makes perfect fresh toast on your table. 15/ H5600 Nickel-l'iated. "Magnet Milk Sterilizer and Food Warmer. H5360 1-pint 27 6 Of polished copper, electrically fitted exterior, and best china inner container "Magnet" Electric Toaster. Fitted with sheathed element. giving long lite. able to with stand rough use H5602 Nickel-l'lated 21 186