Electric breakfast, 1914. Electric coffee pot, toaster and egg-boiler in use. The attraction, to supply engineers, of the electrically-cooked breakfast, was that it used power at a time of low demand. From Mrs Lancaster, Electric Cooking, Heating, Cleaning, etc., 1914. \*Maud Lancaster, Electric Cooking, Heating, Cleaning etc., being a Manual of Electricity in the Service of the Home, London, 1914, gives a very full account of the domestic electrical appliances available in 1914. \*See discussion to W.R. Cooper's paper in JIEE (1908-09). \*C.R. Belling, 'Electric Fires and Cookers', Electrical Review, vol. 108, 19th June 1931, p.1048. appliances were available for anyone who could afford them; indeed, almost every type of appliance known to us today could be obtained. There were not only electric cookers and heaters, but kettles, toasters, dishwashers, washing machines, vacuum cleaners, mixers, potato peelers and knife grinders. Uses of electricity which improved the load factor were particularly favoured. So, for example, 'electric breakfasts', which fell outside the main load period, received strong publicity. Some of the appliances originated in the United States, which, partly because gas supplies had never developed to any extent, had advanced further in the domestic uses of electricity, but many of the appliances were British designed and made. On the whole, as electricity supply engineers frequently complained, the standard of design was not high.\* In some cases, such as certain domestic clothes washing machines, the appliances were manual models to which an electric motor had been attached. Some electric cookers had been made by installing electric elements in the cast-iron carcases of gas cookers, while those that were purpose-built often looked very much like gas cookers.\* Even where, as in the case of electric fires, the product was not a direct substitute for a manual or gas appliance, there was rarely much about the designs to indicate their specifically electrical nature, and the level of efficiency was generally unspectacular. The extravagant claims that were sometimes made for the luxury of the all-electric home were hardly justified by the appliances themselves, which could not in any case be put to more than occasional use because of the high price of electricity. By 1914, then, the electric house looked feasible, but the actual proportion of households using electricity was too small to make much difference to the load. World War I was a prosperous time for the electricity industry, since it was called upon to supply power for many of the wartime industries. As shift and, in some cases, continuous working gave very high load factors, there was little reason for the supply industry to concern itself much with domestic consumers. However, peacetime once again confronted the industry with the problems of 187