Electric fire, c.1910. Despite the elegant brasswork, the electrical nature of this product was not exploited in the design. \*B.R. Mitchell & H.G. Jones, Second Abstract of British Historical Statistics, Cambridge, 1971, p.71. \*The development of domestic consumption of electricity is discussed in Hannah, chapter 6; and in D.A. Wilson, 'The Economic Development of the Electricity Supply Industry in Great Britain, 1919-1939', Ph.D. thesis, University of Loughborough, 1976, chapter 5. uneven demand and low load factors. Domestic demand resurfaced as the solution to the industry's problems, but so, too, did the same obstacles to its development, and the fact that no more than 6% of British homes were wired for electricity by 1918 prevented any rapid expansion of supply. In spite of these drawbacks, the domestic consumption of electricity did rise from about 7 kilowatt hours (kWh) per head of population in 1920, to 128 kWh in 1939 and to around 770 kWh per head in 1961. Of all the categories of electricity sales - domestic, industrial, commercial, street lighting and traction - it was domestic sales that increased the most: the proportion of electricity generated that was sold to households rose from 8% in 1920 to 27% in 1939 and to 41% in 1963, figures which fulfilled the ambitions of the early twentieth-century electrical engineers.\* The most spectacular growth, in terms of proportional increase in domestic sales, came between the wars. Although this time has been described as a golden age for the industry, since the potential for expansion was so great, considerable obstacles had to be faced in building up domestic demand.\* Of the obstacles, the high price of electricity was the most serious. The problem had long been recognised as circular: high prices discouraged domestic demand, but the only way to lower costs was to improve load factors, which could only be done by 188