increasing domestic demand. Many engineers argued that the best solution was some form of tariff that would not penalise good customers who consumed large amounts of electricity, but at the same time would not result in losses from supplying households that consumed very little. As tariffs which had a high charge per unit discouraged any increase in consumption, the ideal involved a substantial fixed charge and a low unit price. This system, the 'two-part tariff', was widely recommended; by 1939, it had been adopted by most undertakings across the country. Not only did the two-part tariff promote electricity sales, but, during the interwar years, the relation between the fixed charge and the running costs was such that, if anything, large consumers who used electricity for cooking and heating were slightly subsidised by the many small consumers who used electricity only for lighting.\* Even so, electricity continued to be more expensive than other kinds of fuel. In the 1920s, it was generally too expensive to be considered as the sole means of heating and cooking, and even after substantial price reductions in the 1930s, it still remained generally more expensive than other forms of energy. With no price advantage over other fuels, electricity was most likely to attract new consumers through the merits of the appliances that utilised it. The design and efficiency of electrical appliances therefore became an important element in the promotion of domestic electricity sales. As one supply engineer said in 1922: 'In my view there are two conditions necessary for successful domestic load building, i.e. cheaper current, and cheap and good appliances . . . The best propagandist is a satisfactory service, which cannot be given without reliable appliances.'\* The second problem in building up domestic demand was distribution and wiring. There was no point in offering electricity at even the lowest of prices if there were only a few households in a position to buy it. Between 1918 and 1939, however, the extension of mains supply to both new and existing houses meant that the proportion of households connected to the mains rose from 6% to about two thirds. Commercially, a particularly important factor was the amount of electricity each household could potentially consume. Quite a high proportion of the households wired during the inter-war years were equipped only for lighting. More households had one 5 amp socket into which an electric iron might be plugged, but probably only at most one third of all homes that were wired had more than two electric sockets, and they were principally newly built houses in the upper price bracket.\* The third obstacle to the development of domestic demand, fear of electricity, was not as trivial as it might appear. There are enough stories of superstitions about electricity to make it clear that for many people electricity was far from a natural form of energy. One case, known to the author by hearsay, was of two old ladies who anxiously kept plugs in all the electrical sockets to prevent the electricity leaking out; another old lady was said to be terrified by the installation of even an electric bell lest the workman \*Hannah, p.200. \*J.E. Nelson, JIEE, vol. LXI, 1922-23, p.201. \*Hannah, p.208; Alan A. Jackson, Semi-Detached London, London, 1973, p. 145; D.A. Wilson thesis. be killed in the process. In another case, at a country house where a private generating set was installed, the owner was so apprehensive of the unpredictable powers of electricity that he refused to allow a potential of more than 50 volts. Even in the United States, a case was reported in the 1930s of a woman who refused to use a modern 189