\*C.R. Gibson, Electricity as a Wizard, London, 1929, p. 146; the house concerned was Ston Easton Park, Somerset; Margaret G. Reid, Economics of Household Production, New York, 1934, p.254. \*Quoted D.A. Wilson thesis, p.169. \*Electrical Review, vol.94, June 1924, p.928. \*A.G. Whyte, The All-Electric Age, London, 1922, p.228. electric cooker on the grounds that it was 'just too spooky' and preferred her wood-burning range.\* Ridiculous though such stories may sound, the electricity industry took these fears seriously, recognising that they were one of the major obstacles to the development of domestic demand. Speaking at the general meeting of the Electrical Development Association in 1934, the chairman said: 'One of the greatest bugbears to be contended with in the development of electricity [is] the haunting spectre of fear.'\* To some extent, fears and prejudices could be overcome by education and by rational explanations of the physics of electricity. However, since the fears themselves were partly irrational (and even now are to be found in people who have had the opportunity to learn the rudiments of electricity), no amount of reason could entirely overcome them. A more effective approach was therefore to try replacing the popular idea of electricity as a dark, invisible and lethal force by a more positive image of it as a miraculous source of energy that would take away all the troubles of the world. Propaganda about electricity made much of its being a uniquely 'modern' fuel, and descriptions of electricity promised unheardof benefits that it would bring. For instance, in the Electrical Review in 1924, it was said that: '... with the coming of electricity a new era has dawned. One of the great powers of nature has been tamed and harnessed and trained to the service of man, making life clean, wholesome and simple.'\* Millenarian accounts of the all-electric age were common, as in the following quotation from the 1920s: "˜Of all the gifts that electricity brings, almost the greatest is the relief from the burden of mechanical, monotonous, everlasting toil. Just as our factories have become organised to turn out their product rapidly and efficiently by electrical machinery controlled by man, our homes will be transformed to operate smoothly with the aid of electricity, so that the labour involved in cleaning, in heating, in cooking and in washing and other domestic tasks will be performed by an electrical deputy. The energy thus released can be devoted to the enjoyment of home life, to education, to the cultivation of music and art and the other beneficent recreations for which a measure of freedom is essential. Leisure will cease to be a monopoly of the well-to-do and will extend until it becomes a common possession.\*' Electricity was held to promise a bright, clean, efficient, cheerful, toil-free world; it would make real the visions of Utopias and science fiction. Electrical millenarianism flourished best in prose and films, but the industry did its utmost, through advertising, exhibitions and show houses, to convince the public that electricity was indeed the fuel of the future. Its principal agent was the Electrical Development Association (EDA), an organisation set up under the Electricity Act of 1919 and financed by the supply undertakings. From 1926 onwards, the EDA became heavily involved in the development of domestic demand, and electrical millenarianism, though of a restrained form, played a significant part in its publicity. In the late 1920s, the EDA was publicising electricity with slogans like 'To Electricity belongs the Present and the Future', and 'Science's Greatest Gift to the World 190