\*British Commercial Gas Association advertisement in Mrs. R. Noble, Labour Saving in the Home, London, 1930, p.i. Appliance Design and Images of Electricity for it could offer its own qualities as actual and immediate. The gas industry was able to make much of the contrast between the Utopian visions projected by the electricity industry and its own capacity to offer all its benefits in the present. One advertisement, from a publication of 1930, ran as follows: "The Dream Come True A labour-saving home for every woman now Politicians, social workers, novelists, and journalists continue to paint for us rosy pictures of a future when all houses will be so well equipped with labour-saving devices that we shall just sit round pressing buttons while Robots do everything. But these things are always in the future . . . What the modern practical young housewife wants is not a House of the Future - which never comes, but a House of Today - a home fitted now with clean, economical labour-saving equipment, not a vague dwelling fitted at some future date with appliances not yet invented. The gas industry is making such happy, labour-saving homes possible today in every part of the country, among rich and poor alike.'\* It was statements such as this that exposed electricity's dependence on ideas and potential rather than present realities in its appeal to domestic consumers. It is clear that had every consumer acted with rational economic instincts, the growth in electrical demand between 1920 and 1939 would have been nothing like as great as it was. The high cost of electricity and the fact that electricity was no more efficient than gas for cooking and heating meant that consumers who chose electricity must have been influenced by other reasons than the pursuit of value for money. One such reason was that it was said to be a progressive and liberating source of energy with unlimited future potential. Ultimately, whether or not people gave credence to these claims depended upon what they thought of the appliances that harnessed the energy. The future of electricity therefore depended on improving the design of electrical equipment. For the supply industry, domestic electrical appliances had to meet two fundamental requirements: to be efficient and as far as possible superior to gas appliances, and to convey the idea that electricity was the only modern form of energy. Until the 1930s, most electrical appliances satisfied neither requirement particularly well and gave rise to many complaints from the supply side of the industry. Far from living up to the vision of electricity as a modern source of energy, the majority of appliances on the market in the 1920s looked ramshackle and clumsy. In an electric show house fitted out by Battersea Borough Council in 1927, the appliances that furnished the kitchen were cumbersome and distinctly old fashioned compared with the futurism projected by the EDA, on, say, the cover design of Twentieth Century Cookery, published around 1930. This brightly coloured post-cubist image of the modern electric age could not have presented a greater contrast to the dingy reality of the Battersea Electric House. The problem was to represent some of the qualities of modernity and efficiency represented on the cover of Twentieth Century Cookery in the design of appliances themselves. 193