## E Kitchen, Battersea Electric House, 1927. This kitchen may have been well equipped, but the appliances were awkward and cumbersome. \*W. Wilson, JIEE, vol. LXIV, 1925-26, p.314. \*Political and Economic Planning (PEP), The Market for Household Appliances, London, 1945, chapter 3, para. 115. On the history of the appliance manufacturing industry, see T.A.B. Corley, Domestic Electrical Appliances, London, 1966. \*G. Routh, Occupation and Pay in Great Britain 1906-60, Cambridge, 1965, p. 104. The prices of appliances are derived from those quoted in catalogues and press advertisements. Electric cookers came in for particularly severe criticism for their anachronistic design, which slavishly imitated that of coal or gas ranges. A speaker at the Institute of Electrical Engineers in 1926 complained that ' . . . oven designers are copying an older apparatus the features of which are dependent upon its having to be stoked with coal and placed so that its hot hob can be accessible for cooking utensils.'\* Such backwardness in design was not calculated to lead consumers to believe that electricity was an advanced and superior form of energy. There was little that supply engineers could do about the design defects of electric appliances. Supply undertakings were forbidden by law to do anything but generate and distribute electricity, and the only financial connection between them and the appliance manufacturers occurred when they bought appliances for hiring or retailing to their customers. They had no more influence over the manufacturers than any ordinary retailer, and the supply industry as a whole was able to exert pressure on manufacturers only through the EDA. For their part, the appliance manufacturers had had no great incentive during the 1920s to improve their designs. Throughout the decade, the number of consumers was too small to offer much prospect of mass sales, and the variations in voltage between different undertakings made it difficult to achieve economies of scale in manufacture. The practice adopted by some undertakings of hiring appliances in order to promote electricity sales was said to make them poor customers for improved designs, since they would be required to scrap all their existing stock. As a result, standards of design were low, and the appliances were very expensive. In the 1920s, when the average income of managers and professional men was between £500 and £700 a year, electric cookers cost upwards of £30, a vacuum cleaner around £20, and an ordinary electric fire about £3.\*