Above: Josiah Wedgwood: copy of the Portland Vase, 1790. The production of the black jasper body was a technical triumph, which Wedgwood publicised by reproducing the famous firstcentury cameo glass Portland Vase. Right: Admission ticket to view the Wedgwood copy of the Portland Vase, 1790. Wedgwood made his successful reproduction of the Portland Vase into a society event. Grack Sheet Sotiv between 12 o'clock and 5. at the time shows that this was an acceptable way of communicating progressive ideas and knowledge. Just as unrealistic was Benjamin West's painting of Josiah Wedgwood's factory at Etruria: women decorators clad as Roman matrons, in languid classical poses against scenes of artistic craftwork, could hardly have been less representative of the actual conditions in the factory, which was renowned throughout Europe for its progressive methods of manufacture and its high degree of separation between the different processes. It was typical of the eighteenth-century approach to novelty that when Wedgwood sought to advertise his technical abilities as a ceramist, he set himself the task of reproducing the Portland Vase, the celebrated piece of Roman cameo glass acquired by the Duke of Portland in 1786. The point of the reproductions was not just that they were as good as the original, but that they demonstrated the sophistication of contemporary manufacturing techniques better than any new and original designs could have done. Unease about progress and a compulsive interest in the past were connected phenomena. In The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (1776-88), Edward Gibbon described Rome of the second century AD, the Golden Age, as a place of perfect peace and harmony, which was only subsequently disturbed by the introduction of Christianity from elsewhere. Not until recently have historians questioned this idealised picture of the Golden Age and argued that, far from being static, Rome was going through a period of considerable internal change, a view which would not have been well received in the eighteenth century, as it would have deprived antiquity of one of its greatest attractions. To the leisured classes of the eighteenth century, much of the pleasure of studying ancient 16