\*Hannah, pp. 10-12; manuscript notebooks of Dr Ferranti, held by Ferranti Ltd, Holmwood, Lancs. \*The Ferranti Fire, publicity booklet, n.d., p. 14. Far left: Illustration, Ferranti publicity booklet, c. 1930, showing the parabolic reflector fire in use. Left: Berry Magicoal electric fire, The Sundown, 1925. Simulated and electric fires were a longstanding way of giving a familiar form to the invisible source of energy. \*Electrical Review, vol. 114, 9th February 1934, p. 188. \*See A. Forty, 'The Electric Home', Unit 20 of Open University Course A305 History of Architecture and Design 1890- 1939, Milton Keynes, 1975, p.60. electrical appliances, among them electric fires. In the mid-1920s, he returned to the development of domestic load and investigated possible improvements in the design of electric water heaters and space heaters.\* In theory, any electric fire gives 100% efficiency in the conversion of electricity into heat, but there may be big differences in the distribution of heat. Improvements in the design of electric fires did not therefore affect overall efficiency, but simply the way in which the heat was distributed. Reflector fires had been in existence since before World War I, and Ferranti turned his attention to ways of increasing the efficiency of the reflector to radiate a larger proportion of the heat. His solution, a parabolic reflector with a thin wound-wire heating element lying along the focus, shed a warming glow over a large area and helped overcome one of the common criticisms of electric fires: that they gave little visual evidence of heat. Ferranti started to manufacture the fire in 1929 and offered several versions of the basic form, one with a plain surround and another with Georgian trim. In 1931, he introduced a model that could be set into a fireplace, as well as a smaller and cheaper portable model. The Ferranti fire became something of a classic of design in Britain in the 'thirties and was praised enthusiastically by Nikolaus Pevsner in 1937 in his book An Enquiry into Industrial Art in England. Ferranti's publicity for his fire made much of its scientific design: "The remarkable radiation efficiency of the Ferranti fire is obtained by the scientifically correct application of a well-known principle in the projection of heat. . .'\* But as important as its radiant efficiency was its appearance, which, as well as being discreet and tasteful, also had some of the 'modern' and technological qualities attributed to electricity. During the 1930s, other manufacturers became increasingly aware of the importance of appearance in electrical appliances. Discussing the market for electric fires in the Electrical Review in 1934, A. Curwen asked: 'How are we to create this demand for electric heaters? First we must improve their design until they impress by their very appearance - they must symbolise electricity. This is the age of the unorthodox, and I feel that if fire manufacturers departed somewhat from accepted designs, they would find a better market for their products.'\* The appearance of most early electric appliances had taken the form of the object whose function they most closely followed. Electric cookers looked like gas cookers, which in turn imitated coal ranges, and from early in their history many electric fires had simulated coal or log fires.\* These 'traditional' designs arose partly from the unimaginativeness of manufacturers and their designers, but partly from the belief that such familiar appearances would help overcome prejudices against electricity. However, as a result of comments from others in the electricity industry, manufacturers became aware of the discrepancy between the traditionalism of their products and the modern image for electricity that the industry and the EDA were trying to promote. From the early 1930s, the designs began to change in ways that met with the 197