Creda parabolic reflector fire on tubular steel stand, 1935. A 'modern' design for an electric fire. \*JIEE, vol. LXXII, 1933, p.137. Below: HMV Bruton electric fire, 1939. The double parabola of the reflector improved the distribution of heat, and the extensive use of chrome had connotations of contemporary car styling. Right: HMV Lincoln electric fire, 1955. The fins, intended to reflect radiant heat over an even wider area, again gave the fire a 'modern' form. approval of the supply side of the industry. For instance, R.B. Matthews, an engineer who had complained in 1927 about the design of electric fires, found himself able to say of them in 1933, that 'Since [1927]. . . there has been a remarkable improvement, and in many cases there are striking departures from previously accepted principles.'\* Though electricity is invisible, colourless and no more good than bad, the properties ascribed to it were that it was clean, silent, instantaneous, modern and revolutionary. To symbolise these qualities, manufacturers and designers employed 'modern' design, based on the 'Art Deco' style, on the style of the European Modern Movement, or on features derived from automobile styling. Chromium plating and streamlining became the clichés of electrical product design from the early 1930s. Ferranti's fire had made use of some of these features: the chromed surface of the parabolic reflector created its visual effect as well as diffusing heat. Subsequent appliance designs were more aggressively 'modern': for instance, a smaller version of the parabolic reflector fire rested on a chromed tubular steel support that owed much to the furniture designs of the German architect Marcel Breuer or to those of the English firm of PEL; when Walter Gropius, a celebrated pioneer