\*D. Sharp, T. Benton & B.C. Cole, PEL and Tubular Steel Furniture of the Thirties, London, 1977; R.D. Best, Design and be Damned (unpublished typescript), p.136. Sunbeam electric mixer, c.1958. The automobile-derived motifs gave this appliance an up-to-date image. \*H. Dreyfuss, Designing for People, New York, 1955, p.80. Advertisement for electricity, 1980. Electricity can only effectively be marketed through its appliances, and to draw custom, these must be (or appear to be) technologically advanced. In this advertisement, the modernity of the cooker is implied by contrasting it with an obviously antiquated model. From Company, August 1980, pp.66-67. of Modern Movement architecture, came to England in 1934, he chose a fire of this design for his own use.\* Although many electrical appliances continued to have a highly traditional appearance, it was designs such as those of the HMV electric fires, with their strong references to contemporary car styling, that projected an image of electricity as the modern, progressive and liberating source of energy. After World War II, appliances continued to be an important part of campaigns for the domestic sale of electricity, again with designs that conveyed to consumers the image of electricity as the most up-to-date form of energy. Appliances manufactured in the 1950s incorporated the latest features of styling, like the electric mixer with the car headlamp motif at the front and space-ship fins at the rear. Likewise, the English Electric cooker described at the beginning of the chapter contained features (particularly the control panel) that were redolent of the future. Designers have acknowledged that they intentionally used references to cars and aeroplanes in order to convey ideas of progress and modernity. The American industrial designer Henry Dreyfuss wrote in 1955 that the impetus for the changes in the design of modern kitchens had been brought about: "... by two things that had nothing to do with cooking a meal or taking a bath the automobile and the airplane. Actually, the auto and the plane have become symbols of the nation's scientific imagination and a vital part of its psychology, establishing trends and influencing people in everything they buy.'\* In the marketing of electricity, emphasis on the technological futurism of appliances remains important - a 1980 advertisement for electricity featured a cooker, the great efficiency and advanced features of which were brought out by its utter dissimilarity to the older cooker standing by it. Although the symbolism used to express modernity and the future has changed over time as images have been superseded, the idea that electricity will put one into the twentieth, or indeed the twenty-first century has been a constant feature of the design of electrical appliances. This technological futurism, while by no means confined to electrical products, can be explained in them Beauty and the beast. Thankfully, hist that the ty Ergash with fastig anquet fadlahtiol the-thelen.. for! the was the Thank-Lab. hungen warm the walke chal-in at grills alkatr In Suva tal-bak Steamwealth aleat Call in a streh und dog Almaketarstab tits Malbellinking bed in writing by JL. The list COOK Clean and simple 199