Wireless Sets \*A. Briggs, The Golden Age of Wireless, London, 1965, pp.6 and 253. \*PEP report, 1945, chapter 6, para. 155. by the particular problems the electricity industry had in making its colourless, odourless, invisible, dangerous and expensive form of energy attractive to the public. The design of appliances has been one means by which people have received favourable ideas about electricity and formed the desire to use it despite all their prejudices and objections. Wireless sets were the first pieces of electrical equipment to be owned on a mass scale in Britain. In 1922, when broadcasting began, there were 36,000 licences for receivers, in 1931 there were 4.3 million, and in 1939 there were 9 million, enough for almost every member of the population to have access to a set.\* Radio sets were the most popular electrical appliances; the next most widely owned was the electric iron, of which there were estimated to be 6.5 million in Britain in 1939.\* Wireless sets were also among the first electrical appliances to use futuristic design, and, although styles have changed, the same basic imagery has continued. However, radios, unlike other appliances, used little or no current from the mains, and the electricy supply industry did not have the same cause to be interested in their commercial development. The reasons for the introduction of futurist design in wireless sets lay elsewhere and had to do with the ways in which radio as a medium was thought to appeal to the public. When broadcasting was introduced in the 1920s, it was a novelty without parallel and without precedent. Broadcasting brought sounds of the outside, public world into the home much more vividly and immediately than the gramophone, and the unfamiliarity of this experience occasionally had surprising effects on listeners. The wireless set also provided most people's first experience of owning a piece of modern technology and thus carried great weight as a symbol of scientific progress, putting them in touch with changes that they were told that technology would bring in all areas of life. Because of its great potency as a symbol of what life in the twentieth century would offer, radio became one of the most popular metaphors for the changes that technology would bring about in everyday life. It is hardly possible for us today to appreciate the impact of radio, because we have become so used to technical innovation and the claims made for it. The closest comparison might be with the pocket calculator, which has enabled Burndept IV Wireless Receiver, 1924. Most early wirelesses were presented as pieces of technical apparatus. 200