\*For a fuller discussion of wireless cabinet design, see A. Forty, 'Wireless Style: Symbolic Design and the English Radio Cabinet 1928- 33', Architectural Association Quarterly, vol.4, Spring 1972, pp.23-31. Wireless set designed by Sir Ambrose Heal for George V, 1924. In mahogany, with mother-of-pearl inlay depicting a whispering shell transmitting radio waves and a conch shell receiving them. Apart from this discreet symbolism, this cabinet was not recognisable as a radio when the doors were closed. everybody to possess a product of the silicon chip technology which we are told will transform the world out of all recognition. The design of the appearance of wireless sets went through three distinct stages.\* In the years immediately after broadcasting began, the rate of technical development of wirelesses was very rapid, and significant improvements were continually being made in the design of receivers. Customers' attention was focused on the innovations, and they would look for sets incorporating the latest improvements. In these conditions, the buying public was relatively unconcerned about what the receivers looked like and was more interested in how many and what type of valves each model had. In appearance, the earliest sets tended to be rude assemblies of diodes, capacitors and resistors, a form that was in its own way extremely striking but reflected the almost total preoccupation of both manufacturers and public with the technical properties of the apparatus. Some superior models were housed in cabinets, but these, like the one made by Heal's for George V, were not mass-produced and tended to be custom-made by cabinet makers who were independent of the wireless manufacturers. In the late 1920s, wireless-making was a boom industry: hire purchase meant that even relatively poor people could buy radio sets, and it was generally upon radio sets, rather than the cookers and heaters that the electricity industry was so keen for them to buy or hire, that they spent what spare money they had. The wireless, after all, gave pleasure, whereas other electrical appliances only promised efficiency, and even that was doubtful and at a price. In these favourable conditions, the wireless industry grew very fast, and as long as the rate of technological innovation continued so rapidly, much of each manufacturer's appeal to the market depended upon his being able to offer a better set than his rivals. However, around 1929, as the rate of technological advance began to slow down, the superheterodyne receiver offered by one company was no longer very different from that made by any other. ttt 201