\*V. Gielgud, British Radio Drama, London, 1957, p.20; reference to the problem of the confusion caused by radio was made by M. Muggeridge, The Thirties, London, 1940, pp. 44-45. pp. 44-45. In the second stage of development, manufacturers, unable to compete with each other by technical innovation, turned to other means, notably the design of cabinets, to which little thought had been given previously, except in the most expensive sets. The problem that faced manufacturers was what cabinets should look like. There seemed good reason to believe that customers would rather not furnish their living rooms with pieces of obviously scientific apparatus, but what were the alternatives? Most manufacturers began to market their sets in wooden cabinets, which were still usually designed and made by outside firms of cabinet makers and generally resembled other pieces of furniture. But the more far-sighted were not satisfied with these designs. There were complaints that wirelesses could not be distinguished from other pieces of furniture; stories circulated of guests mistaking the radio set for the cocktail cabinet. Some manufacturers therefore began to consider whether there might not be better ways of housing wireless sets, ways that would perhaps fit people's expectations of radio more closely. The problem of the best way of housing wireless sets centered around people's ideas of radio. Although radio was extremely popular, the sounds and voices that it brought into the home could be very disturbing. Early broadcasts exploited radio's unprecedented realism, and listeners were encouraged to sit in a darkened room so that their imaginations would heighten the illusion of reality. The effect of one of the first successful radio plays, Richard Hughes's Danger, was to make listeners feel that, like the characters, they were trapped underground in a mine.\* Yet radio's dependence on convincing its audience that they were listening to reality also made it very confusing. Were listeners really to think that they had Stanley Baldwin or the Hallé Orchestra sitting in their living rooms? Clearly they were not, but the less they believed this to be true, the less they were likely to enjoy radio. The dilemma has been even more of a problem with television, and most people avoid thinking about it by assuming most of the time that what they see on television is reality itself. Listeners in the 1920s and 1930s could at times be very credulous; the outstanding instance of how they could be duped occurred in the United States when Orson Welles's version of H.G. Wells's War of the Worlds was broadcast, and thousands of people who had turned on their sets during the programme fled from their homes, convinced that the Martian invasion was actually happening. In reconciling the illusory reality of broadcasting with its actual artificiality, there was a good deal to be said for the furniture approach to radio cabinet design, since it helped to assimilate the unfamiliar medium into people's homes. A cabinet which harmonised with the domestic furnishings at least helped to make the monstrous unreality of radio seem part of everyday life. Some manufacturers took this approach to its limits, concealing their sets inside articles of furniture which served other functions, like the radio easy-chair illustrated on p.12. Others took a less bizarre course, but kept to the notion that their sets should appear as furniture. This approach, however, did not fulfil the popular idea of radio as the symbol of future progress: it was supposed to represent everything that living rooms, and lives, lacked; sets that simply imitated what was already there could not fully satisfy people's expectations. The solution adopted by one firm, Murphy, 202