MAKING. WIRELESS SIMPLE "Here's my new All-mains, Set!" Well, what do you think of it. It's out standing in design, isn't it? And it's just as outstanding in construction. I can tell you frankly that I've never seen a factory staff more keen to make a good job of this set than my people are at present. And the sales staff too-bursting with enthusiasm to sell it. In fact they are all as keen as I am. Murphy dealers know that this summer is going to be a great success a stepping stone to even greater successes. It you want to be a Murphy Dealer let me know now, while I am adding to the list. Drank Mughn 8. AMLEE. ALRE Charter THE MURPHY TYPE A.3 3-VALVE SCREENED GRID ALL-MAINS RECEIVER SINGLE TUNING CONTROL DIAL MARKED IN WAVELENGTHS Above: Qualery P   
The very perfectly included this report 19 GNS ere with ample med hly pay MURPHY RADIO LTD.. Welwyn Garden City. Herts Ways Garden 331 150 RPHY RADIO Advertisement for the Murphy A-3 receiver, cabinet designed and made by Gordon Russell, 1931. One of the first cabinets that was unmistakably a radio, but which was also designed as contemporary modern furniture. From The Wireless and Gramophone Trader, 16th May 1931. Right: Pye radio receiver, 1930. Pye radios were sold in cabinets that were essentially pieces of modern furniture. They were distinguished by the sunburst motif on the loudspeaker grille. From Wireless and Gramophone Trader, 18th October 1930. \*G. Russell, Designer's Trade, London, 1968, pp. 147-154; and N. Pevsner, An Enquiry into Industrial Art in England, Cambridge, 1937, pp. 103-105. IRRESISTIBLE PREDOMINANT UNIQUE 333 ## PYE TWINTRIPLE PORTABLES which manufactured good quality sets in the medium price range, was to have cabinets that were still furniture, but recognisably modern. Murphy went to one of the leading designers of modern furniture, Gordon Russell, who produced a design that incorporated features from contemporary furniture without being derivative of some other article and was instantly recognisable as a radio set. In people's homes, these cabinets would almost invariably have looked more modern than the other furnishings. For the next twenty years, Murphy continued to have their cabinets designed and made by Gordon Russell, maintaining throughout the principle that the wireless, as a modern invention, should be housed inside a case of modern design that was also a piece of furniture and therefore gave the alien and confusing sounds of radio a place in people's homes.\* Throughout the 1930s, the majority of other manufacturers adopted a similar policy and sold their radios in cabinets that were essentially pieces of furniture, though not all of such tasteful appearance. Some, like Murphy and Pye, laid great stress on the quality of cabinet design, in the belief that sophistication and modernity were likely to attract customers. The convention of housing wirelesses in cabinets that were identifiable as pieces of furniture gave radio an image which, while it might have been convenient, was not particularly true to its nature. One firm that did not follow the convention was E.K. Cole Ltd., which sold wirelesses under the brand name of Ekco. Cole was responsible for initiating what can now be recognised as the third stage of radio cabinet design, in which the imagery of technological futurism (as distinct from the raw technology that was evident in the Burndept receiver of 1924) was introduced to 203