Old couple having tea with Pye radio in the background, c.1935. The radio stands out as the most modern piece of furnishing in this interior. \*Pevsner, 1937, pp. 105-107; also W. Landauer, 'Plastics', Trend, vol. 1, 1936, pp. 75-91. Below: Ekco 313 Radio, 1930. Ekco's first experiment in moulded plastic cabinets. Although moulded in bakelite this design could equally well have been made in wood. From Wireless and Gramophone Trader, 1930. Centre: Ekco M25 radio receiver, bakelite cabinet, 1932. Designed by J.K. White. Although more 'modern', this cabinet was still similar to wooden ones. provide the basis for the design. Although its technical development slowed down around 1930, radio continued for the following decade to be the most universal and available symbol of social change based upon technical progress. People still expected radios to move with the times and characterise the future. This expectation, originally fulfilled by constant improvements in the circuitry of receivers, was transferred into the design of radio cabinets. Cole discovered the potential for visual design to achieve this effect through circumstances connected with the production rather than the sale of wirelesses. Because of problems with the manufacture of wooden cabinets, the firm decided in 1930 to start making cabinets in bakelite.\* This was a recently developed thermosetting plastic which promised to be a very cheap material for cabinets, provided that enough sets were sold in each design to cover the cost of the moulds. For its first two bakelite cabinets, Ekco employed a traditional furniture designer, and the results looked very much like imitation wooden cabinets. The firm then became dissatisfied and decided to employ a designer associated with the Modern Movement, in the hope that something more appropriate to the material might be achieved. Ekco approached the architect Serge Chermayeff, who already had a reputation for his modern furniture, and the set he designed went into production in 1933 as the AC64. Although this design could still have been constructed in plywood, it made rather more of the qualities of bakelite. In the following year, Ekco invited several 'modern' architects to submit designs in competition, and chose to put those by Wells Coates and Serge Chermayeff into production.