## Above: Ekco 74 receiver, bakelite cabinet, 1934. Chermayeff's second design for Ekco, this cabinet was a form that it would have been impractical, if not impossible to make in wood. Right: Ekco AD65 receiver, bakelite cabinet, 1934. Designed by Wells Coates, this was the first of Ekco's bakelite cabinets to break totally with the image of the radio as a piece of furniture. From The Architectural Review, December 1935. Left: Ekco AC64 receiver, bakelite cabinet, 1933. Designed by Serge Chermayeff. A 'modern design, which could still have been made in plywood. Ironically, the mottled brown imitation-wood finish shown here sold better than the pure black bakelite finish. Wells Coates's design, the AD 65, was unlike Chermayeff's designs in bearing no resemblance at all to furniture. Not only would it have been impracticable to make it of wood, but its circular form with chromium plated grille, prominent tuning dial and conspicuous knobs conveyed the impression that it housed a piece of unequivocally modern technology. Where the Burndept receiver of 1924 had been technological in appearance, but not particularly modern, Wells Coates's AD 65 combined an evocation of technology with modernity. Unlike the earlier set, it gave the impression that the experimental stage was over and that it belonged instead to a world that would be made harmonious and comfortable by reliable and smooth-running technology. In its combination of technological sophistication with futurist imagery, the AD 65 was an achievement not previously realised in any radio cabinet design. As long as the use of valves required receivers to be fairly large, the convention of designing radio cabinets as furniture continued, but the introduction of transistors after World War II made great reductions in size possible and revived the problems of what a radio set should look like. As the majority of sets became portable, furniture ceased to have any relevance to cabinet design. Manufacturers cast around for other solutions, and made use, for example, of the forms of light hand luggage. By the 1960s, the majority were using the same set of ideas, though through different imagery, as had been developed by Ekco in the 1920s, and radios began to appear in the form of conspicuously modern objects of technology. Even if not all designs had pretensions to such technical sophistication as the black-anodised boxes of the 1970s, the tendency to adopt advanced scientific imagery has been fairly widespread. The technical developments in wireless design since the 1950s have been minimal, but manufacturers have persisted in making radio sets look as if they were breaking the frontiers of science. Their attachment to this image led to the innumerable designs that imitated the appearance of the apparatus developed for the space programme. This self-conscious futurist symbolism has continued despite the fact that radios are no longer the only pieces of electronic technology in popular possession, nor even, since the 205