\*The account of the history of the Staffordshire pottery industry, and of Wedgwood, is based on the following sources: J. Thomas, The Rise of the Staffordshire Potteries, Bath, 1971; L. Weatherill, The Pottery Trade and North Staffordshire 1660-1760, Manchester, 1971; Wolf Mankowitz, Wedgwood, London, 1953; D. Towner, Creamware, London and Boston, 1978; N. McKendrick, 'Josiah Wedgwood: an Eighteenth Century Entrepreneur in Salesmanship and Marketing Techniques', Economic History Review, 2nd series, vol. XII, no. 3, 1960, pp. 408-433. See also N. McKendrick, J. Brewer and J.H. Plumb, The Birth of Consumer Society. The Commercialization of Eighteenth Century England, London, 1982. Wedgwood: Neo-Classicism in Industrial Production \*See note above. \*Quoted in Mankowitz, p.27. Rome and collecting relics from it was the contact it gave them with a civilisation that had seemingly been stable. Their desire to see classical principles, and classical designs, applied to contemporary life arose partly out of a wish to suppress from their consciousness its disturbing tendency to change. Of course, it can be argued with justification that when, for example, Wedgwood introduced neo-classicism into the design of his pottery, he did so because that style was in fashion. Yet such an explanation is incomplete in that it does not tell us why neoclassicism rather than some other style was the fashion: to answer this and know why eighteenth century consumers preferred neoclassicism to the alternatives, we need to know what it meant to them. Unfortunately, the reconstruction of consumer preferences in the past is a historical enterprise fraught with difficulties and generally leading to unsatisfactory results. Even the evidence of the few consumers who took the trouble to articulate and record the reasons for their choices cannot be wholly relied upon, since they may not have been fully conscious of their motives, or have failed to record them completely. Moreover, we cannot assume that the preferences recorded by one consumer were shared by others, even others of the same class, age or sex. In these circumstances, the best we can do is to indicate the predisposing factors that might have led consumers to act in one way or another at a particular time. In general, the best historical evidence about consumer preferences, at least for the purposes of understanding design, comes from manufacturers, who can, after all, be expected to have had their fingers on the pulse of the market, and we should value their testimony above that of any individual consumer. Josiah Wedgwood's experiences with neo-classicism largely confirm that, among other things, it was the style that made the late eighteenth-century middle and upper classes feel most at ease with progress. In 1759, when Josiah Wedgwood ended five years of partnership with the potter Thomas Whieldon in Stoke-on-Trent in Staffordshire, considerable changes were taking place in the English potteries. At the beginning of the century, few workshops had employed more than half a dozen men, and most of their output had been sold locally. By 1750, some potters had increased their sales by extending their markets to more distant parts of the country and so were employing more men in their workshops. By 1769, the average potworks in Staffordshire was thought to employ about twenty men.\* At the end of his partnership with Whieldon, Wedgwood rented a potworks nearby at Burslem and began production on his own, shrewdly recognising the business possibilities open to him. As he later wrote at the beginning of the Experiment Book he started at this date, 'I saw the field was spacious, and the soil so good as to promise ample recompense to anyone who should labour diligently in its cultivation.'\* How Wedgwood went about this cultivation is known to us through the exceptional series of letters that Wedgwood wrote to his friend Thomas Bentley. These letters provide a unique picture of the mind of an entrepreneur during the early stages of industrialisation, revealing the problems he faced and the solutions he 17