Ever Ready Sky Countess portable transistor radio, 1959. The advent of the batterypowered transistor demanded a new image for the cases: many manufacturers chose to imitate light hand luggage. development of the silicon chip and its use in pocket calculators, the most advanced. The effect has been to prevent radio from taking a respectable place in history by trying constantly to convince us that it belongs to an age that we are only just on the brink of entering. The use of imagery to make products appear 'ahead of their time' has been a recurrent and at times thoroughly monotonous feature of twentieth-century design. The reasons are not hard to see for the appeal is exactly the same as that on which all millenarian religions have been based. The attractions of a future from which all present ills will have been eliminated are overwhelming; furthermore it is emotionally very much easier to live in the past or the future than it is to live in the present. The discovery by twentieth-century manufacturers that one of the most effective ways to stimulate the desire for commodities was to suggest that they were the key to a clean, harmonious and comfortable way of life would have come as no surprise to any nineteenth-century revivalist preacher. What, however, would have been a surprise was the entirely novel way in which designers were able to make inanimate objects convey this message without the assistance of words or pictures. The success of design in using the imagery of science and technology to convey a vision of a future free from discomfort and anxiety has been one of the stranger phenomena of twentieth-century society. 206