Mythologies of Housework \*A. Oakley, Housewife, London, 1974, pp. 52-53. The following discussion of the sociology of housework is based heavily on the same book. appliances, but exploited by manufacturers of all kinds of other household products and gadgets. Yet how could this absurd and impossible idea ever have been made to seem real, especially in a century when, more than ever before, women were expected to take pride in and labour over exactly the same work that was to be eliminated? The willingness of rational people to believe that appliances could remove work from the home was made possible only through a whole set of ideologies about housework, and to a large extent it was domestic appliance design that was responsible for making housework seem what it was said to be. Most modern housewives would rather see themselves as successors to the mistresses of middle-class nineteenth-century homes than to working-class wives of the same century.\* Although doing their own housework makes modern housewives more like working-class women of the past than like middle-class women whose housework was done for them by servants, this gross selfdeception helped housewives to suppose, as most have been inclined to do, that what they are engaged in is not really work at all, but some other kind of activity. One of the most fundamental reasons why people have not regarded housework as work in the same sense as typing letters in an office or packing cartons in a factory has been to do with the conflicting domestic demands placed upon women. In Western societies in the early twentieth century, it came to be assumed that the only way for women to achieve fulfillment and recognition as women was by being successful in the rôle of housewives and mothers, an assumption that only began to be questioned openly in the 1960s. For the greater part of this century, despite the contrary standards that applied in wartime, both sexes took it for granted that women should derive pleasure from doing housework and looking after homes and families - a straightforward ideal, but one which the actual nature of housework rendered impossible. Because housework has been rewarded, not with money, but with the allegedly superior currency of emotional satisfaction, it is easy to think it is different to other work. Nevertheless, judged by the standards usually applied to other sorts of work, housework compares rather badly, for it is laborious and isolated, the hours are long and the work is unending. There was a danger that if the negative aspects of the work became too obvious, they would detract from the pleasure that women were expected to derive from housework, and interfere with its unusual system of reward. Society and housewives themselves avoided these contradictions by resisting making comparisons between housework and other kinds of work, a dissociation which came about much more naturally if housework was not thought of as work at all. The nature of housework as a duty has been reconciled with the expectation that it should also be a voluntary expression of love through the idea that it is not actually work, an idea that has been represented endlessly through advertising, the media, stories in women's magazines and the design of kitchens and domestic appliances until it has acquired the force of 'common sense'. A second reason why housework was dissociated from other kinds of work had to do with what was thought of as its demeaning 208