\*C.V. Butler, Domestic Service, an Enquiry by the Women's Industrial Council, London, 1916. pp. 13-40; M. Powell, Below Stairs, London, 1968, p.79. \*Quoted in T.M. McBride, The Domestic Revolution, London, 1976, p. 18. \*A.L. Bowley and J. Stamp, The National Income, 1924, Oxford, 1927, pp. 11-12. The Myth of the Mechanical Servant nature. Although in some quarters housework was represented as the most worthwhile and rewarding of activities, the very same tasks of cleaning, cooking, washing and mending, when done by servants in the homes of the nineteenth and early twentieth century middle class, had been regarded as lowly and undignified. So much was domestic service looked down upon that young women in service would usually try and conceal the fact that they were 'skivvies' from any potential male admirer for fear that the knowledge would cool the man's interest.\* When, as happened in the early part of the twentieth century, increasing numbers of women who aspired to middle-class status found themselves having to do the same work as servants, it was natural that they should want to distinguish housework from servant's work in order not to be degraded by it. Rather than pretending that house work was not work at all, another strategy was to make it into a 'craft' and, through the development of higher standards, to endow it with the status of a profession, which was the purpose behind organisations like the Good Housekeeping Institute. Because of its associations with servants, domestic work had come to be regarded as improper for middle-class women as early as the mid-nineteenth century. For instance, a surgeon's wife wrote in 1859: 'I must not do our household work, or carry my baby one: or I should lose caste. We must keep a servant.'\* Only 'progressive' or eccentric people could risk ignoring the convention that middle-class households needed to keep at least one servant. As long as the supply of servants was sufficient, this convention presented no problems, but difficulties arose in the early part of the twentieth century because of the rapidly increasing number of aspirants to middle-class status. A rough indication of the change can be seen in the growth in the number of salaried workers from about 1.7 million in 1911 to about 2.7 million in 1921.\* Though these people, paid monthly and wearing a suit to work, might have regarded themselves as middle-class, the fact that there had been no corresponding increase in the number of domestic servants meant that their wives were compelled to do their own housework. This was demeaning and interfered seriously with their claims to belong to the middle class. Aspirants to this status therefore found the mythologies surrounding housework particularly attractive: the idea that housework was not work removed one of the main barriers to social advancement by obscuring the reality of the domestic tasks they found themselves still having to do. The pretence that housework was not work could seem more convincing if there were some alternative to the servant, a substitut which could appear to do the laborious and degrading parts of her work. Thus an additional myth was created about housework, the idea that domestic appliances were replacements for servants. This idea has had a compulsive attraction both to housewives and to manufacturers of domestic appliances. The myth that the work once done by servants has been taken over by gadgets and machines has been repeated so often that it has acquired the authenticity of historical truth. But persuasive though this line in advertising has been, it hardly needs to be said that appliances and servants are not interchangeable, since a large part of domestic work in cooking, cleaning and childcare consists of tasks that cannot be automated. 209