You set it and forget it... no filling no scrubbing BENDIX no emptying SOAKS WASHES no wringing no clouds of steam "¢ RINSES THREE TIMES DAMP-DRIES CLOTHES DRAINS & SWITCHES OFF .. all by itself! BENDIX automatically gives you time to do those things you want to do Write for full particulars to BENDIX HOME APPLIANCES, LIMITED, ALBION WORKS, KINGSBURY ROAD, BIRMINGHAM, 24 Advertisement for Bendix washing machine, 1955. The advertisement was optimistic about the freedom it would bring to the housewife. From Daily Mail Ideal Home Book, 1955, p.118. \*Oakley, p.7. Over half a million British housewives use BENDIX Automatic Washers in the home or at their local "Launderette " every week Advertisements have tended to exaggerate the extent to which appliances could take over entire tasks: for example, the 1955 advertisement for the Bendix washing machine implied that it could appropriate the entire task of domestic laundry (though only, it turned out, to leave the housewife free for another form of domestic work). Similarly, the manufacturers' illustrations of cookers, with ovens brimming with roasts, soufflés and other dishes while smartly dressed women stood idly by, suggested that these were magical cooking machines with the capacity to deliver ready-cooked meals by some process of immaculate conception. Although appliances do reduce the amount of labour involved in particular domestic tasks, it is significant that since they have become widespread, they have not been used to bring about any overall reduction in the time spent on housework. There is evidence that during the period when domestic appliances became common in Britain, women spent not less but more time on housework: in 1950, a survey of full-time housewives surveyed showed that they spent an average of 70 hours a week on housework, and another survey in 1970 showed an average of 77 hours.\* What seems to have happened is that appliances lightened the burden and saved time in certain tasks, but also made it possible to achieve higher standards. Thus the time saved was spent on doing the same job, or other jobs, more often or better. The labour-increasing consequences of labour-saving devices had been noticed in the United States as early as 1930, when an article in the Ladies' Home Journal argued: 'Because we housewives of today have the tools to reach it, we dig every day after the dust that grandmother left to a spring cataclysm. If few of us have nine children for a weekly bath, we have two or three for a daily immersion. If our consciences don't prick over 210