\*Ladies' Home Journal, May 1930, p.30. \*Hazel Kyrk, Economic Problems of the Family, New York, p.99. vacant pie shelves or empty cookie jars, they do over meals in which a vitamin may be omitted or a calorie lacking.'\* Domestic economy experts also observed and commented on the labour-increasing effects of appliances. Thus, Hazel Kyrk, whose book Economic Problems of the Family was published in America in 1933 wrote: 'In household production too, as elsewhere, we have shown a tendency to use the time freed by labor-saving machinery not for more leisure, but for more goods or services of the same general character. The invention of the sewing machine meant more garments, for a time garments on which there was an enormous amount of sewing tucks, ruffles and so on. The invention of the washing machine has meant more washing, of the vacuum cleaner more cleaning, of new fuels and cooking equipment, more courses and more elaborately cooked food.'\* The failure of appliances to bring about any savings in the time spent on housework was not a consequence for which the appliances themselves could be blamed. It is clear that the compulsion to use them to achieve higher domestic standards was the result of the 'conscience' referred to in the Ladies' Home Journal article or, in other words, the general expectation that twentieth-century women should take trouble in looking after their homes and families to the highest possible standard. Despite all this, appliances have continued to be described as 'labour-saving', and the idea that they are substitutes for servants Publicity photograph, American electric cooker, 1961. No mess, no sweat - the cooker, it seems, produces meals on its own. VIVED