Publicity photograph for Hoover electric vacuum cleaner, 1927. Significantly, the advantages held out for the vacuum cleaner were not that it saved time, but that it enabled the housewife to dress neatly while cleaning the carpets. From The Electrician, September 1927. \*Ladies' Home Journal, November 1918, p.28. "Which shall it be?" The overworked woman in unsightly attire, or the attractive woman in, neat attire who keeps her self-respect because she uses an electrical cleaning service? has been repeated with monotonous regularity. The unlikely equivalence between people and machines was made to seem real in a fabric of stories about the departure of servants and their replacement by appliances that were published between 1910 and 1930 in magazines and household manuals. The following story, 'I Am Glad my Servant Left', appeared in the Ladies' Home Journal in 1918: 'My maid left to go into Munitions work . . . I've been thinking, and I'm glad she's gone! I have gone to the bottom of why I don't like housework, and conclude it is because I have never had the right thing to work with at the right time. I recall that "there are always tools to work with for those who will", and on the other hand that "a poor workman loses his tools". I figure that what I save on clothes this year will balance the increased cost of food and what I save on the maid's wages I can put into working conveniences and still be to the good.'\* The author went on to list the many appliances, among them a vacuum cleaner, an electric knife-sharpener, a dishwasher and a washing machine, that enabled her to enjoy life without a servant. In this story, the cause of the servant's departure had been the war, but different versions of similar events had appeared before 212