\*G.B.L. Wilson, 'Domestic Appliances', chapter 47 in A History of Technology, edited by T.I. Williams, vol. VII, part 2, Oxford, 1978, p.1135. \*Calculated from Great Britain, Census Reports, 1891 to 1931. 1914, each with the moral that it was possible to live more comfortably and more economically by substituting a few appliances for the labour of a servant. In a book called First Aid to the Servantless, published in Britain in 1913, the author, Mrs J.G. Frazer, gave a fictional account of how Mr and Mrs Smith, having sacked their maid Imogen, were able to live a very much more agreeable existence with the aid of a few appliances, such as a vacuum cleaner, a washing-up machine, an electric boot-cleaner, some improvements to the fixtures of the home and some re-organisation in their lives Another book with the same message was Randal Phillips's The Servantless House (1920). With investment in a few appliances and some changes in domestic fittings, such as wooden rather than brass stair rods, chromed rather than brass taps, and drainage racks in the kitchen, Phillips argued that it was possible to live not only more comfortably but also more cheaply without servants. He appended a set of accounts to show that where the total cost of a servant was £90 a year, including wages and board, a mere £40 would buy a number of lasting labour-saving improvements and still leave money in hand out of the year's expenditure. Such stories and arguments all suggested that the appliances were indeed servants in another form. This might be seen as nothing but a harmless poetic fiction which no one seriously believed. Even so the myth has had enough influence for it to be mistaken for the truth in almost all histories of domestic appliances and domestic labour, as in the discussion of labour-saving' appliances in The Oxford History of Technology, which begins as follows: 'The First World War was a watershed in social habits and conditions and greatly affected the design and adoption of household objects. During and after the war servants effectually vanished for ever - and in any case comparatively few families were left who could have afforded them.'\* The author goes on to assume that appliances were developed to replace the absent servants. This account disregards several facts. In the first place, domestic service far from disappeared in Britain after 1918: although many servants left service during the war, the number in employment by 1921 had returned almost to prewar levels. Domestic service remained common in Britain until 1939; only then did it disappear for good. The decline in domestic service was a long-term process that took place over about fifty years, between 1890 and 1940. In 1891, the year in which the greatest number was recorded, there were approximately 0.24 servants per household in Britain; by 1911, the figure had dropped to 0.16, and the decline over the next twenty years was more gradual, to 0.14 servants per household in 1921, and to 0.12 in 1931.\* It is clear that the decline was not precipitated by World War I and that in the period between 1911 and 1939 the process was slow and gradual. Since there was a fairly rapid increase in the ownership of domestic appliances in the inter-war years, quite out of proportion to the decline in servant numbers, it would appear that appliances were manufactured and bought for other purposes than simply to provide substitutes for servants. Another objection to the 'servant displacement' theory is that most of the early appliances were designed for use by servants. Until the 1930s, virtually the only people, at least in Britain, who 213