\*G. Routh, Occupation and Pay in Great Britain 1906-60, Cambridge, 1965, pp.64, 104. \*Ministry of Reconstruction, Women's Advisory Committee, 'Report on the Domestic Service Problem', Cmd. 67, Parliamentary Papers, 1919, vol. 29, p.28. could afford to buy domestic appliances were also those who employed domestic servants: in the early 1920s, the average income of professionals and managers lay between £500 and £700 per annum and even people of this class would have been hard-pressed to afford a vacuum cleaner for £20 or a washing machine for £25.\* Manufacturers were well aware that their principal customers were sufficiently well-off to employ servants, and in Britain in the period just before and just after World War I this was acknowledged in manufacturers' advertising, which frequently showed appliances being used by servants (illustrated on p.177). Indeed, it could be argued that far from replacing servants, appliances actually halted the decline in their numbers. The grounds for supposing this are that towards the end of World War I, when there was alarm among the middle class that the temporary shortage of domestic servants might become permanent, ways began to be sought of making domestic service more attractive. The reluctance of women to go into service was attributed in part to the sheer laboriousness of the work, and it was therefore supposed that better designed houses and more labour-saving appliances would entice working-class women into domestic service. The Women's Advisory Committee of the Ministry of Reconstruction reported as follows in 1919: 'We are convinced that much of the dissatisfaction and discomfort felt by workers and employers arises from preventable waste of labour and bad general conditions which could be remedied. Domestic workers will not take pleasure in their work so long as much of it consists in constantly carrying by hand for unnecessary distances, often up and down stairs, considerable weights of water, wood and fuel, of tending heating and cooking apparatus undesirably wasteful of labour, and of the larger cleaning processes which could be better effected by outside workers furnished with mechanical appliances. One evil is the prevalence of antiquated house planning and labour wasting fittings and appliances.'\* The introduction of appliances, combined with the installation of hot water systems, could certainly relieve some of the burdens of domestic work, even if they did not actually induce working-class women into service. Certainly, employers believed that wellequipped homes were more likely to attract servants, since advertisements for domestic posts in London newspapers in the 1930s often included such terms as 'labour-saving house' or 'labour-saving appliances'. Although manufacturers gave their products such names as the Daisy or the Betty Anne (both vacuum cleaners) to suggest that the appli ice was a substitute for a servant, and although household manuals and magazines frequently drew the public's attention to the economics of exchanging a servant for some labour-saving appliances, there were probably few households in which this transaction actually occurred. In general, at least in Britain, the class that had been able to afford servants before 1914 was still able to do so after the war, while those without the means before the war remained in the same position afterwards. The myth of the mechanical servant furnished people who had never employed a servant, and were never likely to, with the illusion of a substitute at least as good as a servant of flesh and blood. It allowed housewives to believe that what they found themselves doing was not really work at all. In reality, nobody could have 214