The Aesthetics of Housework \*Chats' about Electricity, p.6. been entirely taken in by the idea that washing machines or vacuum cleaners were really substitutes for servants, but the illusion helped quell any uneasiness that people might have felt about their status in society and made it possible for almost all housewives, of all classes, to believe that they were the successors to the servantemploying mistress of the nineteenth-century house. The styling of appliances has always depended in part on the users for whom they were intended. Initially, it was only small appliances, likely to be used directly by their owners in their living or dining rooms, such as electric kettles and toasters, that were designed with much attention to their appearance. There was no reason for 'below stairs' appliances for cleaning and cooking to match the standards of elegance found in the drawing room. Many of the appliances intended for use by servants resembled industrial equipment. The similarity was not seen as needing to be concealed; an Electrical Development Association pamphlet of 1924 specifically mentioned that there were domestic mixers 'designed like the dough mixers of modern bakeries, but in miniature form. While it would be an overstatement to suggest that the form of such appliances was wholly determined by the class of labour for which they were intended, it would at least be true to say that as long as they were made principally for use by servants, Electric washing machine, c. 1920. Early domestic electrical appliances were generally expected to be used by servants, and resembled industrial plant. From A.G. London, 1922. ANOTHER FORM OF FIE TRIC WA HING MACHINE AND WRINGER