\*The letters have never been published in full. There are two published selections: The Letters of Josiah Wedgwood, edited by K.E. Farrer, 2 vols, 1903 (subsequently referred to as Farrer), with a supplementary volume, Correspondence of Josiah Wedgwood 1781-1794, 1906; the second is The Selected Letters of Josiah Wedgwood, edited by A. Finer and G. Savage, London, 1965 (subsequently referred to as Finer and Savage). Salt-glazed shell teapot, mug and jug, Staffordshire, c.1750. Typical products of the Staffordshire potteries in the mid eighteenth century. developed.\* In particular, they show the unprecedented importance that design was to have in the production of his wares. The demand for pottery increased steadily in the eighteenth century, but not simply because of the growth in population. The new popularity of tea required ceramic cups (since hot liquids cannot comfortably be drunk from pewter), while colonial expansion created a market overseas. These developments stood to benefit the industry as a whole, and the majority of manufacturers did increase their trade. Wedgwood, however, was more successful than most. Among the reasons for Wedgwood's exceptional success were the rationalisation of production methods in his factory, his imaginative marketing techniques and, of particular significance here, his attention to his products. Not only was he determined to produce wares of consistently higher quality than other potters, but he also attached great importance to the appearance of his pots. The main products of Wedgwood and Whieldon in the 1750s, in common with other Staffordshire potters, had been a saltglazed stoneware, a white earthenware with various coloured glazes, and a red earthenware. In his experiment book, Wedgwood described the problems presented by these products as follows: 'White stoneware (viz. with salt glaze) was the principal article of our manufacture; but this had been made a long time, and the prices were now reduced so low that the potters could not afford to bestow much expense upon it, or make it so good in any respect as the ware they would otherwise admit of; and with regard to elegance of form, that was an object very little attended to. 'The article next in consequence to stoneware was an imitation of tortoise-shell, but as no improvement had been made in this branch for several years, the consumer had grown nearly tired of it; and though the price had been lowered from time to time in