Domestic electric food mixer, c.1920. An appliance of essentially industrial appearance. \*Household efficiency is discussed in D.P. Handlin, The American Home, Boston 1979, chapter 6; and Gwendolyn Wright, Building the Dream, A Social History of Housing in America, New York, 1981, chapter 9. it did not matter greatly to the people who bought them if the appliances were heavy, clumsy and crudely assembled. Clearly, the most important requirements of design were that the appliances should be efficient in operation, easy to use and quickly assembled or dismantled. From the 1930s onwards, these were the principal criteria of good appliance design, and, particularly during the 1950s, many improvements were made along these lines. However, manufacturers were well aware that appearance and styling could also contribute towards making the public believe in the labour-saving potential of their products, an important consideration once they started to expand their market by appealing to the servantless middle class. In the 1930s, when domestic appliances began to be mass-produced, the most potent metaphor for efficiency was the factory. Just as the imagery of the factory was employed extensively to suggest efficiency in offices, housewives were encouraged to achieve efficiency in the home by planning their domestic duties as if they were tasks in an industrial routine. Much was made of the potential of scientific management techniques for rationalising work in the home: two American texts, both published in 1915, Mary Pattison's The Business of Home Management and Christine Frederick's Household Engineering, were the earliest and best known of numerous books and articles in which it was shown how the breakdown of domestic tasks could lead to more efficient housework.\* Diagrams of movements 216