\*Odham's Household Management Illustrated, n.d. [c.1950], p.161. Efficient (a) and Inefficient (b) Kitchen Plans, 1920. The application of Taylorism to the kitchen was an attempt to bring the efficiency of the factory to the home. From C. Frederick, Scientific Management in the Home: Household Engineering, London, 1920. in the kitchen, after the manner of F.W. Taylor's analyses of labour in the factory, indicated supposedly optimum kitchen layouts. The analogy between the home and the factory in these books and many later writings was strengthened by frequent references to the kitchen as a workshop and to domestic appliances as tools. For instance, according to one domestic manual: 'No man in a factory would be expected to produce good work without proper tools, but the housewife often tries to do her work with totally inadequate equipment. . . She must, therefore, make sure that her home is run easily by using care in choosing tools.'\* These analogies between the home and the factory also influenced design. Manufacturers deliberately styled their appliances in forms reminiscent of factory or industrial equipment of the time to emphasise the labour-saving efficiency which they claimed for their products. For example, the first model of the British Kenwood food mixer, introduced just after World War II, closely resembled industrial catering equipment of the period, and many other appliances manufactured between the 1930s and the 1950s showed similar imagery. Making a domestic appliance look like a piece of factory equipment might have been a good way of making it seem efficient, but in other respects it was an extremely bad marketing device, particularly when, in the 1950s, appliances began to be bought by people who actually spent a large part of their lives working in factories. The presence in the kitchen of an object that looked like a machine tool not only militated against notions of the home as a place separate from work, but also made housework look disturbingly like real work, a comparison that everyone was anxious to avoid. It is noticeable that during the 1950s appliances that resembled industrial equipment began to get unfavourable comments in the press, whatever their functional or operational merits, and by the end of the decade it had become something of an insult to describe a PORCH REFRIG DOOR, WINDOW ABOVE CLO CLO STACK TABLE with GARBAGE SINK REFRIG. KITCHEN CABINET OVEN á VENT TOVE B   
SHELVES and OUN CLOâ‚‚ SERVING TABLE DINING ROOM TABLE (b) REFRIG SHELVES and DWM CLO. PORCH KITCHEN CABINET ProvE OVEN VENT DINING ROOM TABLE VINK SERVING TABLE 217