## BRAUN Braun electric toaster, HT1, 1961, designed by Reinhold Weiss. Braun introduced a new aesthetic for domestic appliances, distinguishing them from office or factory equipment. by P. Barker, London, 1977, pp. 164-169; see also "˜Design Review, Braun', Architectural Review, vol. 131, 1962, Far left: Braun electric kitchen machine, KM2, 1957. This design, with its delicacy and crispness, departed from all previous mixer styling. Left: Kenwood chef mixer A701, 1960, designed by Kenneth Grange. Other manufacturers followed Braun's example in restyling their products. \*Archer in Design, no. 125, p.44. by Braun, Hans Gugelot and Dieter Rams, both associated with the Hochschule für Gestaltung at Ulm, developed a standard of appearance that departed radically from all previous appliance design. Braun products appeared in discreet, smooth, grey and white boxes, designed on proportional systems and had a purity of form that was recognised by the intellectual élite as being derived from the classical tradition.\* The forms had a more immediate marketing attraction in being unlike industrial equipment. The appliances, though robust, were so elegant and delicate in their finish that they were more like finely-worked sculpture than anything that belonged in the office or the factory. For example, the base and powerhead of the food mixer, designed by Gerd Muller and put on the market in 1957, were housed beneath a virtually unbroken skin, ornamented only by the coloured plastic of the control knob and area above the beater socket, and by the crisp lettering: it was quite unlike other mixers on the market at the time, which used imagery that was mostly derived from cars, spaceships or factories (see illustration on p.199). The styling of Braun products suited the deceits and contradictions of housework well, for their appearance raised no comparisons with machine tools or office equipment and preserved the illusion that housework was an elevated and noble activity. When Design magazine compared the Braun mixer with other makes, it acknowledged the machine's unique capacity to satisfy the expectations of housework. 'Only the Braun', it wrote, 'appeared to have been designed with a woman, a kitchen sink, and a crowded shelf in mind.'\* Other manufacturers rapidly followed Braun's example and modified the design of their products along the same lines, even if they did not take the aesthetic to such virtuous lengths of purity 219