Consumer-oriented Design \*Quoted in 'Overseas Review', Design, no. 104, August 1957, p.43. and refinement. For example, Kenwood, whose original mixer had been compared unfavourably with the Braun, redesigned their machine in 1960 to incorporate some Braun-like characteristics: the power-head and base were fitted into a single monolithic form, and the styling was crisp and hard-edged, with the separate elements of the machine expressed by coloured plastic mouldings. Commercial sense developed a standard of appearance for domestic appliances which succeeded in making even more vivid the illusion of housework not being work. Unlike advertising, television or fiction, whose messages were always transitory, the physical presence in the home of appliances of specifically domestic appearance was a continuing confirmation of the special nature of housework. It might be asked how manufacturers came to represent the mythologies of housework so closely in the design of appliances. Their success might suggest that they and their designers had become exceptionally well attuned to consumer's sensibilities. Certainly, they tried hard during the 1950s to understand better what consumers wanted and to incorporate their understanding more perfectly in design. Indeed it became something of an axiom in the 1950s, at least in the United States, that the consumer's values lay at the heart of all good design. For example, one American industrial designer, David Chapman, stated in 1957: 'I am convinced that the search for successful product development does not start with a study of manufacturing processes, merchandising techniques, cost accounting or analysis of competitive merchandise... the industry must get to the roots of the problem and study people and their way of living."\* But although increasingly sophisticated market research may have made designers better able to understand people's wants, increasingly sophisticated techniques of persuasion, described so vividly by Vance Packard in The Hidden Persuaders, were making manufacturers more adept at convincing their customers that the products being offered had been designed exactly to match their desires. It is therefore almost impossible to say to what extent the needs that consumer-oriented design satisfied were felt independently, rather than being the products of persuasion. If we consider the following statement made in 1957 by Arthur BecVar, head of appliance design at General Electric in the United States, we can see how he was advancing ideas that he and many others probably believed to be true but which were also very useful in convincing the public of their need for domestic appliances: ... more emphasis is placed on home and family living . . . larger families and lack of servants have necessitated as many automatic helpers in the home as possible. By his investment in mechanical servants, an individual can show how he is providing for his family. 'The woman's rôle in our society has become increasingly complex with the triple responsibility of raising a family and running a home, holding a job, and keeping up with outside activities. She is more active in civic, social and national affairs than ever before. She is caught in a maelstrom and needs all the technological help which a technological society can give her. Yet with all these forces 220