\*Design, no. 104, p.46. pulling her in different directions, she still wants to retain the role of creative home maker - but without unnecessary drudgery.'\* BecVar described the conditions of modern domestic life in terms that superficially seem accurate, and certainly corresponded in part to what most people thought. Yet the analysis was also misleading: while he acknowledged the conflict between domestic and external rôles, he overlooked the much more fundamental conflicts in the purely domestic rôle of the housewife, where the work was meant to be the expression of love but actually consisted of unrewarding and unending tasks. BecVar's stress upon housewives' wishes to participate in outside activities was calculated to make the purchase of domestic appliances irresistible; had he chosen to recognise other conflicts experienced by housewives, he could not have offered such a straight-forward solution. Consumer-oriented design was highly selective in what it chose to express of consumers' ideas and beliefs, with a strong tendency to relate only to those problems of consumers' lives that the product concerned stood a good chance of being able to banish. Naturally, it was very much easier to banish false or mythical problems rather than real ones. The way that the design of manufactured goods invariably contains all sorts of ideas has been a major theme of this book. Yet the process by which design incorporates these ideas is by no means direct, although manufacturers would sometimes like us to believe that it is and that they act only as neutral agents, transmitting through their products ideas that we are all said to hold. In practice, however, manufacturers filter and distill these ideas and add some of their own, all with the intention of making their products seem more desirable. Hygiene and labour-saving have both mattered to a lot of people in this century, but as represented in domestic appliances, they have been modified, added to and subtracted from in ways that manufacturers supposed would suit their commercial ends. In the way it transforms ideas and beliefs, successful design is like alchemy: it fuses together disparate ideas from different origins, so that the form of the completed product seems to embody only a single idea, which comes across as so familiar that we find ourselves supposing it to be exactly what we ourselves had always thought. Wherever the ideas embedded in manufactured goods come from, they are just as important in design as the more objective factors such as the price of labour or the availability of materials. The rôle of ideas, other than purely artistic ones, has not usually been given much weight in discussions of design. When it has been acknowledged, the ideas have generally been referred to as influences, a description that belittles their importance and fails to make clear how central they are. Without the existence of certain ideas about the nature of domestic life and the part that appliances might play in it, none of the products discussed in this chapter could have been designed. Despite the existence of capital, labour, machines and materials with which to make them, and a market to sell them to, it is only ideas that have allowed any of the products to progress beyond a shapeless heap of raw materials. The capacity of design to create form occurs only through the conjunction between ideology and material factors: if either is absent, the union cannot take place.