10. Design and Corporate Identity \*Joan Evans, Monastic Life at Cluny 910-1157, London, 1931; and Joan Evans, The Romanesque Architecture of the Order of Cluny, Cambridge, 1938. Of all the ways in which design can influence the way we think, the only one to have been acknowledged widely has been its use to express the identity of organisations. Empires, armies, navies, religious orders and modern corporations have all used design to convey ideas about what they are like both to insiders and to the outside world. Thus, as the Romans conquered successive nations and races and incorporated them within their Empire, buildings in recognisably Roman, rather than local style, helped to impress upon subject nations the supremacy of Roman law and government, while it also helped to ensure that Roman settlers in distant parts of the Empire did not forget their allegiance to Rome and become too closely identified with the native populations. Several hundred years later, the new monastic orders of the early Middle Ages used architecture in a similar way to impress upon monks the supremacy of their order above purely local interests. Until the development of the Cluniac order in the tenth century, Christian monasticism had been cellular in organisation: the many individual monasteries all followed broadly the rule of St Benedict, but they were otherwise independent and, apart from acknowledging the authority of the Pope, belonged to no hierarchy. Gradually, in the tenth century, the abbey of Cluny became the centre of monastic reform, and its revised and more rigorous system of rule was introduced into many monasteries throughout Western Europe; Cluny became their spiritual head, dispensing rules and advice to other houses, and often providing them with abbots. Along with the new monastic ideal, the Cluniacs also carried with them a preference for a particular form of architecture, subsequently to become known as the Romanesque. Though there is no evidence to suggest that the Cluniacs intended their architecture to demonstrate the principles of their order in any particularly direct way, or that they were very dogmatic in its application, Romanesque became closely associated in people's minds with the abbey of Cluny.\* In the twelfth century, the influence of the Cluniacs was supplanted by a new monastic reform movement, the Cistercian order, centred on the abbey of Clairvaux. Like the Cluniacs, the Cistercians developed a preferred form of architecture, which was to be the basis of the Gothic style, and they disseminated this with considerable energy. New Cistercian houses were built according to a strict pattern, which was reproduced in all the countries where they established foundations. The ground plans were so similar that a monk from France visiting an abbey in England could immediately comprehend its layout and organisation; equally, the appearance of each abbey identified it as Cistercian. There were 222