\*A.W. Clapham, English Romanesque Architecture after the Conquest, Oxford, 1934, pp. 74-83. London Transport: the creation of a public transport conglomerate clear advantages in this architectural policy: it made Cistercian houses and Cistercian monasteries easy to distinguish from backward and unreformed monasteries, and it impressed upon the monks and abbots their allegiance to the order, whose authority extended across national and political boundaries. Any inclinations by particular abbeys to develop independent rules, or to secede from the order, were discouraged not only by the routine visits of monks from other houses in the order, but also by the enduring presence of the distinctive architecture of their buildings.\* Organisations which extend over a large geographical area, perhaps across different countries and languages, have always had difficulties in maintaining their cohesion. The problems were as great for the monastic orders of the Middle Ages as they are for multi-national companies today; the design policies of a company like IBM, which operates in many countries, have been developed to fulfill much the same purpose as early Gothic architecture served for the Cistercians, making the identity of the company apparent to the employees, and advertising the company's special characteristics to the public. Some of the ways in which design has been used by modern organisations to hold themselves together and to publicise themselves have been described by a corporate identity consultant, Wally Olins, in his book, The Corporate Personality, published in 1978. The book is so informative that I need do no more here than summarise his argument. Design, he says, can be used to convey to people the shape and nature of organisations that might otherwise appear formless, either because of their geographical spread or because they have come into existence through the merging of many smaller organisations. Particularly for a large organisation, made up of many smaller companies, each of which may be better known to the public and to the stock market, design is a way of conveying their collective identity to the world; in helping the employees of the separate parts of a large company to recognise the identity of the whole, it can counteract the hostilities that often arise between those working for the different parts of conglomerates that have been created by mergers. Rather than simply adding to Olins's list of examples, the rest of this chapter will be taken up with considering the variety of problems that were resolved through the use of design in a single organisation. London Transport provides one of the best known and most often quoted case histories of corporate design. However, the way in which it has been discussed exemplifies the inadequacies of much design criticism and history, in particular the tendency to isolate design in a make-believe world of pure aestheticism. Little attention has been paid to why design was so important to London Transport, or what it was expected to do; and most of the discussion has been centred on the contribution of one man, Frank Pick. In the 1920s, Pick was the managing director of the company that ran most of London's buses and underground railways, and in 1933, he became the Vice Chairman and Chief Executive of the newly-formed London Passenger Transport Board, a post which he held until 1940. While Pick undoubtedly conceived London Transport's design policy, and much of the success in its execution was due to him, it would be wrong to suppose that the policy was 223