LD CALABARY CALADAR NESTLE MILK BOOK HERE TO THE LI 3   
3TH TICKETS ANC Ticket Hall, Euston underground station, photographed in 1924. A typical station entrance before the design reforms of the 1930s. \*Nikolaus Pevsner, 'Patient Progress One: Frank Pick', in his Studies in Art, Architecture and Design, vol.2, London, 1968, pp.190-209 (reprinted from Architectural Review, vol. XCII, 1942). For an earlier version of the argument developed in this chapter, see A. Forty, 'Lorenzo of the Underground', London Journal, vol.5, no. 1, 1979, pp. 113-119. \*C. Barman, 'Frank Pick', Architectural Review, vol.XCI, 1942, pp. 1-2; and C. Barman, The Man Who Built London Transport, Newton Abbot, 1979. motivated solely by his taste and his own aesthetic idealism. The descriptions that have laboured Pick's belief in the moral and regenerative powers of design and his support for 'modernism' have largely ignored the fact that he was the manager of a large and very complicated organisation, and everything he did about design or anything else had to satisfy commercial ends and to meet with the approval of the rest of the management. Although Pick believed, in the tradition of John Ruskin and William Morris, that design could raise human life to a higher spiritual level, his choice of designs was based upon what he judged would be good for London Transport. To separate Pick's interest in design from his role as a manager of London Transport, as Sir Nikolaus Pevsner's article about him did, is to sever design from the sinews of material life, a form of butchery too often performed by historians of the subject, generally to fatal effect.\* One of the few people to have acknowledged the commercial aspects of London Transport's design policy was Christian Barman, who was publicity manager in the 1930s and was responsible for the co-ordination of the design policy.\* Yet even he does not make altogether clear how important design was in management, or exactly how it was used to deal with the problems that beset London Transport during the inter-war years. Those problems have been described very extensively by T.C. Barker and Michael Robbins in volume two of their History of London Transport. Like most historians, however, Barker and Robbins appear unaccustomed to thinking of design as having any relevance outside purely artistic, or technical spheres. That it might have affected the entire way in which the population of London regarded London 224