! "first thing every morning YARDLEY'S LAVENDER BOUNDS GREEN D   
ENO'S FRUIT SALT 16% Platform, Bounds Green station, in 1932. The improvements to station design gave the platform tunnel a smooth shell, improved the lighting, and clearly distinguished station signs from posters. \*This summary, and most of the information about London Transport in this chapter are based on T.C. Barker and Michael Robbins, History of London Transport, vol.2, London, 1974. of the company and was in time extended throughout the system to identify all its property and all its publicity. The station furniture was a model of pure, simple design, as neat and orderly as the typeface. In the stations and outside them, posters in artistic styles otherwise rarely found outside Bond Street art galleries advertised the joys of travel by this efficient and orderly system. On the railways, the locomotives of the earlier trains were gradually eliminated and the motors installed under the floors of the carriages, to give more passenger space; pneumatic doors operated by the guard replaced passenger-operated doors and gates, while the interiors of the carriages became increasingly seamless in appearance, with flush surfaces, faired-in details, invisible bolts and screws, high-quality upholstery to specially commissioned designs, and special bulbous handholds to replace the earlier strap loops. Above ground, the motor buses changed during the 1930s from crude machines like orange boxes on wheels to sleek objects with every constructional detail concealed beneath shaped panels. These changes took place gradually until, by 1939, the single most striking characteristic of London Transport was that all the parts every station, bus, train, poster, seat and litter bin - were identifiable as the property of a single organisation. This is not a solution to transport design that can be taken for granted: other capital cities, though their rail and road services may be run by a single organisation, have not gone to such lengths to identify them as such. The reasons behind London Transport's approach come from its history. Its origins lay in the many independent bus, underground railway and tram companies that developed in the latter part of the nineteenth century and the early twentieth century.\*