Left: Piccadilly line carriage in 1923. Relatively large amounts of dark woodwork and low lighting levels were characteristic of carriages before the design reforms. ## Right: ST Bus, 1929. The type of bus most widely used by the London General Omnibus Co. in the late 1920s. TURKEY CARPET 13- MAPLE TURKEY CARPET 13 GENERAL MAPLES CARPETS are Best Right: RT Bus, 1939. The perfected version of the inter-war improvements in bus design; the RT bus was a vehicle of London Transport's corporate style. Left: Bakerloo line carriage, 1938. The new carriage designs reduced the amount of woodwork, made the more numerous handholds integral with the interior, and modified the carriage lighting. 164 ## LONDON TRANSPORT The first underground railway in London, the Metropolitan, was opened in 1863, with a service between Paddington and Farringdon Street; in the succeeding forty years, new lines were built by other companies, creating a network of separate routes beneath London. A short period of rash speculation in the early part of this century made it clear that some of these lines had been very expensive enterprises and that they were none too profitable. By 1906, one group, the Underground Electric Railways of London (UERL), was on the brink of financial disaster, from which it was saved only by agreeing to co-operate with some of the other underground railway companies. The scheme began by offering through booking between any two stations on the network, which simplified travel and helped to increase traffic. In 1908, the companies agreed to publicise themselves collectively as a single Underground system, though they remained financially independent. However, in 1907, a new manager of UERL had been appointed, a man called Albert Stanley, who was to prove a most remarkable and able entrepreneur. Under his direction UERL succeeded by 1913 in merging fully with most of the other Underground companies. However, the underground had been suffering severely from competition by the newly developed motor bus. Recognising the great advantages and profitability of the bus, in 1912 the UERL 229