Palm Toffee SUNRIPE BAKERS ARMS DANGERS SUNRIDE 511 LAWAYOS EAST-VITE TABLETS Yeast is lifelon SIBATSIONE REYTONSTWER SUNRIPE OF LEVEN HIGH DA SAKERS ADV 511 PU 7282 P.C P3549 Two Dennis buses of the P.C. Co., 1924. The rivalry of independent bus operators, their buses identified by different liveries, was a feature of London's transport in the 1920s. bought up the largest of the bus companies, the London General Omnibus Company (LGOC), and all but one of the smaller companies. Thus by 1913, UERL controlled most of London's transport, with the exception of the tramways, most of which were run by local government authorities. During the 1920s, further acquisitions and development increased the size and the scope of the operations of UERL, but a number of newly formed independent bus companies, as well as the continued independence of the Metropolitan Railway and of the local authority trams, prevented the combine from establishing a monopoly of London's transport. Lord Ashfield (as Stanley had been created in 1920) was convinced that a public transport business in London could be a commercial success only if it were a monopoly administered by a single management, with the entire fare revenue from all forms of public transport at its disposal. Because it proved impossible for the UERL to establish a monopoly by means of the customary commercial processes of takeovers and mergers, only government intervention could bring about what Ashfield believed to be necessary. Through a somewhat surprising alliance between Ashfield and Herbert Morrison, the Minister of Transport in the 1929 Labour Government, a scheme was agreed upon which would transfer the ownership and management of all London's buses, trams and railways (with the exception of those owned by the main line railways companies) to a new single authority. The result was the creation in 1933 of London Transport, under the control of the London Passenger Transport Board (LPTB), a body which was neither a nationalised industry, since it continued to have equity stockholders, nor a normal public company since the stockholders had no voting rights. Lord Ashfield was made chairman of the LPTB, and, since the UERL combine constituted by far the largest part of the new London Transport, its interests and former staff dominated the management. The LPTB continued in existence until 1948, when it was fully nationalised along with the rest of the rail and road services in Britain. 230