\*F. Pick, 'Organisation of Transport with Special Reference to the London Passenger Transport Board', Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, vol.84, 1936, p.207; Barker and Robbins, p.283. Design Unifies the System. \*London Passenger Transport Board, Fifth Annual Report, London, 1938, para. 10. \*LPTB, Fifth Annual Report, para.27. See also H.A. Clegg, Labour Relations in London Transport, Oxford, 1950, pp. 17- 18 and pp.32-36. London Transport was created through the amalgamation of 165 companies that had once been separate and independent. Of these companies, 73 had already been merged with the UERL combine before 1933, but the remaining 92 had to be incorporated into London Transport in 1933.\* Historically, London Transport was therefore a conglomerate, which had to establish for itself a distinctive identity that would successfully contain all its disparate parts, a problem that had already faced the UERL combine in its takeover and merger activities. However, UERL had not troubled itself too much about using visible means to unify all its separate activities and there was nothing about the appearance of one of the LGOC's buses to indicate that it belonged to the same organisation as a District Railway train. Although some attempts were made in the 1920s to give the UERL combine a corporate identity, it was not until the formation of London Transport in 1933 that a comprehensive design policy was energetically pursued. With hindsight, one can see two distinct reasons for London Transport's corporate design policy. One concerned internal organisation and labour relations; the other was to encourage people to travel more. The task of integration faced by the LPTB in 1933 caused difficulties for several years, as it depended not only on managerial changes and technical reforms, such as the standardisation of equipment, but also on transferring employees' allegiance from former independent companies to the Board.\* To avoid labour disputes, the Board took great trouble to unify the wage scales of its employees and to remove all trace of the identity of the former independents, discarding their separate operating rules, schedules and liveries in favour of a uniform identity for London Transport. Bus conductor's winter uniform, 1933. When the various independent companies were merged with the LGOC in 1933, new uniform designs helped smooth the process of unification. HONE SALAD CHEAMST ç¦