Ticket Hall, Northfields station, 1933. The clerestory lighting system extensively used by the architect, Charles Holden, for the new Underground stations served to light the stations internally by day, and advertise them externally by night. A strong design identity encouraged the staff to see themselves as the employees not of a once independent company that had been taken over but of a unified London Transport. Encouraging more travel involved the transformation of the popular perception of public transport from a daily inconvenience into a comfortable experience and the means to a fuller and richer life. While faster journey times, better schedules and greater comfort might be appreciated by those who travelled regularly on particular routes, the problem was to tell those who did not about the improvements that were being made. Fast journeys are transient experiences that are quickly forgotten, but buildings, trains and buses are lasting and are the signs by which transport systems are known to people. If these things could be designed to be obviously rational, efficient, and co-ordinated, they would speak the same message about the services they provided. The attention given to the design of stations, buses, trains, publicity and even seemingly insignificant objects like bus stops and ticket machines all contributed to the image of a planned and co-ordinated system. Most of the stations that were built on the various suburban extensions to the underground lines between 1923 and 1950 had certain features in common. Many of them were designed by the architect Charles Holden, who was responsible for the development 30000 TANERICE HAR 232