ur ticket Top deck interior of RT bus, 1939. The almost seamless finish was one of the most successful examples of London Transport's pre-war design policy. of the formula that was used, with variations, in different places. Instead of the dark, cavernous interiors of the older stations, Holden designed the new stations where possible with a double-storeyheight interior space, which was illuminated with natural light by clerestory windows. During the day, light from the windows filled the booking hall, while at night the interior lighting illuminated the windows so that they shone out into the darkness, beckoning to travellers. Inside the stations, the booking kiosks, ticket machines, station bookstalls, light fittings, passenger barriers and fire-fighting equipment were all designed to harmonise with each other. It was a principle enunciated by Pick and observed by Holden and the other architects employed by London Transport in the inter-war years that every element should bear a visual relation to everything else. The order and harmony of details was calculated to lead the passenger to think that nothing had been left to chance and that, by analogy, the system as a whole was designed and managed with the same thoroughness. The stations designed in the 1930s were the most concentrated examples of this philosophy, but the same principle was applied to the design of London Transport's other property, in particular its trains and buses. The first bus to be designed for the LPTB, the RT, introduced in 1939, became famous for its stylishness and its reliability. Although modelled on the STL bus designed for the LGOC and introduced in 1932, the RT greatly surpassed the earlier model in the quality of its detail. The structure was concealed beneath panels, every screw and bolt was hidden, and every angled joint rounded; the light bulbs were set into the ceiling to form a row of exactly hemispherical protrusions, the window winders were elegantly formed, 233