Underground Map, 1931. The first of the new schematic maps, which enlarged the central area relative to the outer area. all, the surrounding countryside. The advertisements aimed to encourage people to travel on the under-utilised parts of the network, the off-peak services, and the outer suburban routes. It is hard to say precisely how effective they were, though, by 1938, a considerable proportion of traffic was being generated by this kind of travel. It was estimated that one third of all journeys were for purposes other than travelling to work, and since almost all of these journeys took place outside the peak travel periods and so added nothing to the capital cost of providing the services, they represented an important part of London Transport's total revenue.\* At the same time, the advertisements drew attention to the diversity of London and suggested the opportunities it offered, changing people's perceptions of the city from merely a place of dismal labour to a metropolis offering unlimited resources for every pursuit. However, of all the means by which the UERL combine or London Transport changed people's ideas about the capital, none was more lasting and influential than the Underground map. So effective was this strikingly simple and legible map, introduced in 1931, that its representation of London has become one of the most widely accepted mental images for the city. Yet for all its clarity, it is highly misleading; unlike the previous maps, which represented the stations in their correct geographical positions, the new map not only reorganised the lines along horizontal, vertical or 45 degree axes, but also enlarged the distance between the stations in the central area, and reduced that between the stations in the outer area. The result was to make London look very much smaller than it actually is, as the outlying areas seem deceptively close to the centre. While this had the virtue of making the map very easy to read, it also, by making the distance between the suburbs and the centre look so small, induced people to undertake journeys they might otherwise have hesitated to make. Not only does the BAKERLOO LINE REFERENCE PICCADILLY LINE EDGWARE HOWATEL & MORDER LINE DOVER STALEY BOUNDS GREEN WOOD GREEN TURNPAE LANE OPEN CANONBURY YTY ROAD Door) UNDERGROUND TOOTING 237