map distort the actual length of the journeys, making a trip from, say, Ruislip to Leytonstone seem very much less formidable than it actually is, but it also makes some of the other obstacles in such a journey seem considerably less significant than they really are. In particular, the arrangements for changing from one line to another are represented on the map by a standard symbol which obscures the true nature of the difficulties involved at some stations. Although improvements were gradually made in the connections between the lines as stations were rebuilt, the legacy of a system that originated as a series of separate lines run by independent companies continued, and still continues, to make itself felt. The difficulties involved in changing from, say, the Northern to the Circle line at Kings Cross, involving two escalators, staircases and some hundreds of yards walking, do not appear in their full enormity on the map. In giving the semblance of order and method to a series of railways that were not originally conceived as a system, the Underground map has been remarkably successful, at the cost of some deception. It is impossible to say to what extent London Transport's design policies excited people's appetite for travel, but there seems every reason to believe that by making travel seem easy, effortless and enjoyable, they contributed to the very substantial leisure traffic. Before World War II, London Transport was in a more favourable position than it has since enjoyed; it had acquired monopoly powers, and the expansion of the suburbs created a growing demand for transport, while car ownership had not yet begun seriously to erode the traffic figures. During this period, considerable improvements were made to the quality of the services, which were unified within a system. But it was a system that no individual could perceive as a whole, for it was impossible to see more than one part of it at a time. It was highly desirable, though, that people should be aware of the changes, both for London Transport's public and political reputation, and for the sake of attracting passengers. The unified design policy, by identifying every object, bus stop, station sign, or train as belonging to the Board, and bearing a visible relation to every other piece of the Board's property, succeeded in communicating the presence of a system that was more than the sum of its parts. The use of corporate design to consolidate the results of mergers and takeovers has become rather familiar in the last thirty years, but at the time when Pick first contemplated such a programme in the early 1930s, nothing as ambitious had ever been attempted. London Transport's use of design to establish its unity remains outstanding for its results. All too often, corporate identities have ended up looking like cheap off-the-peg suits that do not properly fit the organisation within; but London Transport's design identity was nothing if not a very high class piece of tailoring. Because so much attention was paid to making the design represent the aims of the organistion, and so much care was taken in fitting the identity to the design of each individual object, the result conveyed the impression of thoroughness and complete integration. Although today dilapidation, makeshift repairs and demoralisation among the staff have eroded the force of the vision, it is still occasionally possible, standing on a suburban Piccadilly Line platform, to glimpse how a progressive style applied consistently throughout the system created an organisation with which every employee could identify with pride.