## 11. Design, Designers and ## the Literature of Design Compared to most works on the history of design, this book has referred very little to individual designers. Although the development of design as a specialised activity requiring particular skills was described in the first two chapters, this has been a book about design rather than about designers and their careers, ideas and theories. It is worth considering here why so many other books claim to be about design, but turn out to be concerned largely with the lives and works of individuals. Much time and effort has been put into identifying often obscure people and researching their careers, although such knowledge adds relatively little to the significance of their designs. It seems odd that the biographies of individuals should be considered a satisfactory means of explaining an activity that is by nature social and not purely personal. The history of architecture and design is full of attempts to make sense of buildings and objects through the careers, ideas and theories of known designers, and the approach is to be found even in works that are not specifically biographies. For example, in Pioneers of Modern Design, which appeared in its revised form over thirty years ago and must be one of the most widely read books on design, Nikolaus Pevsner's main purpose was to establish a historical pedigree for Modern Movement architecture and design. However, his method was based on the assumption that design could be understood satisfactorily by examining its products with reference only to the careers and published statements of individual designers. Yet there seems no particular reason why the often obscure and long-winded statements made by architects and designers should provide a complete or even adequate account of the buildings or artefacts they design. If political economy consisted only of the study of the economy in the light of the statements made by politicians, the subject would indeed do little to increase our understanding of the world. Clearly, it would be foolish to dismiss designers' statements altogether, but we should not expect them to reveal all there is to know about design. After all, they themselves are not the cause of design having become such an important activity in modern society, and we should not assume that they hold any superior knowledge about the reasons for its importance. The emphasis on the person of the designer to the exclusion of all other considerations has been particularly marked in the way that manufactured goods have been displayed in museums and exhibitions. For example, in 1979, the Arts Council of Great Britain mounted a large exhibition at the Hayward Gallery in London under the title 'Thirties' in which specimens of British art, architecture and design of the 1930s were displayed. Most of the artefacts on 239