\*Arts Council of Great Britain, Thirties, British Art and Design Before the War, London, 1979. \*For a longer critique of the treatment of design in the 'Thirties' exhibition, see M. Swenarton, 'Should We Stop Exhibiting Design?', London Journal, vol.6, no. 1, 1980, pp. 112-115. \*Giedion, p.628. show had evidently been selected for their conformity to a style believed to be that of the decade, and the information on the captions gave the name of the designer, the name of the manufacturer, the date of the design, and the name of the present owner. The only additional information provided in the catalogue was a short biography of every designer named.\* From these pieces of information, the visitor to the exhibition would naturally conclude that what was most significant was who designed each object. The absence of all other information, such as the original price of the products displayed or the market for which they were intended, or how they were advertised, or some facts about the manufacturer, made it difficult for the public to see that the designs were not only expressions of the designers' creativity, but also embodied ideas and material constraints over which they had no control. As it was, the very existence of many of the objects was made to seem primarily due to the creative powers of the designers.\* A likely cause for the stress that Pevsner and others placed on individual is the relative safety of this as a method compared to the perils encountered in trying to treat design in terms of what it does rather than who did it. The outstanding attempt to deal with design at a social rather than an individual level was Mechanization Takes Command, published in 1948, in which Siegfried Giedion tried to show how design was determined by certain extremely general dominating ideas. The problem about Giedion's approach was the status of these ideas: in his book they hang like vast clouds suspended above society, overshadowing everything beneath, a simile that is reinforced by his frequent references to ideas being 'in the air'. Where, though, did these 'ideas' come from? How could they, as Giedion implied, possibly have an existence independent of human consciousness and affect all people at any one time? For example, Giedion opened his account of the development of bathing and bathing apparatus in the nineteenth century with the statement, 'The nineteenth, that century which looked so much to other cultures, awakened to the idea of regeneration'.\* How, though, could such an idea exist prior to the awakening of consciousness and outside people's heads? As a proposition, it seems most unlikely, but, as it can be neither proved nor disproved, it is also useless for the purposes of historical enquiry. Giedion's model of social consciousness cannot be counted among the many good points of Mechanization Takes Command, and this is a serious fault, for so much of the book's historical analysis relies on the general ideas that are said to determine design. Although Giedion's purpose, to investigate the relation between design and societies, was admirable, the shortcomings of his model of society and the defectiveness of his schema for relating ideas to materiality were all too obvious. The effect has been to deter others from following him in the pursuit of his original enquiry, and encouraging them to keep to the relative safety of studying the empirically verifiable connections between what designers think and what they do. There have also been some more positive reasons why the identity and careers of designers have been researched so energetically. Designed objects have begun to be collectors' items and thus to hold some of the same status as works of art: signs of this were apparent at the 'Thirties' exhibition, where the display tickets identified the owners, many of whom were antique dealers. Products by recognised and acclaimed designers have attracted substantially 240