AEG Electric kettle, 1909, design by Peter Behrens, photographed in an antique shop in the 1970s. By virtue of being the work of a well-known designer, this product acquired a value it would not otherwise have had. \*Select Committee on the Copyright of Designs, Minutes of Evidence, Parliamentary Papers, 1840, vo. IV, paras 105, 388, 752, 755, 3616-18. higher prices than anonymously designed objects. The electric kettles manufactured by the German firm of AEG at the beginning of this century, because they were designed by Peter Behrens, are now bought and sold at prices above those of other electric kettles of the same date, which must rarely realise more than their value as scrap. The creation of a market in designed goods, and one in which the works of known designers are more highly valued, provided one motive for establishing identities. The need for accurate attributions has long been recognised in the art market and partly explains why catalogues raisonnés and biographical monographs figure so large in art history, but the same process has only recently begun to be felt in the history of design. This still does not explain why the activity of design has been treated as existing in the relationship between the mind of the designer and the form of the object designed. Of the two possible reasons for this tendency, the more superficial lies in the tendency of designers, when asked about design, to describe what they do. Designers who have written about their work have described the creative steps they have taken, their ideas about form, the constraints under which they have operated and their methods of working. Yet while such accounts are not meant to mislead, their effect is often to obscure the fact that design involves more than just the work done by designers and to create the fallacious impression that the designers themselves were solely responsible for the results. Although designers prepare designs, the responsibility for carrying them out rests with the entrepreneur; in the development of a manufactured article, it is normal for many preliminary designs to be prepared, from which one is chosen by the entrepreneur to be worked up for production. This procedure was just as usual a century and a half ago as it is today, and, in every case, it has been the entrepreneur and not the designer who chose which design to put into production. When the calico print masters of Manchester in the 1830s sometimes had two or three thousand patterns prepared and printed perhaps five hundred\*, they were acting in a way identical to the management of British Leyland when it rejected half a dozen different prototypes for the car which became known as the Mini Metro before approving the final design in 1978. The act of selecting the design to be manufactured is just as important a design decision as any performed by the designer, but it is one that he is not empowered to take himself, and that must be made by the entrepreneur. Many designers will admit that when they put up their first proposals, the entrepreneur chose a different design from the one they them- Because designers generally talk and write only about what they do themselves, design has come to be regarded as belonging entirely within their realm. This misunderstanding has reappeared in innumerable books and in the coverage of design in the press and on television. It has also, with more serious consequences, been taught in schools of design, where students are liable to acquire grandiose illusions about the nature of their skills, with the result that they become frustrated in their subsequent careers.