\*For an introduction to the theoretical debates on the status of the artist in the production of culture, see Raymond Williams, Marxism and Literature, Oxford, 1977, and J. Wolff, The Social Production of Art, London, 1981. The second and more fundamental reason why so much has been made of what designers think and do has come out of an apparent paradox in their rôle. On the one hand, design is determined by ideas and material conditions over which designers have no control, yet, on the other hand, designs are the result of designers exercising their creative autonomy and originality. To put the paradox in the most extreme terms, how can designers be said to be in command of what they do, but at the same time merely be the agents of ideology, with no more power to determine the outcome of their work than the ant or worker bee? There is no answer to this question: it is a fact that both conditions invariably co-exist, however uncomfortably, in the work of design. The same apparent paradox occurs in all manifestations of culture: any painting, film, book or building contains ideas about the nature of the world, ideas which exist in other minds apart from that of the artist, author or designer, but which are mediated through his or her ability to conceive a form or means of representation. The paradox has been widely discussed, and there are have been numerous attempts to give a theoretical explanation.\* For most designers, however, the solution to the problem lies not in theory, but in collusion with the myth of their own omnipotence and in wholly ignoring their rôle as agents of ideology. Although some designers do acknowledge that they are involved in the transmission of ideas over which they have no control and which they may not fully understand, it is more common to hear them describing their work as if they had overall power. Clearly, it is necessary for designers to believe, at least temporarily, in their own omnipotence in order for them to be able to create at all, but this does not mean, as they often assume, that everything they do is the result of their own conscious will and determination. The omnipotence is surely, like all such claims, a fantasy, but an attractive one: the myth of creative autonomy obliterates the problem of ideology as a determinant in design and releases designers from the uncomfortable prospect that they might be no more than actors in the theatre of history. That others, such as critics and historians, should have proved so attached to the myth is more surprising, and can only be explained by its accordance with the widespread assumption that, despite all evidence to the contrary, individuals are the masters of their own will and destiny. Lucky Strike cigarette packet, 1940, before being redesigned prior to redesign by Raymond Loewy. LUCKY STRIKE IT'S TOASTED CIGARETTES A BLEND of the finest Turkish and domestic Tobacc (based on the ORIGINAL LUCKY STRIKE TOBACCO FORMULA). An entirely NEW principle in cperele ITS TOASTED 242