LUCKY STRIKE PS TOASTED LUCKY STRIKE ITS TOASTED? CIGARETTES CIGARETTES Lucky Strike cigarette packet, 1940, as redesigned by Raymond Loewy. The principal changes were to give the design a white ground, change the lettering and make both sides \*Raymond Loewy, Never Leave Well Enough Alone, New York, 1951, chapter 12; and Raymond Loewy, Industrial Design, London and Boston, 1979, pp.218-219. \*Loewy, 1951, p. 148. One example of a successful design will suffice to illustrate how easily a designer's own view of a job can make him appear omnipotent. The design of the Lucky Strike cigarette packet has not, to the best of my knowledge, been written about by anyone except the man who designed it, Raymond Loewy: it therefore provides a subject fresh for exegesis.\* In 1940, American Tobacco decided for reasons which are not known that the packet in which their Lucky Strike cigarettes were sold needed to be redesigned. They took the job to Loewy, a Frenchman who had emigrated to the United States in 1919 and had established a successful industrial design practice in New York. The changes Loewy made to the Lucky Strike packet were in fact very minor, so minor that one wonders why he has drawn so much attention to them: he changed the ground colour of the pack from green to white, altered the lettering of the word 'cigarettes', and made both sides of the pack the same, where before only one side had borne the red target symbol. The new design was evidently judged a success by the manufacturers, as it has continued unchanged to the present. In his autobiography, Never Leave Well Enough Alone, Loewy has described the characteristics that he thought made the design a winner. The elimination of the green simplified the printing, as well as dealing with the problem of the unpleasant smell given off by the green ink. The white ground made the brand symbol more conspicuous, and placing it on both sides made it always visible. The design was also meant to change the way people thought about the cigarettes, as Loewy described: "... owing to its impeccable whiteness, the Lucky pack looks, and is, clean. It automatically denotes freshness of content and immaculate manufacturing." In the 1940s, of course, these signs did not serve the same purpose as they would now, since smoking was not then known to have any adverse effects upon health. Loewy's account of the design and his reasons for its success