made much of his own ingenuity and talent. Were we to accept this version and to take the single most important fact about the Lucky Strike packet as being that it was designed by Raymond Loewy, we should be following the routine of conventional histories of design. Yet for all its apparent credibility, there are large flaws in this version. While one cannot deny that skill and creativity went into the design, it seems hard to believe that only Loewy could have come up with the idea of a white cigarette packet, and once we admit the possibility that other designers could have achieved similar results, the case for attributing the design's success entirely to Loewy's personal creativity falls away. If there were others who could have produced it, some of the reasons for the design's success must have lain elsewhere than in the individuality of the designer. Suppose for a moment that we did not know who designed the packet. In this condition of ignorance, which is how we normally experience designs, we would have no choice in trying to understand the causes of the design's success but to consider what ideas it signified. The potency of the Lucky Strike design might, for instance, be understood in terms of the problem perceived by manufacturers in the United States of creating a single national market out of the heterogeneous assortment of different races and nationalities that have become the country's citizens. The massive influx of immigrants to the United States in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries had created a population which strenuously wanted to be identified as American, but in which individuals were daily reminded by their tongues, diets and customs of their origins as, say, Chinese, Irish or Italian. They could identify themselves as Americans only if they had ideas of what Americanness was, and these ideas, to be acceptable to them, had to be compatible with their own ethnic or national identities. Great efforts were therefore made to establish an American ideal with which all races and creeds could identify. American culture is full of affirmations of what it means to be American, a characteristic that seems odd to non-Americans, but has been very important to the development and cohesion of the nation: Canada, with its militant French separatist movement, is a warning of the consequences of the failure to establish a satisfactory national identity. The ideas by which the American was distinguished seem vague and so extraordinarily general as to be very hard to question or refute. Their very flabbiness, however, is one of their great qualities, for it enables them to be shared by all Americans without undermining the self-image of any sub-group of Italians, Jews or Poles. The following description of the characteristics said to distinguish Americans is taken from a book published in 1933: 'What according to the American standard is rated relatively high? Formal education certainly goes on that list . . . Protection of health - everything promoting physical health, bodily vigour and longevity is also undoubtedly on the list of values rated relatively high. This motive without question justifies any expenditure of time and money. Physical comfort and bodily cleanliness too, it may be alleged, rank relatively high in the American standard of living. "Americanisation", it is quite frankly said at times, means inculcation of our passion for hot water, large and numerous towels, soaps, baths and other cleansing agents. The physical 244