\*Kyrk, p.382. comfort motive shows itself in the widespread systems of central heating, electric fans, refrigeration and easy chairs.'\* Hygiene, cleanliness and comfort are general, unspecific qualities with which no reasonable person, whether Lithuanian Jew or Japanese, could possibly disagree. So suitable have they proved that they have been seized upon avidly by all who wish to show that they are indeed Americans, creating in the process all sorts of curious effects - Americans pay more for white-shelled eggs than for brown, whereas the converse is true in Britain. If hygiene and purity were important constituents of the idea of Americanness, so too was the belief in material prosperity and the abundance of commodities, which thus needed to be not only freely available, but also identifiably American. An industry based upon markets consisting of specific minority groups could be expected neither to achieve mass sales nor to promote the idea of prosperity with a specifically American basis. The problem, then, was to discover the characteristics that would make products identifiable as American. In this task, design was to provide some answers, one of which would appear to have been represented by the Lucky Strike packet. Drawing upon the existing association between cleanliness and Americanness gave the Lucky Strike packet an American image, which ensured it a national market. A member of any ethnic group could identify Lucky Strike as an American cigarette by virtue of the pack's conspicuous cleanliness, and perhaps, by purchasing a packet, instantly feel part of American culture. Indeed, the packet was so recognisably American that, within a very short space of time, Lucky Strike became famous throughout the world as a symbol of the American way of life. Unless we are to invent some fiction about the design being 'timeless' (a device much favoured by design historians for evading the problem of design's relation to society), we can suggest two distinct factors as lying behind the Lucky Strike packet's success within a particular society at a particular point in history. The ideas of cleanliness and Americanness signified by the design belonged in the minds of all Americans and cannot in any way be said to have been an invention of the designer. The other factor in the design's success was the way in which an association between the ideas of whiteness, cleanliness and America was set up by means of a single image. This image was the creation of the designer, and Loewy and his office certainly deserve credit for their skill in devising a form that conveyed the association so effectively. No design works unless it embodies ideas that are held in common by the people for whom the object is intended. To represent design purely as the creative acts of individuals, as Nikolaus Pevsner did in Pioneers of Modern Design, temporarily enhances the importance of designers, but ultimately only degrades design by severing it from its part in the workings of society. This book has set out to show the ways in which design turns ideas about the world and social relations into the form of physical objects. Only by exploring this process and by shifting our attention away from the person of the designer can we properly comprehend what design. is, and appreciate how important it has been in representing to us the ideas and beliefs through which we assimilate and adjust to the material facts of everyday life.