Wedgwood creamware plate with transfer-printed enamel decoration, c. 1775. Handpainted enamels were slow to produce, and the introduction of transfer-printed enamels enormously speeded up the process of decoration. \*Finer and Savage, p.78. \*Finer and Savage, pp.220-221. Wedgwood to cease production of the green-glazed ware. Wedgwood's remarks in the Experiment Book show that he was also concerned about the form of his pots, which he thought far from satisfactory. It was not until the mid-1760s that the designs began to change appreciably. The basic shapes of creamware were not very different from those of greenware, although moulded ornament was reduced and eventually eliminated altogether; the most striking change was in the enamelled decoration, which could be very intricate as it was applied by hand or transfer after the pot had been glazed. Over the next ten years, up to 1774, when Wedgwood's first creamware catalogue was produced, the forms continued to become plainer and simpler, with decoration that became increasingly neo-classical. Creamware, or 'Queensware', as Wedgwood renamed it after Queen Charlotte commissioned a creamware service in 1765, became highly successful both nationally and internationally. As tableware, it filled a gap between the very poor quality of the ordinary ware made in other countries and the very expensive, high quality products of the royal porcelain factories like Sèvres, Meissen and Copenhagen. It also owed much of its success to the essentially neo-classical qualities of purity and simplicity of form. Wedgwood did not originally seem to be aware of this, but, when it was pointed out to him in 1769 that simplicity was esteemed, he sought to improve Queensware in that direction.\* The popularity of Queensware continued to increase until the late 1770s, when the market seems to have become temporarily surfeited. Wedgwood wrote in 1778 that it was 'no longer the choice thing it used to be, since every shop, house and cottage is full of it.'\* Nevertheless, with further refinement and more deliberate neo-classicising, it continued to be produced into the nineteenth century.