## Bibliography Adam, Robert & James The Works in Architecture of Robert and James Adam, 1778, vol. 1. Ames, K.L. 'Meaning in Artefacts: Hall Furnishings in Victorian America', Journal of Interdisciplinary History, vol.IX, no. 1, 1978, pp. 19-46. Anderson, G. Victorian Clerks, Manchester, 1976. Archer, L. Bruce 'Honest Styling' Design, no. 108, 1957, pp. 36-38. Archer, L. Bruce 'Electric Food Mixers', Design, no. 125, May 1959, pp.41-43. Ariès, Philippe Centuries of Childhood, London, 1962. Baines, E. History of the Cotton Manufacture in Great Britain, London, 1835. Ballin, H.H. The Organisation of Electricity Supply in Great Britain, London, 1946. Banham, Reyner 'Household Godjets' reprinted from New Society in Arts in Society, edited by P. Barker, London, 1977, pp. 164-169. Barker, Lady [M.A. Broome] The Bedroom & the Boudoir, London, 1878. Barker, T.C. & Robbins, Michael A History of London Transport, vol.2, London, 1974. Barman, Christian The Man Who Built London Transport, Newton Abbot, 1979. Barman, Christian 'Frank Pick', Architectural Review, vol.XCI, 1942, pp. 1-2. Barnard, H. School Architecture, 5th edition, New York, 1854. Barthes, Roland Mythologies, Paris, 1957; Englsh translation, London, 1972. Bayley, Stephen In Good Shape. Style in Industrial Products 1900 to 1960, London, 1979. Bell, Quentin The Schools of Design, London, 1963. Belling, C.R. 'Electric Fires and Cookers', Electrical Review, vol. 108, 19th June 1931, p. 1048. Benjamin, W. 'Paris - the Capital of the Nineteenth Century' in Charles Baudelaire: a Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism, London, 1973, pp. 155-176. Best, R.D. Design and be Damned (unpublished typescript). Bowley, A.L. & Stamp, J. The National Income, 1924, Oxford, 1927. Branca, P. Silent Sisterhood, London, 1975. Brandon, R. Singer and the Sewing Machine, A Capitalist Romance, London, 1977. Braverman, H. Labor and Monopoly Capital, New York & London, 1974. Briggs, A. The Golden Age of Wireless, London, 1965. British Labour Statistics Historical Abstract, 1886-1968, Department of Employment, London, 1971. Brown, Baldwin Young Men and Maidens. A Pastoral for the Times, London, 1871. Bruyn Andrews, C. (ed.) The Torrington Diaries, 4 vols, London, 1934-1938. Buck, A. 'The Dress of Domestic Servants in the Eighteenth Century' inStrata of Society, Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Conference of the Costume Society, London, 1974, pp. 10-16. Burdett, H.C. Hospitals and Asylums of the World, 4 vols, London, 1893. Burgess, M.M. Health, London, 1914. Burnett, J. (ed.) Useful Toil, London, 1974. Butler, C.V. Domestic Service, an Enquiry by the Women's Industrial Council, London, 1916. Calico Printers' Petition, Minutes of Evidence, Parliamentary Papers, 1806-07, vol. II. Callen, Anthea The Angel in the Studio, London, 1979. Census Reports, Great Britain, 1891 to 1931. Chandler, Raymond Farewell My Lovely, Harmondsworth, 1949. 'Chats' about Electricity, Electrical Development Association pamphlet no.422, 1925. Chew, V.K. Talking Machines, London, 1967. Clapham, A. W. English Romanesque Architecture after the Conquest, Oxford, 1934. Clegg, H.A. Labour Relations in London Transport, Oxford, 1950. Cobbe, Frances Power 'The Final Cause of Woman' in Woman's Work and Culture edited by Josephine Butler, London, 1869. Cook, C. The House Beautiful, Essays on Beds and Tables, Stools and Candlesticks, New York, 1878.