Cooper, Grace R. The Sewing Machine, Its Invention and Development, 2nd edition, Washington D.C., 1976. Cooper, Nicholas The Opulent Eye, London, 1979. Cooper, W.R. 'Domestic Electricity Supply (including Heating and Cooking) as Affected by Tariffs', Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, vol. XLII, 1908-09, pp.26-48. Corley, T.A.B. Domestic Electrical Appliances, London, 1966. Coulson, Anthony J. A Bibliography of Design in Britain 1851-1970, London, 1979. 'Counsel to Designers of Woven Fabrics', Journal of Design, no. 18, vol. III, August 1850, pp. 179 ff. Cowan, R. Schwartz "The "Industrial Revolution" in the Home: Household Technology and Social Change in the Twentieth Century', Technology and Culture, vol. XVII, no.I, January 1976, pp. 1-23. Cowan, R. Schwartz 'Two washes in the morning and a bridge party at night: the American Housewife between the wars', Women's Studies vol.III, no.2, 1976, pp. 147-172. Crompton, R.E. 'The Cost of the Generation and Distribution of Electrical Energy', Proceedings of the Institute of Civil Engineers, vol.CVI, 1891, pp.2-28. Crompton, R.E. 'President's Inaugural Address' Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, vol. XXIV, 1895, pp.4-29. Cunnington, C.W. & P. Handbook of English Costume in the Nineteenth Century, London, 1959. Cunnington, P. Costume of Household Servants, London, 1974. Curwen, A. 'Architectural Heating', Electrical Review, vol. 114, 9th February 1934, pp. 188 ff. Daily Mail Ideal Home Book, 1955. Davidoff, Leonore The Best Circles, London, 1973. Davidoff, Leonore 'Mastered for Life: Servant and Wife in Victorian and Edwardian England', Journal of Social History, vol. 7, no.4. Davin, A. 'Imperialism and Motherhood' History Workshop Journal, no.5, Spring 1978, pp.9-65. 'Design Review, Braun', Architectural Review, vol. 131, 1962. Deslandres, Y. Le costume, l'image de l'homme, Paris, 1976. De Wolfe, Elsie The House in Good Taste, New York, 1913. Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics, United Kingdom Department of Energy, 1980. Dodd, G. The Textile Manufacturers of Great Britain, London, 1844. Douglas, Mary Purity and Danger, Harmondsworth, 1970. Dreyfuss, Henry Designing for People, New York, 1955. Duffy, F. & Cave, C. 'Bürolandschaft, an Appraisal' in Planning Office Space, edited by F. Duffy, C Cave & J. Worthington, London, 1976. Duffy, F. 'Bürolandschaft '58-'78', Architectural Review vol. CLXV, no.983, January 1979, pp.54-58. Duffy, F. 'Office Building and Organisational Change', in Buildings and Society, edited by Anthony D. King, London, 1980. Eastlake, Charles Hints on Household Taste, London, 1868. Edis, Robert Decoration and Furniture of Town Houses, London, 1881. Edis, Robert 'Internal Decoration' in Our Homes and How to Make Them Healthy, edited by S.F. Murphy, London, 1883, pp. 309-364. Edis, Robert 'Healthy Furniture and Decoration', Health in the Dwelling, vol.I of International Health Exhibition Literature, London, 1884, pp.287-365. Edwards, H.R. Competition and Monopoly in the British Soap Industry, Oxford, 1962. Ehrenreich, B. & English, D. For Her Own Good, 150 Years of Advice to Women, London, 1979. Ellis, Mrs The Daughters of England, London, 1845. Ellis, Mrs The Mother's Mistake, London, 1860, originally published in serial form in the Family Friend, new series, vol. III, 1854. Evans, Joan Monastic Life at Cluny 910-1157, London, 1931. Evans, Joan The Romanesque Architecture of the Order of Cluny, Cambridge, 1938. Evans, R. The Fabrication of Virtue, Cambridge, 1982. Ewing, E. Dress and Undress, London, 1978. Farrer, K.E. (ed.) The Letters of Josiah Wedgwood, 2 vols, 1903. Farrer, K.E. (ed.) Correspondence of Josiah Wedgwood 1781-1794, 1906. 'The Fashion of Furniture' Cornhill Magazine, vol.IX, March 1864, pp. 337-349. Ferranti, Dr S.Z., manuscript notebooks held by Ferranti Ltd, Holmwood, Lancs. The Ferranti Fire publicity booklet, n.d. Finer, A. & Savage, George (eds.) The Selected Letters of Josiah Wedgwood, London, 1965. Floud, P. English Printed Textiles 1720-1836, Victoria & Albert Museum, London, 1960. Flugel, J.C., The Psychology of Clothes, London, 1930. Forty, Adrian 'Wireless Style: Symbolic Design and the English Radio Cabinet 1928-33' Architectural Association Quarterly vol.4., Spring 1972, pp.22-31.