Forty, Adrian 'The Electric Home', Unit 20 of Open University Course A305 History of Architecture and Design 1890-1939, Milton Keynes, 1975. Forty, Adrian 'Lorenzo of the Underground', London Journal, vol. 5, no. 1, 1979, pp. 113-119. Forty, Adrian 'The Modern Hospital in England and France: the Social and Medical Uses of Architecture', in Buildings and Society, edited by Anthony D. King, London, 1980. Frazer, Mrs J.G. [L. Grove] First Aid to the Servantless, Cambridge, 1913. Frederick, Christine Scientific Management in the Home: Household Engineering, London, 1920. Frederick, Christine 'How I Would Sell Vacuum Cleaners', Electrician, 30th September 1927, pp. 396-397. Freud, Sigmund The Interpretation of Dreams, 2 vols, Standard Edition of the Complete Works of Sigmund Freud, vols IV & V, London, 1955. First published, Vienna, 1900. Freud, Sigmund & Breuer, Joseph Studies in Hysteria, Standard Edition of the Complete Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. II, London, 1955. Galloway, L. Office Management. Its Principles and Practice, New York, 1919. Galton, Francis Inquiry into Human Faculty and its Development, London, 1883. Garrett, R. & A. Suggestions for House Decoration, London, 1879. Gaskell, Elizabeth Wives and Daughters, London, 1866. Gibbon, Edward The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 6 vols, London, 1776-1788. Gibson, C.R. Electricity as a Wizard, London, 1929. Giedion, Siegfried Mechanization Takes Command, New York, 1948. Giedion, Siegfried 'Vacuum in the Home' Technology Review, January 1947, pp. 157-160. Gielgud, Val British Radio Drama, London, 1957. Gilbert, C. The Life and Work of Thomas Chippendale, London, 1978. Girouard, Mark The Victorian Country House, Oxford, 1971. Girouard, Mark Sweetness and Light, Oxford, 1977. Goldthorpe, J.H., Lockwood, D., Bechhofer, F., & Platt, J. The Affluent Worker in the Class Structure, Cambridge, 1969. Gray, H. 'Electric Heating as Applied to Cooking Apparatus', Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, vol. XLVII, 1911, pp.249-263. Great Exhibition of 1851, Jury Reports, vol. IV, 'Supplementary Report on Design to Class XXX'. Grossmith, George & Weedon The Diary of a Nobody, London, 1892. Hamilton Ellis, C. Railway Carriages in the British Isles from 1830 to 1914, London, 1965. Handcock, H.W. & Dykes, A.H. 'The Present Aspect of Electric Lighting', Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, vol. XLIV, 1909-10, pp.57-73. Handlin, D.P. The American Home, Boston, 1979. Hannah, L. Electricity Before Nationalisation, London, 1979. 'Happy Homes' in Family Friend, new series, vol. II, 1853. Harmsworth's Household Encyclopaedia, vol.I, 1923. Haweis, M.E. The Art of Decoration, London, 1881. Heller, G. "Propre en Ordre." Habitation et vie domestique 1850-1930: l'exemple vaudois, Lausanne, 1979. Héricourt, Dr J. L'Hygiène Moderne, Paris, 1907. The Home of Today, Daily Express Publications, London, n.d. [c. 1935]. Honour, Hugh Neo-Classicism, Harmondsworth, 1968. Hood, E. Fighting Dirt, the World's Greatest Warfare. A Hygiene Reader, London, 1916. Hopkinson, James Victorian Cabinet Maker, edited by J.B. Goodman, London, 1968. Houghton, W.E. The Victorian Frame of Mind, New Haven, 1957. Jackson, Alan A. Semi-Detached London, London, 1973. Jackson, Vincent E. Modern Office Appliances, London, 1936. James, C.H. & Yerbury, F.R. Modern English Houses & Interiors, London, 1925. John Flaxman R.A., catalogue of an exhibition at the Royal Academy of Arts, London, 1979. Klingender, F.D. Art and the Industrial Revolution, revised edition, London, 1968. Klingender, F.D. The Conditions of Clerical Labour in Britain, London, 1935. Kron, J. & Slesin, S. High Tech, London, 1979. Kusamitsu, T. 'Great Exhibitions before 1851', History Workshop Journal, no.9, Spring 1980, pp.70-89. Kyrk, Hazel Economic Problems of the Family, New York, 1933. Lancaster, Maud Electric Cooking, Heating, Cleaning etc., being a Manual of Electricity in the Service of the Home, London, 1914. Landauer, W. 'Plastics', Trend, vol. 1, 1936, pp.75-91. Le Corbusier Towards a New Architecture, trans. F. Etchells, London, 1927. Lee, C.E. Passenger Class Distinctions, London, 1946. Leffingwell, W.H. The Office Appliance Manual, 1926. Leffingwell, W.H. Office Management, Chicago & New York, 1927.