Leffingwell, W.H. Scientific Office Management, Chicago, 1917. Lockwood, D. The Black Coated Worker, London, 1958. Loewy, Raymond Industrial Design, London and Boston, 1979. Loewy, Raymond Never Leave Well Enough Alone, New York, 1951. Loftie, W.J. A Plea for Art in the Home, London, 1879. London Passenger Transport Board, Fifth Annual Report, London, 1938. Loudon, J.C. Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa Architecture, London, 1833 and many later editions. Mankowitz, Wolf Wedgwood, London, 1953. Manser, J. 'New Thinking in Office Furniture', Design, no.236, 1968, pp. 16-18. Manual of Modern Business Equipment: Dictating Machines, 2nd edition, London, 1962. Mark Rutherford's Deliverance [by William H. White], London, 1888 (first edition, 1885). Marsh, C.W. Recollections 1837-1910, Chicago, 1910, quoted in Dewhurst, C.K., MacDowell, B., MacDowell, M. Artists in Aprons, New York, 1979. Marx, Karl Capital, vol. I, Harmondsworth, 1976. Maurice, F. 'National Health: A Soldier's Study', Contemporary Review, January 1903. Mayes, L.J. The History of Chairmaking in High Wycombe, London, 1960. Mayhew, Henry London Labour and the London Poor, 4 vols, London, 1860. Mayhew, Henry 'Labour and the Poor, Letter LIX; Sawyers', Morning Chronicle, 4th July 1850, p.6. Mayhew, Henry 'Fancy Cabinet Makers of London', Morning Chronicle, 8th August 1850. Mayhew, Henry & Augustus, The Greatest Plague in Life, London, 1847. Mayo, E. The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization, New York, 1933. McBride, T.M. The Domestic Revolution, London, 1976. McKendrick, N., Brewer, J. and Plumb, J.H. The Birth of Consumer Society. The Commercialization of Eighteenth Century England, London, 1982. McKendrick, N. 'Josiah Wedgwood: an Eighteenth Century Entrepreneur in Salesmanship and Marketing Techniques', Economic History Review, 2nd series, vol. XII, no. 3, 1960, pp.408-433. McKendrick, N. 'Josiah Wedgwood and Factory Discipline', Historical Journal, vol. IV, no. 1, 1961, p. 30-55. McKendrick, N. 'Josiah Wedgwood and Thomas Bentley: an Inventor-Entrepreneur Partnership in the Industrial Revolution', Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 5th series, vol. XIV, 1964, pp.1-34. Meikle, Jeffrey Twentieth Century Limited, Philadelphia, 1979. Merkle, Judith A. Management and Ideology, Berkeley, 1980. Merrifield, Mrs Dress as a Fine Art, London, 1854. Mitchell, B.R. & Jones, H.G. Second Abstract of British Historical Statistics, Cambridge, 1971. Moll Weiss, Augusta Les Ecoles Ménagères Ã L'Etranger et en France, Paris, 1908. Moll Weiss, Augusta Le Livre du Foyer, 2nd edition, Paris, 1912. Morris, William, 'Art and its Producers', Collected Works of William Morris, vol. XXII, London, 1914. Muggeridge, Malcolm The Thirties, London, 1940. Mullin, S. 'Some Notes on an Activity', in Planning Office Space, edited by F. Duffy, C. Cave, & J. Worthington, London, 1976. Murphy, S.F. (ed.) Our Homes and How to Make Them Healthy, 1883. Nelson, J.E. quoted in discussion of W.A. Gillot, 'Domestic Load Building' Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, vol. LXI, 1922-23, pp.197-213. News of the World Better Homes Book, London, n.d. [c. 1953]. Newton, S.M. Health, Art and Reason, London, 1974. Nightingale, Florence Notes on Hospitals, London, 1859. Noble, Mrs R. Labour Saving in the Home, London, 1930. The Nursery Book, Heal & Co., n.d. [1914]. Oakley, A. Housewife, London, 1974. Odham's Household Management Illustrated, n.d. [c.1950]. Olins, Wally The Corporate Personality. An Inquiry into the Nature of Corporate Identity, London, 1978. Orrinsmith, Mrs The Drawing Room, London, 1978. 'Overseas Review', Design, no. 104, August 1957, pp.43-46. Packard, Vance The Hidden Persuaders, London, 1957. Panton, J.E. Surburban Residences and How to Circumvent Them, London, 1896. Papaneck, V. Design for the Real World, London, 1972. Parker, Rozsika The Subversive Stitch, London, 1984. Pattison, Mary S. The Business of Home Management, New York, 1915. Pevsner, Nikolaus An Enquiry into Industrial Art in England, Cambridge, 1937. Pevsner, Nikolaus Pioneers of Modern Design, Harmondsworth, 1960.