Thompson, E.P. The Making of the English Working Class, Harmondsworth, 1968. Thompson, E.P. & Yeo, E. (eds) The Unknown Mayhew, Harmondsworth, 1973. Thompson, J.D. & Goldin, G. The Hospital: a Social and Architectural History, New Haven and London, 1975. Tickner, L. 'Women and Trousers' in Leisure in the Twentieth Century, Papers at the Second Conference on Twentieth Century Design History, London, 1977, pp.56-68. Tilley, E.Y. Healthy Man Badge for Boy Scouts, Glasgow, 1923. Tooker, K.O. & Pierce, F.L. 'The Hoover One Fifty', Modern Plastics, vol. 14, November 1936, pp.32-33. The Torrington Diaries, edited by C. Bruyn Andrews, 4 vols, London, 1934-1938. Towner, D. Creamware, London and Boston, 1978. Turnbull, G. A History of the Calico Printing Industry of Great Britain, Altrincham, 1951. Twentieth Century Cookery, Electrical Development Association publication no.297/1, c. 1930. Vanier, H. La Mode et ses Métiers, Paris, 1960. Veblen, Thorstein The Theory of the Leisure Class, New York, 1899. Wallis, G. 'Recent Progress in Design as Applied to Manufactures', Journal of the Society of Arts, no.173, vol. IV, 14th March 1856, pp.291-301. Watkins, C., Harvey, W. & Senft, R. Shelley Potteries, London, 1980. Watson, Rosamund Marriot The Art of the House, London, 1897. Weatherill, L. The Pottery Trade and North Staffordshire 1660-1760, Manchester, 1971. Whyte, A.G. The All-Electric Age, London, 1922. Williams, Raymond Marxism and Literature, Oxford, 1977. Wilmshurst, T.P. 'Commercial Aspects of Electric Cooking and Heating' Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers vol. LI, 1913, pp. 180-194. Wilson, Charles The History of Unilever, 2 vols, London, 1954. Wilson, D.A. 'The Economic Development of the Electricity Supply Industry in Great Britain 1919-1939', Ph.D. thesis, University of Loughborough, 1976. Wilson, G.B.L. 'Domestic Appliances' in A History of Technology, edited by T.I. Williams, vol. VII, part 2, chapter 47, Oxford, 1978. Wilson, R.L. Soap Through the Ages, Port Sunlight, 1952. Wilson, W. quoted in discussion of Parker Smith, 'The All Electric House', Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, vol. LXIV, 1925-26. Wolff, J. The Social Production of Art, London, 1981. Woodforde, J. The Diary of a Country Parson, edited by J. Beresford, vol. V, London, 1931. Wright, Gwendolyn Building the Dream, A Social History of Housing in America, New York, 1981. Young, Arthur A Six Months Tour through the North of England, London, 1770.