\*See N. McKendrick, 'Josiah Wedgwood and Thomas Bentley: an Inventor-Entrepreneur Partnership in the Industrial Revolution', Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 5th series, vol.XIV, 1964, pp.1-34. James Stuart: detail from a design for an interior, drawing, c.1757. The architect James 'Athenian' Stuart, a pioneer of neo-classical design in Britain, designed interiors furnished with antique ornaments. Urns and vases of the kind he incorporates would have had to be either genuine antiquities, or wood or plaster dummies. Wedgwood's main source of knowledge about the classical revival was his associate, friend and later partner, Thomas Bentley, a Liverpool merchant who exported his wares to the American colonies and the West Indies. Bentley was a cultured man, knowledgeable about the changes in artistic fashion that were taking place in Europe, and with wide social connections. In 1769, he and Wedgwood went into partnership to produce "˜ornamental wares' (as distinct from the creamware products, which were known as 'useful wares') from Wedgwood's new factory at Etruria. Bentley moved to London and became responsible for marketing there. He also brought his knowledge of art to bear on the design of the ornamental wares. Apparently it was under his influence that Wedgwood revised his designs: he began to produce conspicuously neo-classical ornamental objects and to make the useful ware more obviously neo-classical as well. It was in the designs of the ornamental wares - vases, urns, statuettes, cameos and ceramic tablets that Wedgwood and Bentley went to the greatest lengths to make use of neo-classicism. When they entered this market, ornamental pottery in England was still baroque and heavy. Bentley's inspired realisation that there might be a market for neo-classical ornamental pottery presumably arose from his knowledge of what was happening to contemporary furnishing. Neo-classicism, among its many other effects on domestic architecture, introduced the practice of decorating interiors in a unified style, so that all the details, mouldings, furniture and furnishings of a room appeared to convey a consistent set of references to the antique. While genuinely antique sculptures and vases were the ideal ornaments for a neo-classical interior, they were in short supply, and architects and decorators had to find substitutes. For example, the interior designs of the architect James Stuart, one of the pioneers of neo-classicism in Britain, incorporated urns, ewers and bowls, which would have had to be either genuine antiquities, or wood or plaster dummies. 71. 69 70. PL15 Wedgwood Queensware catalogue, 1774. The shapes show some simplification from the earlier, more baroque products, and the quality of the engravings heightens the neoclassical effect of the products still further. 12 72. 73. 22