20000006 ய860003 Robert Adam: design for a sideboard at Kenwood, 1768-69. Adam's interior designs often included accurately drawn antique ornaments, which were generally executed in wood, the smaller ones in silver. The demand for antique ornaments presented an opportunity for Wedgwood & Bentley. From The Works in Architecture of R&J. Adam, 1778, vol. 1, no. 2, pl. viii. \*Farrer, vol. I, pp.377-378. \*Farrer, p.358; and Finer and Savage, p.149. The architect Robert Adam, aware of the lack of suitable ornaments for the neo-classical interiors of the houses he designed in the 1760s, went further than Stuart and himself designed ornaments, such as those for the sideboard at Kenwood House, all of which had to be specially made, the large urns from wood painted to look like stone or pottery, and the smaller objects from silver. Bentley's most imaginative insight was to see that the demand for neo-classical ornaments might be satisfied by ceramics produced in Wedgwood's factory; he was the first to see that pottery and neo-classicism, hitherto unassociated, might be suited to one another. The marriage of the two, brought about by Wedgwood and Bentley, not only led to new designs for familar objects, like vases, but also opened up the prospect of a whole new range of products, such as urns, tablets and cameos, suited to the embellishment of neo-classical interiors. His espousal of neo-classicism transformed Wedgwood from an ordinary, though successful, potter into a leader of avant-garde taste. Wedgwood and Bentley took some trouble to further this position by associating themselves with the neo-classical movement, partly through their social connections, but also through trading on their familiarity with the neo-classical theorists. For example, they were keen to publicise the fact that Count Caylus, the author of a well-known six volume study of classical antiquities, had lamented that there were no modern equivalents of ancient Etruscan vases, a gap they were able to announce that their own products filled.\* Wedgwood and Bentley gained their knowledge of classical design partly from their aristocratic contacts, who showed and sometimes lent them antique pottery and sculpture to study. They had a large collection of the books on classical archaeology that had been published in the eighteenth century, and Wedgwood made extensive use of them. He also considered employing an artist in Rome to study original antiquities at first hand and to communicate new developments in artistic taste to 23