\*Farrer, vol. I, p.428; and Finer and Savage, p.114; Wedgwood's relations with Flaxman are discussed in John Flaxman R.A., catalogue of an exhibition at the Royal Academy of Arts, London, 1979. \*Finer and Savage, p.317. \*Farrer, vol. I, p.240. \*Farrer, vol. I, p.456. 3213 him, but this scheme came to nothing, though he did later subsidise John Flaxman's trip to Rome.\* The way that Wedgwood made use of his knowledge of antiquities was either to set his craftsmen to produce exact copies, or alternatively to reinterpret the classical originals. This approach Wedgwood described as follows: ... I only pretend to have attempted to copy the fine antique forms, but not with absolute servility. I have endeavoured to preserve the stile and spirit or if you please the elegant simplicity of the antique forms, and so doing to introduce all the variety I was able, and this Sir W. Hamilton assures me I may venture to do, and that is the true way of copying the antique.'\* Wedgwood's method, in the approved manner of neo-classicism, was to improve upon rather than copy the antique. The actual work of design was carried out either by his own modellers at Etruria, or by artists specially hired for the purpose, the most famous of whom was John Flaxman. While Wedgwood's own craftsmen could copy antiquities, Flaxman's value lay in his appreciation of the spirit of the classical revival and his ability to give a classical air to new products which had no precise antique equivalent. Flaxman's services were important in the design of cameos and busts of living people, and the relief decoration on vases and tablets, subjects which required a knowledge of classicism to give them a convincingly antique appearance. Contrary to what many books about design suggest, Wedgwood and Bentley's development of a neo-classical style for the ornamental wares took place only gradually. Many of Wedgwood's early ornamental products were baroque in style, with much surface ornament and gilding, and the process of refining the designs and producing convincing neo-classical products took a number of years. The changes were the result of suggestions from Bentley and hints from the cognoscenti among his customers. For example, the leading antiquarian, Sir William Hamilton, advised Wedgwood and Bentley to abandon gilding on their products. Wedgwood himself found this advice, and the demands of neoclassicism, rather hard to take, as they were contrary to his own notions of fine pottery. He complained to Bentley: 'I do not find it an easy matter to make a Vase with the colouring so natural, vairied, pleasing & unpot-like, & the shape so delicate, as to make it seem worth a great deal of money, without the additional trappings of handles, ornaments, & Gilding."