Opposite: John Flaxman Jr: Blind Man's Buff, wax relief on slate, 1782. One of a number of designs in the antique manner executed by Flaxman for the decoration of Wedgwood's ornamental wares. \*Farrer, vol. I, p.250. Nevertheless, Wedgwood was well aware of the attractions that neoclassicism had for his customers, and did not hesitate to modify his designs according to the expert advice he was given. His understanding of the strength of demand for neo-classical design was revealed when he wrote to Bentley about the pots of one particular product range, 'They certainly are not Antique, and that is fault enough to Damn them for with most of our customers." Much of Wedgwood's own interest in pottery lay in technical discoveries and innovation; to make these profitable, the partners had to find marketable applications for them, to which end neoclassicism proved invaluable. Throughout his life, Wedgwood experimented prolifically with glazes and bodies, and he was clearly fascinated by everything that went on in the kiln. His reputation in his own lifetime was not only as a manufacturer but also as a scientific experimenter, for which he was elected to the Royal Society. Experiment and innovation were, therefore, as important to him as entrepreneurial activity and commerce; what made him so exceptional was that he was talented in all of them. In his experiments, Wedgwood developed and perfected two new bodies, black unglazed stoneware called 'black basaltes' and a fine white, slightly translucent stoneware called 'jasper', which Wedgwood & Bentley: three handled ornamental vase in Queensware, early 1770s. Many of Wedgwood & Bentley's wares were more obviously rococo than neo-classical, and as such were closer to Wedgood's own idea of what was ornamental. Wedgwood & Bentley: Sacred to Bacchus, Sacred to Neptune, pair of ewers for wine and water, black basalt, 1775. An example of ornamental ware in the black basalt body developed in the early 1770s. 25