## Above: Josiah Wedgwood: Sacrifice to Aesculapius, test medallion in blue and white jasper, c. 1773. The development of the jasper body was a technical achievement, the result of much experiment, as shown by this test. Having developed the body, Wedgwood had to find applications for it. Right: Josiah Wedgwood: ornamental vase with relief of Venus in her chariot drawn by swans, white jasper with black dip, c. 1784. Vases and urns in antique forms bearing antique motifs supplied suitable ornaments for neoclassical interiors. \*Farrer, vol. II, pp. 341-342. DODAOD in its unglazed form had a texture similar to marble. Wedgwood also developed coloured jaspers and later 'jasper dip', a surface colouring for white jasper. Although many of the earlier ornamental wares had been made in glazed earthenware from the mid-1770s, an increasing proportion were made with these two new bodies. Black basaltes, a less remarkable invention than jasper, was used principally for urns and statuettes, while jasper had originally been developed to provide a suitable body for making good reproductions of antique gems and cameos. Having perfected it, the partners wanted to find other marketable applications for it. The solution to this problem was provided by neo-classicism. Realising that jasper closely resembled marble, Wedgwood and Bentley saw its possibilities in the growing market for neo-classical ornaments. It lent itself to urns, ewers and tablets with moulded relief designs, all of which Wedgwood started to make in antique patterns. On the whole, the products were a great success and exactly satisfied the demand for neo-classical ornaments. Among the few products that did not prove popular were large jasper relief tablets for setting in architectural features such as mantelpieces and friezes. Despite their usual skill at marketing, Wedgwood and Bentley were unable to sell these products although they tried repeatedly to interest architects and designers in them. One of those approached was Capability Brown, the architect and landscape designer, who advised Wedgwood that they were unacceptable beause they were made in coloured jasper; he recommended making them in plain white jasper, so that they would look like marble.\* For once, Wedgwood's technical accomplishment, here the application of colour to jasper, had led to products that were too novel for men of taste to accept. Brown's advice was that only 26