Wedgwood & Bentley: Bacchanalian Procession, blue and white jasper plaque, c.1778. These plaques, designed as interior ornaments, proved unsuccessful. Wedgwood & Bentley: white jasper plaque showing Five Muses, c. 1778. Following Capability Brown's advice, Wedgwood & Bentley stopped making coloured jasper plaques and turned instead to plain white jasper plaques, which simulated marble and looked more antique. \*The catalogue is reprinted in Mankowitz. making them more like real antiques would give them any chance of success. In fact, this was the basis of the policy generally adopted by Wedgwood and Bentley in their marketing: antique designs clothed technical innovation, and the novelty of the product was described in publicity material in the most guarded terms. For one of the most progressive manufacturers in the country, Wedgwood was surprising reticent, at least in the early part of his career, about advertising his technical innovations. Not until the demand for his wares was well established, in the late 1780s, did he judge it wise to draw attention to the technical and industrial changes of which his products were the results; even then, he was very selective about what he let his customers know. Although Wedgwood and Bentley referred in their catalogues to their progress and 'continual improvements', the purpose of these statements appears to have been to draw the attention of established customers to the existence of new products for them to buy. However, the main technical advances, the development of new bodies and processes, were never directly referred to in the early catalogues as innovations. The usual form was to describe something new, such as encaustic painting on basaltes ware, which gave an effect similar to Etruscan pottery, as the 'rediscovery' of a lost craft of antiquity. Likewise, with the design of the products, it was not their novelty that was emphasised, but their antique origins. In the 1779 catalogue, the cameos and intaglios were introduced with the statement 'These are exactly taken from the finest antique gems. Since they included portraits of Lord Chatham, the reigning Pope and George II, this was hardly possible, but it 27