\*Farrer, vol. I, pp.445-446. Josiah Wedgwood: black basalt jug decorated with encaustic design, c. 1770. Wedgwood's new decorative technique was described as 'the rediscovery of an antique art, a notion reinforced by the Etruscan form of this jug. \*Honour, p.48. had the effect of drawing attention to the classical quality of the designs. Antiquity, not novelty, was the marketable quality. Similar sentiments directed the choice of the self-consciously classical name of Etruria for Wedgwood's factory, which was far from Etruscan in both appearance and management. Wedgwood and Bentley adopted this apparently devious way of advertising their innovations when they wanted people to know about them. But when Wedgwood introduced methods that bore no relation to any known antique process, such as the substitution of painted transfers for hand-painted enamels, he was very concerned that these developments, which had important effects on his production and his profits, should remain a secret.\* His unwillingness to publicise certain of his discoveries suggests that he understood his products were popular because they did not remind his customers of the aspects of progress which would be unacceptable to them. Some of Wedgwood and Bentley's attempts to convince their customers of the antique qualities of their new products and processes now seem rather disingenuous. But if their advertising copy was crude, their use of design to the same ends was highly sophisticated, and the more exact they made their references to the antique, the more sought-after their products became. Their purpose was not to deceive people into believing that anything they manufactured was antique, but to convince them that the products, though made by modern processes, were as good as, or better than, the products of antiquity. The very special value attached to antiquity in the eighteenth century made this a most effective way of overcoming the reservations their customers might have felt about innovations. In some ways, Wedgwood and Bentley's relationship to neoclassicism was pragmatic. The style was not integral to their production, for they could and did produce goods in other styles. As Hugh Honour has pointed out, they used antiquity for decorative ends and were really perpetuating the rococo taste for decoration in antique fancy dress.\* Nevertheless, if neo-classicism was simply another decorative style to Wedgwood and Bentley, it was also most valuable to their success through the unique power that it had in the eighteenth century to make modern methods of manufacture fashionable. Wedgwood & Bentley: cameo portrait busts of George III and Queen Charlotte, blue and white jasper, 1778. Many of Wedgwood & Bentley's portrait cameos were of living people, but represented in the manner of antique cameos. 00 T   
28