2. The First Industrial Designers The Need for a Consistent Product Wedgwood and Byerley's London showroom, 1809. To avoid tying up capital in unsold stock, Wedgwood displayed only samples in the shop; customers ordered from these or catalogues. From Rudolph Ackermann, Repository of Arts, vol. I, no.2, 1809. In the history of every industry, design has become necessary as a separate activity in production once a single craftsman ceases to be responsible for every stage of manufacture from conception to sale. In many industries, this organisational change took place in the eighteenth century; in few of them can the emergence of the specialist designer, and the great importance attached to his work, be seen more clearly than in Josiah Wedgwood's pottery manufacture. Although Wedgwood was not the first pottery master to make a distinction between the tasks of designing pots and making them, he attached more value to the work of designers than other manufacturers had done. Josiah Wedgwood's original intention, as he stated at the outset, was to be successful in business, to obtain 'ample recompense' from diligent labour in what he saw as a spacious field. The fulfilment of this simple ambition depended upon being able to make more pots, sell more pots and also, if possible, increase the unit profit on them. All the extensive changes that he subsequently introduced into the sale and manufacture of pottery can be referred back to those three conditions of success. When Wedgwood began his own production in 1759, potters normally sold their goods by sending batches of completed work