\*Farrer vol. I, p.150. See also McKendrick, 1960. Wedgwood Queensware sample tile with transfer-printed and hand-painted enamel decorations, c.1800. Sample tiles were carried by travellers to enable customers to choose the decoration for the shapes they ordered from the printed catalogues. either direct to markets, or to merchants. Although Wedgwood sold some of his wares this way, he also adopted the apparently novel technique of selling by advance orders. In London and elsewhere, he opened showrooms with samples of his wares on display, but no stocks for sale.\* The customers' orders were passed to the factory, and the pots were made and delivered direct. Later, Wedgwood extended this system by sending out travellers with cases of samples in Britain and abroad, and by publishing illustrated catalogues of the wares, from which customers ordered. With these methods of selling, Wedgwood did not have to tie up capital in unsold stock or risk making large quantities of designs for which there might be no demand. However, selling from samples and catalogues required the products to be completely uniform in quality. A customer who bought a complete service on the basis of a few samples would expect to receive wares that were indistinguishable from the samples he or she had seen. Maintaining absolute consistency was a major problem in pottery manufacture; Wedgwood's solutions to this problem were at the root of many of his production methods. Wedgwood's main product of the early 1760s, his greenware, could not be reproduced reliably. The decoration was in the glazes Above right: Whieldon ware tortoiseshell glaze plate, c. 1760. Tortoiseshell and greenware glazes varied unpredictably with the firing and the workmanship, and were too inconsistent for a business 44444 + 59A 62 59A 63 A based on orders from samples 59A and catalogues. 59 Tray of Josiah Wedgwood's creamware glaze tests, early 1760s. The white earthenware body of creamware was reliable, but much experiment went into finding a consistently flawless glaze. 60 A 12 61A 59 бо 63 30