\*Towner; Mankowitz, chapter 2. applied over the moulded ornament, and the result depended on both the hand of the glazer and the conditions in the kiln, neither of them particularly dependable. Charming though the variations in the glazes may have been, they did not lead to a consistent product and so made greenware unsuited to the method of sale that Wedgwood was adopting. The purpose of Wedgwood's experiments with creamware was to find a more reliable replacement for greenware. Cream-glazed earthenware had been produced in the Staffordshire potteries from the 1740s and would have been well known to Wedgwood.\* The white earthenware body, which gave constant results under a fairly wide range of firing conditions, was well suited to Wedgwood's purpose. The problem lay in the glaze, which tended to vary in colour at different kiln temperatures, to run and become uneven in thickness, and to craze. Wedgwood needed to produce a glaze that was as reliable as the body, and, in 1765, he developed one that was reasonably satisfactory, although it tended to vary in colour and to run. It took several more years to perfect a creamware glaze that gave a completely uniform result. Greenware had been unreliable because part of the decoration was in the colours of the glaze, which varied according to the firing conditions. To overcome this problem in creamware, Wedgwood did not use glaze colours, but glazed the pieces plain and decorated them with hand-painted enamels, which were applied after the glaze firing, and then baked on at a much lower temperature. Enamelling was a reliable process and gave constant results. It was not new, as it had been used on porcelain and, in Staffordshire, on salt-glazed stoneware, but because it was a laborious and expensive technique, it had not previously been used on the lower-valued earthenware products. Much of Wedgwood's early enamelling consisted of pictures and decoration in an attractive, though rather florid, freehand style. These designs, being often Detail of Wedgwood creamware compotier, mid 1760s. Crazing in the glaze, common in Wedgwood's early ceramics, was one of the faults he set himself to overcome. Salt-glazed teapot with hand painted enamel decoration, Staffordshire, c. 1755. Enamelling was an accepted technique for decorating pots in the potteries, but was a laborious and unreliable way of producing anything but the simplest decoration. L